Influenza virus neuraminidase regulates host CD8+ T-cell response in mice | Communications Biology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature communications biology articles article Influenza virus neuraminidase regulates host CD8+ T-cell response in mice Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 08 December 2020 Influenza virus neuraminidase regulates host CD8+ T-cell response in mice Chung-Yi Wu1, Hong-Yang Chuang1 & Chi-Huey Wong ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9961-78651,2 Communications Biology volume 3, Article number: 748 (2020) Cite this article 3283 Accesses 4 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects GlycoconjugatesLive attenuated vaccines AbstractInfluenza A virus (IAV)-specific CD8+ T-cell response was shown to provide protection against pandemic and seasonal influenza infections. However, the response was often relatively weak and the mechanism was unclear. Here, we show that the composition of IAV released from infected cells is regulated by the neuraminidase (NA) activity and the cells infected by NA-defective virus cause intracellular viral protein accumulation and cell death. In addition, after uptake of NA-defective viruses by dendritic cells (DCs), an expression of the major histocompatibility complex class I is induced to activate IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell response. When mice were infected by NA-defective IAV, a CD8+ T-cell response to the highly conserved viral antigens including PB1, NP, HA, M1, M2 and NS1 was observed along with the increasing expression of IL10, IL12 and IL27. Vaccination of mice with NA-defective H1N1 A/WSN/33 induced a strong IAV-specific CD8+ T cell response against H1N1, H3N2 and H5N1. This study reveals the role of NA in the IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell response and virion assembly process, and provides an alternative direction toward the development of universal influenza vaccines. Similar content being viewed by others MCMV-based vaccine vectors expressing full-length viral proteins provide long-term humoral immune protection upon a single-shot vaccination Article Open access 07 January 2022 Modified influenza M158–66 peptide vaccination induces non-relevant T-cells and may enhance pathology after challenge Article Open access 12 August 2023 CD8+ T-cell responses towards conserved influenza B virus epitopes across anatomical sites and age Article Open access 29 April 2024 IntroductionInfluenza A virus (IAV) has been a major threat to human health, causing seasonal outbreaks and pandemics with high morbidity and mortality especially involving more virulent strains such as 1918 A/H1N1, H5N1, and H7N9. Vaccination has been an effective strategy to control the spread of IAV, and the protective antibodies induced by the vaccine are known to recognize mainly the viral hemagglutinin (HA) domain and partially the NA moiety1,2. However, seasonal vaccines may lose their efficacy because of antigenic shift or drift in the circulating virus population through genomic reassortment or antigen mutations, respectively. Interestingly, certain populations, including pregnant women infected by some novel strains of IAV were asymptomatic with little antibody response, but had a steady IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell response to IAV-infected cells1,2. In addition, it was shown that humans, mice, and macaques with positive IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell response had cross-protective immunity against pandemic and seasonal influenza3,4,5,6,7, and the targets of CD8+ T-cell response were the highly conserved proteins from various IAV strains8. Despite the importance of CD8+ T-cell response in protection against influenza infection, the reported cellular immune response is often relatively weak and the mechanism has not been well understood.In our previous study, we found that mice infected by a live attenuated IAV without the stalk or catalytic domain of NA were able to strongly induce the IAV-specific CD8+ instead of CD4+ T-cell response against the virus, leading to the development of a live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV)4. In this study, we further investigate the mechanism of such a selective immune response and elucidate the role of NA in the induction of IAV-specific CD8+ T cells against a broad range of IAV strains.ResultsNA activity regulated virus releaseWe previously reported that immunization of mice with IAV without the stalk or catalytic domain of NA induced a strong IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell response with little antibody elicited4. In order to further understand the mechanism, WSN viruses with defective NA activity were generated by reverse genetics through deletion of the stalk or the catalytic domain (LAIV WSN-NA or LAIV WSN-NA-CD) or inactivation of the active site domain (LAIV WSN-NA-AS1 or LAIV WSN-NA-AS2) (Fig. 1a, b, Table 1). After A549 cells or MDCK cells were infected by defective NA viruses, only a small number of viruses was released in the supernatant compared to that from the cells infected by WSN with intact NA (Fig. 1c). In addition, the viral RNA (vRNA) (Fig. 1d) and viral proteins were accumulated inside the cells (Fig. 1e, Supplementary Fig. 7a), suggesting that the release of virus would require NA activity (Supplementary Figs. 1 and 7b).Fig. 1: NA activity controls the release of virus.a Schematic overview of IAV and constructs of WSN and NA-defective WSNs: LAIV WSN-NA (deletion of the stalk and catalytic domains of NA) and LAIV WSN-NA-AS1 (inactivation of the active site of NA through R102A mutation). HA and NA are the two major surface glycoproteins of IAV and M2 is the third surface protein of IAV with ion channel activity. The matrix protein M1 is the most abundant protein to maintain viral structure. Viral RNA (vRNA) is the viral genome associated with the nucleoprotein (NP) to form the complex of vRNP. PB1, PB2, and PA are the components of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The NS1 protein is an interferon antagonist to facilitate viral replication. N, N-terminal cytoplasmic domain and cytoplasmic tails; TM, transmembrane domain. Purple Ψ, the glycosylation site; light blue ɸ, the active site of NA (AS). b NA activity was measured by the 4-MUNANA assay4. After A549 cells were infected with various viruses at an MOI of 3, the titers of viruses released from A549 cells (c) and the amount of vRNA (d) in A549 cells at 8 and 24-h post-infection were measured. e the total lysates from A549 cells were collected at 24-h post-infection by WSN and NA-defective WSNs (see Table 1) for analysis of the intracellular viral proteins HA, NP, and M1 by western blot. The filter was probed with anti-NA, anti-NP, anti-M1, and anti-β-actin antibodies. b Mean ± SD of five independent experiments. c, d Mean ± SD of three independent experiments. *P < 0.001.Full size imageTable 1 Characterization of different recombinant viruses.Full size tableNA activity affected the virus-mediated host immune responseTo study whether the IAV without NA activity was the cause of reduced viral release and accumulation of viral proteins inside the infected cells leading to the biased host immune response4, we performed an animal study (Fig. 2a). Mice infected with the NA-defective virus (LAIV WSN-NA or LAIV WSN-NA-AS1) survived well and showed no body weight loss (Fig. 2b, c). The virus titers were lower in the lungs compared to non-vaccinated or WSN control groups with less interferon alpha and gamma (IFN-α/γ) induced in the bronchial alveolar lavage (BAL) fluid on day 4 after infection (Fig. 2d–f), and little anti-HA antibody was produced (Fig. 2g).Fig. 2: NA activity affected the host immune response in mice.a Schematic strategies used for mouse infection and analysis. After mice were infected with 1 × 106 pfu of WSN, LAIV WSN-NA, LAIV WSN-NA-AS1 virus, or non-lethal dosage (1 × 103 pfu) of WSN virus (WSN (UL)), the survival rate b and body weight c were recorded for 14 days. d IAV replication kinetics in the lungs of the virus-infected mice at day-4 post-infection. Measurement of IFNα e and IFNγ f from the BAL fluid of virus-infected mice at day-4 post-infection. g The sera from mice were analyzed using hemagglutination inhibition assay to measure the anti-HA antibody level at day-14 post-infection. h Schematic strategy used for mouse immunization and challenge. Analysis of survival rate i and body weight j of WSN, LAIV WSN-NA, LAIV WSN-NA-AS1, or PBS treated mice after challenge with a lethal dose of H5N1. k H5N1 virus replication kinetics in the lungs. IFNα l and IFNγ m from the BAL of the immunized mice as indicated at day-4 post-infection. The control indicated the group of mice without IAV infection. b, i Ten independent experiments are shown. c, j Mean ± SD of ten independent experiments. d, e, f, g, k, l, m Mean ± SD of five independent experiments. *P < 0.001.Full size imageIn the H5N1 challenge study (Fig. 2h), mice vaccinated with the NA-defective WSN also survived well without significant body weight loss (Fig. 2i, j) and were able to clear different strains of viruses from the lungs (Fig. 2k). Interestingly, the mice challenged with H5N1 virus induced less IFN-α (Fig. 2l) but more IFN-γ in BAL (Fig. 2m), indicating the activation of IAV-specific T-cell response. These results suggest that the activity of NA is an important factor in virulence, immune response, and probably is a key factor to be considered for the development of live attenuated influenza vaccines (LAIVs).NA-defective viruses, expression of MHC, and activation of IAV-specific CD8+ T cellsTo understand how responses to NA-defective viruses might activate IAV-specific CD8+ T cells, we first investigated the interaction of dendritic cells (DCs) with IAVs and IAV-infected cells to understand how they were processed by DCs for presentation to T cells and other immune cells9,10. After A549 cells were infected by NA-defective WSN viruses, the cells showed increased viability (Fig. 3a) and released fewer viruses into the supernatant as compared to the WSN-infected cells (Fig. 3b). It was also found that the distribution of some viral proteins inside the cell was not significantly affected, probably due to the different processes of cell death in different IAV-infected cells and viral proteins accumulated in NA-defective virus-infected cells (Supplementary Fig. 2). The green fluorescent signals were relatively weak compared to WSN (Fig. 3c) in DCs co-cultured with mouse B cells labeled with 5(6)-carboxyfluorescein diacetate N-succinimidyl ester (CFSE) and infected with NA-defective WSN that had similar vRNA levels at 6-h post-infection to WSN-infected B cells (Fig. 3d), suggesting that the NA activity might affect the uptake of IAV antigens by DCs. When DCs were cultured with the cells infected by WSN, more DCs with green fluorescent signal and more viral protein M1 inside the DCs (Fig. 3e, Supplementary Fig. 7c) were observed. After further incubation at 37 °C for 24 h, more viruses were released to the supernatant (Fig. 3f), suggesting that WT viruses replicated in DCs.Fig. 3: The NA activity regulated MHC I expression on DCs to prime and activate CD8+ T cells.a Analysis of the cell viability of virus-infected A549 cells by MTS assay. b Comparison of the amount of released virus at different time points from A549 cells. c Analysis of DCs with green fluorescent signal by flow cytometry after DCs were incubated with CFSE-labeled IAV-infected B cells in 24 h. % indicated the percentage of DCs with green fluorescent signal. 100% indicated 10,000 DCs. d Comparison of cellular vRNA at 6-h post-infection after B cells were infected with various viruses at an MOI of 3. e Analysis of viral protein M1 in DCs by western blot. The filter was probed with anti-M1 and anti-β-actin monoclonal antibodies. f Virus released from DCs after incubation with CFSE-labeled B cells infected by virus. Analysis of MHC I g and MHC II h expression by flow cytometry of DCs, and virus replication in IAV-infected DCs (i). Some isolated DCs were incubated in DC culture medium for another 24 h at 37 °C for detection of virus replication. i Representative flow cytometry histograms of MHC I j and MHC II k expression on DCs after incubation with IAV-infected B cells. l Virus released from DCs after incubation with IAV-infected cells. m Representative flow cytometry histograms of CD8+ T-cell proliferation. n Distribution of IAV proteins recognized by the CD8+ T cells induced by NA-defective viruses. The epitope regions of viral proteins were shown in the figure. The peptides were incubated with CD8+ T cells and GrzB-secreted cells and measured by flow cytometry. o Cytotoxicity of IAV-specific CD8+ T cells. a, b, c, d, f, i, l, n, o Mean ± SD for three independent experiments. g, h, j, k, m Data are representative of duplicate experiments. *P < 0.001.Full size imageTo further study the effects of DCs infected by IAV, the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) and class II (MHC II), which are essential for presentation of the internalized molecules after processing, were measured by flow cytometry9. In general, we observed that when DCs were infected by WSN or co-cultured with the cells infected by WSN, MHC II was more expressed than MHC I (Fig. 3g, h, j, k), and the virus replicated more in DCs (Fig. 3i). However, when DCs were co-cultured with the cells infected by NA-defective WSN viruses, MHC I was more expressed whereas MHC II was not expressed on DCs (Fig. 3j, k) and little virus was released to the medium (Fig. 3l). We also found that when DCs were incubated with inactivated IAVs, more MHC II than MHC I was expressed (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b); however, when DCs were incubated with the cells treated with the inactivated virus, the expression of MHC I/II was not increased (Supplementary Fig. 3c, d).MHC I-expressed DCs can prime and activate the proliferation of CD8+ T cells and secretion of IFN-γ9. LAIV WSN-NA treated mice would induce IAV-specific CD8+ T cells4. When DCs were co-cultured with the B cells infected by NA-defective viruses, the isolated DCs were incubated with CD8+ T cells from mice treated with different IAVs. As expected, the DCs induced a proliferation of CD8+ T cells (Fig. 3m) accompanied with IFN-γ secretion (Supplementary Fig. 4a), especially when DCs were incubated with the CD8+ T cells isolated from the mice vaccinated with LAIV WSN-NA produced from MDCK cells. This result suggested that the uptake of antigens by DCs from the cells infected by NA-defective viruses would prime and activate the IAV-specific CD8+ T cells.The IAV-specific CD8+ T cells induced by NA-defective WSN were able to recognize the epitopes from different IAV proteins such as PB1, NP, HA, M1, M2, and NS1, as shown by their secretion of granzyme B (GrzB) by flow cytometry (Fig. 3n). In addition, the CD8+ T cells were more activated when incubated with different combinations of viral peptides (Supplementary Fig. 4b). Furthermore, when the cells infected by NA-defective WSN were incubated with different ratios of CD8+ T cells, the lysis of the IAV-infected cells (Fig. 3o) and the secretion of IFN-γ (Supplementary Fig. 4c) showed a dose-dependent response, suggesting that the NA-defective virus could induce an immune response in which CD8+ T cells recognize and eliminate the cells infected by IAV. The observation that vaccination of mice with LAIV WSN-NA elicited a broadly protective immune response against different strains and subtypes of IAVs, including WSN, A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1), A/Solomon Islands/3/2006 (H1N1), A/New Caledonia/20/1999 (H1N1), A/California/07/2009 (H1N1), A/Brisbane/10/2007 (H3N2), and H5N1 in the challenge study suggests that LAIV WSN-NA induced IAV-specific CD8+ T cells have the ability to recognize many conserved viral antigens (Supplementary Fig. 5).NA-defective viruses and expression of cytokines in host immune responseThe mechanism of immune response to IAV infection that causes tissue injury in the host is complicated, and it is known that the cellular activities of innate and adaptive immune response can be affected by cytokines11,12. Here we found that mice infected by WSN induced higher levels of IFNα, IFNγ, IL-2, IL-4, and IL-6 known to activate the antibody response, while the NA-defective WSN induced higher levels of IL-10, IL-12, and IL-27 known to trigger the cellular immune response (Fig. 4a–h)13,14,15,16,17,18. In a recent study, IL-17D was shown to be a critical cytokine during IAV infection to suppress the activity of CD8+ T cells through regulation of dendritic cells19. We also found that mice immunized with NA-defective WSN induced a very low level of IL-17D (Fig. 4i), likely minimizing its suppression of the CD8+ T-cell induction (Fig. 4j, k) and activation (Fig. 4l, m). This result was supported by the observation that IL-17D was able to reduce the secretion of INFγ from CD8+ T cells (Fig. 4j, k) or IAV-specific CD8+ T cells (Fig. 4l, m)19. We speculate that when IAV was taken by DCs, MHC II, and the cytokines including IL-2, IL-4, and IL-6 were expressed to activate CD4+ T cells, and IL-17D was induced to suppress the CD8+ T-cell activity. However, the expression of MHC I on DCs to prime the IAV-specific CD8+ T cells required the uptake of IAV-infected cells and the cooperation of cytokines such as IL-10, IL-12, and IL-27 (Fig. 4n).Fig. 4: The NA activity affects cytokines production.a INFα, b IFNγ, c IL-2, d IL-4, e IL-6, f IL-10, g IL-12, h IL-27, and i IL-17D production from the mice infected with 1 × 103 pfu of IAV at 4-day post-infection. j IL-17D inhibited the induction of IAV-specific CD8+ T cells. HI IL-17D: Heat inactivated IL-17D. k The relationship between the dose of IL-17D and the secreted IFNγ from CD8+ T cells. l IL-17D suppressed the activation of IAV-specific CD8+ T cells. m` Dose-dependent suppression of IFNγ secreted from the IAV-specific CD8+ T cells by IL-17D. n A model of IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell induction and activation. CD8+ T-cell induction was suppressed by IL-17D but activated by IL-27. The gray cell indicated IAV-infected cell. a–m Mean ± SD for three independent experiments. *P < 0.001, **P < 0.05.Full size imageSevere influenza infection causes a cytokine storm that originates from the hyperinduction of proinflammatory cytokine production20,21. Interestingly, the mice with robust IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell activation could avoid the cytokine storm caused by highly pathogenic IAV infection. When mice were vaccinated with LAIV WSN-NA followed by infection with a high lethal dosage of H5N1, the mice produced less total protein in the BAL fluid and lower levels of IFN-α, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-17D, but higher levels of IFNγ, IL-12, and IL-27 to activate the IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell response, suggesting that the NA activity would affect the course of host immune response to IAV infection (Fig. 5).Fig. 5: NA activity affects the profile of cytokine expression in host defense.a Total protein, b INFα, c IFNγ, d IL-2, e IL-4, f IL-6, g IL-12, h IL-17D, and i IL-27 production from mice immunized with different viruses at 4-day post-infection in a challenge study with H5N1. The control indicated the group of mice without IAV infection. a–i Mean ± SD for three independent experiments. **P < 0.05. *P < 0.001.Full size imageNA activity and composition of virusesUnexpectedly, we also found that the composition of released viruses from IAV-infected cells was affected by NA-defective strains. At the late stage of NA-defective IAV infection in MDCK cells (on 18-h post-infection), the cells released some particles (LAIV WSN-NA(p) and LAIV WSN-NA-AS1(p)) that had different distributions of proteins (Supplementary Fig. 6a). These particles contained more M2 (ion channel) protein and less HA protein (Fig. 6a, Supplementary Fig. 7d), but still had the viral genome (vRNA) (Supplementary Figs. 6b, 7e) albeit with lower HA-sialic acid binding ability (Supplementary Fig. 6c), and were mainly elongated, filamentous, and irregular-shaped particles (Fig. 6b–d).Fig. 6: Characterization of the released viral particles from MDCK cells infected with NA-defective viruses.a Analysis of major proteins in the NA-deffective viral particles by western blot. The filter was probed with anti-HA, anti-NA, anti-M2, and anti-M1 monoclonal antibodies. Morphology of WT virus (b), LAIV WSN-NA(p) (c), and LAIV WSN-NA-AS1(p) (d) examined by transmission electron microscopy. e Comparison of the viral particles released from LAIV WSN-NA(p) and WSN-NA-AS1(p) infected A549 cells, and f vRNA in A549 cells infected with the NA-deffective viral particles at 24-h post-infection. g Cell viability of A549 cells infected with the NA-deffective viral particles. h The sera of immunized mice were analyzed using hemagglutination inhibition assay to measure the anti-HA antibody level. i Analysis of the survival rate of mice immunized with WSN, LAIV WSN-NA(p), WSN-NA-AS1(p), or PBS after challenge with H5N1. j Following (i), IFNγfrom BAL fluid was measured at day-4 post-infection. The control indicated the group of mice without IAV infection. e, f, g Mean ± SD of three independent experiments. h, j Mean ± SD of five independent experiments. i Ten independent experiments are shown. *P < 0.001.Full size imageApplication to universal vaccine designAfter A549 cells were infected by LAIV WSN-NA(p) and LAIV WSN-NA-AS1(p) produced from MDCK cells, there were fewer viruses released into the supernatant (Fig. 6e), and the intracellular viral genome (Fig. 6f) and protein M1 (Supplementary Figs. 6d, 7f) were accumulated, along with a reduction in viable cells (Fig. 6g). When mice were infected with 1 × 106 pfu of LAIV WSN-NA(p) or LAIV WSN-NA-AS1(p) via oral administration, they survived well with no body weight loss, and were able to effectively clear the infection particles (Supplementary Fig. 6e–g). In addition, the mice induced less IFN-α/γ in the BAL fluid (Supplementary Fig. 6h, i) and produced very low levels of anti-HA antibodies (Fig. 6h), indicating that these particles could be used as effective LAIVs with low pathogenicity. In the H5N1 challenge study, the immunized mice were able to survive well without body weight loss (Fig. 6i, Supplementary Fig. 6j), clear the virus from the lungs (Supplementary Fig. 6k), and induce less IFN-α (Supplementary Fig. 6l) and more IFN-γ (Fig. 6j), suggesting that the IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell response was activated. Since the immune responses of LAIV WSN-NA(p) and LAIV WSN-NA-AS1(p) were similar to that of NA-defective WSN, we concl uded that the induction of IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell response does not require the release of much infective virus, further supporting the important role of NA in the process of immune response.DiscussionIt is known that infection with one subtype of IAV may induce IAV-specific CD8+ T cells to target different subtypes of IAV6,8,22, or IAV-specific CD4+ T cells to target that specific subtype of IAV8,23. However, patients with severe IAV infection usually have a limited or severely compromised CD8+ T-cell proliferation and differentiation response to eliminate the virus6,24,25. Our study indicated that though CD4+ T cells were generally induced in response to IAV infection, and IL-17D was expressed to suppress the CD8+ T-cell activity, MHC I was expressed to activate CD8+ T cells in the presence of NA-defective IAV. In addition, the mice infected with WT IAV did not generate higher CD8+ T cells through induction of cytokines such as IL-10, IL-12, and IL-2718,26.Recent studies have suggested strategies for the design of LAIV to elicit CD8+ T cells for cross protection4,27,28,29,30, and uptake of large amounts of target antigens by DCs will stimulate an efficient activation of CD8+ T cells31,32,33,34. However, our study showed that the viral particles released from MDCK cells infected by NA-defective WSN would provide sufficient antigens for DCs to prime the IAV-specific CD8+ T cells and eliminate IAV-infected cells through recognition of conserved cytotoxic T lymphocyte epitopes of various IAV antigens such as PB1, NP, HA, M1, and NS1.During the process of influenza infection, the cytoplasmic tails of HA and NA play an important role in the budding process. The concentration of HA and NA in lipid raft provides a local alteration in membrane curvature resulting in the interaction of the cytoplasmic tails of HA and NA with M1 protein to start the budding process. M1 recruits M2 to the budding site for membrane scission and NA then cleaves the sialic acid linkage on the cell surface to release the budding virion35,36,37,38. In our study, the NA-defective viruses can still express the cytoplasmic tails of NA and produce infection particles in MDCK cells but not in A549 cells, probably because the MDCK cell is highly polarized and susceptible for IAV replication39. Surprisingly, these infection particles have different compositions, especially with increase in M2 and decrease in HA expression, suggesting that NA is used not only for the cleavage of sialic acid ligands to release virions but its ectodomain also affects virion composition in the budding process.In summary, this study has demonstrated that the NA-defective WSN or the viral particles produced from MDCK cells infected with NA-defective WSN can be used as LAIV to effectively induce IAV-specific CD8+ T-cell response to protect against different influenza strains such as H1N1, H3N2, and H5N1. The LAIV particles can be easily produced and this approach may lead to a new direction toward the development of a universal influenza vaccine.MethodsCell lines and virusesMadin-Darby canine kidney cells (MDCK) and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293T) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen, Rockville. MD). A549 human adenocarcinoma alveolar basal epithelial cells were kept in F-12K medium (Invitrogen, Rockville, MD). All media were supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Thermo Scientific) and antibiotics (100 U/ml penicillin G and 100 gm/ml streptomycin). The MDCK cells with stable NA expression were prepared by cloning the full-length NA (from WSN strain) into a cDNA expression lentivector (pLAS2w.Ppuro) to generate NA-expression lentivirus using the protocol provided by the National RNAi Core Facility, Academia Sinica, Taiwan (rnai.genmed.sinica.edu.tw) and were maintained in DMEM medium4. Influenza A virus, A/WSN/33 strain was used in the studies.AntibodiesMouse monoclonal anti-HA, anti-NA, and anti-NP antibodies were obtained from Sino Biological. Mouse monoclonal anti-β-actin and rabbit monoclonal anti-MHCII antibodies were purchased from Millipore. Goat polyclonal anti-M1 was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Mouse monoclonal anti-M2 antibody was obtained from ABcan. Rabbit polyclonal anti-granzyme B antibody was purchased from Aviva Systems Biology. Rabbit monoclonal anti-MHC I antibody was obtained from Invitrogen. All commercial antibodies were validated for specificity by companies and us via western blot.Virus replication rateMonolayer cultures of MDCK and A549 cells in 12-well dishes were washed twice with 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The cells were infected with variants of modified influenza virus at an MOI of 3 in serum-free medium containing 0.1 g/mL L-(tosylamido-2-phenylethyl) chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-trypsin (Pierce) and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h; cells were washed twice with 1x PBS and then incubated with complete medium. At different time points, the supernatant was collected to determine the virus titer by plaque assay in MDCK cells36.Plaque assayMonolayers of MDCK cells (for WSN) or MDCK cells with stable NA expression (for NA-defective WSN such as LAIV WSN-NA, LAIV WSN-NA-AS1, LAIV WSN-NA(p), and LAIV WSN-NA-AS1(p)) in 6-well dishes were washed twice with 1x PBS. The cells were then inoculated with serial 10-fold dilutions of the virus in serum-free medium containing 0.5 μg/mL TPCK-trypsin and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Afterward, the cells were washed and overlaid with MEM containing 0.5% agarose (Lonza) and 0.5 gm/ml TPCK-trypsin, and after 3 days, fixed with 10% formaldehyde and stained with 0.1% crystal violet solution4.Generation of recombinant virusesEight fragments of A/WSN/33 viral genome were amplified by RT-PCR. As shown in Table 1, we mutated the N residue to A in the putative sequon N-X-S/T to delete the glycosites 44, 72, and 219 (i.e., N44A mutation designated as 44-G), or added a stop codon to the first amino acid residue of the stalk or catalytic domain in the NA genome to remove the stalk and/or catalytic domain (designated as LAIV WSN-NA (S31stop) and LAIV WSN-NA-CD (L75stop)) of NA as previously described4, or changed the designated amino acid in the active site (AS1: R102A (designated as LAIV WSN-NA-AS1); AS2: D135A (designated as LAIV WSN-NA-AS2)) by site-directed mutagenesis. The viral cDNAs were inserted into pcDNA3.1 containing the pol I and CMV promoter with the method similar to the way pHW2000 was generated. The recombinant viruses were generated by the 8-plasmid co-transfection method into MDCK/293T cells with stable NA expression following the method described previously by our group4. Supernatants were collected, titrated, and frozen at −80 °C until use.RNA isolation, reverse transcription, and quantitative PCRThe total intracellular or virus particle RNA was extracted by using Trizol (Invitrogen) and EasyPrep total RNA kit (TOOLS, Taiwan) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. The reverse transcription (RT) reaction was carried out using the SuperScript III first-strand synthesis system (Invitrogen). To synthesize the cDNA of vRNA, the influenza A-specific primer (uni-12; 5′-AGCAAAAGCAGG-3′) was used. The primer with the sequence 5′-AGGTCCAGACGCAGGATGGC-3′ was used for β-actin in the RT reaction36. To quantify vRNA, quantitative PCR was performed by using SYBR green 1 (Roche, Germany). To detect influenza vRNA, the primers used were 5′-AATAAGACGAATCTGGCGCCAAGC-3′ and 5′-CAGCCGTTGCATCGTCACCA-3′. To quantify β-actin, the primers used were 5′-GCAAGCAGGAGTATGACGAGTCCG-3′ and 5′-GCATTTGCGGTGGACGATGG-3′. To quantify the total intracellular and cytoplasmic vRNA of influenza A virus, the threshold cycle (CT) values of vRNA were normalized to β-actin36. For amplification of influenza A NP, HA, NA, and M segments, the primer sets for NP were 5′-ATGGCGACCAAAGGCACCAAAC-3′ and 5′-CTTTGTCATAAAGGATGAGTTC-3′, for HA were 5′-ACAATATGTATAGGCTACCATG-3′ and 5′-TCTGTATTGAATGGATGGGATG-3′, for NA were 5′-ATGAATCCAAACCAGAAAATAATAAC-3′ and 5′-AGATGAATTGCCGGTTAATATC-3′, and for M were 5′-ATGAGTCTTCTAACCGAG-3′ and 5′-ACTGGCAAGTGCACCAGCAG-3′36,40.Preparation of WSN and NA-defective WSN viruses for immunogenicity testWSN, LAIV WSN-NA(p) and LAIV WSN-NA-AS1(p) were cultured in MDCK cells, and LAIV WSN-NA and LAIV WSN-NA-AS1 viruses were cultured in MDCK cells with stable expression of NA. For the preparation of inactivated viruses, viruses were inactivated by using 0.1% BPL (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium) at room temperature for 24 h followed by dialysis for 24 h against PBS buffer. Inactivation of virus was confirmed by performing culture on MDCK cells4. For analysis of the virulence of recombinant virus, each group of ten female 4–6-week-old BALB/c mice was intranasally inoculated with 50 μL of virus (1 × 103 pfu for WSN (UL) and 1 × 106 pfu for WSN, LAIV WSN-NA, LAIV WSN-NA-AS1, LAIV WSN-NA(p), or LAIV WSN-NA-AS1(p)). The survival rate and body weight changes were recorded daily for 14 days post-infection. For the immunogenicity test, mice were immunized twice intranasally with 1 × 103 pfu of WSN (UL), or with 1 × 106 pfu of LAIV WSN-NA, LAIV WSN-NA-AS1, LAIV WSN-NA(p), or LAIV WSN-NA-AS1(p) on days 0 and 21. One week after the booster immunization, mice were anesthetized and inoculated intranasally with 10xLD50 of H5N1 virus and separated into three groups. In the first group, the survival rate and body weight changes were recorded daily for 14 days post-infection. In the second group, the BAL fluids were collected to measure the production of IFN-α/γ, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, IL-17D, and IL-27, and the extent of IAV replication; and in the third group, the serum sample was collected for analysis of antiserum production. For the challenge assay, the immunized mice were inoculated intranasally with 10 × LD50 of WSN, A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1), A/Solomon Islands/3/2006 (H1N1), A/New Caledonia/20/1999 (H1N1), A/California/07/2009 (H1N1), A/Brisbane/10/2007 (H3N2), and H5N1, and separated into two groups. In the first group, the survival rate and body weight changes were recorded daily for 14 days after the infection. In the second group, the BAL fluids were collected to measure IAV replication. All animal experiments were evaluated and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Academia Sinica.Hemagglutination inhibition assayAfter serum samples were serially diluted twofold in a 96-well plate, 4 hemagglutination units (HAU) of WT WSN were added to each well for 1 h at room temperature. After incubation, 25 µL of a 2% (vol/vol) turkey erythrocyte solution was added to give a total volume of 125 µL and the mixture was incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The HAI titer of individual serum samples was determined to be the inverse of last dilution where cells were not agglutinated4.Measurement of IFN-α/γ and other cytokinesIFN-α/γ, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, IL-17D, and IL-27 were measured by using ELISA kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (IFN-α: Cloud-Clone Corp; IFN-γ: Boster Biological Technology Co., Ltd: IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, IL-17D, and IL-27: R&D Systems).Immunofluorescence microscopyMDCK cells grown in slide chambers were infected by WSN, LAIV WSN-NA, or LAIV WSN-NA-AS1 at an MOI of 3. After 24 h, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0.5% saponin. After being blocked with 0.25% bovine serum albumin, the cells were incubated with mouse monoclonal anti-HA, anti-NP, anti-M2, and anti-M1 antibodies (ABcam). After extensive washes, the cells were stained with goat anti-mouse secondary antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (ABcam). Last, images were captured with an inverted fluorescence microscope (Leica DMI6000).Uptake of antigens from IAV-infected cells by DCsB cells from normal mice were infected with LAIV or incubated with inactivated WSN (BPL treatment) at an MOI of 1 in RPMI 1640 medium containing 0.5 μg/ml TPCK-trypsin and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. The infected cells were washed five times with PBS and labeled with CFSE (Merck) (1 μM CFSE for 10 min at room temperature, then washed twice with complete RPMI 1640 plus 10% FCS), then incubated with GM-CSF-cultured bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDC) (ratio: 1:3) in DC culture medium (RPMI 1640 supplemented with 20 ng/mL murine GM-CSF (R&D Systems), 10% FBS, 50 μM 2-ME, 100 units/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin) for 24 h at 37 °C. After incubation, DCs were isolated by M-pluriBead Cell Separation kit (pluriSelect) following the procedure from the company. The number of DCs with the green fluorescent signal was analyzed by flow cytometry, and viral proteins were analyzed by western blot41. Some isolated DCs were incubated in DC culture medium for another 24 h at 37 °C for detection of virus replication.MHC I and MHC II expression on DCs infected by IAV or co-cultured with IAV-infected cellsDCs were infected with live WSN or incubated with inactivated WSN (BPL treatment) at an MOI of 3 in RPMI 1640 medium containing 0.5 μg/ml TPCK-trypsin and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Then, the DC cells were washed twice and incubated in DC culture medium for 24 h at 37 °C, then analyzed for MHC I and MHC II expression by flow cytometry. For the study of DCs interacting with IAV-infected cells, IAV-infected B cells (as described previously) were co-cultured with DCs (ratio: 3:1) in DC culture medium for 24 h at 37 °C. Then, DCs were isolated by using M-pluriBead Cell Separation kit (pluriSelect) and analyzed to measure the MHC I and MHC II expression by flow cytometry.IAV-infected cells regulate DCs to affect the proliferation of CD8+ T cellsAfter DCs were incubated with the B cells infected by WSN or LAIV WSN-NA virus, DCs were isolated and co-cultured with CFSE-labeled CD8+ T cells (1 μM CFSE for 10 min at room temperature, then washed twice with complete RPMI 1640) (ratio: 1:2) from mice treated with PBS, WSN, or LAIV WSN-NA in complete RPMI 1640 with 0.5 ng/mL IL-7 (R&D Systems), 30 U/mL IL-2 (R&D Systems), and 50 μM 2-ME for 24 h at 37 °C. CD8+ T cells were then isolated by Dynabeads Untouched Mouse CD8 Cells kit (Invitrogen) following the procedure from the company and the number of cells with FITC signal was analyzed by flow cytometry.Suppression of CD8+ T-cell activity by IL-17DAfter DCs incubated with the B cells infected by LAIV WSN-NA virus, the DCs were isolated and co-cultured with CD8+ T cells (from PBS or LAIV WSN-NA treated mice) (ratio: 1:2) and IL-17D (0–200 ng/mL, R&D Systems). After 3 days, the supernatants were collected to measure the IFN-γ production by ELISA kit. Heat inactivated IL-17D was prepared by heating at 56 °C for 30 min.CD8+ T cytotoxicity assayCD8+ T cells were isolated from the mice immunized with WSN, LAIV WSN-NA, or PBS using Dynabeads Untouched Mouse CD8 Cells kit (Invitrogen) and co-cultured with CFSE-labeled B cells infected with LAIV WSN-NA at an MOI of 3 in complete RPMI 1640. The co-cultures were run at different cell ratios (i.e., 1:1, 2:1, and 4:1 CD8+ T cell/IAV-infected cell) in 200 μl of RPMI 20% in U-bottom 96-well plates. Afterward, the mortality of IAV-infected cells was scored by flow cytometry. The value of cell mortality was normalized to that of IAV-infected cells without co-culturing with CD8+ T cells as IAV-infected cells would cause cell apoptosis.Flow cytometryCells were harvested and suspended in FACS buffer [2% (vol/vol) FBS in PBS] at a density of 106/ml. The antibody used in this study was anti-MHC I, anti-MHC II, or anti-granzyme B antibody. Cellular fluorescence intensity was analyzed by FACS Canto (BD Biosciences) and FCS Express 3.0 software.Cell-binding assayTurkey erythrocytes were pretreated with different amounts (0–60 μg/mL) of Vibrio cholerae neuraminidase [receptor destroying enzyme (RDE)] (Sigma) for 60 min at 37 °C, then washed once with PBS and divided into 2% (vol/vol) erythrocyte solutions in PBS. Twenty-five microliters of each 2% solution were added to a solution of virus containing the same amount of M1 protein (determined by western blot) to give a total volume of 125 μL. The virus and RDE-treated erythrocytes were incubated for 1 h at room temperature, and agglutination was then measured. Data were expressed as the maximal concentration of RDE that gave full agglutination4.Transmission electron microscopyMDCK cells were grown on ACLAR embedding film with 7.8-mil thickness (E, M, S) for 1 day followed by infection with influenza virus at an MOI of 5. At 24 hpi, the virus-infected cells were rinsed with 0.1 M cacodylate buffer and fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer at 4 °C for 30 min. Then cells were postfixed with 1% osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M cacodylate for 30 min, stained with 1% uranyl acetate and lead citrate for 1 h, dehydrated with ethanol, and embedded with resin. After baking, the sample was cut into 80-nanometer thin sections using ultramicrotome and examined with Tecnai G2 Spirit TWIN (FEI Company)36.Statistics and reproducibilityAll data were presented as means ± standard error of the mean. The numbers of sample and replicates of experiments were shown as mentioned in the figure legends. Comparisons between groups were determined using Student’s t test. Differences were considered significant at *P < 0.001, **P < 0.05. All data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 6 software.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability All relevant data are available from the authors upon request and the corresponding author will be responsible for replying to the request. Source data underlying plots shown in figures are provided in Supplementary Data 1. Full blots are shown in Supplementary Fig. 7 of Supplementary Information. ReferencesSridhar, S. et al. Cellular immune correlates of protection against symptomatic pandemic influenza. Nat. Med. 19, 1305–1312 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Miloje, S. et al. Distinct T and NK cell populations may serve as immune correlates of protection against symptomatic pandemic influenza A(H1N1) virus infection during pregnancy. PLoS ONE 12, e0188055 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Weinfurter, J. T. et al. Cross-reactive T cells are involved in rapid clearance of 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza virus in nonhuman primates. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002381 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, C. Y. et al. Influenza A surface glycosylation and vaccine design. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 280–285 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Komadina, N. et al. High conservation level of CD8(+) T cell immunogenic regions within an unusual H1N2 human influenza variant. J. Med. Virol. 88, 1725–1732 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gonzalez, Y. et al. Diminished effector and memory CD8+ circulating T lymphocytes in patients with severe influenza caused by the AH1N1 pdm09 virus. Virology 500, 139–148 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wang, Z. et al. Recovery from severe H7N9 disease is associated with diverse response mechanisms dominated by CD8+ T cells. Nat. Commun. 13, 6833 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Petrova, V. N. & Russell, C. A. The evolution of seasonal influenza viruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 16, 47–60 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Duan, M. et al. The contributions of lung macrophage and monocyte heterogeneity to influenza pathogenesis. Immunol. Cell Biol. Mar. 95, 225–235 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Shim, J. M. et al. Influenza virus infection, interferon response, viral counter-response, and apoptosis. Viruses 9, pii: E223 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Betakova, T. et al. Cytokines induced during influenza virus infection. Curr. Pharm. Des. 23, 2616–2622 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen, X. et al. Host immune response to influenza A virus infection. Front Immunol. 9, 320 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Abbas, A. K. et al. Revisiting IL-2: biology and therapeutic prospects. Sci. Immunol. 3, pii: eaat1482 (2018).Article Google Scholar Karasuyama, H. et al. How do basophils contribute to Th2 cell differentiation and allergic responses? Int Immunol. 30, 391–396 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yang, J. et al. IL-6 impairs vaccine responses in neonatal mice. Front Immunol. 9, 3049 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Oft, M. Immune regulation and cytotoxic T cell activation of IL-10 agonists—preclinical and clinical experience. Semin Immunol. 44, 101325 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Barbarin, A. et al. Phenotype of NK-like CD8(+) T cells with innate features in humans and their relevance in cancer diseases. Front Immunol. 8, 316 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Chihara, N. et al. Induction and transcriptional regulation of the co-inhibitory gene module in T cells. Nature 558, 454–459 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, Y. et al. Interleukin-17D promotes pathogenicity during infection by suppressing CD8 T cell activity. Front. Immunol. 10, 1172 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Liu, Q., Zhou, Y. H. & Yang, Z. Q. The cytokine storm of severe influenza and development of immunomodulatory therapy. Cell Mol. Immunol. 13, 3–10 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Li, X. et al. H5N1 influenza virus-specific miRNA-like small RNA increases cytokine production and mouse mortality via targeting poly(rC)-binding protein 2. Cell Res. 28, 157–171 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Hayward, A. C. et al. Natural t cell-mediated protection against seasonal and pandemic influenza. Results of the flu watch cohort study. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 191, 1422–1431 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao, Y. et al. High levels of virus-specific CD4+ T cells predict severe pandemic influenza A virus infection. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care. Med. 186, 1292–1297 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rutigliano, J. A. et al. Highly pathological influenza A virus infection is associated with augmented expression of PD-1 by functionally compromised virus-specific CD8+ T cells. J. Virol. 88, 1636–1651 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Koutsakos, M. et al. Downregulation of MHC class I expression by influenza A and B viruses. Front. Immunol. 10, 1158 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Raeber, M. E. et al. The role of cytokines in T-cell memory in health and disease. Immunol. Rev. 283, 176–193 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wang, Z. et al. Establishment of memory CD8+ T cells with live attenuated influenza virus across different vaccination doses. J. Gen. Virol. 97, 3205–3214 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Longlong, S. I. et al. Generation of influenza A viruses as live but replication-incompetent virus vaccines. Science 354, 1170–1173 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Lulan, W. et al. Generation of a live attenuated influenza vaccine that elicits broad protection in mice and ferrets. Cell Host Microbe 21, 334–343 (2016). Google Scholar Du, Yushen et al. Genome-wide identification of interferon-sensitive mutations enables influenza vaccine design. Science 359, 290–296 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Li, J. et al. DNA is an efficient booster of dendritic cell-based vaccine. Hum. Vaccin Immunother. 11, 1927–1935 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Anticoli, S. et al. Engineered exosomes emerging from muscle cells break immune tolerance to HER2 in transgenic mice and induce antigen-specific CTLs upon challenge by human dendritic cells. J. Mol. Med. 96, 211–221 (2017).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Spranger, S. & Gajewski, T. F. Impact of oncogenic pathways on evasion of antitumour immune responses. Nat. Rev. Cancer 18, 139–147 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Crouse, J. et al. Regulation of antiviral T cell responses by type I interferons. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 231–242 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rossman, J. S. & Lamb, R. A. Influenza virus assembly and budding. Virology 411, 229–236 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wu, C. Y. et al. The SUMOylation of matrix protein M1 modulates the assembly and morphogenesis of influenza A virus. J. Virol. 85, 6618–6628 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Takashi, O. et al. Influenza A virus hemagglutinin and neuraminidase mutually accelerate their apical targeting through clustering of lipid rafts. J. Virol. 88, 10039–10055 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Leser, G. P. & Lamb, R. A. Lateral organization of influenza virus proteins in the budozone region of the plasma membrane. J. Virol. 91, pii: e02104-16 (2017).Article Google Scholar Gregersen, J. P. et al. Safety of MDCK cell culture-based influenza vaccines. Future Microbiol. 6, 143–152 (2011).Article PubMed Google Scholar Hoffmann, E. et al. Universal primer set for the full-length amplification of all influenza A viruses. Arch. Virol. 146, 2275–2289 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Davor, F. et al. Influenza virus and poly(I:C) inhibit MHC class I-restricted presentation of cell-associated antigens derived from infected dead cells captured by human dendritic cells. J. Immunol. 182, 2766–2776 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Dr. Jia-Tsrong Jan’s laboratory for mouse vaccination and challenge experiments. The Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) was from the imaging core in the Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica. This work was supported by the Summit Program, Academia Sinica.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsGenomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, 128 Academia Road, Sec. 2, Nankang Dist., Taipei, 115, TaiwanChung-Yi Wu, Hong-Yang Chuang & Chi-Huey WongDepartment of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550N. Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA, 92037, USAChi-Huey WongAuthorsChung-Yi WuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHong-Yang ChuangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChi-Huey WongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsC.-Y.W. and C.-H.W. designed the research and supervised the project. C.-Y.W. designed and performed experiments and analyzed data. H.-Y.C. contributed new reagents/analytical tools. C.-Y.W. and C.-H.W. wrote the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Chi-Huey Wong.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationDescription of Additional Supplementary FilesSupplementary Data 1Reporting SummaryRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleWu, CY., Chuang, HY. & Wong, CH. Influenza virus neuraminidase regulates host CD8+ T-cell response in mice. Commun Biol 3, 748 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01486-zDownload citationReceived: 05 May 2020Accepted: 03 November 2020Published: 08 December 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01486-zShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Journal Metrics Editors Editorial Board Calls for Papers Referees Contact Editorial policies Aims & Scope Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Communications Biology (Commun Biol) ISSN 2399-3642 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingExperts are homing in on an influenza vaccine that could last a lifetime - ABC News ABC NewsVideoLiveShowsElections538ShopStream onLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 10, 11:43 PM ETNational Election Results: presidential Projection: Trump is President-elect226312226312Harris71,145,751270 to winTrump74,673,847Expected vote reporting: 94%Recent ProjectionsColo. Dist. 8Projected WinnerGabe Evans•R5 hours agoAriz.PresidentProjected WinnerDonald Trump•R1 day agoNational Election Results: house205214205214Dem.214 up for electionLost: 2218 for controlestimateRep.221 up for electionGained: 2Election 2024 updates: With Arizona, Trump sweeps all 7 swing statesLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 9, 9:49 PM ET9:46 PMWith Arizona, Trump sweeps all 7 swing states8:59 PMTrump projected winner in ArizonaExperts are homing in on an influenza vaccine that could last a lifetimeAnnual flu shots may soon become a thing of the past.ByDr. Shiela Beroukhim AfrahimiDecember 7, 2020, 12:14 PM6:27A medical worker administers a Flu vaccination during a free flu clinic vaccination event held by Meijer at Comerica Park, Nov. 10, 2020, in Detroit.Matthew Hatcher/Getty Images, FILEWith COVID-19 cases still surging, the nation is heading toward what health officials fear to be a “critical and dangerous time” -- battling the deadly virus and peak flu season. Now, researchers are pushing forward to find a better way of protecting vulnerable populations than with a yearly flu vaccine, which may not always be effective against the current viral strains.Scientists have been scrambling to create an injection that can be one-and-done without the hassle of having to revaccinate the population on a yearly basis. Researchers, under the lead of Dr. Florian Krammer, a professor of vaccinology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, hope they’ve discovered the first sign of progress, according to a study published Monday in the journal Nature Medicine.Krammer’s team of researchers are designing an injection that covers a broader range of virus strains that may no longer require yearly revaccinations.“We are developing a vaccine so that we can provide more breadth of protection,” Dr. Adolfo Garcia-Sastre, director of the Mount Sinai Health and Merging Pathogens Institute and co-author of the study, told ABC News.The current flu vaccine boasts an efficacy rate of 40% to 60% but this is only if the vaccine matches the current viral strains, which change every year. The vaccines are developed based on what scientists predict will be the next year’s batch of viral strains, leaving us a step behind one of the nation’s top killers and leaving our most vulnerable without adequate protection when scientists don’t get it right.MORE: Hundreds of protesters gather against new flu vaccine mandate in MassachusettsCurrent flu vaccines are designed to attack an integral protein on the surface of the flu virus – the hemagglutinin protein. Flu vaccines traditionally target the head of this hemagglutinin protein, but at a fault. The head of the hemagglutinin varies across different virus strains and also frequently changes, or mutates, through a process experts call “antigenic drift.”Krammer and his team of researchers have now designed a vaccine that tries a new approach. The outside of the flu virus is covered in tiny proteins, which scientists use to create “targets” for their vaccines. Krammer is trying to design a vaccine that would take aim at the stalk-end of the protein. Unlike the head, the stalk of the hemagglutinin protein is nearly the same across viral strains. If the vaccine proves to be effective, it would be touted as the first universal flu vaccine.“They are one step closer to a universal type of vaccine that is strong, broad, and durable,” said Dr. Todd Ellerin, head of Infectious Disease at South Shore Health, who was not involved in the research.The flu costs the nation over $10 billion a year and is traditionally one of the top 10 causes of death among people 65 years or older.MORE: Health officials urge Americans to get flu vaccine as concerns mount over possible 'twindemic'A universal flu vaccine that requires one or two injections over a person’s lifetime would reduce costly visits to the doctor’s office for yearly shots.“The virus changes all the time and we are not that good at predicting how it will change,” said Krammer. This universal vaccine, however, would “replace the seasonal vaccine so you would only get one or two shots, and maybe a booster here and there,” he added.Krammer’s vaccine has so far completed Phase 1 of clinical trials that test the vaccine’s safety and ability to stimulate the immune system. So far, the vaccine has proven to be safe with side effects similar to those seen with the traditional injection: transient muscle aches and pain at the injection site.The Phase 1 trial did not test for the vaccine’s efficacy but it did give scientists a better sense of which type of vaccine might work best. By analyzing blood samples from the volunteers, Krammer and his colleagues realized that one version of their vaccine, called an “inactivated” or “killed” form of the virus, was likely to work. Another version of the vaccine, called a “live-attenuated” virus, did not seem to work as well as the killed version.“The current live-attenuated vaccines are not as great as we initially thought,” said Dr. Walter Orenstein, associate director of the Emory Vaccine Center. But he's still encouraged by the data because "the inactivated vaccine gets protection against both transmission and infection,” he said.A medical worker prepares to administer a Flu vaccination at a drive through flu clinic held by Meijer at Comerica Park, Nov. 10, 2020 in Detroit, Michigan.Matthew Hatcher/Getty Images, FILEKrammer’s team plans to move forward with the inactivated form of the vaccine to Phases 2 and 3 – larger clinical trials that test for vaccine efficacy and safety.“The data suggest that immune response against the virus [from the vaccine] will be protective. We need to get to Phases 2 and 3 trials to look at this, but I find the data promising,” said Orenstein, who was not involved in the study.There are still many questions that will need to be answered before everyone can get this flu vaccine. But a vaccine set to last for years to life would also be a welcome gift to more disadvantaged parts of the world where yearly shots are a huge financial burden.“You won’t have to be worried about endemics anymore. That is something very positive. Maybe something that can really become reality,” said Krammer.Shiela Beroukhim Afrahimi, M.D., is an internal medicine resident at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center in Torrance, California, and a contributor to the ABC News Medical Unit.Related TopicsFlu SeasonPopular ReadsCalifornia fire grows over 20,000 acresNov 7, 9:47 PMSeattle stabbings: 10 attacked in 2 daysNov 8, 7:04 PMFEMA probing supervisor over Trump sign orderNov 9, 3:46 PMWhat Trump's win reveals about American votersNov 9, 5:09 AM538's final forecasts for the 2024 electionNov 5, 7:49 AMABC News Live24/7 coverage of breaking news and live eventsABC News NetworkAbout Nielsen MeasurementChildren's Online Privacy PolicyContact UsDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationInterest-Based AdsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseYour US State Privacy Rights © 2024 ABC NewsAdolfo García-Sastre: The Virus Hunter | Mount Sinai - New York Toggle navigation Toggle search Search Close 1-800-MD-SINAI 1-800-MD-SINAI Find a Doctor Find a Doctor Request an Appointment Request an Appointment Same-Day Appointments Request an Appointment RAA By Name By Specialty Next Select Specialty Acupuncture Adolescent Medicine Allergy and Immunology Anesthesiology Breast Cancer Cancer (Oncology) Cardiology Cardiovascular Surgery Dentistry Ear, Nose, Throat (Otolaryngology) Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Gastroenterology Genetics and Genomics Geriatric Medicine Hematology Infectious Disease Internal Medicine Nephrology Neurological/Neurosurgery Neurology Obstetrics and Gynecology Occupational Medicine Ophthalmology Orthopaedic / Orthopaedic Surgery Pain Management Pediatrics Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Podiatry Preventive Medicine Primary Care (Internal Medicine) Psychology-PhD Pulmonology/Sleep Medicine Radiology Rehabilitation and Physical Medicine Rheumatology Spine Surgery Transplant Urology Next Our Locations Our Locations Our Locations View More Locations Mount Sinai Beth Israel Mount Sinai Brooklyn The Mount Sinai Hospital Mount Sinai Morningside Mount Sinai Queens Mount Sinai South Nassau New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai Mount Sinai West​​​ Mount Sinai Doctors Faculty Practice The Spine Hospital at Mount Sinai The Mount Sinai Health Network Mount Sinai Kravis Children's Hospital Urgent Care Mount Sinai Doctors Outpatient Locations Mount Sinai-Union Square The Blavatnik Family Chelsea Medical Center Mount Sinai Emergency Care Locations Mount Sinai-Behavioral Health Center Phillips School of Nursing at Mount Sinai Patient Care Patient Care Featured Services View All Services Cancer Dermatology Digestive Diseases - Gastroenterology Ear, Nose and Throat Emergency Care Endocrinology Heart - Cardiology and Cardiovascular Surgery Liver Diseases Neurology Neurosurgery Nursing Obstetrics and Gynecology Ophthalmology Orthopedics Pain Management Primary Care Psychiatry Radiology Surgery Thoracic Surgery Transplantation Services Urgent Care Urology View All Services About Us About Us About Us View More Contact Us Digital Patient Tools and Resources Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Executive Leadership Facts and Figures Financial Assistance Insurance Information International Patient Services LGBT- GNB Health Language Access Services Mount Sinai Daily Mount Sinai Doctors Medical Records Medical Staff Services Department MyMountSinai® App Newsroom The Mount Sinai Health Network Our Mission Pay My Bill Physician Access Services Visit Us View More Search Close 1-800-MD-SINAI1-800-MD-SINAI MyMountSinai (MyChart) Check Symptoms & Get Care Pay My Bill For Physicians Same-Day Appointments Make a Gift Home About Us Newsroom Mount Sinai Podcasts Real, Smart People Adolfo: The Virus Hunter Mount Sinai Podcasts Road to Resilience Healing Through Empowerment The Breast Cancer Wake-Up Call Addiction Among Older Adults Struggles with Obesity Creativity Cures the Mind Resilience in Community Care Care for the Caregiver Environmental Science, at Gunpoint The Burnout Crisis Matching Mind & Body Recipes for Resilience Life as a Hero’s Journey In Sickness & Health Education Through Autism Thriving With Down Syndrome Surviving Domestic Violence When Hearts Attack The Trials of Scientific Research The Brain & Body Under Social Stress The Challenges of Schizophrenia Zlata’s Diary Bridging Parenting and Recovery Physical Endurance Breeds Resilience Interpreting Resilience The Dog Will See You Now Approaches to Building Resilience Women’s Health is Everyone’s Right The Cold Chill of Seasonal Depression When a Family Experiences a Homicide A New Approach to Behavioral Health Modern Widows Club Coping with a Rapid-Aging Disease Powering Through Internal Conflict Music Therapy Resilience Lessons from Sully The Long Battle with Long COVID Return of Road to Resilience Road to Resilience Archive Farewell Bright Days, Dark Nights Talking Resilience With a Harlem Minister The Cancer Dancer Coming Home The Resilience Paradox 7300 Days Polymath of the Soul Only the Lonely Ketamine: From Club to Clinic Heart to Heart The Fierce Side of Self-Compassion Beyond Sleep Hygiene Wise Up Toxic Apocalypse A WEIRDo’s Guide to Exercise The Man Box Good Trouble A Shot in the Arm Enough with the Mindfulness PTSD, Meet MDMA Year of the Pandemic Theater of War Workshopping Resilience Cancer is Me The Indestructible Judith Hunt The Price of Perfection Our Better Angels Three Generations of Autism Advocates I Am Not My Hair Coping After a Natural Disaster Unmaking Painful Memories Rewrite Your Script Opening Up Three Good Things The Recharge Room Emily & Kumail on Staying In The Givers The Edge of the Unknown Signs of Hope Pandemic-Proof Parenting Tips Our Finest Hour How to Stay Sane While Staying Home Calm Through Chaos The Only Way Out is Through The Body Heals the Mind Modeling Courage "I Made a Decision to Live" Facing Climate Change The Gospel of Curtis 10 Resilience Insights from 2019 My Experiments With Truth The Stuff With My Mom Kids Who Can Deal Your Brain on Fear The Story of Bed 25 A Scientist’s Guide to Optimism Unknown Exposure The Comedian and the Brain Tumor Measuring the Mental Toll of Child Separation Forget Kumbaya: The Art of Self-Care Dr. Krieger’s Three Resilience Tips Somebody to Lean On The Long Arm of Childhood Trauma Resilience Stories (Live!) The Mystery Virus The Power of Optimism Thriving After a Devastating Loss Managing Stress, Anxiety and Fear A Resilient Journey from Trauma to Success Faith, Spirituality and Mindfulness Building a Resilient Family The Prescription to My Recovery An Unexpected Trauma Real, Smart People Miriam: The Dancing Scientist Bevin: The Problem Solver Jess: Love Thy Neighbor Joshua: The Sculptor Mary: Autopsies Save Lives Yasmin: The Barrier Breaker Adolfo: The Virus Hunter Date Published: December 7, 2020 Adolfo Garcia-Sastre, PhD, reflects on the thrill of discovery and the connection between butterfly-catching, his hobby, and pursuing the universal flu vaccine. Dr. Garcia-Sastre’s research has been focused on the molecular biology of influenza viruses and several other negative strand RNA viruses. Seasonal influenza is a major public health concern, triggering as many as 650,000 deaths every year globally, according to the World Health Organization. In addition, influenza pandemics, similar to the current COVID-19 outbreak, occur at irregular intervals and can claim millions of lives. Read More Dr. Garcia-Sastre with his insect collection. Adolfo: The Virus Hunter (Podcast Trailer) Podcast Transcript Dr. Garcia-Sastre: 00:00 This one came from Colombia. This one came from China. This one came from Burgos, my hometown in Spain. It relaxes me a lot to go from time to time. Go with my butterfly catcher, pick up a couple of beetles, a couple of butterflies, especially those that I don't know. "Oh! What beautiful colors, what beautiful shapes!" And then I mount them, classify them, and put them into boxes. My kids, for example, hate me because I kill butterflies. How can I kill butterflies, they are so beautiful and so nice? But I still find it quite relaxing. Dr. Garcia-Sastre: 00:40 So what's easier to catch: these or a virus? Dr. Garcia-Sastre: 00:43 Oh, a virus is more difficult to catch! These ones you see them and you pick them up. A virus you don't see, they are very sneaky. My name is Adolfo Garcia-Sastre. I'm a professor of microbiology here at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. And I'm also Director of the Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute. Flu every year kills an average of 500,000 people worldwide. Here in the United States, an average of 35,000 people. So we have been working now on trying to generate an improved influenza virus vaccine that will prevent influenza virus infection, not only for influenza viruses that are circulating this year, but also for the influenza viruses that will be circulating 10 years from now, including potential new pandemic viruses. When I was a young person, I didn't have at this time influenza in my mind, or medicine in my mind or making an impact on public health. Basically what I like is understanding how life works. I could have been happy working with a very strange ant in the Amazon that has a very strange shape and try to find out why they have this shape. But I actually like that I went into flu because I'm fulfilling my own desire to discover. And the fulfilling of these desires can be translated into something that is going to be of benefit to everybody. This is a mad virus. So it's like a serial killer, meaning that influenza in general doesn't want to kill people. The influenza virus, the only thing it wants is to make copies of itself and propagate. But from time to time you get the mad virus which doesn't care so much about propagating and becomes more of an efficient killer. Basically what we want is to understand the mind of a criminal serial killer virus in order to be able to stop them. Dr. Garcia-Sastre: 02:52 Would it be correct to call you the Sherlock Holmes of this effort? Dr. Garcia-Sastre: 02:56 I love Sherlock Holmes. He was smarter than me! When I'm very much immersed in my work, I start to become obsessed with a particular idea and it comes to my mind like a flash. These things happen to me when I'm running or when I'm in the shower or when I'm watching a movie or whatever, and then I become completely obsessed. You're thinking all the time in your mind, "Did I miss something?" And, "Is this something that is—a connection that I think could be important? Something important? And how to figure out whether this connection is important?" One of the best thrills was when we, for the first time, were able to recover influenza virus from plasmid DNA. This colleague of mine, he called me up at two o'clock in the morning to my home and said, "Adolfo, I have it." "Is it working?" "Yes, it is working." And that was a very thrilling thing. And this technology now is used everywhere to study influenza viruses. So it was a great discovery, and this compensates for all the work that is usually very tedious that we do when we are working in the lab. When I will know that we have done it, that we have a universal vaccine—when we do the studies, the final studies, and it will take a long time still for that. Hopefully in my lifetime, but perhaps not, perhaps not. That's something that we can't know for sure. If it's a failure for whatever reason, I'm sure that we can learn from the failure and find out how to make it better. What do I do next after the universal flu vaccine? [laughs] I'm sure there will be another thing that will take my attention. What these things will be, I don't know. But I'm sure part of it will also be the thrill of discovery and finding new things. In This Episode Adolfo Garcia-Sastre, PhD Director, Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Professor, Microbiology, Medicine (Infectious Diseases), Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai View Full Bio Related Resources Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute The Garcia-Sastre Laboratory Department of Microbiology Available On Apple Podcasts Spotify Google Podcasts YouTube More Episodes Miriam: The Dancing Scientist Bevin: The Problem Solver Jess: Love Thy Neighbor Joshua: The Sculptor Mary: Autopsies Save Lives Yasmin: The Barrier Breaker Adolfo: The Virus Hunter LinkedIn Facebook X Youtube Instagram Pinterest Tiktok COVID-19 Staff Resources Mount Sinai Today Blog 1-800-MD-SINAI1-800-MD-SINAI Patient Information MyMountSinai® App Pay My Bill No Surprises Act International Services Mount Sinai Access Find a Doctor Check Symptoms & Get Care Patient Representatives Offices Language and Accessibility Health Library Clinical Trials Newsroom Research & Education Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Medical Education Graduate Education Research Find Faculty Phillips School of Nursing Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Insurance For Health Professionals Transfer a Patient Mount Sinai Connect Refer a Patient Nursing Hospital Sponsored Programs Medical Staff Services Choose A Location Hospitals Urgent Care/Walk-In Choose a location Mount Sinai Beth IsraelMount Sinai BrooklynThe Mount Sinai HospitalMount Sinai MorningsideMount Sinai QueensMount Sinai South NassauMount Sinai West New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount SinaiMount Sinai-Union Square Choose a location Mount Sinai-Union Square Urgent CareMount Sinai Doctors West 23rd StreetMount Sinai Doctors East 34th Street ©2024 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Contact Us Careers Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy HIPAA Privacy Practices Compliance Non-Discrimination Notice Patient Responsibilities Price Transparency Vendors close× close×Why the 1918 Flu Pandemic Never Really Ended | HISTORYSkip to contentShowsThis Day In HistoryScheduleTopicsStoriesHistory ClassicsLive TVYour ProfileYour ProfileHistoryFind History on Facebook (Opens in a new window)Find History on Twitter (Opens in a new window)Find History on YouTube (Opens in a new window)Find History on Instagram (Opens in a new window)Find History on TikTok (Opens in a new window)Email UpdatesLive TVHistory ClassicsShowsThis Day In HistoryScheduleTopicsStoriesVideosHistory PodcastsHistory VaultHomeTopicsWorld War IWhy the 1918 Flu Pandemic Never Really EndedWhy the 1918 Flu Pandemic Never Really EndedAfter infecting millions of people worldwide, the 1918 flu strain shifted—and then stuck around.By: Dave RoosUpdated: June 13, 2023 | Original: December 11, 2020copy page linkPrint PageBettmann Archive/Getty ImagesAn unthinkable number of people worldwide—more than 50 million—died from the 1918-1919 flu pandemic commonly known as the “Spanish Flu.” It was the deadliest global pandemic since the Black Death, and rare among flu viruses for striking down the young and healthy, often within days of exhibiting the first symptoms. In the United States, the 1918 flu pandemic lowered the average life expectancy by 12 years. What’s even more remarkable about the 1918 flu, say infectious disease experts, is that it never really went away. After infecting an estimated 500 million people worldwide in 1918 and 1919 (a third of the global population), the H1N1 strain that caused the Spanish flu receded into the background and stuck around as the regular seasonal flu. But every so often, direct descendants of the 1918 flu combined with bird flu or swine flu to create powerful new pandemic strains, which is exactly what happened in 1957, 1968 and 2009. Those later flu outbreaks, all created in part by the 1918 virus, claimed millions of additional lives, earning the 1918 flu the odious title of “the mother of all pandemics.” The Spanish Flu Was Deadlier Than WWIDeadly Virus Struck in Three WavesJeffrey Taubenberger was part of the pioneering scientific team that first isolated and sequenced the genome of the 1918 flu virus in the late 1990s. The painstaking process involved extracting viral RNA from autopsied lung samples taken from American soldiers who died from the 1918 flu, plus one diseased lung preserved in the Alaskan permafrost for nearly 100 years. Now chief of the Viral Pathogenesis and Evolution Section at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Taubenberger explains that genetic analyses of the 1918 flu indicate that it started as an avian flu and represented a completely new viral strain when it made the leap to humans shortly before 1918. Lab tests of the reconstructed 1918 virus show that in its original form, the virus’s novel encoded proteins made it 100 times more lethal in mice than today’s seasonal flu. The 1918 pandemic struck in three distinct waves over a 12-month period. It first appeared in the spring of 1918 in North America and Europe largely in the trenches of World War I, then reemerged in its deadliest form in the fall of 1918, killing tens of millions of people worldwide from September through November. The final wave swept across Australia, the United States and Europe in the late winter and spring of 1919. But did the 1918 flu simply “go away” after that third wave? Absolutely not, says Taubenberger. Photos: Innovative Ways People Tried to Protect Themselves From the FluDuring the first half of the 20th century, people used a variety of measures—including gargles, masks and signs—to try and avoid catching the flu.Read more5 Hard‑Earned Lessons from Pandemics of the PastHow do populations survive a pandemic? History offers some strategies.Read more1918 Flu PandemicGet the full story behind the aches, pains and dangerous history of the flu.Watch nowVirus Mutates Into Seasonal FluSince the whole world had been exposed to the virus, and had therefore developed natural immunity against it, the 1918 strain began to mutate and evolve in a process called “antigenic drift.” Slightly altered versions of the 1918 flu reemerged in the winters of 1919-1920 and 1920-1921, but they were far less deadly and nearly indistinguishable from the seasonal flu. “The 1918 flu definitely lost its real virulence by the early 1920s,” says Taubenberger.But what’s truly incredible, according to genetic analyses, is that the same novel strain of flu first introduced in 1918 appears to be the direct ancestor of every seasonal and pandemic flu we’ve had over the past century.“You can still find the genetic traces of the 1918 virus in the seasonal flus that circulate today,” says Taubenberger. “Every single human infection with influenza A in the past 102 years is derived from that one introduction of the 1918 flu.”Welcome to the Pandemic EraThe 1918 flu pandemic was by far the deadliest flu outbreak of the 20th and 21st centuries to date, but it wasn’t the only one to qualify as a pandemic. Even with the advent of the first seasonal flu vaccines after World War II, the flu virus has proven capable of some unexpected and deadly genetic tricks. In a normal flu season, vaccine scientists can track the most active viral strains and produce a vaccine that protects against changes in the human flu virus from year to year. But every so often, viral genes from the animal kingdom enter the mix. Boys wear bags of camphor around their necks around the time of the 1918-19 Spanish flu—an “old-wives’ method of flue-prevention,” according to a December 1946 issue of Life magazine. The Spanish flu was a huge concern for WWI military forces. Here, men gargle saltwater to prevent infection at the War Garden at Camp Dix (now Fort Dix) in New Jersey, circa 1918.Read more: Why October 1918 Was America's Deadliest Month EverA woman wears a sci-fi-looking flu nozzle attached to a machine circa 1919. It’s not clear how it worked or if it had any health benefits.Donning a mask, a man uses a pump to spray an unknown “anti-flu” substance in the United Kingdom, circa 1920.Professor Bordier of France’s University of Lyon apparently claimed that this machine could cure colds in minutes. This photo circa 1928 shows him demonstrating his own machine.People in London wear masks to avoid catching the flu circa 1932. This is a preventative method people still use around the world today.People in England wear different-looking masks to prevent the flu circa 1932.This baby’s parents had the right idea in this photo circa 1939. The flu can spread between people up to six feet away, and because babies have a high risk of developing serious flu-related complications, it’s best for people who haven’t received flu shots to stay away.Read more: Pandemics That Changed HistoryBritish actress Molly Lamont (far right) receives her “emergency flu rations” of oranges at Elstree Studios in London, circa 1940.1 / 9: Bettmann Archive/Getty Images“If one animal is infected with two different influenza viruses at the same time,” says Taubenberger, “maybe one virus from a bird and another from a human, those genes can mix and match to create a brand new virus that never existed before.”That’s what happened in 1957 when the 1918 flu, which is an H1N1 virus, swapped genes with another bird flu giving us the H2N2 pandemic, which claimed a million lives worldwide. It happened again in 1968 with the creation of the so-called “Hong Kong Flu,” an H3N2 virus that killed another million people. The so-called “Swine Flu” pandemic of 2009 has an even deeper backstory. When humans became infected with the 1918 pandemic flu, which was originally a bird flu, we also passed it on to pigs. “One branch of the 1918 flu permanently adapted to pigs and became swine influenza that was seen in pigs in the US every year after 1918 and spread around the world,” says Taubenberger.In 2009, a strain of swine flu swapped genes with both human influenza and avian influenza to create a new variety of H1N1 flu that was “more like 1918 than had been seen in a long time,” says Taubenberger. Around 300,000 people died from the 2009 flu pandemic. All told, if 50 to 100 million people died in the 1918 and 1919 pandemic, and tens of millions more have died in the ensuing century of seasonal flus and pandemic outbreaks, then all of those deaths can be attributed to the single and accidental emergence in humans of the very successful and stubborn 1918 virus. “We’re still living in what I would call the ‘1918 pandemic era’ 102 years later” says Taubenberger, “and I don’t know how long it will last.”HISTORY VaultStream thousands of hours of acclaimed series, probing documentaries and captivating specials commercial-free in HISTORY VaultWATCH NOWBy: Dave RoosDave Roos is a journalist and podcaster based in the U.S. and Mexico. He's the co-host of Biblical Time Machine, a history podcast, and a writer for the popular podcast Stuff You Should Know. Learn more at daveroos.com. Citation InformationArticle TitleWhy the 1918 Flu Pandemic Never Really EndedAuthorDave RoosWebsite NameHISTORYURLhttps://www.history.comews/1918-flu-pandemic-never-endedDate AccessedNovember 10, 2024PublisherA&E Television NetworksLast UpdatedJune 13, 2023Original Published DateDecember 11, 2020Fact CheckWe strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something that doesn't look right, click here to contact us! HISTORY reviews and updates its content regularly to ensure it is complete and accurate.Print PagePandemicsSign up for Inside HistoryGet HISTORY’s most fascinating stories delivered to your inbox three times a week.Sign UpBy submitting your information, you agree to receive emails from HISTORY and A+E Networks. You can opt out at any time. You must be 16 years or older and a resident of the United States.More details: Privacy Notice | Terms of Use | Contact UsA+E NetworksOur Family of BrandsHistory EducationHistory VaultMobile/AppsNewsShare Your OpinionFollow Historydpm+BiographyCrime and InvestigationHistory en EspanolLRWMilitary HistoryAd ChoicesAdvertise With UsAccessibility SupportCopyright PolicyCorporate InformationEmployment OpportunitiesFAQ/Contact UsPrivacy NoticeCookie NoticeTerms Of UseTV Parental GuidelinesContact UsCopyright PolicyPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseAd ChoicesAccessibility Support© 2024, A&E Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.Clinical Trials of 'Universal' Flu Vaccine That Blocks Multiple Strains Show Promise : ScienceAlert Space Health Environment Humans Tech Nature Physics Society Opinion Explainer About Us Our Team Follow Us Daily Newsletter Contact Privacy Privacy Manager Accessibility Terms © 2024 ScienceAlert Pty Ltd Clinical Trials of 'Universal' Flu Vaccine That Blocks Multiple Strains Show Promise Health11 December 2020By David Nield (Guido Mieth/DigitalVision/Getty Images) While the current COVID-19 pandemic has rightly taken precedence in our public health concerns at the moment, seasonal influenza continues to be linked to hundreds of thousands of deaths worldwide every year. Now, scientists think they may be one step closer to formulating a universal flu vaccine. Such a vaccine would offer long-lasting protection against a wide variety of flu strains, which can mutate and evolve to escape the reach of the flu vaccines we have today. Having a vaccine like this would make a huge difference to public health, and many research teams are looking for one. This new solution has just completed the first stage of human clinical trials, designed to evaluate its safety. It passed with flying colours, and though the sample size was small – just 65 people – it's a promising start to what will hopefully be a long-term life saver. "An influenza virus vaccine that results in broad immunity would likely protect against any emerging influenza virus subtype or strain and would significantly enhance our pandemic preparedness, avoiding future problems with influenza pandemics as we see them now with COVID-19," says microbiologist Florian Krammer, from the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City. "Our chimeric hemagglutinin vaccine is a major advance over conventional vaccines which are often mismatched to the circulating strains of virus, impacting their effectiveness. In addition, revaccinating individuals annually is a huge and expensive undertaking." Just two or three shots of the chimeric hemagglutinin (HA)-based vaccine would be enough to push the body's immune system into developing immunity, the researchers say, and it wouldn't have to be reformulated each year. The vaccine is so named because it targets the hemagglutinin protein that binds the influenza virus to host cell receptors in the body. Influenza vaccines usually encourage the body to produce antibodies that target the globular head domain, or tip, of the protein. In this case, though, researchers took aim at the stalk domain further down, closer to the virus's shell. While the flu virus is typically able to use a process called antigenic drift to counter neutralisation by mutating the head of the hemagglutinin protein, that escape route isn't available through the stalk part. It's a fixed target rather than a changing one. "The beauty of this vaccine is that it's not only broad, but multifunctional with stalk-specific antibodies that can neutralise many kinds of influenza viruses," says microbiologist Adolfo García-Sastre, from the Icahn School of Medicine. "This universal vaccine could be particularly beneficial to low and middle-income countries that don't have the resources or the logistics to vaccinate their populations each year against influenza." The participants that received the jab developed strong immune responses that lasted at least 18 months, which is promising. As this is just a Phase 1 trial though, the volunteers weren't directly tested for protection against influenza – that first stage just deals with safety. Although scientists have long thought that the stalk section of hemagglutinin might be key to developing a universal vaccine, it hasn't been clear if this part of the protein could actually be properly targeted. The new study suggests so. Over the next couple of years, the researchers will be busy developing similar vaccines to target other influenza groups, before combining them together and organising a larger scale human trial to test immunity directly. After that, we might start seeing flu seasons that aren't quite so deadly. "This phase of our clinical work significantly advances our understanding of the immune response in terms of its longevity, and leaves us greatly encouraged about future progress for this potentially breakthrough vaccine," says Krammer.The research has been published in Nature Medicine. Trending News Huge Study Shows Where Gout Comes From, And It's Not What We Thought Health3 days ago We Finally Know Why Ancient Roman Concrete Was Able to Last Thousands of Years Physics6 days ago One Super Predator in Africa Instills Even More Fear Than Lions Nature2 days agoLatinos are especially reluctant to get flu shots – how a small clinic in Indiana found ways to overcome that Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair Juan Miranda receives a flu shot from Yadira Santiago Banuelos, family nurse practitioner, at the Family Health Clinic of Monon in Monon, Indiana. Purdue University/Rebecca McElhoe Latinos are especially reluctant to get flu shots – how a small clinic in Indiana found ways to overcome that Published: December 9, 2020 8.14pm GMT Pamela M. Aaltonen, Jennifer Coddington, Purdue University Authors Pamela M. Aaltonen Professor Emerita; Immediate Past President, APHA, Purdue University Jennifer Coddington Clinical Professor of Nursing, Purdue University Disclosure statement The authors do not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and have disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment. Partners Purdue University provides funding as a member of The Conversation US. View all partners Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger Every year, tens of millions of Americans avoid the flu vaccine. During the 2019-2020 flu season, fewer than half of U.S. adults got the shot. The Latino population is more reluctant than most other groups to get the flu vaccine and often pays a high price with their health. An analysis by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of 10 flu seasons showed the Latino community had the third highest flu-related hospitalization rates of any demographic group. As professors and researchers who study public health, we want to know why the Latino population, in particular, is so wary of the vaccine. Here are a few reasons: Latinos worry about whether the shot is safe. They wonder if it works. They question whether it’s actually needed. Confidence in the vaccine is a major predictor of influenza vaccination among Latina women. Getting a flu shot not only stops the spread of the flu. It might also be an indicator of who is willing to get a COVID-19 vaccine – and conversely, who is not, and why. So it is more important than ever to understand why large groups of people are reluctant to get vaccinated – and what might be done to earn their trust. We think our experience at a clinic in rural Indiana might shed some light on this important issue. Low vaccination rates among Latinos and Blacks are a growing concern. Historically low rates, despite high rewards Reports from the 2019-2020 influenza season say that 38% of Latino adults were immunized, compared to 41% of Blacks, 42% of American Indian or Alaska Natives, 52% of Asians and 53% of whites. However, when children are included in the calculation rates, numbers for Latinos go up; Latino children are typically immunized with greater frequency than their parents. Those receiving the shot have fewer lost work and school days. They reduce the risk of seeking medical intervention by 40% to 60%. That includes visits to crowded emergency rooms. In communities with known influenza virus circulation, vaccinations decreased pediatric hospitalizations by 41%. For adults, vaccines reduce the likelihood of admission to an intensive care unit by 82%. Those with the lowest influenza vaccine rates are also disproportionately affected by COVID-19. Since both illnesses show some of the same symptoms, testing is needed to distinguish one disease from the other. This will divert health care personnel from other tasks. Hospitals already crowded with COVID-19 patients will be asked to make room for those with severe influenza. This is particularly important this year, as health care providers scramble to prevent the possible “twindemics” of influenza and COVID-19. Even during normal times, the Latino community may be at increased risk of exposure to the flu virus; many have jobs in crowded work environments, like meat packing plants, warehouses and agriculture enterprises. [Get the best of The Conversation, every weekend. Sign up for our weekly newsletter.] A rural community steps up The Family Health Clinic in Monon, Indiana, a rural community in White County, Indiana, has worked to build trust with the local Latino population by taking some relatively simple steps. The clinic, recognized by the U.S. government as a place that provides high-quality care to a traditionally underserved population, is staffed by nurse practitioners. Partnering with the Purdue University School of Nursing, the Family Health Clinic serves a clientele that is 52% Latino. One important part of gaining trust was in making sure the staff were bilingual. Other strategies the clinic used to establish relationships with the Latino population included sponsoring community activities and inviting Latino participation on the clinic board. Perhaps of most importance was generating a reputation for providing a secure, affordable and respectful place for excellent health care in a setting where staff listened to and responded to questions about vaccines. Brenda Andrade is one of the many who recently received her influenza shot there. She has five children, ranging in age from 4 months to 9 years. Andrade was willing to receive a shot because she wanted to “make sure her family is protected.” Two more local residents, Juan and Elidia Miranda, also made the flu shot a priority. “We’ve gotten colds every so often, but not influenza,” said Juan Miranda. After talking with clinic staff, they realized the benefits of staying healthy for themselves and their families. Elidia Miranda receives a flu shot from Yadira Santiago Banuelos, family nurse practitioner, at the Family Health Clinic of Monon in Indiana. Purdue University/Rebecca McElhoe Community health centers like the Monon clinic have long been a trusted source of care for those who don’t otherwise have health care access. They are more than equipped to handle the reasons often given by Latinos as to why they don’t get the shot. But will this willingness to receive the flu vaccine from a trusted source translate to receiving the COVID-19 vaccine when it’s available? The answer is likely yes. A history of having taken other vaccines is a significant predictor of future behavior, as is a vaccine recommendation from one’s trusted health care provider. Monon clinic staff have already initiated discussion of the rationale for being vaccinated, sharing available safety and efficacy data with patients. Vaccination Flu Healthcare Anti-vaxxers Flu shot Latinx COVID-19 COVID-19 vaccines Influenza shot Flu vaccines Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationFlu vs. COVID-19 Skip to main content Aetna® CVS Caremark® CVS Pharmacy Careers Investors Contact Us Aetna® CVS Caremark® CVS Pharmacy Careers Investors Contact Us About About Our purpose is simple and clear: Bringing our heart to every moment of your health. About About Our Strategy Our Strategy Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Company History Our Strategy Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Company History Our People Our People Our Purpose Our People Our Purpose Leadership Leadership Public Policy Public Policy Public Health Value-Based Care Access to Coverage Drug Costs Public Policy Public Health Value-Based Care Access to Coverage Drug Costs CVS Health Ventures CVS Health Ventures Services Services Our approach ties directly to our purpose: Bringing our heart to every moment of your health™. Services Services COVID-19 COVID-19 Timeline COVID-19 Timeline Health Care and Wellness Health Care and Wellness Health Services Condition Management Mental Health Health and Wellness Products Other Health Care Services Health Care and Wellness Health Services Condition Management Mental Health Health and Wellness Products Other Health Care Services Prescription Drug Coverage Prescription Drug Coverage Pharmacy Benefits Management Health Care Affordability Prescription Drug Coverage Pharmacy Benefits Management Health Care Affordability Health Insurance Health Insurance Commercial Health Coverage Medicare Medicaid Individual and Family Plans Vision and Dental Management Medical Management Health Insurance Commercial Health Coverage Medicare Medicaid Individual and Family Plans Vision and Dental Management Medical Management Pharmacy Pharmacy Mail Order Pharmacy Neighborhood Pharmacy Prescription Delivery Prescription Savings Specialty Pharmacy Pharmacy Mail Order Pharmacy Neighborhood Pharmacy Prescription Delivery Prescription Savings Specialty Pharmacy News News Find everyday health news, media resources and more. News News Press Releases Press Releases Featured Content Featured Content Research Reports Research Reports Media Contacts Media Contacts Media Library Media Library Impact Impact Find out how we're touching people, communities, businesses and the planet. Impact Impact Healthy People Healthy People Healthy Community Healthy Community Health Zones Our Giving Disaster Relief Volunteerism Our Opioid Response Healthy Community Health Zones Our Giving Disaster Relief Volunteerism Our Opioid Response Healthy Planet Healthy Planet Climate Action Sustainability Healthy Planet Climate Action Sustainability Healthy Business Healthy Business Health Equity Health Equity Social Determinants of Health Health Equity Social Determinants of Health Impact Reports Impact Reports Annual Report Impact Reports Annual Report Back Home News Pharmacy Flu vs. COVID-19 December 08, 2020 | Pharmacy Download Save as PDF Share Twitter Facebook Linkedin Mail Copy link When DawnName changed to protect patient privacy., a health care provider from Maine, felt the familiar tickle in her throat along with congestion, she thought it was seasonal allergies. When her condition became worse, she decided to get tested for COVID-19, which shares similar symptoms. Waiting for the result was not only stressful, but also delayed her ability to find out what she had and how to treat it. “The waiting is so anxiety-provoking,” says Dawn. “Do I have it? Do I not have it? Once you know what you’re dealing with, you can figure out what to do next.” As it turned out, Dawn discovered she did have COVID-19. COVID-19, influenza, strep throat, seasonal allergies and even wildfire smoke cause similar symptoms, such as a sore throat, runny nose, headache or cough — but have very different treatments and isolation requirements. A person with COVID-19, for example, must isolate for 10 days, while patients with strep throat are not considered infectious after 24 hours on antibiotics. Angela Patterson, Chief Nurse Practitioner Officer at MinuteClinic, says a quick and accurate diagnosis is critical for improving health outcomes, avoiding unnecessary isolations and getting people back to work and school. That’s why as cases skyrocket, CVS Health is expanding its nationwide COVID-19 testing services to offer rapid-result tests at nearly 1,000 sites by the end of the year. Results can be provided within 30 minutes or less. Since March, CVS Health has administered eight million COVID-19 tests at 4,000 drive-thru locations and has expanded testing to include children ages 10 and up. , New Rapid-Result test kiosks keep patients and CVS Health staff safe. , “Patients with concerns about being COVID-19 positive — and who are COVID-19 positive — can more quickly get that diagnosis so that they can more quickly receive the appropriate treatment,” says Angela. “It’s also about minimizing community spread so that patients have the information to protect and care for themselves and protect their loved ones.” Symptomatic patients who test negative for COVID-19 at a CVS Health testing site can also visit an on-site MinuteClinic to get tested for other highly contagious illnesses, like flu or strep throat. And, if you're healthy and haven't gotten a flu shot yet, it's not too late to get one. Angela reminds us that patients who contract both COVID-19 and the flu are at risk for increased complications. “It’s critical that everyone who is able to receive the vaccine is vaccinated against the flu this year, especially those who are at high risk.” , COVID-19, infuenza and seasonal allergy symptoms COVID-19, influenza and seasonal allergies share common symptoms, which makes a quick and accurate diagnosis critical for improving health outcomes and recovery times. Commmon symptoms of COVID-19, flu and seasonal allergies: Cough Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing Fatigue (tiredness) Headache Sore throat Runny or stuffy nose Seasonal allergies do not usually cause shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, unless a person has a respiratory condition like asthma that can be triggered by pollen exposure. Source: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020 Healthier happens together™ Quick Links News Leadership Careers Investors Contact Us Services COVID-19 Health Care and Wellness Prescription Drug Coverage Health Insurance Pharmacy Impact Initiatives Company Policies Our Opioid Response Political Contributions Disclosures Vulnerability Disclosure Program Sign Up for News Thank you for subscribing. There seems to be a problem. Please try again later. Email Please enter a valid email Subscribe Accessibility Privacy Center Site Map Terms of Use Code of Conduct facebook twitter youtube instagram linkedin © Copyright 1999 - 2024 CVS Health CVS Health Media resource Terms of use Photo and video available via the CVS Health Newsroom are for use only by accredited members of the media. We will permit use of photography and video available via the CVS Health Newsroom by the media as long as the use will not disparage CVS Health nor imply endorsement by CVS Health Newsroom, and the photography cannot be changed or manipulated in any way with the exception of resizing or cropping. Please read the terms of use, indicate you read the statement by checking the checkbox, and then click the Download button. I agree to the terms of use policy Invalid Input Accept CloseTransmission of respiratory illnesses outdoors ‘definitely happens’ but less than indoors News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Account Account Anonymous User Log In Log In Log Out Log Out News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Specialties Choose a specialty All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Menu Close Specialties All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Infectious Disease Subspecialties Antimicrobials Dermatology Emerging Diseases Fungal Diseases Gastrointestinal Infections Hepatitis C HIV/AIDS Influenza MRSA Nosocomial Infections Pediatric ID Practice Management Respiratory Infections STDs Vaccination Viral Hepatitis Zoonotic Infections Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Account Account Log In Log In Log Out Log Out Account Account Anonymous User Close Searchbar Healio News Infectious Disease Emerging Diseases ByCaitlyn Stulpin Read more December 08, 2020 1 min read Save Transmission of respiratory illnesses outdoors ‘definitely happens’ but less than indoors ByCaitlyn Stulpin Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Outdoor transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory viruses is possible, but the odds are much lower than indoor transmission, according to a recent study. “We wanted to better understand the risk of getting or transmitting SARS-CoV-2 when people congregate outdoors,” Nooshin Razani, MD, MPH, director of the Center for Nature and Health at the University of California, San Francisco Benioff Children’s Hospital Oakland, told Healio. “We sought to inform policies that reconcile the many health benefits of being outdoors with the very important need to reduce COVID transmission.” Source: Bulfone TC, et al. J Infect Dis. 2020;doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa742. Razani and colleagues conducted a systematic review of peer-reviewed papers indexed in PubMed, EMBASE and Web of Science as well as preprints in Europe PMC through Aug. 12, 2020, that described cases of human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2. The researchers included reports of other respiratory virus transmission for reference. Five studies in their analysis determined that less than 10% of reported global SARS-CoV-2 infections have occurred outdoors and that the odds of indoor transmission were 18.7 times higher in comparison to outdoor transmission (95% CI, 6-57.9). Nooshin Razani Additionally, the researchers found five studies that described influenza transmission outdoors and two that described adenovirus transmission outdoors, but varying study quality and definitions of “outdoor transmission” limited their ability to draw conclusions. However, they did determine that factors such as duration and frequency of personal contact, lack of personal protective equipment and occasional indoor gathering during a largely outdoor experience were all associated with outdoor reports of infection. According to Razani, “outdoor transmission definitely happens.” “Bottom line: existing evidence supports the wide-held belief that the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission is lower outdoors, but there are significant gaps in our understanding of specific pathways. Access to outdoor spaces is important because the odds of infection are lower,” Razani said. “But being outdoors doesn't make you immune to infection and doesn't stop you from spreading infection. You still need masks and distance outdoors.” Published by: Sources/DisclosuresCollapse Source: Bulfone TC, et al. J Infect Dis. 2020;doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa742. Disclosures: Razani reports receiving grants from the REI Foundation and the Long Foundation. Please see the study for all other authors’ relevant financial disclosures. Read more about covid-19 sars-cov-2 coronavirus Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print Comment Continue Reading Related Content Play on Healio Follow Healio Twitter Facebook Instagram Threads LinkedIn About About Healio About Healio About the Wyanoke Group About the Wyanoke Group Editorial Policy and Philosophy Editorial Policy and Philosophy Sitemap Sitemap Account Information My Account Login My Account My Account Help Help Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Unknown Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Contact Us Email Us Email Us Contact Newsroom Contact Newsroom Advertising Information Advertising Information Permissions and Reprints Permissions and Reprints Legal Do Not Sell My Personal Information Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms and Conditions Terms and Conditions Medical Disclaimer Medical Disclaimer Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Sign Up for Email Get the latest news and education delivered to your inbox Email address Enter your email Update email address Specialty All Specialties Allergy & Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology/Hepatology Hematology Oncology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women’s Health & OB/GYN Subscribe Update email address The email address associated with your Healio account is: If you would like to edit or change the email address that your subscriptions and alerts are sent to, use the "Update email address" link. Update email address © Healio All Rights Reserved. Job board for health care professionals Job Opportunities We’re sorry, but an unexpected error has occurred. Please refresh your browser and try again. If this error persists, please contact ITSupport@wyanokegroup.com for assistance. Close Would you like to receive email reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME? Yes No Activity saved! You'll receive reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME. UnsubscribeYoung Surfer Loses Lung and Leg From Infection Caused by Flu Important Updates Close Important Updates Coming to a Cleveland Clinic location? E. 100th Street on Cleveland Clinic main campus closed Cole Eye entrance closing 800.223.2273 100 Years of Cleveland Clinic MyChart Need help? Giving Careers Search Search Cleveland Clinic Menu ClevelandClinic.org Find a Doctor Locations & Directions Patients & Visitors Health Library Institutes & Departments Appointments MyChartNeed help? Call for Additional Assistance 800.223.2273 ClevelandClinic.org Find a Doctor Locations & Directions Patients & Visitors Health Library Institutes & Departments Appointments Home / Patient Stories / Young Surfer Loses Lung and Leg From Infection Caused by Flu Young Surfer Loses Lung and Leg From Infection Caused by Flu See All Stories Slowly paddling out to sea, with his dad close by, 23-year-old Carter Parry was eager to resume the surfing life. Except this ride, in October 2020, was starkly different. The location was the Atlantic Ocean, off the coast of Massachusetts, and not at his adopted home of Kaneohe, Hawaii. He was on an 8-foot, easy-to-paddle, fish surfboard, rather than the shorter boards he regularly used on the massive waves, off Oahu’s North Shore. This expedition would last about 25 minutes, instead of the hours he would usually spend pounding the surf. The Shaker Heights, Ohio, native knew that day was a transcendent moment in his months-long battle to recover from the early-January onset of influenza B, which was complicated by pneumonia. “I’m making progress, that’s for sure,” says Carter, who is dividing time between his parent’s homes in Akron and Cleveland, Ohio, while continuing physical rehabilitation. “I know a lot of times people don’t survive what I had.” Carter surfing at Ala Moana, in Honolulu, Hawaii, in 2019. (Courtesy: Carter Parry) The combination of flu and pneumonia left Carter’s body vulnerable to a “super infection” of methicillin-susceptible staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). It eventually required removal of his right lung, and not long after, a below-the-knee amputation of his right leg and plastic surgery to reconstruct his left foot. “We’re completely in awe of Carter’s resiliency and determination,” says thoracic surgeon Alejandro Bribriesco, MD, part of a large team of Cleveland Clinic physicians, nurses and therapists who treated Carter when he arrived from Honolulu, about a month after he became ill. “Here, we see a lot of ‘unicorn’ cases that nobody else sees, but there really are not many patients quite like Carter.” Carter’s dad, Bob Parry adds, “Carter looks at life as a ‘glass half full’ person. And now, he’s just so driven to get back to a normal life.” Bob is a pediatric surgeon at another local hospital who was instrumental in getting his son transferred to Cleveland Clinic. After Carter contracted the flu and pneumonia, it left his body vulnerable to developing a life-threatening infection called MSSA. (Courtesy: Carter Parry) Carter’s sudden descent from a healthy and active young man to the brink of death took just a few days. Soon after returning to Hawaii in late December 2019, after spending the holidays with his family in Ohio, Carter felt minor cold-like symptoms, including a headache and scratchy throat. He attributed the scratchy throat to smoke from New Year’s Eve fireworks near the east Oahu home he shares with lifelong friend Chase Putney. However, at the beginning of January, he felt more flu-like symptoms, such as body aches and trouble sleeping. “Nothing extremely alarming,” Carter recalls, “but I called my dad.” Bob, who was just getting onto a boat in Fort Lauderdale, for a cruise to Mexico, advised bed rest and ibuprofen. A day later, while he was halfway across the Caribbean Sea, Bob, as well as Carter’s mother Kim, who was in Cleveland, got a text from Chase informing them Carter was hospitalized and in poor condition. Carter and his mom, Kim, at Lanikai, in Oahu, Hawaii, in April 2018. (Courtesy: Carter Parry) Kim immediately booked the first available flight out of Cleveland to Hawaii. She arrived at Carter’s bedside 20 hours later and was greeted with an embrace from his surgeon, saying they were doing everything possible. “That hug told me how dire things were. I sensed on the plane Carter was dying, and the surgeon’s response confirmed that. I was trying to prepare myself, but somehow I also felt Carter would somehow survive.” Bob, rushed off the ship when it docked on the island of Cozumel, took a ferry to Cancun, a flight to Seattle and then the first flight out to Honolulu. Two days later, he was finally at his son’s bedside and alarmed by what he saw. “When I walked into his (hospital) room, it was clear he was seriously in trouble. It didn’t take me long to process the fact that Carter was dying.” While still on ECMO, Carter flew from Hawaii to Cleveland Clinic. (Courtesy: Carter Parry) First treated at a community hospital in Kaneohe, with blood pressure-raising vasopressors and other medications, Carter was soon moved to a hospital in Honolulu, the only one in Hawaii equipped to provide extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) to adults. ECMO is a temporary mechanical device that supports the heart and lungs. As Bob explains,“The doctors did a great job in using ECMO to save his life. But his lung was so destroyed, I knew there were only a few places in the world where he’d have a chance to survive.” One of those places was Cleveland Clinic. Still on ECMO, Carter was rushed to Cleveland, Ohio, by air transport, and immediately admitted into Cleveland Clinic’s cardiothoracic intensive care unit in mid-February. Carter has gone through extensive therapy throughout his treatment. (February 2020) (Courtesy: Carter Parry) “Working together, we came up with a plan – it was kind of a Hail Mary,” Dr. Bribriesco recalls. “We’ve seen cases like Carter’s, but there’s no simple way to treat this. It’s unusual for someone his age to have this type of response to a virus, but it was Carter’s youth and remarkable will that helped him make it through.” The raging infection completely destroyed Carter’s right lung, spreading inside the right chest cavity. To control the infection from the right lung and protect the left lung, one of the first steps was to surgically remove the right lung by pneumonectomy, which Dr. Bribriesco performed. At the same time, to prevent the contaminated right chest space from becoming an abscess, surgeons also performed an open-window thoracostomy (also called a Clagett window), in which portions of Carter’s ribs were removed and the hole around his chest skin was sewn to the inner lining of the chest wall. “That created an open cavity we packed with gauze, soaked in a strongly medicated solution, to try and kill the remaining infection,” he adds. Caregivers who have met Carter throughout his medical journey have talked about his positive attitude, resiliency and determination. (Courtesy: Carter Parry) Meanwhile, there were other worries. Because Carter required ECMO and vasopressors for so long to keep him alive, side effects developed – including a decrease in blood flow to his extremities, causing dry gangrene in his feet and finger tips. The gangrene in his right foot progressed from dry to wet, necessitating an emergent guillotine amputation of his right foot. Later, when the infection cleared, surgeons performed a more precise amputation, slightly below his right knee. “Of course, I’m not super stoked to have had an amputation done,” notes Carter. “But I just look to the positive. You can surf with a prosthetic leg!” While dry gangrene in his fingers improved, Carter ultimately lost the toes on his left foot. Once weaned off ECMO and a breathing ventilator, he was healthy enough to be transferred out of intensive care in late April. He was discharged from Cleveland Clinic early in May and underwent about six weeks of inpatient rehabilitation where he was fitted for his leg prosthesis. In early July, one week after being discharged from rehab and just as his medical condition seemed to be taking a positive turn, Carter contracted COVID-19 soon after vacationing with family and friends. After being discharged from Cleveland Clinic in early May 2020, Carter underwent rehabilitation at another local hospital where he was fitted for his prosthetic. (Courtesy: Carter Parry) Bob and Kim were devastated. “It was another incredible sequence of bad luck,” says Bob, who notes the group had taken numerous precautions to keep the virus at bay. Fortunately, Carter experienced mild symptoms from COVID-19. “He barely turned a hair,” says Bob. “It was just a bump in the road, really.” One of his Cleveland Clinic doctors, pulmonologist Mani Latifi, MD, was alarmed when he heard the news. “With one lung and not yet completely recovered, it was a difficult situation,” he says. “But Carter was able to handle COVID. Despite these challenges, it was never ‘doom and gloom’ with him. He’s got an attitude like nobody I’ve ever met.” Carter relearning how to surf with his dad, off the coast of Massachusetts, in October 2020. (Courtesy: Carter Parry) As Carter slowly regains his strength and dexterity, and learns to use various leg prostheses, he has a goal of returning home to Oahu sometime in early 2021. He wants to return to work at a Marine base, where he is an information technology specialist contractor. A longer-range goal is to relearn how to surf using a prosthetic leg. “I hear they’re planning on bringing surfing to the Paralympics in 2024. So that’s the big goal for me,” he says. “I’m a young guy that got amputated early in life. So it’s in my court to make it happen.” Related Institutes: Respiratory Institute, Digestive Disease & Surgery Institute Patient Stories Patient Stories Young Woman Achieves Goals While Overcoming Aortic Dissection And Cancer Nov 7, 2024 “After being told I’m a walking miracle, I understand I’m lucky to be alive and I’m still here for a reason. I want to be a light for others and give hope to those going through a similar experience.” Read Story Man Travels 7,216 Miles From Shanghai to Cleveland For Heart Surgery — But Felt Right at Home Nov 7, 2024 “We saw a quote on the wall at Cleveland Clinic that said patients should be treated like family members. Those were not just words. Dr. Svensson and all of Cleveland Clinic’s caregivers really did.” Read Story Mother Grateful To Be Alive After Surviving Ruptured Brain Aneurysm Nov 5, 2024 “From the first responders and flight medics to the doctors, nurses and physical therapists – everyone who took care of me was wonderful throughout this whole process. I’m back to doing the things I love.” Read Story See All Stories Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram LinkedIn Pinterest Snapchat Actions Appointments & AccessAccepted InsuranceEvents CalendarFinancial AssistanceGive to Cleveland ClinicPay Your Bill OnlinePrice TransparencyRefer a PatientPhone DirectoryVirtual Second OpinionsVirtual Visits Blog, News & Apps Consult QDHealth EssentialsNewsroomMyClevelandClinicMyChart About Cleveland Clinic 100 Years of Cleveland ClinicAbout UsLocationsQuality & Patient SafetyOffice of Diversity & InclusionPatient ExperienceResearch & InnovationsCommunity CommitmentCareersFor EmployeesResources for Medical Professionals Site Information & Policies Send Us FeedbackSite MapAbout this WebsiteCopyright, Reprint & LicensingWebsite Terms of UsePrivacy PolicyNotice of Privacy PracticesNon-Discrimination Notice 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195 | 800.223.2273 | © 2024 Cleveland Clinic. All Rights Reserved.Automation Anywhere Enables NHS to Launch Flu-Reporting Bot as Influenza and COVID-19 Surge Resources Blog Journalists Log In Sign Up Data Privacy Send a Release News Products Contact Search Search When typing in this field, a list of search results will appear and be automatically updated as you type. Searching for your content... No results found. Please change your search terms and try again. News in Focus Browse News Releases All News Releases All Public Company English-only News Releases Overview Multimedia Gallery All Multimedia All Photos All Videos Multimedia Gallery Overview Trending Topics All Trending Topics Business & Money Auto & TransportationAll Automotive & Transportation Aerospace, Defense Air Freight Airlines & Aviation Automotive Maritime & Shipbuilding Railroads and Intermodal Transportation Supply Chain/Logistics Transportation, Trucking & Railroad Travel Trucking and Road Transportation Auto & Transportation OverviewView All Auto & Transportation Business TechnologyAll Business Technology Blockchain Broadcast Tech Computer & Electronics Computer Hardware Computer Software Data Analytics Electronic Commerce Electronic Components Electronic Design Automation Financial Technology High Tech Security Internet Technology Nanotechnology Networks Peripherals Semiconductors Business Technology OverviewView All Business Technology Entertain­ment & MediaAll Entertain­ment & Media Advertising Art Books Entertainment Film and Motion Picture Magazines Music Publishing & Information Services Radio & Podcast Television Entertain­ment & Media OverviewView All Entertain­ment & Media Financial Services & InvestingAll Financial Services & Investing Accounting News & Issues Acquisitions, Mergers and Takeovers Banking & Financial Services Bankruptcy Bond & Stock Ratings Conference Call Announcements Contracts Cryptocurrency Dividends Earnings Earnings Forecasts & Projections Financing Agreements Insurance Investments Opinions Joint Ventures Mutual Funds Private Placement Real Estate Restructuring & Recapitalization Sales Reports Shareholder Activism Shareholder Meetings Stock Offering Stock Split Venture Capital Financial Services & Investing OverviewView All Financial Services & Investing General BusinessAll General Business Awards Commercial Real Estate Corporate Expansion Earnings Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Human Resource & Workforce Management Licensing New Products & Services Obituaries Outsourcing Businesses Overseas Real Estate (non-US) Personnel Announcements Real Estate Transactions Residential Real Estate Small Business Services Socially Responsible Investing Surveys, Polls and Research Trade Show News General Business OverviewView All General Business Science & Tech Consumer TechnologyAll Consumer Technology Artificial Intelligence Blockchain Cloud Computing/Internet of Things Computer Electronics Computer Hardware Computer Software Consumer Electronics Cryptocurrency Data Analytics Electronic Commerce Electronic Gaming Financial Technology Mobile Entertainment Multimedia & Internet Peripherals Social Media STEM (Science, Tech, Engineering, Math) Supply Chain/Logistics Wireless Communications Consumer Technology OverviewView All Consumer Technology Energy & Natural ResourcesAll Energy Alternative Energies Chemical Electrical Utilities Gas General Manufacturing Mining Mining & Metals Oil & Energy Oil and Gas Discoveries Utilities Water Utilities Energy & Natural Resources OverviewView All Energy & Natural Resources Environ­mentAll Environ­ment Conservation & Recycling Environmental Issues Environmental Policy Environmental Products & Services Green Technology Natural Disasters Environ­ment OverviewView All Environ­ment Heavy Industry & ManufacturingAll Heavy Industry & Manufacturing Aerospace & Defense Agriculture Chemical Construction & Building General Manufacturing HVAC (Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning) Machinery Machine Tools, Metalworking and Metallurgy Mining Mining & Metals Paper, Forest Products & Containers Precious Metals Textiles Tobacco Heavy Industry & Manufacturing OverviewView All Heavy Industry & Manufacturing Telecomm­unicationsAll Telecomm­unications Carriers and Services Mobile Entertainment Networks Peripherals Telecommunications Equipment Telecommunications Industry VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol) Wireless Communications Telecomm­unications OverviewView All Telecomm­unications Lifestyle & Health Consumer Products & RetailAll Consumer Products & Retail Animals & Pets Beers, Wines and Spirits Beverages Bridal Services Cannabis Cosmetics and Personal Care Fashion Food & Beverages Furniture and Furnishings Home Improvement Household, Consumer & Cosmetics Household Products Jewelry Non-Alcoholic Beverages Office Products Organic Food Product Recalls Restaurants Retail Supermarkets Toys Consumer Products & Retail OverviewView All Consumer Products & Retail Entertain­ment & MediaAll Entertain­ment & Media Advertising Art Books Entertainment Film and Motion Picture Magazines Music Publishing & Information Services Radio & Podcast Television Entertain­ment & Media OverviewView All Entertain­ment & Media HealthAll Health Biometrics Biotechnology Clinical Trials & Medical Discoveries Dentistry FDA Approval Fitness/Wellness Health Care & Hospitals Health Insurance Infection Control International Medical Approval Medical Equipment Medical Pharmaceuticals Mental Health Pharmaceuticals Supplementary Medicine Health OverviewView All Health SportsAll Sports General Sports Outdoors, Camping & Hiking Sporting Events Sports Equipment & Accessories Sports OverviewView All Sports TravelAll Travel Amusement Parks and Tourist Attractions Gambling & Casinos Hotels and Resorts Leisure & Tourism Outdoors, Camping & Hiking Passenger Aviation Travel Industry Travel OverviewView All Travel Policy & Public Interest Policy & Public InterestAll Policy & Public Interest Advocacy Group Opinion Animal Welfare Congressional & Presidential Campaigns Corporate Social Responsibility Domestic Policy Economic News, Trends, Analysis Education Environmental European Government FDA Approval Federal and State Legislation Federal Executive Branch & Agency Foreign Policy & International Affairs Homeland Security Labor & Union Legal Issues Natural Disasters Not For Profit Patent Law Public Safety Trade Policy U.S. State Policy Policy & Public Interest OverviewView All Policy & Public Interest People & Culture People & Culture All People & Culture Aboriginal, First Nations & Native American African American Asian American Children Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Hispanic Lesbian, Gay & Bisexual Men's Interest People with Disabilities Religion Senior Citizens Veterans Women People & Culture Overview View All People & Culture In-Language News Arabic español português Česko Danmark Deutschland España France Italia Nederland Norge Polska Portugal Россия Slovensko Suomi Sverige Overview Distribution by PR Newswire Cision IR Guaranteed Paid Placement SocialBoost All Products General Inquiries Editorial Bureaus Partnerships Media Inquiries Worldwide Offices Hamburger menu Send a Release ALL CONTACT INFO Contact Us 888-776-0942 from 8 AM - 10 PM ET Send a Release Sign Up Log In Resources Blog Journalists RSS GDPR News in Focus Browse All News Multimedia Gallery Trending Topics Business & Money Auto & Transportation Business Technology Entertain­ment & Media Financial Services & Investing General Business Science & Tech Consumer Technology Energy & Natural Resources Environ­ment Heavy Industry & Manufacturing Telecomm­unications Lifestyle & Health Consumer Products & Retail Entertain­ment & Media Health Sports Travel Policy & Public Interest People & Culture People & Culture Send a Release Sign Up Log In Resources Blog Journalists RSS GDPR Overview Distribution by PR Newswire Cision IR SocialBoost All Products Send a Release Sign Up Log In Resources Blog Journalists RSS GDPR General Inquiries Editorial Bureaus Partnerships Media Inquiries Worldwide Offices Send a Release Sign Up Log In Resources Blog Journalists RSS GDPR Automation Anywhere Enables NHS to Launch Flu-Reporting Bot as Influenza and COVID-19 Surge Flu vaccine reporting bot frees up 2,000 hours of administrative time for staff to spend on patient care News provided by Automation Anywhere Dec 08, 2020, 09:00 ET Share this article Share toX Share this article Share toX SAN JOSE, Calif., Dec. 8, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Automation Anywhere, Inc., a global leader in Robotic Process Automation (RPA), today announced the company is expanding its collaboration with Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust – one of the largest teaching hospitals in the United Kingdom – to launch its flu-reporting bot. Already, it's saved 2,000 hours that were previously spent compiling manual reports. To thwart a winter "twindemic" – where both influenza and COVID-19 spread and sicken patients and frontline staff – Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust is offering the flu vaccine to its more than 14,000 employees. As part of the NHS Trust's mandate to promote health and safety over the winter months, the need for reporting on the number of staff being vaccinated and flu-related absences has intensified. Current reporting processes are manual-intensive, requiring significant administrative time. Additionally, there is added pressure to report COVID-19 cases surging across the region. With the successful roll-out of the flu-reporting bot, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust is reviewing plans to extend the technology to support local test and trace processes and report on COVID-19 vaccinations, when they are ready to be administered. Freeing up time for patient-centered healthcare with intelligent automationAlready, the new flu-reporting bot has captured updates for more than 10,000 staff vaccinations across multiple clinical sites and saved nearly three months of cumulative administrative time. Automating the reporting has given valuable hours back to the Trust at a time when staff resources are strained daily. "Right from the start, intelligent automation has helped us enhance staff engagement, free up valuable resources and has had a positive impact on the work we do for our staff and patients," said Neil Picton, Head of Workforce Engagement and Information, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. "The flu-reporting bot has helped to streamline a heavy administrative load for our Occupational Health team. It has also helped improve data accuracy and ensured valuable time is not diverted from supporting staff and patient care." Added Steven Forster, Occupational Health Manager, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, "The use of intelligent automation has drastically improved the accuracy and information governance as well as saving invaluable Occupational Health staff time, which has allowed our team to focus on more meaningful work. The flu-reporting bot is an expansion of a successful intelligent automation program implemented by the Trust to enhance workforce processes, improve employee morale and deliver more time to focus on critical patient care. "Healthcare facilities have been under tremendous pressure this year, and intelligent automation is helping to refocus precious time back to where it's most needed – on the front line, centered on patient care," said Prince Kohli, CTO, Automation Anywhere. "We are proud to support Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and are encouraged by how they continue to scale their use of RPA to empower staff and make better use of available resources to ensure the best patient care." Interact with Automation Anywhere: Visit our website: https://www.automationanywhere.com/ Check out our monthly webinar series: https://www.automationanywhere.compa-webinars Check us out on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/AutomationAnywhereSoftware/ Follow us on Twitter: @AutomationAnywh Explore with us on Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/automation_anywhere/ Connect with us on LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/company/automation-anywhere Experience RPA for free: https://www.automationanywhere.com/products/community-edition About Automation AnywhereAutomation Anywhere is a global leader in Robotic Process Automation (RPA), empowering customers to automate end-to-end business processes with intelligent software bots – AI-powered digital workers that perform repetitive and manual tasks, resulting in dramatic productivity gains, optimized customer experience and more engaged employees. The company offers the world's only web-based and cloud-native intelligent automation platform combining RPA, artificial intelligence, machine learning and analytics to help organizations rapidly start and scale their automation journey from the front office to the back office to every office. Its Bot Store is the world's first and largest marketplace with more than 1,100 pre-built, intelligent automation solutions. Automation Anywhere has deployed over 2.6 million bots to support some of the world's largest enterprises across all industries in more than 90 countries. For additional information, visit www.automationanywhere.com. AUTOMATION ANYWHERE is a trademark/service mark or registered trademark/service mark of Automation Anywhere, Inc. in the United States and other countries. SOURCE Automation Anywhere Related Links http://www.automationanywhere.com WANT YOUR COMPANY'S NEWS FEATURED ON PRNEWSWIRE.COM? 440k+ Newsrooms & Influencers 9k+ Digital Media Outlets 270k+ Journalists Opted In GET STARTED × Modal title Also from this source Automation Anywhere dévoile un nouveau système d'entreprise IA + automatisation qui permet aux entreprises de multiplier par 10 l'impact commercial grâce aux agents d'IA et à la transformation de flux de travail critiques IMAGINE 2024 -- Automation Anywhere, un leader de l'automatisation alimentée par l'IA, a annoncé son nouveau système d'entreprise IA + automatisation ... Automation Anywhere stellt neues AI + Automation Enterprise System vor, das Unternehmen in die Lage versetzt, mit KI-Agenten eine 10-fache Geschäftswirkung zu erzielen und geschäftskritische Arbeitsabläufe zu transformieren IMAGINE 2024 -- Automation Anywhere, ein führendes Unternehmen im Bereich der KI-gestützten Automatisierung, kündigte sein neues AI + Automation... More Releases From This Source Explore Computer & Electronics Computer Software Computer Software Artificial Intelligence News Releases in Similar Topics Contact PR Newswire Call PR Newswire at 888-776-0942 from 8 AM - 9 PM ET Chat with an Expert Contact Us General Inquiries Partnerships Media Inquiries Products For Marketers For Public Relations For IR & Compliance For Agency For Small Business All Products About About PR Newswire About Cision Become a Publishing Partner Become a Channel Partner Careers Accessibility Statement Global Sites Asia APAC APAC - Traditional Chinese Brazil Canada Czech Denmark Finland France Germany India Indonesia Israel Korea Italy Japan Mexico Middle East Middle East - Arabic Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Russia Slovakia Spain Sweden United Kingdom My Services All New Releases Online Member Center ProfNet Do not sell or share my personal information: Submit via [email protected] Call Privacy toll-free: 877-297-8921 Contact PR Newswire Products About My Services All News Releases Online Member Center ProfNet Call PR Newswire at 888-776-0942 Terms of Use Privacy Policy Information Security Policy Site Map RSS Cookie Settings Copyright © 2024 Cision US Inc.Can a Healthcare Worker Refuse the COVID-19 Vaccine? News & Perspective Drugs & Diseases CME & Education Video Decision Point ﻿ Specialty: Multispecialty Allergy & Immunology Anesthesiology Cardiology Critical Care Dermatology Diabetes & Endocrinology Emergency Medicine Family Medicine Gastroenterology General Surgery Hematology - Oncology HIV/AIDS Hospital Medicine Infectious Diseases Internal Medicine Multispecialty Nephrology Neurology Ob/Gyn & Women's Health Oncology Ophthalmology Orthopedics Pathology & Lab Medicine Pediatrics Plastic Surgery Psychiatry Public Health Pulmonary Medicine Radiology Rheumatology Transplantation Urology Today on Medscape Business of Medicine Medical Lifestyle Science & Technology Medical Students Nurses Pharmacists Residents Edition: English Medscape English Deutsch Español Français Português UKNew Univadis Log In Sign Up It's Free! English Edition Medscape English Deutsch Español Français Português UKNew Univadis X Univadis from Medscape Register Log In No Results No Results Monday, November 11, 2024 News & Perspective Drugs & Diseases CME & Education Video Decision Point close Please confirm that you would like to log out of Medscape. If you log out, you will be required to enter your username and password the next time you visit. Log out Cancel Perspective > Medscape Infectious Diseases COMMENTARY Can a Healthcare Worker Refuse the COVID-19 Vaccine? Carolyn Buppert, MSN, JD Disclosures December 09, 2020 Find the latest COVID-19 news and guidance in Medscape's Coronavirus Resource Center. As hospitals across the country develop their plans to vaccinate their healthcare employees against COVID-19, a key question has come to the fore: What if an employee — whether nurse, physician, or other healthcare worker — refuses to receive the vaccine? Can hospitals require their employees to be vaccinated against COVID-19? And what consequences could an employee face for refusing the vaccine? My answer needs to be based, in part, on the law related to previous vaccines — influenza, for example — because at the time of this writing (early December 2020), no vaccine for COVID-19 has been approved, although approval of at least one vaccine is expected within a week. So there have been no offers of vaccine and refusals yet, nor are there any cases to date involving an employee who refused a COVID-19 vaccine. As of December 2020, there are no state or federal laws that either require an employee to be vaccinated against COVID-19 or that protect an employee who refuses vaccination against COVID-19. It will take a while after the vaccine is approved and distributed before refusals, reactions, policies, cases, and laws begin to emerge. If we look at the law related to healthcare workers refusing to be vaccinated against the closest relative to COVID-19 — influenza — then the answer would be yes, employers can require employees to be vaccinated. An employer can fire an employee who refuses influenza vaccination. If an employee who refused and was fired sues the employer for wrongful termination, the employee has more or less chance of success depending on the reason for refusal. Some courts and the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) have held that a refusal on religious grounds is protected by the US Constitution, as in this recent case. The Constitution protects freedom to practice one's religion. Specific religions may have a range of tenets that support refusal to be vaccinated. A refusal on medical grounds has been successful if the medical grounds fall under the protections of the Americans with Disabilities Act(ADA) but may fail when the medical grounds for the claim are not covered by the ADA. Refusal for secular, nonmedical reasons, such as a healthcare worker's policy of treating their body as their temple, has not gone over well with employers or courts. However, in at least one case, a nurse who refused vaccination on secular, nonmedical grounds won her case against her employer, on appeal. The appeals court found that the hospital violated her First Amendment rights. Employees who refuse vaccination for religious or medical reasons still will need to take measures to protect patients and other employees from infection. An employer such as a hospital can, rather than fire the employee, offer the employee an accommodation, such as requiring that the employee wear a mask or quarantine. There are no cases that have upheld an employee's right to refuse to wear a mask or quarantine. The situation with the COVID-19 vaccine is different from the situation surrounding influenza vaccines. There are plenty of data on effectiveness and side effects of influenza vaccines, but there is very little evidence of short- or long-term effects of the COVID-19 vaccines currently being tested and/or considered for approval. One could argue that the process of vaccine development is the same for all virus vaccines. However, public confidence in the vaccine vetting process is not what it once was. It has been widely publicized that the COVID-19 vaccine trials have been rushed. As of December 2020, only 60% of the general population say they would take the vaccine, although researchers say confidence is increasing. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has designated healthcare workers as first in line to get the vaccine, but some healthcare workers may not want to be the first to try it. A CDC survey found that 63% of healthcare workers polled in recent months said they would get a COVID-19 vaccine. Unions have entered the conversation. A coalition of unions that represent healthcare workers said, "We need a transparent, evidence-based federal vaccine strategy based on principles of equity, safety, and priority, as well as robust efforts to address a high degree of skepticism about safety of an authorized vaccine." The organization declined to promote a vaccine until more is known. As of publication date, the EEOC guidance for employers responding to COVID-19 does not address vaccines. The CDC's Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers Responding to Coronavirus Disease 2019, May 2020, updated December 4, 2020, does not address vaccines. The CDC's page on COVID-19 vaccination for healthcare workers does not address a healthcare worker's refusal. The site does assure healthcare workers that the vaccine development process is sound: "The current vaccine safety system is strong and robust, with the capacity to effectively monitor COVID-19 vaccine safety. Existing data systems have validated analytic methods that can rapidly detect statistical signals for possible vaccine safety problems. These systems are being scaled up to fully meet the needs of the nation. Additional systems and data sources are also being developed to further enhance safety monitoring capabilities. CDC is committed to ensuring that COVID-19 vaccines are safe." In the coming months, government officials and vaccine manufacturers will be working to reassure the public of the safety of the vaccine and the rigor of the vaccine development process. In November 2020, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Dr Anthony Fauci told Kaiser Health News: "The company looks at the data. I look at the data. Then the company puts the data to the FDA. The FDA will make the decision to do an emergency use authorization or a license application approval. And they have career scientists who are really independent. They're not beholden to anybody. Then there's another independent group, the Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee. The FDA commissioner has vowed publicly that he will go according to the opinion of the career scientists and the advisory board." President-elect Joe Biden said he would get a vaccine when Fauci thinks it is safe. An employee who, after researching the vaccine and the process, still wants to refuse when offered the vaccine is not likely to be fired for that reason right away, as long as the employee takes other precautions, such as wearing a mask. If the employer does fire the employee and the employee sues the employer, it is impossible to predict how a court would decide the case. Related legal questions may arise in the coming months. For example: Is an employer exempt from paying workers' compensation to an employee who refuses to be vaccinated and then contracts the virus while on the job? Can a prospective employer require COVID-19 vaccination as a pre-condition of employment? Is it within a patient's rights to receive an answer to the question: Has my healthcare worker been vaccinated against COVID-19? If a hospital allows employees to refuse vaccination and keep working, and an outbreak occurs, and it is suggested through contact tracing that unvaccinated workers infected patients, will a court hold the hospital liable for patients' damages? Answers to these questions are yet to be determined. Carolyn Buppert (www.buppert.com) is an attorney and former nurse practitioner who focuses on the legal issues affecting nurse practitioners. Follow Medscape on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and YouTube Medscape Infectious Diseases © 2020 WebMD, LLC Any views expressed above are the author's own and do not necessarily reflect the views of WebMD or Medscape. Cite this: Can a Healthcare Worker Refuse the COVID-19 Vaccine? - Medscape - Dec 09, 2020. Tables Authors and Disclosures Authors and Disclosures Author Carolyn Buppert, MSN, JD Healthcare attorneyDisclosure: Carolyn Buppert, MSN, JD, has disclosed no relevant financial relationships. Comments 3090D553-9492-4563-8681-AD288FA52ACE Commenting is limited to medical professionals. To comment please Log-in. Comments on Medscape are moderated and should be professional in tone and on topic. You must declare any conflicts of interest related to your comments and responses. Please see our Commenting Guide for further information. We reserve the right to remove posts at our sole discretion. Comments on Medscape are moderated and should be professional in tone and on topic. You must declare any conflicts of interest related to your comments and responses. Please see our Commenting Guide for further information. We reserve the right to remove posts at our sole discretion. My Alerts You have already selected for My Alerts Add Other Topics Click the topic below to receive emails when new articles are available. Add You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive email when new content is published. Manage Email Alerts Share Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email Close Print Add to Email Alerts processing.... What to Read Next on Medscape Special Coverage: COVID-19 Latest Perspective Guidelines Drugs & Diseases Global Coverage Additional Resources Business of Medicine It's Right to Discipline Docs Who Spread False Information About COVID-19 Are COVID Nasal Vaccines Our Ticket Out of the Pandemic? Medicaid Acceptance Among Pediatric Dermatologists Varies by Practice Type, Region Here's How We Can Rebuild Trust in Vaccines US Invests in Avian Flu Vaccine Candidates WHO Clears Bavarian Nordic's Vaccine for Mpox, Sets Up Access Scheme Recommended Reading 2001/s/viewarticle/983218 Journal Article COVID-19 Vaccine Uptake and Factors Affecting Hesitancy Among US Nurses, March–June 2021 2001/s/viewarticle/991497 White House to End COVID Vaccine Mandate for Federal Workers 2001/s/viewarticle/987039 COVID Death Toll Declined in 2022: Report 2001/s/viewarticle/989562 Three Years Ago, the COVID-19 Pandemic Officially Began 2001/viewarticle/how-doctors-can-overcome-vaccine-hesitancy-through-empathy-2024a1000i5u news How Doctors Can Overcome Vaccine Hesitancy Through Empathy, Storytelling, and Patient-Centered Communication 2001/viewarticle/vaccine-hesitancy-europes-physicians-can-do-so-much-2023a1000fy4 news Vaccine Hesitancy: Europe’s Physicians Can Do So Much More 2001/viewarticle/global-consensus-reached-covid-19-vaccine-updates-2023a1000bm0 news Global Consensus Reached on COVID-19 Vaccine Updates 2001/viewarticle/immunomodulators-do-not-affect-covid-19-vaccine-efficacy-2024a10005a5 news Immunomodulators Do Not Affect COVID-19 Vaccine Efficacy Related Conditions & Procedures Fast Five Quiz: Overcoming Vaccine Hesitancy COVID-19 Booster Immunization With Bivalent Vaccines Rapid Review Quiz: COVID-19 Vaccination Fast Five Quiz: COVID-19 Vaccines Skill Checkup: A 68-Year-Old Woman With Low-Grade Fever, Headache, Body Aches, Fatigue, Nasal Congestion, and Sore Throat Trending Clinical Topic: Migraine Slideshow A Nurse's Camera Captures COVID Expert Commentary How Doctors Can Overcome Vaccine Hesitancy Through Empathy, Storytelling, and Patient-Centered Communication Vaccine Hesitancy: Europe’s Physicians Can Do So Much More Global Consensus Reached on COVID-19 Vaccine Updates Preventing severe Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) infections in infants by maternal vaccination Indications for using updated COVID-19 vaccines in the post-pandemic era When RSV Hits Home: Community Care in Rural West Virginia Recommendations 2001/viewarticle/how-doctors-can-overcome-vaccine-hesitancy-through-empathy-2024a1000i5u How Doctors Can Overcome Vaccine Hesitancy Through Empathy, Storytelling, and Patient-Centered Communication news 2001/viewarticle/vaccine-hesitancy-europes-physicians-can-do-so-much-2023a1000fy4 Vaccine Hesitancy: Europe’s Physicians Can Do So Much More news 2003/viewarticle/998034 Optimizing Opportunities in Vaccination: Practical Considerations for an Evolving COVID-19 Landscape 1.0 CME / CE / ABIM MOC Credits You are being redirected to Medscape Education Yes, take me there 1.0 CME / CE / ABIM MOC Optimizing Opportunities in Vaccination: Practical Considerations for an Evolving COVID-19 Landscape 2001/viewarticle/global-consensus-reached-covid-19-vaccine-updates-2023a1000bm0 Global Consensus Reached on COVID-19 Vaccine Updates news b:curatedcuratedHasData : false Email This Feedback Help us make reference on Medscape the best clinical resource possible. Please use this form to submit your questions or comments on how to make this article more useful to clinicians. Your Name: Your Email: Send me a copy Recipient's Email: Subject: Optional Message Comment or Suggestion(Limited to 1500 Characters) Send Send Feedback Pleasedo not use this form to submit personal or patient medical information or to report adverse drug events. You are encouraged to report adverse drug event information to the FDA. Your Name is required. Subject is required. Please enter a Recipient Address and/or check the Send me a copy checkbox. Your email has been sent. is an Invalid Email Address. Find Us On About About Medscape Privacy Policy Editorial Policy Cookies Manage Preferences Terms of Use Advertising Policy Help Center Membership Become a Member About You Professional Information Newsletters & Alerts Advertise Market Research App Medscape Editions English Deutsch Español Français Português All material on this website is protected by copyright, Copyright © 1994-2024 by WebMD LLC. This website also contains material copyrighted by 3rd parties. CloseThermo Fisher Scientific releases new CE-marked COVID-19, Flu A/B, RSV Combo Kit - Research & Development World Continue to Site Research & Development World R&D World Home Topics Aerospace Archeology Automotive Biotech Chemistry Environment Energy Life Science Material Science R&D Management Physics Technology 3D Printing A.I./Robotics Battery Technology Controlled Environments Cleanrooms Graphene Lasers Regulations/Standards Sensors Imaging Nanotechnology Scientific Computing Big Data HPC/Supercomputing Informatics Security Software Semiconductors R&D Market Pulse 2024 R&D 100 Awards Winner Archive R&D 100 Awards Resources Digital Issues Podcasts Subscribe Video Webinars Global Funding Forecast R&D Index Thermo Fisher Scientific releases new CE-marked COVID-19, Flu A/B, RSV Combo Kit By Heather Hall | December 7, 2020Thermo Fisher Scientific announces CE-marking of its TaqPath COVID-19, Flu A/B, RSV Combo Kit for the in vitro diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2, influenza A/B and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) A/B infections. Using the new kit, laboratories can now run a single test for SARS-CoV-2, influenza (flu) A/B, and RSV to detect and differentiate between diseases that share similar clinical symptoms, and get the information needed to help diagnose and monitor the spread of these respiratory illnesses in approximately three hours. “We knew that this season’s surge in COVID-19 infections could coincide with cases of influenza and RSV, so we worked quickly to develop a PCR-based diagnostic kit for detecting and differentiating these illnesses simultaneously,” said Mark Smedley, president of Genetic Sciences for Thermo Fisher. “Our new kit provides laboratories with the ability to diagnose and monitor the spread of COVID-19 and similar illnesses, which may require different patient management, including quarantining measures.” The TaqPath COVID-19, Flu A/B, RSV Combo Kit enables laboratories expand their existing COVID-19 testing menu for respiratory samples while maintaining low operational costs and workflow simplicity. The device includes Applied Biosystems Pathogen Interpretive Software to automatically convert genetic analysis data into a readable report, helping reduce risk of user interpretation error. Tell Us What You Think! Cancel replyComment * Name * Email * Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ Related Articles Read More >Wastewater surveillance kit and RNA master mix simplifies detection of COVID-19 targetsR&D 100 winner of the day: kNOw TouchExothera to develop and manufacture COVID vaccine based on proprietary technology2022 Global Funding Forecast: R&D variants cover more than the pandemic EXPAND YOUR KNOWLEDGE AND STAY CONNECTED Get the latest info on technologies, trends, and strategies in Research & Development. GET THE ENEWSLETTER R&D World Digital Issues Browse the most current issue of R&D World and back issues in an easy to use high quality format. Clip, share and download with the leading R& magazine today. Back Issues Subscribe Connect with R&D World Research & Development WorldSubscribe to R&D World Magazine Enews Sign Up Contact Us About Us Drug Discovery & Development Pharmaceutical Processing Global Funding Forecast Copyright © 2024 WTWH Media LLC. All Rights Reserved. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of WTWH Media Privacy Policy | Advertising | About Us Search R&D World R&D World Home Topics Aerospace Archeology Automotive Biotech Chemistry Environment Energy Life Science Material Science R&D Management Physics Technology 3D Printing A.I./Robotics Battery Technology Controlled Environments Cleanrooms Graphene Lasers Regulations/Standards Sensors Imaging Nanotechnology Scientific Computing Big Data HPC/Supercomputing Informatics Security Software Semiconductors R&D Market Pulse 2024 R&D 100 Awards Winner Archive R&D 100 Awards Resources Digital Issues Podcasts Subscribe Video Webinars Global Funding Forecast R&D IndexFaced with the risk of Covid-dengue-influenza, SSJ asks to remain vigilant Subscriber Login Local News National News Real Estate Weather Topics Expat’s Corner Trending News Events Volcanoes Hurricanes Earthquakes LGBTQ+ Crime Tourism Economy Politics Subscriber Login Local News National News Real Estate Weather Topics Expat’s Corner Trending News Events Volcanoes Hurricanes Earthquakes LGBTQ+ Crime Tourism Economy Politics Expat's Corner Faced with the risk of Covid-dengue-influenza, SSJ asks to remain vigilantDecember 10, 2020Vallarta Daily NewsMore NewsCOVID-19Faced with the possibility of the so-called trinomial: Covid-dengue-influenza infection, the Jalisco Ministry of Health (SSJ) calls not to lower our guard this winter season. The temperature in Puerto Vallarta continues to be conducive to the development of the dengue-transmitting fly (Aedes aegypti), as well as changes in the weather that can cause acute respiratory diseases. Dr. Armando Pérez Oliva, director of the Eighth Health Region, highlighted that they continue to work very hard, inviting society to continue working on cleaning their water tanks that may be possible breeding sites . . . CONTINUE READING Already a Subscriber? Login Here Popular posts:Puerto Vallarta Records Another Month of Decline in Passenger Arrivals In October 2024, Puerto Vallarta International Airport experienced a slight decline in passenger traffic, marking a 0.8% decrease compared to the same month last year. The airport welcomed 433,900 passengers, down from 437,300 in October 2023, according to data released by Grupo Aeroportuario del Pacífico (GAP). Despite the monthly dip, the airport has maintained a…Puerto Vallarta Unveils Monumental Xoloitzcuintle Sculpture in Day of the Dead Festivities Puerto Vallarta, Mexico — The Malecón of Puerto Vallarta burst into life with joy and color as Mayor Luis Munguía unveiled the "Spiritual Guardian of the Monumental Catrina," an event that attracted hundreds of residents and their beloved pets. The centerpiece of the celebration is a colossal figure of a Xoloitzcuintle dog, measuring 8 meters…Puerto Vallarta Tops Beach Destinations for Day of the Dead Festivities Puerto Vallarta, Jalisco—As the Day of the Dead festivities concluded, Puerto Vallarta emerged as one of Mexico's most popular tourist destinations for the celebration, according to the Federal Ministry of Tourism (Sectur). Among beach locales, it achieved the highest hotel occupancy rates during the festive period. From Friday, November 1 to Sunday, November 3, Puerto…Sinkhole Opens on Guadalajara-Puerto Vallarta Highway Puerto Vallarta, Mexico — A significant sinkhole has emerged in the Sierra Occidental region of Jalisco, posing a danger to motorists traveling on the Guadalajara-Puerto Vallarta free federal highway. The sinkhole is located beneath the asphalt at kilometer 103 of Federal Highway 70, in the section corresponding to the municipality of Mascota. The cavity was…Puerto Vallarta Springs to Life with a Festive November Lineup As the gentle embrace of autumn settles over Puerto Vallarta, the city blossoms with a vibrant array of events that promise visitors an unforgettable experience. From culinary delights to athletic feats, cultural celebrations to art exhibitions, November in Puerto Vallarta is a tapestry of entertainment and tradition. A Grand Welcome by the Monumental Catrina Kicking…Puerto Vallarta Shines with Four Wins at the 2024 Travvy Awards Puerto Vallarta, Mexico — The vibrant coastal city of Puerto Vallarta is celebrating a sweep of accolades after securing four prestigious awards at the 2024 Travvy Awards. The destination clinched one silver and three bronze awards across multiple categories, underscoring its position as a premier travel locale in Mexico and beyond. Presented annually by TravelPulse…Mexican Peso Gains Slightly But Still Trading Above 20 Dollars At Start of the Week Puerto Vallarta, Mexico - At the start of today's session, the Mexican peso recovered part of the losses it suffered against the U.S. dollar last week. After closing on Friday at 20.26 pesos per dollar, the exchange rate improved to 20.11 pesos per dollar by 7:20 a.m. Mexico City time, marking an appreciation of 0.77%,…Puerto Vallarta Set to Welcome 18 Cruise Ships in November, Marking Start of High Season Puerto Vallarta is gearing up for a bustling month as it prepares to receive 18 cruise ships throughout November, according to the schedule released by the Administration of the Puerto Vallarta National Port System (Asipona). The arrivals kick off today, signaling the beginning of the high season for maritime visitors. Particularly busy days include November…Mexican Peso Opens Lower After a Day of Gains, Trading Above 20.00 Dollars The Mexican peso lost ground against the US dollar today, once again breaching the psychological barrier of 20.00 units per dollar. The depreciation comes amid a strengthening US dollar and renewed market uncertainty following the recent U.S. presidential election. As of 7:30 AM Mexico City time, the exchange rate rose to 20.02 pesos per dollar,…Tourists Capture Puerto Vallarta Traffic Officer Requesting Bribe on Video Puerto Vallarta, Mexico — To the surprise of absolutely no one who has been stopped by police in Puerto Vallarta, a video recently recorded by tourists has surfaced, showing a traffic officer allegedly requesting a bribe to waive a supposed traffic fine. The incident has sparked widespread concern and debate over corruption within the city's… COPYRIGHT 2022 PVDN, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED | TERMS OF USE | PRIVACY POLICY | Website by ¡Gotcha! BrandsTHIS SITE IS SAFE CERTIFIED XBERNAMA - Influenza Cases Not Expected To Rise This Year-End – Expert BERNAMA.com | BERNAMA TV | BERNAMA Radio | BERNAMA Images | BLIS | NewsLink5 English Malay 中文 Arabic Español தமிழ் General BernamaBiz Crime & Courts Politics Sports Lifestyle Region Central Northern Southern East Sabah Sarawak World Main Nam News Network (NNN) The Organization of Asia-Pacific News Agencies (OANA) Microsite Budget 2025 ASEAN 2025 HAWANA 2024 Fokus BERNAMA Thoughts Health Energy MAPO MCMC Budget 2025 More Infographics Videos Exclusive Press Archived English Malay 中文 Arabic Español தமிழ் Home General BernamaBiz Crime & Courts Politics Sports Lifestyle Region Central Northern Southern East Sabah Sarawak World Main Nam News Network (NNN) The Organization of Asia-Pacific News Agencies (OANA) Microsite Budget 2025 ASEAN 2025 HAWANA 2024 Fokus BERNAMA Thoughts Health Energy MAPO MCMC Budget 2025 More Infographics Videos Exclusive Press Archived FEATURES Influenza Cases Not Expected To Rise This Year-End – Expert 10/12/2020 07:12 PM -- Photograph for illustrative purposes. deenamik.com/blog/2018 Datuk Dr Musa Mohd Nordin. -- Photo courtesy of HOSPITAL PAKAR KPJ DAMANSARA Prof Dr Zamberi Sekawi. --fotoBERNAMA (2020) ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Dr Helmy Haja Mydin. -- Photo courtesy of HOSPITAL PANTAI KUALA LUMPUR Number of Specimens Positive for Influenza by Subtype Sources: CDC, WHO, American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology High-risk Groups. Souces : IFRC Americas By Sakini Mohd Said KUALA LUMPUR (Bernama) – Father-of-four Hairi Zolhaini did not realise how crucial it was to have his children vaccinated against influenza until his eight-year-old son Qaleef Iman Rayyan fell ill in January this year. Hairi, 37, who is a part-time event management worker, said he became worried when his son’s fever did not go away after a few days even though he had taken him to a clinic. “I then took him to a hospital where a PCR (polymerase chain reaction) test was done on his nasal swab and the result showed he had influenza A,” he said. Qaleef Iman Rayyan was immediately treated with the anti-viral drug Oseltamivir to prevent complications from setting in. High-risk Groups. Souces : IFRC Americas “I am thankful my son received treatment immediately… I dare not think what would have happened if treatment was delayed,” Hairi said, adding that it was only then he realised the importance of the flu-prevention vaccine. “I’m now advising my relatives and friends to get themselves vaccinated against the flu.” RISING TREND IN CASES Influenza, also known as the flu, is a contagious viral infection that affects the respiratory system. Influenza viruses that infect humans can be classified into three main groups: A, B, and C. Type A influenza infection can be serious and can cause widespread outbreaks. Sources: CDC, WHO, American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), annual influenza epidemics worldwide result in an estimated three million to five million cases of severe illness and about 290,000 to 650,000 deaths. Incidentally, towards the end of December 2019 and early this year, Malaysia recorded an increase in influenza A cases, with most of those affected being schoolchildren. Selangor had recorded the highest number of cases then with more 800 schoolchildren infected. Two schools in Perak and Sabah had to close temporarily due to an influenza outbreak which got many parents worried. In January this year, Health director-general Tan Sri Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah said in a statement that lab surveillance by the Institute of Medical Research and the National Public Health Laboratory showed that the consultation rate for influenza-like illness (ILI) and the admission rate of patients with severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) had increased since the last week of December 2019. The number of ILI and SARI cases reported by Malaysia’s influenza surveillance centre to WHO showed an influenza positive rate of 21.2 percent in 2019. For the first quarter of 2020, the influenza positive rate was even higher at 32.8 percent. In comparison, the influenza positive rate was only 10.4 percent in 2018, 13.3 percent in 2017 and 8.6 percent in 2016. Dr Noor Hisham, however, was quoted as saying that influenza infections in Malaysia were still under control and within the normal range. CASES MAY NOT SPIKE Meanwhile, an expert interviewed by Bernama said although flu outbreaks occur throughout the year in tropical countries like Malaysia, surveillance activity data for the consultation rate for ILI and SARI, however, revealed a pattern of spikes in such cases between April and June and later from October to January. Datuk Dr Musa Mohd Nordin. -- Photo courtesy of HOSPITAL PAKAR KPJ DAMANSARA KPJ Damansara Specialist Hospital consultant paediatrician and neonatologist Datuk Dr Musa Mohd Nordin, however, said that it is very likely that this month’s hike in influenza cases may not be as high as in previous years. In fact, Dr Musa, who is also head of the hospital’s Infectious Disease Control Unit, expects a downward trend in influenza cases compared to previous years. “Based on data obtained from FluNet, influenza (incidence) trend in Malaysia is declining and flattening. “And, if this trend continues, I don’t think there will be an increase in influenza cases in December 2020,” he told Bernama. (FluNet is a global web-based tool for influenza virological surveillance. The data at the country level are publically available and updated weekly.) Number of Specimens Positive for Influenza by Subtype For the record, in Malaysia, actual statistics on influenza cases are not available mainly due to the fact that it is not among the list of infectious diseases that have to be reported or notified under the Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases Act 1988. The Ministry of Health, nevertheless, constantly monitors influenza activity trends and related outbreaks through the existing influenza reporting system from sentinel locations nationwide. The surveillance data is then sent to WHO for the purpose of updating the data displayed on FluNet. According to Dr Musa, the projected drop in influenza cases this month can be attributed to several factors, the main one being public compliance with the standard operating procedures (SOPs) set by the government to stem the transmission of COVID-19. SOP COMPLIANCE “The SOPs, which include physical distancing, wearing a face mask and washing hands frequently, are not only preventing the spread of COVID-19 but also other diseases such as RSV bronchiolitis, para-influenza and adenovirus pneumonia that are transmitted through respiratory droplets ejected whilst talking, coughing and sneezing,” he explained. Furthermore, a number of institutions such as universities, schools, kindergartens and nurseries are currently closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic while many companies are allowing their employees to work from home. “The measures (to fight COVID-19) are helping to control the spread of the influenza virus,” he said, adding that public awareness on this disease is also rising and more people were also taking the influenza jab. Dr Musa is confident that when more people adhere to the COVID-19 SOPs and also realise the importance of the influenza vaccine, the government would be able to flatten influenza cases in the nation. “It will help to avert a ‘twindemic’ or twin pandemics involving COVID-19 and influenza,” he added. The projected decline in influenza cases does not only apply to Malaysia but also worldwide, according to WHO data as of Nov 8, 2020. Globally, despite continued or even increased testing for influenza in some countries, influenza activity remained at lower levels than expected for this time of the year. COMPLICATIONS There is still confusion between the common cold and influenza as both manifest similar symptoms such as fever, cough and cold. The two infections, however, are completely different. Unlike the common cold, influenza can lead to various complications if treatment is delayed. These complications can be serious in the case of babies and children below the age of five, pregnant women, senior citizens aged 65 and above, and individuals with chronic health issues such as asthma, cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Prof Dr Zamberi Sekawi. --fotoBERNAMA (2020) ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Malaysian Influenza Working Group chairman Prof Dr Zamberi Sekawi said influenza should not be taken lightly as the majority of patients who succumb to it are senior citizens. Although there is a vaccine to prevent influenza, many individuals in both healthy and high-risk groups fail to get themselves vaccinated against the disease. It is understood that only two percent of the population in Malaysia have obtained flu jabs. “Ideally, everyone should get the influenza vaccination and not just the high-risk groups,” he said, adding that the vaccine is recommended to be taken every year as the influenza virus is always mutating which renders the previous vaccine ineffective. Dr Helmy Haja Mydin. -- Photo courtesy of HOSPITAL PANTAI KUALA LUMPUR Pantai Hospital Kuala Lumpur lung specialist Dr Helmy Haja Mydin said for now it is best to prevent influenza through vaccination as the anti-viral drug Oseltamivir is only effective if taken immediately within 48 hours after a person is infected with the virus. “What we are worried about is that due to the similarity in symptoms, people with influenza would think they have the common cold and end up seeking treatment late,” he added. Translated by Rema Nambiar BERNAMA BERNAMA provides up-to-date authentic and comprehensive news and information which are disseminated via BERNAMA Wires; www.bernama.com; BERNAMA TV on Astro 502, unifi TV 631 and MYTV 121 channels and BERNAMA Radio on FM93.9 (Klang Valley), FM107.5 (Johor Bahru), FM107.9 (Kota Kinabalu) and FM100.9 (Kuching) frequencies. Follow us on social media : Facebook : @bernamaofficial, @bernamatv, @bernamaradio Twitter : @bernama.com, @BernamaTV, @bernamaradio Instagram : @bernamaofficial, @bernamatvofficial, @bernamaradioofficial TikTok : @bernamaofficial KEYWORDS influenza covid-19 world health organisation who influenza vaccine ili sari flunet malaysian influenza working groupbernama RELATED NEWS Wholesale And Retail Trade Sales Up 3.8 Pct To Rm148.2 Bln In September - DOSM 3d ago Services Sector Revenue Hits RM618.5 Bln In 3Q, up 5.9 Pct YOY - DOSM 3d ago FKPM Newsroom Offers Hands-on Journalism Experience, Exposure To UiTM Students 3d ago MORE NEWS Extraordinary Arab And Islamic Summit Aims To Halt Israeli Attacks, Arab League Secretary-General Says 4m ago Biban24 Propels Saudi Entrepreneurial Ecosystem Growth, Development 7m ago Malaysia Airlines Improves On-time Performance To Over 80 Pct In October 2024 22m ago BERNAMA, Pertubuhan Berita Nasional Malaysia merupakan Peneraju dalam perkhidmatan berita dan maklumat mempelawa calon warganegara Malaysia yang layak untuk menyertai kami : Sila layari portal kerjaya BERNAMA di https://kerjaya.bernama.com untuk maklumat lanjut. Permohonan hendaklah dibuat secara atas talian melalui portal kerjaya BERNAMA. PORTAL KERJAYA BERNAMA Close Maklum Balas Pelanggan 2023 Para Pelanggan Yang Dihormati, Dimaklumkan bahawa soal selidik ini bertujuan untuk mendapatkan maklum balas pelanggan berhubung tahap pengamalan nilai-nilai murni di jabatan/agensi Kerajaan yang memberikan perkhidmatan kepada tuan/puan. Berdasarkan pengalaman atau pemerhatian semasa berurusan dengan BERNAMA, sila beri maklum balas kepada pernyataan-pernyataan yang berikut dalam konteks semasa. Kami menghargai maklum balas yang jujur dan rasional daripada anda. Maklum balas yang diberikan adalah SULIT. Terima kasih kerana sudi meluangkan masa untuk mengisi soal selidik ini. Sila klik pautan berikut: https://insan.jpa.gov.my/survey/agency/f6de54bf-24f2-4858-b445-9ac506487c1c Close General Line +603 2631 1000 / +603 2693 9933 Bernama.com +601 6415 2766 Wires +603 2631 1535 / 1252 Digital Services +603 2631 1112 PR/MREM Services +603 2631 1123 Subscription +603 2631 1510 Bernama TV +603 2631 1635 Bernama Radio +603 2692 9739 Close Close Malaysian National News Agency Wisma BERNAMA No.28 Jalan BERNAMA Off Jalan Tun Razak 50400 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia [click here] helpdesk[at]bernama.com Categories • General • BernamaBiz • Sports • Lifestyle • Politics • World • Infographics • Videos • Exclusive Press • Archived Microsite • Budget 2025 • HAWANA 2024 • Fokus BERNAMA • Thoughts • Health • Energy • MAPO • MCMC Region • Central • Northern • Southern • East • Sabah • Sarawak About BERNAMA • Corporate Site • Contact Us • BERNAMA Services • Kerjaya@BERNAMA • Quotation / Tender © 2024 BERNAMA • Disclaimer • Privacy Policy • Security PolicyKorea issues nationwide standstill for poultry farms amid bird flu cases - The Korea Times The Korea Times National Politics Foreign Affairs Multicultural Community Defense Environment & Animals Law & Crime Society Health & Science Business Tech Bio Companies Finance Companies Economy Markets Cryptocurrency Opinion Editorial Columns Thoughts of the Times Cartoon Today in History Blogs Tribune Service Blondie & Garfield Letter to the Editor Lifestyle Travel & Food Trends People & Events Books Around Town Fortune Telling Entertainment & Arts K-pop Films Shows & Dramas Music Theater & Others Sports World SCMP Asia Video Howdy Korea Korean Storytellers POPKORN Culture People News Photos Photo News Darkroom The Korea Times National Politics Foreign Affairs Multicultural Community Defense Environment & Animals Law & Crime Society Health & Science Business Tech Bio Companies Finance Companies Economy Markets Cryptocurrency Opinion Editorial Columns Thoughts of the Times Cartoon Today in History Blogs Tribune Service Blondie & Garfield Letter to the Editor Lifestyle Travel & Food Trends People & Events Books Around Town Fortune Telling Entertainment & Arts K-pop Films Shows & Dramas Music Theater & Others Sports World SCMP Asia Video Howdy Korea Korean Storytellers POPKORN Culture People News Photos Photo News Darkroom Login Register Login Register The Korea Times search all menu Login SubscribePhotosVideoWorldSportsOpinionEntertainment & ArtLifestyleFinanceBusinessNationalNorth Korea 1How Rose's chant of 'Apateu' became global sensation 3K-pop group Seventeen honored by Los Angeles for contribution to music 5N. Korea jams GPS signals, affecting ships, civilian aircraft: JCS 7KOREAN TEMPLE ADVENTURESDongguk Temple remains a reminder of Korea's tumultuous past9Sungjin of DAY6 proves musical prowess in his first solo album '30' 11Have you ever been to a Korean wedding? 13Trump put Elon Musk on phone with Ukraine's Zelenskyy during congratulatory call, official says 15Over 3,700 N. Koreans visited Russia in Q3 for 'studies': RFA 17Trump has not asked Lighthizer to reprise US trade chief post: sources 19JCS chief inspects military readiness at border outpost, destroyer 2Rough road ahead for Korea's travel balance over China's visa-free policy 42 umbrella unions stage large-scale rallies in Seoul 6INTERVIEW'Health without intense exercise? Wishful thinking. Don't walk, run!'8Korea's ski tourism loses momentum amid population decline, climate crisis 10Authorities continue nighttime search for 12 missing from fishing boat 12Joseon court music exhibit travels to Sweden 14Fire erupts at POSCO Pohang plant; 1 worker injured16Wonsan - A stamp of disapproval: Part 2 18Playoff-bound teams set in K League 2 with Suwon Samsung stuck for another season 20China summons Philippine ambassador over 'new maritime laws' Close for 24 hours The Korea Times search all menu Login SubscribePhotosVideoWorldSportsOpinionEntertainment & ArtLifestyleFinanceBusinessNationalNorth Korea National PoliticsForeign AffairsMulticultural CommunityDefenseEnvironment & AnimalsLaw & CrimeSocietyHealth & Science Mon, November 11, 2024 | 14:21 Korea issues nationwide standstill for poultry farms amid bird flu cases Posted : 2020-12-12 10:16 Updated : 2020-12-12 20:18 Health officials disinfect an area near duck farms at Jangseong, South Jeolla Province, Saturday. YonhapThe government issued a 48-hour standstill order for all poultry farms across the country Saturday following a series of highly pathogenic avian influenza cases.Until Sunday, all poultry farms and livestock production facilities, including vehicles and personnel, will be subject to the movement ban, with disinfection work to be carried out during the period, the authorities said. The country has been reporting the bird flu cases at local farms nationwide, including South and North Jeolla, Gyeonggi, North Chungcheong and North Gyeongsang provinces.On Friday, South Korea confirmed two more cases, raising the total for this season to 10 outbreaks. Avian influenza is contagious and can cause severe illness and even death in poultry.The country reported its first case in 32 months in late October in Cheonan, about 90 kilometers south of Seoul, among migratory birds. (Yonhap) Most Read in National 12 umbrella unions stage large-scale rallies in Seoul 2Korea to launch economic consultative bodies to brace for Trump 2.0 3Concerns grow over AI textbooks as digital dependence increases among students 4Yoon grapples with growing unpopularity at halfway mark 5Fire erupts at POSCO Pohang plant; 1 worker injured Top 10 Stories 1Korea to launch economic consultative bodies to brace for Trump 2.0 2SK chief wins chance to challenge $986 mil. divorce settlement 3Concerns grow over AI textbooks as digital dependence increases among students 4Korean essay on 'ramyeon' to be published in UK 5Lotte, Shinsegae in limelight after Trump win 6Putin finalizes N. Korea defense deal 7Nobel laureate Han Kang to hear Korean introduction at award ceremony in Stockholm 8Yoon grapples with growing unpopularity at halfway mark 9Trump speaks to Putin, warns against escalating in Ukraine: report 10Ukraine reveals intercepted radio communications of NK soldiers in Russia DARKROOM Bayern Munich beat Tottenham Hotspur in Seoul Tottenham 4-3 K-League All-Stars World Water Day 2024 Busan World Team Table Tennis Championships Finals Super Bowl 2024 CEO & Publisher: Oh Young-jin Digital News Email: webmaster@koreatimes.co.kr Tel: 02-724-2114 Online newspaper registration No: 서울,아52844 Date of registration: 2020.02.05 Masthead: The Korea Times Copyright © koreatimes.co.kr. All rights reserved. About Us Introduction History Contact Us Products & Services Subscribe E-paper RSS Service Content Sales Site Map Policy Code of Ethics Ombudsman Privacy Statement Terms of Service Copyright Policy Family Site Hankook Ilbo Dongwha GroupGov't culls 2.7 million birds to curb highly pathogenic bird flu - The Korea Times The Korea Times National Politics Foreign Affairs Multicultural Community Defense Environment & Animals Law & Crime Society Health & Science Business Tech Bio Companies Finance Companies Economy Markets Cryptocurrency Opinion Editorial Columns Thoughts of the Times Cartoon Today in History Blogs Tribune Service Blondie & Garfield Letter to the Editor Lifestyle Travel & Food Trends People & Events Books Around Town Fortune Telling Entertainment & Arts K-pop Films Shows & Dramas Music Theater & Others Sports World SCMP Asia Video Howdy Korea Korean Storytellers POPKORN Culture People News Photos Photo News Darkroom The Korea Times National Politics Foreign Affairs Multicultural Community Defense Environment & Animals Law & Crime Society Health & Science Business Tech Bio Companies Finance Companies Economy Markets Cryptocurrency Opinion Editorial Columns Thoughts of the Times Cartoon Today in History Blogs Tribune Service Blondie & Garfield Letter to the Editor Lifestyle Travel & Food Trends People & Events Books Around Town Fortune Telling Entertainment & Arts K-pop Films Shows & Dramas Music Theater & Others Sports World SCMP Asia Video Howdy Korea Korean Storytellers POPKORN Culture People News Photos Photo News Darkroom Login Register Login Register The Korea Times search all menu Login SubscribePhotosVideoWorldSportsOpinionEntertainment & ArtLifestyleFinanceBusinessNationalNorth Korea 1How Rose's chant of 'Apateu' became global sensation 3K-pop group Seventeen honored by Los Angeles for contribution to music 5N. Korea jams GPS signals, affecting ships, civilian aircraft: JCS 7KOREAN TEMPLE ADVENTURESDongguk Temple remains a reminder of Korea's tumultuous past9Sungjin of DAY6 proves musical prowess in his first solo album '30' 11Have you ever been to a Korean wedding? 13Trump put Elon Musk on phone with Ukraine's Zelenskyy during congratulatory call, official says 15Over 3,700 N. Koreans visited Russia in Q3 for 'studies': RFA 17Trump has not asked Lighthizer to reprise US trade chief post: sources 19JCS chief inspects military readiness at border outpost, destroyer 2Rough road ahead for Korea's travel balance over China's visa-free policy 42 umbrella unions stage large-scale rallies in Seoul 6INTERVIEW'Health without intense exercise? Wishful thinking. Don't walk, run!'8Korea's ski tourism loses momentum amid population decline, climate crisis 10Authorities continue nighttime search for 12 missing from fishing boat 12Joseon court music exhibit travels to Sweden 14Fire erupts at POSCO Pohang plant; 1 worker injured16Wonsan - A stamp of disapproval: Part 2 18Playoff-bound teams set in K League 2 with Suwon Samsung stuck for another season 20China summons Philippine ambassador over 'new maritime laws' Close for 24 hours The Korea Times search all menu Login SubscribePhotosVideoWorldSportsOpinionEntertainment & ArtLifestyleFinanceBusinessNationalNorth Korea National PoliticsForeign AffairsMulticultural CommunityDefenseEnvironment & AnimalsLaw & CrimeSocietyHealth & Science Mon, November 11, 2024 | 14:21 Gov't culls 2.7 million birds to curb highly pathogenic bird flu Posted : 2020-12-09 11:17 Updated : 2020-12-09 11:17 GettyimagesbankSouth Korea said Wednesday it has destroyed around 2.7 million poultry to prevent the spread of a highly pathogenic bird flu among local farms amid growing concerns over the disease penetrating deeper into the local livestock industry.Local authorities have culled 361,000 ducks, 1.5 million chickens and 885,000 quails since Nov. 28 when South Korea reported its first farm-related case in Jeongeup, about 290 kilometers south of Seoul, according to the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs. South Korea has so far confirmed five cases of the highly pathogenic avian influenza from poultry farms nationwide. The country is currently studying two suspected cases as well.The cases came from different regions, ranging from Gyeonggi Province, which surrounds Seoul, to South Jeolla Province.Authorities cull poultry within a 3-km radius of infected farms. Birds at farms with suspected cases are also destroyed.The country reported its first highly pathogenic case in 32 months in late October in Cheonan, 92 kilometers south of Seoul, from wild birds. Since then, a whopping 19 cases have been found from wild bird habitats across the country. Health authorities are investigating 17 suspected cases of highly pathogenic bird flu among wild birds as well.Highly pathogenic avian influenza is contagious and can cause severe illness and even death in poultry. (Yonhap) Most Read in National 12 umbrella unions stage large-scale rallies in Seoul 2Korea to launch economic consultative bodies to brace for Trump 2.0 3Concerns grow over AI textbooks as digital dependence increases among students 4Yoon grapples with growing unpopularity at halfway mark 5Fire erupts at POSCO Pohang plant; 1 worker injured Top 10 Stories 1Korea to launch economic consultative bodies to brace for Trump 2.0 2SK chief wins chance to challenge $986 mil. divorce settlement 3Concerns grow over AI textbooks as digital dependence increases among students 4Korean essay on 'ramyeon' to be published in UK 5Lotte, Shinsegae in limelight after Trump win 6Putin finalizes N. Korea defense deal 7Nobel laureate Han Kang to hear Korean introduction at award ceremony in Stockholm 8Yoon grapples with growing unpopularity at halfway mark 9Trump speaks to Putin, warns against escalating in Ukraine: report 10Ukraine reveals intercepted radio communications of NK soldiers in Russia DARKROOM Bayern Munich beat Tottenham Hotspur in Seoul Tottenham 4-3 K-League All-Stars World Water Day 2024 Busan World Team Table Tennis Championships Finals Super Bowl 2024 CEO & Publisher: Oh Young-jin Digital News Email: webmaster@koreatimes.co.kr Tel: 02-724-2114 Online newspaper registration No: 서울,아52844 Date of registration: 2020.02.05 Masthead: The Korea Times Copyright © koreatimes.co.kr. All rights reserved. About Us Introduction History Contact Us Products & Services Subscribe E-paper RSS Service Content Sales Site Map Policy Code of Ethics Ombudsman Privacy Statement Terms of Service Copyright Policy Family Site Hankook Ilbo Dongwha GroupDeadly poultry virus causes Agriculture Ministry to suspend imports | Loop Cayman Islands LoginCayman Islands Trinidad & Tobago Jamaica Barbados Haiti St. Lucia Caribbean NewsLoop CaymanNewsVideosCayman NewsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsSportEntertainmentEnvironmentLifestyleTravelFoodBusinessCoronavirusMonday Nov 11 0°CNews (current)VideosTopicsLoop CaymanNewsVideosCayman NewsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsSportEntertainmentEnvironmentLifestyleTravelFoodBusinessCoronavirusLocationTrinidad & TobagoJamaicaBarbadosCayman IslandsHaitiSt. LuciaCaribbean NewsMy LoopSign InForgot Password?Create AccountBreaking News Scotiabank locations to remain closed on Wednesday Cabinet Meeting Summary Published For June 19, 2024FATF Removes Jamaica From FATF Grey ListWheels For Meals' Raises $36k For SeniorsJudiciary's Distinguished Guest Lecture By Sir Geoffrey VosProgressive Raise Questions About Anti-Gang Strategy, Minimum Wage RCIPS Launches National Gun Amnesty For The Month Of JulyThe National Conservation Act And The Bogeyman FallacyPolice Investigate Single-Vehicle Collision On Shamrock RoadAcademy Sports Club Welcomes New Women's Coach Fabian SanginesMonday Nov 11 0°C Cayman News2 min readDeadly poultry virus causes Agriculture Ministry to suspend imports Daphne Ewing ChowDecember 8, 2020 12:14 AM ETThe Ministry of Education Youth, Sports, Agriculture and Lands (MEYSAL) has announced a temporary restriction the importation of fresh, chilled and frozen meat from the United Kingdom, the European Unions and the Netherlands-- with immediate effect.The announcement comes on the heels of an outbreak of the deadly Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI), also known as the H5N8 virus or bird flu.Since November, the UK has confirmed nine outbreaks of avian influenza in poultry or other captive birds. The most recent two came from two turkey farms in Norfolk yesterday– all birds will be culled to limit the spread of the disease.Source: Farmers WeeklyJust yesterday, four countries reported more outbreaks in poultry and wild birds, with the Ukraine joining other countries in Europe to report the virus, according to notifications from the World Organization for Animal Health.The virus has been spreading rapidly in Europe, placing the poultry industry on high alert after previous outbreaks led to the culling of tens of millions of birds.In the Netherlands, Wageningen Bioveterinary Research has reported close to 400,000 birds being affected by the outbreak.Israel has been reporting outbreaks since mid-November, which have killed 660 of nearly 30,000 infected birds between two locations.South Korea has reported two H5N8 outbreaks, both at farms, since the beginning of the month. The first event killed 300 of 188,000 birds. Detection of the virus at a duck farm in South Korea’s South Jeolla Province has forced local authorities to order culling of nearly 500,000 chickens and ducks yesterday.Japan has reported six infected farms in its worst outbreak in more than four years. The last big outbreak was between November 2016 and March 2017, when a total of 1.67 million chickens were culled due to the H5N6 strain of bird flu."Although it is still a developing situation, the Ministry of Agriculture has temporarily restricted the importation of poultry from affected countries to safeguard our local consumers from infection," confirmed Minister of Agriculture, Hon. Juliana O’Connor-Connolly in a press release.“The Veterinary team at the Department of Agriculture has already informed relevant importers about these restrictions, and Agricultural Health Inspection Service (AHIS) Officers will continue to monitor imports closely."MEYSAL further advises that the ban will not affect the importation of products already treated to destroy the virus, such as canned poultry products and those in airtight containers. Loop is better in the app. Customize your news feed, save articles for later, view your reading history and more. Click the links below to download the app for Android and IOS. Related Articles EntertainmentBuju donates Song Festival money to poultry project at Children's Home November 10, 2020 05:47 PM Caribbean NewsGrenada: Poultry policy increased local production December 27, 2019 09:20 AM Cayman NewsThe Real Chickens of CaymanJune 29, 2020 08:50 AMRecent Articles World NewsActor Tony Todd, known for his role in the movie Candyman, dies at 69 Caribbean NewsCaribbean beauties secure Top 8 spots at Miss Earth Caribbean NewsCayman Islands: Police issue warning about romance scammerMore FromEditor's ChoiceiRock.bet announces Brand Ambassador - Busy Signal "It's a new adventure for me, and I can't wait to see where it takes us..." Brought To You ByiRock.betTalking Health in 5: How to keep your heart healthy Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is known to be the leading cause of death worldwide. This remains true in Jamaica and other Caribbean countries. Additionally, there is a high prevalence of CVD Brought To You ByLASCO LaSoyXodus Carnival: Moving soca people 'Twas the first official band launch for the 2023 Carnival season, and patrons and stakeholders alike were rearing to get on bad. Since Xodus Carnival and Bacchanal Jamaica dropped the plot twi Brought To You ByCarib BeerInternational Friendship Day- 10 of the best friendship traits When it comes to friendships, you are always going to be closer to some people than others. While many friends may fall into the “casual acquaintance” category, a special few sit comfortably within yo Brought To You ByCoca-Cola The Caribbean’s Most Downloaded News AppSign Up For Our NewsletterStay Connected Facebook Twitter Instagram Loop News Advertise with us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Comments Policy About Us Contact Us Submit an Article Cookie PolicyCOPYRIGHT 2020 BY DIGICEL | ALL RIGHTS RESERVED