Influenza- and MCMV-induced memory CD8 T cells control respiratory vaccinia virus infection despite residence in distinct anatomical niches | Mucosal Immunology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature mucosal immunology articles article NB: AS OF JANUARY 1, 2023 THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED WITH ELSEVIER: https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/mucosal-immunology Influenza- and MCMV-induced memory CD8 T cells control respiratory vaccinia virus infection despite residence in distinct anatomical niches Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 21 January 2021 Influenza- and MCMV-induced memory CD8 T cells control respiratory vaccinia virus infection despite residence in distinct anatomical niches Suzanne P. M. Welten1, Josua Oderbolz1, Vural Yilmaz1, Susanna R. Bidgood2, Victoria Gould2, Jason Mercer2,3, Roman Spörri1 & …Annette Oxenius ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2079-23541 Show authors Mucosal Immunology volume 14, pages 728–742 (2021)Cite this article 4011 Accesses 5 Citations 10 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractInduction of memory CD8 T cells residing in peripheral tissues is of interest for T cell-based vaccines as these cells are located at mucosal and barrier sites and can immediately exert effector functions, thus providing protection in case of local pathogen encounter. Different memory CD8 T cell subsets patrol peripheral tissues, but it is unclear which subset is superior in providing protection upon secondary infections. We used influenza virus to induce predominantly tissue resident memory T cells or cytomegalovirus to elicit a large pool of effector-like memory cells in the lungs and determined their early protective capacity and mechanism of reactivation. Both memory CD8 T cell pools have unique characteristics with respect to their phenotype, localization, and maintenance. However, these distinct features do not translate into different capacities to control a respiratory vaccinia virus challenge in an antigen-specific manner, although differential activation mechanisms are utilized. While influenza-induced memory CD8 T cells respond to antigen by local proliferation, MCMV-induced memory CD8 T cells relocate from the vasculature into the tissue in an antigen-independent and partially chemokine-driven manner. Together these results bear relevance for the development of vaccines aimed at eliciting a protective memory CD8 T cell pool at mucosal sites. Similar content being viewed by others Prevention of respiratory virus transmission by resident memory CD8+ T cells Article 12 December 2023 Long-term maintenance of lung resident memory T cells is mediated by persistent antigen Article 09 June 2020 CD8+ tissue-resident memory T-cell development depends on infection-matching regulatory T-cell types Article Open access 11 September 2023 IntroductionCD8 T cells are activated in an antigen-specific manner and have the ability to eliminate pathogens by producing effector cytokines and exerting cytotoxic functions. Upon viral infection, naive virus-specific CD8 T cells are activated, clonally expand, and give rise to a pool of effector cells capable of killing infected target cells. A small population of T cells persists as memory cells that have the capacity to respond and rapidly expand upon secondary antigen encounter. These long-lasting memory CD8 T cells are the basis for T cell-based vaccination approaches. Memory T cells form a heterogeneous population, where distinct subsets are defined based on differences in cell surface molecules, anatomical localization, proliferation capacity, effector functions and metabolism.1Central memory T cells (TCM) express markers that permit lymph node homing and are therefore predominantly found in secondary lymphoid tissues, but these cells also recirculate. In addition, TCM cells exhibit profound proliferative potential. Effector memory T cells (TEM) mainly recirculate and do not express lymphoid tissue homing molecules. One hallmark of these cells is their robust effector functions. Although both TEM and TCM recirculate in the vasculature, it is thought that the reactivation of TCM cells is not immediate. Antigen first has to be transported to the lymphoid tissues where it is presented by professional antigen presenting cells to T cell zone-homing and resident TCM cells. It is not entirely clear how TEM cells are reactivated, but there is evidence that the size of the TEM pool in peripheral tissues and blood is directly linked to its early protective capacity,2,3,4 indicating that these cells respond directly in the infected tissue. Circulatory memory T cells can also be divided into distinct subsets using the expression of the fractalkine receptor CX3CR1.5,6 Tissue resident memory (TRM) T cells are another subset of memory T cells, lodged in peripheral tissues, such as the lungs, salivary gland, gut, female reproductive tract, and the skin.7,8,9,10,11,12 In contrast to TEM cells, TRM cells are restricted from the circulation and are transcriptionally distinct from circulatory memory T cells.13 The initial signals that induce this phenotype depend on tissue-specific cues and include TGF-β, IL-15, and local antigen.13 TRM cells rapidly exert their effector functions upon antigen encounter, leading to an anti-viral state in the tissue and to the attraction of other immune cells to the site of inflammation.14,15 Thus, memory T cells residing in peripheral tissues are poised for instant action and are located at barrier sites, which is where pathogens enter the body. Due to these characteristics, both TRM and TEM cells have gained interest in being exploited for vaccination purposes. However, it is not clear which T cell subset is superior in providing early protection upon secondary challenge in peripheral tissues.In order to induce large numbers of effector-like T cells in peripheral tissues, cytomegalovirus (CMV)-based vectors are an interesting option. CMV infection induces an atypical CD8 T cell response, characterized by the accumulation of large numbers of effector-like T cells in the circulation, a process termed memory inflation.4,16,17 Maintenance of the inflationary T cell pool is dependent on antigen presentation by latently infected non-hematopoietic cells.18 Epitopes that induce inflationary T cell responses are processed by the constitutive proteasome, and this pathway can be utilized by inserting the epitope on the C-terminus of a gene of interest in the viral genome.19,20 In pre-clinical animal models, CMV-based vectors encoding foreign antigens derived from tumors or pathogens induced effector-like T cell responses specific for these inserted epitopes. These T cells provided protection from the relevant tumors or pathogens expressing these epitopes.21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29 The protective capacity correlated with the size of the inflationary T cell pool in the peripheral organ and blood.2,3,29Here, we compared the local protective capacity of antigenic-specific CD8 TRM cells (induced by influenza virus infection) and inflationary T cells (induced by MCMV infection) in lung tissue towards a secondary respiratory infection with vaccinia virus (VV) encoding the same antigen. We found that both influenza- and MCMV-induced memory T cells provided protection from a local VV challenge in an antigen-dependent fashion. However, the manner of the response was distinct. Whereas influenza-induced memory T cells increased the local pool of T cells by local proliferation and T cell recruitment, the MCMV-induced T cell pool migrated out of the vasculature into the lung parenchyma, which was partially driven by chemokines, enabling these cells to exert their effector functions at the site of infection.ResultsThe phenotypic composition of the memory T cell pool in the lungs is virus dependentWe established a model to compare the immediate protective capacity of distinct memory T cell pools in a peripheral tissue. We focused on the lungs as both TRM cells and MCMV-induced inflationary T cells are established in this tissue.30,31,32 To compare memory T cells with the same specificity, naive CD45.1+ TCR transgenic OVA257–264/Kb-specific (OT-I) T cells were adoptively transferred into CD45.2+ WT recipients before infection. Mice were then intra-tracheally (i.t.) infected with an influenza strain expressing the OVA257–264 epitope, PR8-OVA (Fig. 1a). A large pool of TRM cells was induced, as the majority of the OT-I T cells in the lungs expressed the typical TRM markers CD69 and CD103 four weeks post infection (Fig. 1b, c), but no sizeable KLRG1+ population was detected. To induce a large pool of effector-like cells in the lungs, mice were systemically infected with an MCMV-vector expressing the OVA257–264/Kb epitope under the control of the ie2 promoter (MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL), inducing an OVA257–264/Kb-specific T cell response with inflationary T cell characteristics.2,19 The majority of the lung OT-I T cells expressed KLRG1, whereas hardly any expressed CD69 and CD103 (Fig. 1b, c), consistent with the effector-like phenotype of the MCMV-induced inflationary memory population. Similar results were found when endogenous OVA257–264/Kb-specific CD8 T cells were analyzed instead of adoptively transferred TCR-transgenic OT-I cells (Supplementary Fig. 1A, B). In both influenza-induced and MCMV-induced memory CD8 T cells, a proportion expressed interleukin 7 receptor subunit alpha (IL7Rα, CD127). For influenza-induced OT-I T cells, this marker was mostly expressed by the TRM CD69+ CD103+ cells (Fig. 1d). In both settings, few OT-I T cells co-expressed CD127 and CD62L, representing TCM cells (Fig. 1e). Although administration of MCMV via the respiratory route was reported to induce MCMV-specific TRM cells in the lungs,33,34,35 in our experimental setup both i.t. and systemic administration of MCMV predominantly induced an effector-like population of MCMV-specific CD8 T cells, and i.t. administration of the virus only slightly increased the proportion of TRM cells (Supplementary Fig. 2A, B). This discrepancy might be explained by differences in genetics of the used mouse strains. We therefore henceforth used i.t. influenza virus infection to induce a CD8 TRM population and systemic MCMV infection to raise an effector-like CD8 memory population.Fig. 1: MCMV and influenza infection induce distinct memory CD8 T cell subsets in the lungs.a Experimental setup: 5 × 104 CD45.1+ OT-I T cells were adoptively transferred into CD45.2+ hosts that were either infected intra-tracheally (i.t.) with 50 PFU influenza-expressing-OVA257-264 (PR8-OVA) or intravenously (i.v.) with 2 × 105 PFU MCMV-expressing-OVA257-264 (MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL). Twenty-eight days post infection, the phenotype of the OT-I T cells in the lungs was determined. b Representative flow cytometry plots show the cell surface expression of CD127 KLRG1 and of CD69 CD103 on OT-I T cells in the lungs. c Bar graphs show the percentage of OT-I T cells that expresses KLRG1, CD69 or CD69 CD103, indicated as mean + SEM. Data is pooled from two independent experiments (n = 6–7, each dot represents an individual mouse). d Flow cytometry plots show expression of CD69 CD103 on CD127+ OT-I T cells in the lungs 28 days post infection. e Flow cytometry plots show expression of CD127 CD62L on OT-I T cells in the lungs 28 days post infection. Bar graph shows the percentage of CD127+ CD62L+ OT-I T cells as mean + SEM. Data is pooled from two independent experiments (n = 6, each dot represents an individual mouse). f Mice received 5 µg fluorescently conjugated αCD8 antibody 3 min prior to euthanasia. Flow cytometry plots show in vivo CD8α labeling and ex vivo CD8β staining in the lungs, 28 days post-infection on OT-I T cells. Bar graphs indicate the percentage of OT-I T cells stained by the i.v. injected CD8 antibody as mean + SEM. Data is pooled from two independent experiments (n = 6–7, each dot represents an individual mouse). g Microscopy image shows the lung tissue 28 days after infection. Arrows indicate OT-I T cells. h tSNE clusters of CD45.1+ OT-I T cells isolated from the lungs of influenza- or MCMV-infected mice, based on expression of CD44, CD8α i.v., CD127, KLRG1, CX3CR1, CD69, CD103, and CD62L. Expression of each marker is color-coded with red = expressed and black = not expressed (n = 4 mice per group). i The total number of OT-I T cells recovered from the lungs is shown at day 28 and day 60 post-infection (n = 3–7). Fold difference is indicated. j The percentage of OT-I T cells in influenza virus infection that expresses CD69 CD103 is shown on day 28 and 60 post-infection, one experiment out of two is shown (n = 3), as mean + SEM, each dot represents an individual mouse. Two-sided Mann–Whitney test was used to determine statistical significance: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 and not significant (ns) P ≥ 0.05.Full size imageTRM cells are restricted from the circulation and located deep within tissues. To discriminate between cells within the tissue and those within/close to the vasculature, a fluorescently conjugated αCD8 antibody was i.v. injected into mice shortly before euthanasia. As expected, the majority of influenza-induced memory OT-I T cells was not labeled by this procedure, whereas MCMV-induced OT-I T cells stained mostly positive for the i.v. injected antibody, indicating that these cells are within or close to the vasculature (Fig. 1f). Similar results were observed for endogenous OVA257–264/Kb-specific CD8 T cells (Supplementary Fig. 1C). The distinct localizations of the memory OT-I T cells were confirmed by microscopy. Influenza-induced memory OT-I T cells were located in close proximity to Epcam+ epithelial cells lining the lung airways and were not labeled by the i.v. injected αCD8 antibody. In contrast, MCMV-induced OT-I T cells were found in close proximity to CD31+ vascular endothelial cells and labeled by the short intravascular exposure to the αCD8 antibody (Fig. 1g).In addition, we evaluated the phenotype of MCMV- and influenza-specific OT-I memory T cells using T-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) analysis and observed heterogeneity between the different memory T cell pools (Fig. 1h). Besides phenotypical differences, the magnitude of the lung memory OT-I T cell pool was also different, as four times more OT-I T cells were detected in the MCMV setting (Fig. 1i). The number of MCMV-specific OT-I T cells in the lungs did not change drastically over a time period of 60 days. In contrast, 60 days post influenza virus infection, a ~6-fold reduction in the number of OT-I T cells in the lungs was observed (Fig. 1i). The TRM cells in particular were declining in the lung tissue, as the percentage of CD69+ CD103+ OT-I T cells had dropped considerably at 60 days post influenza virus infection (Fig. 1j). This is in agreement with previous studies showing that TRM cells in the lung are not steadily maintained.36,37 These findings were confirmed for endogenous OVA257–264-specific CD8 T cells (Supplementary Fig. 1D). The decrease in OT-I T cells in influenza infection was not observed in the spleen (Supplementary Fig. 1E). Combined, these results show that influenza virus and MCMV infection induce memory CD8 T cell populations in the lungs with distinct features in terms of their phenotype, localization, and maintenance.T cells induced by MCMV or influenza virus exhibit comparable protective capacityTo address the question whether the protective capacity of the distinct memory T cell compositions in the lungs differ, we performed a challenge infection with a recombinant VV expressing the shared OVA257–264 antigen (VV-OVA). Specifically, influenza- or MCMV-experienced mice were exposed to a local (i.t.) VV-OVA infection and the viral load in the lungs was determined 2 days later (Fig. 2a). A group of naive mice was included that harbored no pulmonary memory OVA257–264/Kb-specific T cells before the VV-OVA challenge. Both groups of memory mice showed enhanced control of a local respiratory VV challenge as compared to naive mice (Fig. 2b). However, no differences in the viral load were observed between influenza- or MCMV-experienced mice. This result indicates that the distinct memory CD8 T cell compositions protect equally well from VV-OVA infection, irrespective if the majority of the memory T cell pool harbored TRM or effector-like cells. Examining the protective capacity of endogenous OVA257–264/Kb-specific memory CD8 T cells revealed comparable results (Supplementary Fig. 3). The protective effect of the memory OT-I T cells was antigen dependent, as challenge with a VV that did not express the cognate shared antigen was not controlled above naive mice (Fig. 2c). Since the number of TRM cells in the lungs of influenza virus infected mice declined in time, mice were challenged with VV-OVA at a later time point to determine if the protective capacity would also diminish compared to MCMV-primed mice. However, despite the reduction in TRM cells, mice that had memory T cells in the lungs, irrespective of whether they were induced by influenza virus or MCMV, showed enhanced control of VV-OVA challenge (Fig. 2d). These results show that mice with memory CD8 T cells in the lung tissue exhibit enhanced control from a local VV rechallenge, irrespective of the phenotypic memory T cell composition.Fig. 2: MCMV- and influenza-induced memory T cells protect from a local vaccinia virus challenge in the lungs in an antigen-specific manner.a Experimental setup: mice with memory T cells in the lungs induced by influenza virus or MCMV (as described in Fig. 1a) were challenged i.t. on day 28 (b, c), or day 60 (d) with 5 × 106 PFU vaccinia virus expressing OVA (b, d) or with 3 × 105 PFU VV-G2 (vaccinia virus that does not express OVA) (c). Two days post-challenge the viral load was determined in the lungs. All data is pooled from two independent experiments (n = 3–5). Each dot represents an individual mouse, geometric mean and limit of detection are indicated. Statistical significance was determined using one-way ANOVA with Kruskal–Wallis post hoc test to correct for multiple comparisons: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and not significant (ns) P ≥ 0.05.Full size imageT cells induced by influenza virus or MCMV infection produce effector cytokinesMemory CD8 T cells in the lungs provided protection from local challenge in an antigen-dependent manner. As the memory OT-I cells induced by influenza virus or MCMV infection had different characteristics, we next addressed whether the mechanism of responding to antigenic challenge would differ. IFN-γ and TNF produced by CD8 T cells are critical for the clearance of a respiratory VV infection.38,39 We examined the quality of the responding memory T cells by examining cytokine production before (28 days post primary infection) and 2 days post-secondary challenge with VV-OVA. OT-I T cells produced IFN-γ, TNF, and IL-2 (Fig. 3a), independent of which virus was initially used for the establishment of the memory pool. Also, after VV-OVA challenge, the majority of cells in both settings was able to produce these effector cytokines (Fig. 3b–d). To conclude, memory CD8 T cell populations induced in the lungs by either MCMV or influenza virus are both capable of producing effector cytokines upon secondary exposure to cognate antigen.Fig. 3: Memory T cells induced by MCMV or influenza virus produce effector cytokines.Cytokine production was determined in OT-I T cells from the lungs of MCMV-infected or influenza virus-infected mice, before (28 days post primary infection, top row) and 2 days post (bottom row) challenge with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. a Representative plots show intracellular production of IFN-γ versus TNF (left) and IL-2 (right). b–d Bar graphs show the percentage of OT-I T cells that produces IFN-γ (b), TNF (c), or IL-2 (d). All bar graphs represent mean + SEM and each dot represents an individual mouse. One experiment out of two independent experiments is shown. Mann–Whitney test was used to determine significance: *P < 0.05 (n = 4) and not significant (ns) P ≥ 0.05.Full size imageThe lung OT-I T cell pool increases in size upon antigenic rechallengeInfection with MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL induced a memory OT-I T cell pool in the lungs that was higher in magnitude as compared to the TRM pool induced upon influenza (PR8-OVA) virus infection (Fig. 1i). Next, we addressed the size of the OT-I T cell pool 2 days post challenge with VV-OVA. In both the MCMV and influenza virus setting, the OT-I memory T cell population increased in magnitude after local antigen re-exposure upon VV-OVA infection (Fig. 4a). Although the overall expansion of the OT-I T cell pool in the lung was more pronounced in the influenza virus setting (3.6-fold versus 2-fold), the population was still 2-fold larger in the MCMV setting. Also, the number of cytokine-producing cells was larger in the MCMV setting (Supplementary Fig. 4A–C). In contrast to the lung, no changes in the magnitude of the OT-I T cell pool were detected in the influenza virus setting in the spleen (Fig. 4b). Strikingly, in the MCMV setting, splenic OT-I T cells were reduced upon i.t. VV-OVA infection (Fig. 4c), likely indicating that splenic OT-I cells migrated and accumulated in the lung tissue. To corroborate the importance of T cell recruitment for the expansion of the lung localized OT-I T cell pool during VV-OVA challenge, mice were treated with FTY720 which inhibits S1P-S1PR-axis-mediated lymphocyte egress from lymphoid organs. In both the influenza- and MCMV-setting, the lung localized OT-I T cell pool was reduced compared to the untreated group, indicating that T cell recruitment was contributing to the expansion of the lung-localized OT-I T cell pool (Supplementary Fig. 4D).Fig. 4: Memory T cells in the lung expand upon local rechallenge.Mice with memory OT-I T cells induced by influenza virus (PR8-OVA) or MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL (as described in Fig. 1A) were i.t. challenged on day 28 with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. a The number of OT-I T cells in the lungs was determined 28 days post-priming and 2 days post-secondary challenge with VV-OVA (n = 18–31, pooled from eight independent experiments). b Number of OT-I T cells in the spleen 28 days post influenza virus (PR8-OVA) infection and 2 days post-secondary challenge with VV-OVA (n = 20–26, pooled from eight independent experiments). c Number of splenic OT-I T cells 28 days post MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL infection and 2 days post-secondary challenge with VV-OVA (n = 16–31, pooled from eight independent experiments). d Histogram shows the expression of Ki67 in lung OT-I T cells 2 days post VV-OVA infection. e Bar graphs show the percentage of Ki67+ within OT-I T cells on day 28 post-primary infection (left) (n = 11–12, pooled from five independent experiments) or 2 days post-secondary infection with VV-OVA (right) (n = 3–4, one experiment out of eight is shown). f Mice received BrdU in the drinking water during the VV-OVA rechallenge period. Histogram shows BrdU incorporation in OT-I T cells in the lungs. g Bar graphs show the percentage of OT-I T cells that incorporated BrdU in mice from day 28 to day 30 (left) (n = 5–6, pooled from two independent experiments) and in mice that received a VV-OVA challenge on day 28 (right) (n = 3–4, one experiment out of 4 is shown). All bar graphs represent mean + SEM, each dot represents an individual mouse. Two-sided Mann–Whitney test was used to determine statistical significance: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and not significant (ns) P ≥ 0.05.Full size imageAnother explanation for the increase in magnitude of the OT-I T cells localized in the lung could be local proliferation. We therefore determined Ki67 expression in OT-I T cells to identify cycling cells. A higher percentage of OT-I T cells in the lungs expressed Ki67 in the influenza virus setting after local VV-OVA challenge (Fig. 4d, e), although Ki67 was also expressed in a small population of MCMV-induced OT-I T cells. To corroborate these findings, mice were administered with BrdU in the drinking water during the recall response to determine active DNA synthesis and proliferation. Relatively more OT-I T cells induced by influenza virus infection incorporated BrdU compared to the MCMV setting upon VV-OVA challenge (Fig. 4f, g). In summary, these data show that lung-localized memory T cells induced by influenza virus or MCMV infection expand upon local viral rechallenge. However, a higher proliferative capacity was found in memory T cells induced by influenza virus infection. Together, these results suggest that the increased number of OVA-specific CD8 T cells in the MCMV-setting after local VV-OVA challenge might be primarily due to relocation of circulating cells to the lung tissue.Memory CD8 T cells induced by MCMV virus infection relocate from the vasculature upon local inflammationNext, we addressed if the localization of the memory OT-I T cells in the lungs would change upon challenge with a viral infection sharing the cognate antigen. As shown before, the majority of the MCMV-induced OT-I cells in the lungs was close to or within the vasculature (Figs. 1d, 5a). However, after local VV-OVA administration, a large fraction of the OT-I T cells migrated out of the vasculature deeper into the lung parenchyma, as determined by the absence of binding by an i.v. injected, fluorescently conjugated αCD8 antibody (Fig. 5a). Extravasation of OT-I T cells was also observed upon local challenge with a VV not expressing the OVA antigen (VV-G2), indicating that antigen was not a prerequisite for the relocation to occur (Fig. 5b). Moreover, when VV-OVA was administrated i.p. instead of i.t., OVA257–264/Kb-specific CD8 T cells in the lung did not relocate deeper into the tissue. However, in the ovaries, which is the organ where VV replicates upon an i.p. infection, OVA257–264/Kb-specific CD8 T cells extravasated (Supplementary Fig. 5A). Combined these results indicate that local inflammation is required for the extravasation of MCMV-induced memory T cells into the site of the infected tissue.Fig. 5: MCMV-induced memory OT-I T cells relocate in the lungs upon antigenic challenge.a Mice that either have memory OT-I T cells in the lungs induced by MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL or influenza virus (PR8-OVA) (as described in Fig. 1a) were locally challenged on day 28 with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. 2 days post-secondary challenge, the percentage of OT-I T cells that was in the vasculature was determined by i.v. injection of 5 μg fluorescently conjugated αCD8 antibody 3 min prior to euthanasia (n = 14–19, pooled from five independent experiments). b Mice that either had memory OT-I T cells in the lungs induced by MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL or influenza virus (PR8-OVA) (as described in Fig. 1a) were locally challenged on day 28 with 3 × 105 PFU VV-G2 (a vaccinia virus that does not express the SIINFEKL epitope). 2 days post-secondary challenge, the percentage of OT-I T cells that was in the vasculature was determined by i.v. injection of 5 μg fluorescently conjugated αCD8 antibody 3 min prior to euthanasia (n = 12–14), pooled from four independent experiments). c Microscopy image shows the lung tissue 2 days post-infection with VV-OVA. d 5 × 104 CD45.1+ Nur77-GFP OT-I T cells were adoptively transferred into host mice that were subsequently i.t. infected with 50 PFU PR8-OVA or i.v. with 2 × 105 PFU MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL. After 28 days, mice were i.t. challenged with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. Flow cytometry plots show Nur77 expression on OT-I T cells in the lungs before rechallenge (left) and 2 days post VV-OVA infection (right). e The percentage (left) and total number (right) of OT-I T cells expressing GFP (Nur77) is shown in the lungs, after VV-OVA infection as mean ± SEM (n = 2–4, one out of two experiments is shown). f Flow cytometry plots show in vivo CD8α labeling and ex vivo CD8β staining on all OT-I T cells (left) or on GFP+ OT-I T cells (right) one day post VV-OVA infection in the lungs. g Flow cytometry plots show in vivo CD8α labeling versus KLRG1 expression on OT-I T cells, gated on CD45.1+ in the lungs, 2 days post VV-OVA infection (left), and CD127 KLRG1 staining on the IV− fraction of the OT-I T cells (right). h Percentage of cells expressing CD127 and/or KLRG1 within the IV− fraction is shown (n = 3–4, one representative out of 3 independent experiments is shown). i tSNE clusters of CD45.1+ OT-I T cells in the lungs 2 days post VV-OVA infection, based on expression of Nur77, CD8α i.v., CD127, KLRG1, CD44, CD69, and CD103. Expression of each marker is color-coded with red = expressed and black = not expressed (n = 3 mice per group). j Experimental setup: 2 × 105 OT-I T cells were adoptively transferred into naive hosts that were subsequently infected with 2 × 105 PFU MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL. After 4 weeks, CD127+ KLRG1− and CD127- KLRG1+ were sorted from the spleen. 5 × 104 cells of each population were separately transferred into MCMV-ie2-GP33 infection-matched recipients, that were subsequently challenged with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. Two days later the viral load was determined in the lungs. k The VV-OVA viral load in the lungs is shown, pooled data from two independent experiments is shown (n = 5–10). Geometric mean and limit of detection are indicated. l The total number of OT-I T cells in the lungs is shown (n = 10, pooled from two independent experiments). All bar graphs show mean + SEM, each dot represents an individual mouse. Two-sided Mann–Whitney test (a and j) or two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons test (e) or Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s post hoc test (i) was used to determine statistical significance: *P < 0.05, ****P < 0.0001 and not significant (ns) P ≥ 0.05.Full size imageFor memory T cells induced by influenza virus infection and responding to a VV-OVA challenge, we also observed a decrease in the percentage of cells that was stained by the i.v.-injected antibody (i.e. identifying cells within or close to the vasculature). This effect was antigen dependent, as it was not observed upon challenge with VV-G2 (Fig. 5b), likely reflecting an increase of cells in the lung tissue due to local proliferation of the lung localized cells.40,41 Microscopy analysis of lung sections showed relocalization of the MCMV-induced OT-I T cells from CD31+ endothelial cells closer to the Epcam+ epithelial cells lining the airways. These cells were not labeled by the i.v. injected fluorescently conjugated αCD8 antibody, confirming the flow cytometry data (Fig. 5c). Also, influenza virus-induced memory CD8 TRM cells relocated from their original location near Epcam+ epithelial cells to more dispersed sites within the lung tissue.To examine where in the lung tissue OT-I cells encountered antigen, we used OT-I T cells carrying a Nur77-green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgene and thereby reporting T cell receptor (TCR) triggering42 to generate lung memory OT-I T cells. A larger percentage of the influenza virus-induced memory T cells responded to antigen compared to MCMV-induced T cells, judged by a higher percentage of GFP+ OT-I T cells at all time points of analysis (Fig. 5d, e). However, no differences were found in the total number of OT-I T cells responding to antigen (Fig. 5e). The Nur77-GFP signal reports TCR triggering but not inflammation, as no GFP+ cells were detected upon antigenic challenge with VV that did not express OVA (Supplementary Fig. 5B). OT-I activation first occurred in the lungs, subsequently in the mediastinal LN (medLN) after 24 h, but was not observed in the spleen in the first 2 days (Supplementary Fig. 5C). In the lungs, all Nur77+ OT-I T cells were located in the IV− fraction, indicating that antigen encounter took place within the lung tissue and not in the vasculature (Fig. 5f).TCM cells (CD127+ KLRG1− CD62L+) were reported to traffic into inflamed tissue due to extensive synthesis of core 2 O-glycans that generate functional ligands for E- and P-selectins.43 Furthermore, TEM cells (CD127+ KLRG1− CD62L−) express more core 2 O-glycans than the more terminally differentiated effector-like CD127− KLRG1+ CD62L− T cells. As the MCMV-induced T cell pool consists of approximately 80% of KLRG1+ cells (Fig. 1c), we next determined which cells have the ability to migrate out of the vasculature. In the IV− fraction of the MCMV-induced OT-I T cell pool, we detected comparable percentages of CD127+ KLRG1−, CD127− KLRG1+ and CD127− KLRG1− cells, whereas in the influenza virus setting, hardly any CD127− KLRG1+ cells were detected (Fig. 5g, h). These results confirm that CD127+ KLRG1− cells are superior in trafficking into inflamed tissues compared to CD127− KLRG1+, as the CD127− KLRG1+ subset is the dominant subset in the vasculature (Supplementary Fig. 5D). CD127− KLRG1− OT-I cells, perhaps early stage effector cells, were also abundantly found in the IV− fraction in both the MCMV and influenza virus setting. Thus, in MCMV-primed mice, not only the most abundant CD127− KLRG1+ OT-I T cell population migrated out of the vasculature into the lung tissue, but also some smaller populations. tSNE analysis revealed that antigen recognition occurred in the IV− fraction and that in the MCMV setting both CD127+ KLRG1− and CD127− KLRG1+ OT-I T cells responded to antigen (Fig. 5i). The Nur77 signal completely overlapped with CD69 expression. This is not surprising, as CD69 is an early activation marker for T cells upon TCR triggering. Some Nur77 signal overlapped with CD69+ CD103+ cells, indicating that also TRM cells were responding to antigen. Interestingly, there was not such a clear separation for the MCMV- and influenza virus-induced T cells as observed in Fig. 1h, implying that the OT-I cells found in the lungs resemble each other more (Fig. 5i).To test whether both CD127+ KLRG1− and CD127− KLRG1+ OT-I cells contributed to protection from a VV-OVA challenge, we sorted these subsets from MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL-infected mice. Equal cell numbers were separately transferred into infection-matched recipients that were infected with MCMV-ie2-GP33 not expressing the OVA257–264 epitope, to achieve a similar pro-inflammatory environment without an endogenous OVA257–264/Kb-specific T cell response (Fig. 5j). Mice that received either CD127+ KLRG1− or CD127− KLRG1+ OT-I cells similarly controlled a local VV-OVA challenge (Fig. 5k). Furthermore, no differences were found in the total number OT-I T cells recovered from the lungs (Fig. 5l). These data indicate that when present in equal numbers, both CD127+ KLRG1− and CD127− KLRG1+ provide protection from a local VV challenge.Hematopoietic cells in the lungs are infected by VV-OVAWe next addressed which cells in the lungs are infected by VV-OVA. For this purpose, we generated a VV-OVA virus that also expresses GFP. Upon i.t. administration of this virus, the majority of the GFP signal was detected in CD45+ hematopoietic cells (Fig. 6a, b), mostly in CD11b+ cells (Fig. 6c). VV-OVA-GFP-infected cells were also found in the lung parenchyma, corresponding to the location where OT-I T cells were observed upon VV-OVA infection (Figs. 5a and 6d).Fig. 6: Hematopoietic cells in the lungs are infected by VV-OVA.Mice were infected with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA or VV-OVA-GFP. 24 h post-infection, the lungs were isolated. a Flow cytometry plots show GFP expression versus CD45. b Bar graph shows percentage of GFP signal in the hematopoietic (CD45+) and non-hematopoietic (CD45−) compartment as mean + SEM (n = 6, pooled from two independent experiments). Two-sided Mann–Whitney test was used to determine statistical significance: **P < 0.01. c The distribution of the GFP-signal amongst the CD45+ compartment is shown as mean + SEM (n = 3, one out of two independent experiments is shown). d Microscopy image shows the lungs 1 day post infection with VV-OVA-GFP. e Concentration of different chemokines in lung homogenates is shown as mean ± SEM upon i.t. challenge with VV-OVA (n = 3, one out of two experiments is shown) in naive, influenza virus- and MCMV-infected mice. Day 0 represent day 28 post primary infection. f Flow cytometry plots show CXCL9 (RFP) and CXCL10 (BFP) production versus CD45 in REX3 mice. A WT and a naive REX3 mouse are included to determine the background level. g Bar graphs show the percentage of CXCL9 and CXCL10 that is produced by CD11c+ MHC class II+ and CD11b+ Gr1high cells in non-infected (GFP−) and VV-infected (GFP+) cells in the lungs 2 days post-infection with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA-GFP. h Microscopy image shows the lungs of REX3 mice 2 days post infection with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA.Full size imageLeukocytes can be attracted to inflammatory sites by chemokines which, together with integrin-mediated binding, facilitate the migration through the endothelium to the site of infection.44 A number of chemokines including CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CXCL9, and CXCL10, were detected in lung homogenates upon VV-OVA infection. In mice that experienced an infection before the VV-OVA challenge, the chemokine concentrations were consistently higher as compared to VV-OVA infected naive mice (Fig. 6e). Correspondingly, the number of CD8 T cells (excluding the CD45.1+ OT-I T cells) in the IV− fraction was larger in memory compared to naive mice (Supplementary Fig. 6). No marked differences were found in the chemokine induction between MCMV- or influenza virus-experienced mice. We confirmed the production of CXCL9 and CXCL10 upon VV-OVA infection using REX3 reporter mice that express red fluorescent protein (RFP) and blue fluorescent protein (BFP) under the control of the CXCL9 and CXCL10 promoter and found that hematopoietic cells, specifically CD11c+ MHC class II+ and CD11b+ Gr1high cells, were the main producers of both chemokines in both VV-infected and non-infected cells (Fig. 6f, g). CXCL9-producing and CXCL10-producing cells were localized in the lung parenchyma and lining the Epcam+ airways (Fig. 6h). CD45.1+ OT-I T cells co-localized to these CXCL9+ and CXCL10+ producing cells (Fig. 6h). Combined, these results show that upon a respiratory VV-OVA infection, hematopoietic cells are the main infected cells and that both infected and non-infected hematopoietic cells produce chemokines.Chemokines are in part responsible for the extravasation of memory T cells into the lung tissueCXCL9 and CXCL10 bind to the chemokine receptor CXCR3. Although there was no difference in the induction of CXCL9 and CXCL10 in MCMV- and influenza virus-experienced mice, CXCR3 was differentially expressed on OT-I T cells. The majority of lung-localized influenza virus-induced memory OT-I T cells expressed high levels of CXCR3, whereas CXCR3 was hardly detected on MCMV-induced OT-I T cells (Fig. 7a, b). CXCR3 expression was, however, detected on a subset of MCMV-induced OT-I T cells in the spleen (Supplementary Fig. 7A) and correlated with the expression of CD127 (Supplementary Fig. 7B). Upon VV challenge, OT-I T cells quickly downregulated CXCR3 (Fig. 7a, b). Although hardly any CXCR3-expressing cells were found directly ex vivo in the MCMV-setting, overnight incubation at 37 °C of lung single cell suspensions revealed a proportion of cells expressing CXCR3, indicating that CXCR3 is actively downregulated within the lungs (Fig. 7c and Supplementary Fig. 7C). CXCR3 upregulation was hardly observed on OT-I T cells obtained from the spleen after overnight incubation (Supplementary Fig. 7D). Next, we determined the importance of CXCR3 signaling on T cell recruitment and positioning in the lungs (Fig. 7d). Blockade of CXCR3 during the VV-OVA challenge diminished the number of OT-I T cells that was found in the lung after VV-OVA challenge in MCMV-experienced mice (Fig. 7e), and the fraction of OT-I T cells associated with the vasculature was increased (Fig. 7f). A similar trend was observed in the influenza virus setting (Fig. 7e, f). In both settings, OT-I T cells were still found in the lung parenchyma and the positioning of these cells was not altered (Fig. 7g). Furthermore, no differences in the viral load were observed upon CXCR3 blockade (Supplementary Fig. 7E). These data show that CXCR3 signaling is in part involved in recruitment of memory OT-I T cells to the lungs and from the vasculature into the lung parenchyma. However, in the absence of CXCR3 signaling, there are still sufficient numbers of antigen-specific cells present in, or recruited into the lung parenchyma to control VV-OVA replication.Fig. 7: Chemokines are partially involved in the extravasation of memory T cells into the lungs.a Flow cytometry plots show expression of CXCR3 on OT-I T cells isolated from the lungs, 28 days post primary infection (left) or 2 days post rechallenge with VV-OVA (right). b Bar graphs show percentage of OT-I T cells expressing CXCR3 in the lungs, as mean + SEM (n = 5–6, pooled from two independent experiments). Each dot represents an individual mouse. c Histogram shows CXCR3 expression of OT-I T cells in the lungs either directly ex vivo or after overnight incubation at 37 °C. Cells are isolated from an MCMV experienced mouse 2 days post infection with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. d Experimental setup: 5 × 104 CD45.1+ OT-I T cells were adoptively transferred into CD45.2+ hosts that were either infected i.t. with 50 PFU PR8-OVA or i.v. with 2 × 105 PFU MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL. Twenty-eight days post-infection, mice were i.t. challenged with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. Mice received 250 μg αCXCR3 blocking antibodies one day prior and during the rechallenge period. e Bar graphs show the total number of OT-I T cells recovered from the lungs as mean + SEM (n = 4–8, pooled from two independent experiments). f Bar graphs show the percentage of OT-I T cells associated with the vasculature determined by i.v. injection of 5 μg fluorescently conjugated αCD8 antibody 3 min prior to euthanasia (n = 4–8), pooled from two independent experiments). g Microscopy images show the lung 2 days post infection with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. h Experimental setup: 5 × 104 CD45.1+ OT-I T cells were adoptively transferred into CD45.2+ hosts that were either infected i.t. with 50 PFU PR8-OVA or i.v. with 2 × 105 PFU MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL. Twenty-eight days post-infection, mice were i.t. challenged with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. Mice received 400 ng PTX i.p. on the day of and one day after VV-OVA rechallenge. i Flow cytometry plot shows in vivo CD8α labeling and ex vivo CD8β staining on OT-I T cells in the lungs 2 days post VV-OVA infection upon injection with 5 μg fluorescently conjugated αCD8 antibody 3 min prior to euthanasia. j Bar graphs shows the percentage of IV+ OT-I T cells in the lungs 2 days post VV-OVA infection (n = 7–11, pooled from three independent experiments) as mean + SEM. k Microscopy images show the lung 2 days post infection with 5 × 106 PFU VV-OVA. Two-sided Mann–Whitney test b or Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s post hoc (e, f, j) test was used to determine statistical significance: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and not significant (ns) P ≥ 0.05.Full size imageSignaling via chemokines occurs via G-protein-coupled receptors, and this signaling is inhibited by pertussis toxin (PTX). As we observed a large range of different chemokines produced upon VV-OVA challenge, mice were administrated with PTX during the VV-OVA challenge period to inhibit all chemokine receptor signaling (Fig. 7h). PTX treatment partially inhibited the migration of MCMV-induced OT-I T cells from the vasculature into the lung tissue (Fig. 7i, j). However, no difference in the viral load was observed upon PTX treatment (Supplementary Fig. 7F). Similarly to CXCR3 blockade, the repositioning of the OT-I T cells to the lung parenchyma remained normal in both the MCMV- and the influenza virus-setting (Fig. 7k). These data indicate that chemokines are, at least in part, responsible for the recruitment and relocation of memory OT-I T cells from the vasculature deeper into the lung tissue, but other mechanisms also operate to control VV-OVA replication.DiscussionMemory CD8 T cells residing in peripheral tissues are of interest in the context of vaccination. The memory T cell subset providing the best protection in a given infection may vary. By using distinct viral infections, we induced memory T cell pools with unique characteristics within the lung tissue and compared their protective capacity towards a local VV challenge. Upon influenza virus infection, the majority of the established memory T cells had a TRM phenotype, whereas lung localized MCMV-specific CD8 T cells predominantly expressed KLRG1 and thus exhibited an effector-like phenotype. Factors that contribute to the induction of a specific phenotype include the route and dose of infection, the viral tropism and the pro-inflammatory environment. For instance, only respiratory and not systemic administration of MCMV or influenza virus results in the formation of lung TRM cells.34,35,45 Moreover, antigen is required for the maintenance of the MCMV-specific inflationary T cell pool and the MCMV inoculum dose impacts on the balance between CD127+ and KLRG1+ MCMV-specific CD8 T cells found within the lung tissue.27,46,47 Differences in the localization between MCMV- and influenza virus-induced memory T cells were also observed. CD103 tethers TRM cells to E-cadherin expressed by epithelial cells, likely explaining their localization in close proximity to epithelial structures. MCMV-specific KLRG1+ cells express CX3CR1,48 which could explain their localization to the vasculature.Despite their differences in anatomical localization, MCMV- and influenza virus-induced memory T cells both provided protection from a local respiratory VV infection. We detected VV mostly in hematopoietic cells. It is plausible that upon infection with other pathogens, a different outcome in protective capacity may be observed. For instance, intra-nasal administration of MCMV vectors encoding influenza virus epitopes facilitates the clearance of influenza virus in a TRM-dependent manner.35 Despite having large number of effector-like cells in the lungs, mice without TRM cells had a higher viral load in the lungs, indicating that in an influenza virus setting, TRM cells are superior in protection as compared to circulating memory T cells. Furthermore, TRM cells induced by intra-nasal administration of MCMV-vectors encoding respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) epitopes also enhanced the protection towards RSV infection, compared to a setting in which only circulatory memory T cells were present.34 As both influenza virus and RSV infect alveolar epithelial cells49,50,51 and TRM cells are lining the epithelial walls, their anatomical localization could give them an advantage over vasculature-associated memory CD8 T cells induced by systemic administration of MCMV.To control VV replication, effector cytokines such as IFN-γ and TNF are critical.38,39 Although we observed a decrease in the number of lung resident memory CD8 T cells 60 days post-influenza virus infection, the remaining population was still protective. It could be that very few memory T cells are actually needed to provide protection in our experimental setup. In Fig. 5k, only 500 cells were recovered from the lungs after VV-OVA challenge, and a slight, but significant protective effect was observed compared to mice without any memory OT-I T cells. It has been shown before that the number of VV-specific memory CD8 T cells in the lung corresponds to their protective capacity.52 Of note, the number of cells responding to secondary VV-OVA antigen exposure, quantified by Nur77-GFP expression, did not differ between influenza virus- and MCMV-immune mice (Fig. 5e). IFN-γ can be sensed up to a distance of 800 μm from its producer in tumor tissue,53 indicating that IFN-γ can act beyond the cells that are in direct contact with T cells. Whether this range is achieved in case of respiratory VV infections remains to be determined. In any case, we readily detected the IFN-γ-induced chemokines CXCL9 and CXCL10 throughout the lung tissue in REX3 mice.We found that upon local inflammation, MCMV-induced T cells extravasate in an antigen-independent manner and chemokines played a partial role in this process. Integrin-mediated extravasation likely contributes as well.44 In the MCMV setting, the increase in the lung localized OT-I T cell pool was mostly due to T cell recruitment, whereas in the influenza setting both T cell recruitment and proliferation likely contributed. In the female reproductive tract, TRM cell activation recruits other cells of the immune system into the tissue, including bystander memory T cells, via IFN-γ-mediated upregulation of VCAM-1 and by local induction of CXCL9 and CXCL10.14,54 Also in the lungs, TRM cell activation facilitates the accumulation of memory CD8 T cells upon influenza virus infection.35 In our experimental setup, migration of antigen-specific memory T cells from the vasculature into the lung parenchyma was more pronounced in the MCMV as compared to the influenza virus setting, likely due to the large numbers of memory cells that are present in the circulation upon MCMV infection. We observed a similar recruitment of bystander CD8 T cells into lung parenchyma in both the MCMV and influenza virus setting (Supplementary Fig. 6). Lung-localized MCMV-induced T cells were potent IFN-γ producers, and both CXCL9 and CXCL10 were produced upon VV-OVA infection. Recently, it was shown that TRM cells in the female reproductive tract and the skin maintain their proliferative capacity.40,41 Here we observed local proliferation of memory T cells in the lungs upon antigen exposure in the influenza virus setting. However, whether the TRM cells or other memory T cell subsets were proliferating remains to be determined.Upon lung inflammation, both MCMV-specific KLRG1+ and CD127+ OT-I T cells extravasated from the vasculature. CD127+ cells were superior in entering the lung tissue as a higher percentage of CD127+ cells was found within the lung tissue as compared to the blood. This is likely due to higher Core 2 O-glycan synthesis in CD127+ cells that enables these cells to traffic into inflamed tissue.43 Both CD127+ and KLRG1+ cells were able to control VV-infection in the lungs. We have shown before that the number of KLRG1+ antigen-specific cells in the ovaries correlated with the degree of protection towards an i.p. VV challenge.2 These differences might be explained by tissue-specific factors, as the lung is highly vascularized. Furthermore, the ovaries are the preferred site of VV replication and therefore VV might infect also non-hematopoietic cells in this organ.In many infection and vaccination settings, CXCR3 expression is required for T cells to enter the lung tissue.55,56 Lung entry subsequently affects CXCR3 expression in an antigen-dependent manner57 and CXCR3low cells are preferentially found in close proximity to the vasculature.57 However, both CXCR3high and CXCR3low cells can provide protection from respiratory infections.56,57,58,59 The signals required for the downregulation of CXCR3 are not entirely clear. We found that MCMV-induced memory T cells in the lung do not express CXCR3 ex vivo, but upon overnight incubation its expression was restored, likely indicating that the lung environment actively promotes CXCR3 downregulation. Blocking of CXCR3 during the rechallenge period diminished the number of cells recovered from the lung, indicating that CXCR3 is at least in part involved in the recruitment of memory OT-I cells to the lung. In the MCMV setting, CXCR3 is mostly expressed by CD127+ cells (Supplementary Fig. 7B), potentially recruiting these cells upon VV-OVA challenge.MCMV-induced memory T cells are stably maintained over time, making CMV-vectors an interesting candidate for T cell-based vaccines. Until day 60 post-infection, we did not observe a decrease in the protective capacity of influenza virus-induced memory T cells, despite a reduction in TRM cells. It is conceivable that a loss in protective capacity would become evident at later time points after influenza virus infection. Here we set out to determine which cells are superior in providing early protection from a local viral challenge. This likely depends on the timing of secondary infection as well as on the local tropism of the recall pathogen. For future vaccine approaches aimed at eliciting T cells at mucosal sites, it is important to consider which memory T cell subset provides protection from a specific pathogen and therefore should be induced by the vaccines. Our data show that in case of a respiratory VV infection, both TRM cells and MCMV-induced circulatory cells fulfill this requirement.MethodsEthics statementThis study was conducted in accordance to the guidelines of the animal experimentation law (SR 455.163; TVV) of the Swiss Federal Government. The protocol was approved by Cantonal Veterinary Office of the canton Zürich, Switzerland (Permit number 168/2015, 114/2017 and 58/2020).MiceC57BL/6J were purchased from Janvier Elevage and were used as WT mice. The congenic CD45.1 (Ly5.1) and the C57BL/6-Tg(TcraTcrb)1100Mjb/J (OT-I) mice were bred in house. Nur77-GFP OT-I mice were generated by crossing the OT-I mouse with the Nur77-GFP reporter mouse.42 REX3 mice expressing RFP and BFP under the control of the CXCL9 and CXCL10 promoter were obtained from Prof. Dr. Matteo Iannacone and are described.60 All mice were housed and bred under specific pathogen-free facilities at the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule (ETH) Hönggerberg. All mice were between 7 and 12 weeks at the start of each experiment and were age- and sex-matched.VirusesThe recombinant influenza A virus (IAV) strain A/PR8 expressing OVA257-26461 was a kind gift from Stephen Turner (St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, USA) and was grown for 2 days at 35 °C in the allantoic cavities of 10–11-day-old fertile chicken eggs. Viral titers were quantified by standard plaque assay using Madin–Darby canine kidney cells. Mice were infected with 50 PFU intra tracheally (i.t.) in 50 µl PBS. For an i.t. infection mice were anesthesized by isoflurane inhalation or by an i.p. injection with 5 µg xylazine/100 µg ketamine per gram of body weight.MCMV-ie2-SIINFEKL and MCMV-ie2-GP33 are obtained from Dr. L. Cicin-Sain, contain the m157 gene and are described.2,62,63 Mice were infected with 2 × 105 PFU either i.v. or i.t.. MCMV stocks were propagated on M2-10B4 cells. The virus was subsequently purified by ultracentrifugation using a 15% sucrose cushion. Viral titers were determined by standard plaque assay as described.64 Recombinant VV (Western Reserve) expressing Ovalbumin protein (VV-OVA) inserted into the thymidine kinase gene was grown on BSC40 cells and was provided by Dr. P. Klenerman (Oxford Univeristy). Recombinant VV expressing the LCMV glycoprotein (VV-G2) was originally obtained from Dr. D.H.L. Bishop (Oxford University) and was grown on BSC40 cells at low multiplicity of infection. Recombinant Western Reserve vaccinia Ovalbumin nuclear-eGFP virus (WR OVA NP-eGFP, VV-OVA-GFP) was generated by inserting pNP-SIINFEKL-eGFP into the A56L locus of Western Reserve vaccinia Ovalbumin virus (WR VV-OVA) using homologous recombination as described previously.65,66,67 Briefly, BSC40 cells were infected with VV-OVA WR, transfected with linearized plasmid 4 h post infection and harvested 48 h post infection. Clonal recombinant fluorescent virus was selected though multiple serial dilution infection rounds. Mice were challenged i.t. with 5 × 106 PFU VV (unless stated otherwise) in 50 µl under anasthesia as described.Plaque assaysTo determine the viral load in the lungs of VV-infected mice, 1.5 × 105 BSC40 cells were plated per well of a 24-well plate in MEM supplemented with 5% FCS, penicilin, streptamycin, and glutamin. The following day, lungs of VV-infected mice were lysed two times for 1.5 min at 25 Hz using a tissue lyser (Qiagen). Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 3.5×g and supernatant was used. 200 µl of serial dilutions of homogenized lung lysates were propagated on BSC40, upon which the plates were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. 1 ml of complete MEM medium was added and plates were incubated for another day at 37 °C. Plates were fixed for 20 min by adding 200 µl of 4% formalin and subsequently developed using crystal violet solution.Flow cytometrySingle cell suspensions were prepared from spleen by meshing the tissue through a 70 µM cell strainer. Erythrocytes were lysed using a hypotonic ammonium-chloride–potassium buffer for 1 min. To prepare a single cell suspension from the lungs, mice were perfused with PBS to remove all blood-associated cells, the tissue was cut into small pieces, subsequently incubated with Collegenase I and DNAse I for 45 min, followed by a 30% percoll gradient. To determine the lung tropism of VV-OVA-GFP or the production of CXCL9 and CXCL10, no percoll gradient was used. Cells were incubated with fluorescently conjugated antibodies for 30 min at 4 °C. Dead cells were excluded using a LIVE/DEAD fixable NEAR-IR staining. For intracellular Ki67 staining, the FoxP3 kit (invitrogen) was used according to manufacterer’s protocol. Multi-parametric flow cytometric analysis was performed using LSRII flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) or LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences) with FACSDiva software. Data was analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star). Cells were sorted using a FACS Aria sorter.Chemokine bead assayTo determine the concentration of different chemokines in the lungs, mice were perfused with PBS, lungs were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until further use. Lungs were homogenized in 1 ml of MEM supplemented with 5% FCS, penicilin, streptamycin, and glutamin and were lysed two times for 1.5 min at 25 Hz using a tissue lyser (Qiagen). Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 3.5×g and supernatant was used. To determine the chemokine concentration the mouse pro-inflammatory chemokine panel (Biolegend) was used with v-bottom plate according to manufacturers protocol. Data was analzed with the Legendplex analysis software (Biolegend).MHC class I tetramers and in vitro restimulationsMHC class I monomers for OVA257-264 (Kb restricted) were produced as described68 and were tetramerized using streptavidin–APC. For in vitro restimulation, cells were stimulated for 5 h at 37 °C with 1 µg/ml OVA257-264 peptide in the presence of 2 µg/ml Brefeldin A. Cell surface staining was performed as described, and cells were subsequently fixed with 0.5% PFA overnight. The following day, intracellular cytokine staining was performed by diluting the antibodies in perm/wash buffer (Life Technologies) and incubating the samples for 30 min at 4 °C.Adoptive transfer, FTY720, PTX, CXCR3 blockade and BrdU treatmentOT-I or Nur77 OT-I CD8 T cells were enriched from spleens by negative selection according to manufacterer’s protocol (Mojosort, biolegend). 5 × 104 TCR transgenic OT-I cells were adoptively transferred into new hosts that were subsequently infected with influenza virus or MCMV-expressing OVA257-264. For microscopy analysis, 1 × 105 OT-I T cells were transferred into naive recipients prior to infection. To inhibit T cell recruitment from secondary lymphoid organs, mice received 25 µg FTY720 on day 0 and 1 of VV-OVA infection i.p. and starting at day 0, FTY720 was administrated in the drinking water at a concentration of 5 µg/ml. To inhibit chemokine receptor signaling, mice received 400 ng PTX i.p. on the day and one day after VV-OVA challenge. For CXCR3 blockade, mice received 250 μg αCXCR3 antibodies (clone CXCR3-173, BioXCell) i.p. on day −1, 0, and 1 post VV-OVA challenge. To determine proliferation, mice received 0.8 mg/ml BrdU in the drinking water starting on the day of rechallenge. BrdU staining was performed according to manufacturer’s protocol for BrdU flow kit (BD).Immunofluorescence microscopyTo fix the lungs, 1 ml of 1% PFA was infused into the lungs of euthanized mice with a cannula inserted via a small incision in the trachea. After 20 min, PFA was removed and was replaced by 1 ml of 20% sucrose. After an additional incubation of 20 min, sucrose was replaced by 1 ml of optimum cutting temperature (OCT). The lungs were removed, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −20 °C until further use. Cryosections of 10 µM were made and air dried. For the staining, slides were re-hydrated in PBS and blocked with 10% rat serum in PBS. Slides were stained with antibodies diluted in PBS containing 1% rat serum and mounted with Mowiol. Within 1 day, images were acquired on a Visitron confocal system inverse confocal microscope with ×10 magnification. Data was analyzed using Volocity software.Statistical analysisGraphpad prism 8.0 software was used to calculate significance between samples. P-values < 0.05 were considered as significant. Statistical test is indicated in each figure. ReferencesMartin, M. D. & Badovinac, V. P. Defining memory CD8 T cell. Front. Immunol. 9, 2692 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Baumann, N. S. et al. Early primed KLRG1- CMV-specific T cells determine the size of the inflationary T cell pool. PLoS Pathog. 15, e1007785 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Borkner, L. et al. Immune protection by a cytomegalovirus vaccine vector expressing a single low-avidity epitope. J. Immunol. 199, 1737–1747 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Karrer, U. et al. Expansion of protective CD8+ T-cell responses driven by recombinant cytomegaloviruses. J. Virol. 78, 2255–2264 (2004).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gerlach, C. et al. The chemokine receptor CX3CR1 defines three antigen-experienced CD8 T cell subsets with distinct roles in immune surveillance and homeostasis. Immunity 45, 1270–1284 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jameson, S. C. & Masopust, D. Understanding subset diversity in T cell memory. Immunity 48, 214–226 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jiang, X. et al. Skin infection generates non-migratory memory CD8+ T(RM) cells providing global skin immunity. Nature 483, 227–231 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sathaliyawala, T. et al. Distribution and compartmentalization of human circulating and tissue-resident memory T cell subsets. Immunity 38, 187–197 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schenkel, J. M. & Masopust, D. Tissue-resident memory T cells. Immunity 41, 886–897 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Smith, C. J., Caldeira-Dantas, S., Turula, H. & Snyder, C. M. Murine CMV infection induces the continuous production of mucosal resident T cells. Cell Rep. 13, 1137–1148 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thom, J. T., Weber, T. C., Walton, S. M., Torti, N. & Oxenius, A. The salivary gland acts as a sink for tissue-resident memory CD8(+) T cells, facilitating protection from local cytomegalovirus infection. Cell Rep. 13, 1125–1136 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wakim, L. M., Gebhardt, T., Heath, W. R. & Carbone, F. R. Cutting edge: local recall responses by memory T cells newly recruited to peripheral nonlymphoid tissues. J. Immunol. 181, 5837–5841 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Welten, S. P. M., Sandu, I., Baumann, N. S. & Oxenius, A. Memory CD8 T cell inflation vs tissue-resident memory T cells: same patrollers, same controllers? Immunol. Rev. 283, 161–175 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schenkel, J. M. et al. T cell memory. Resident memory CD8 T cells trigger protective innate and adaptive immune responses. Science 346, 98–101 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ariotti, S. et al. T cell memory. Skin-resident memory CD8(+) T cells trigger a state of tissue-wide pathogen alert. Science 346, 101–105 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar O’Hara, G. A., Welten, S. P., Klenerman, P. & Arens, R. Memory T cell inflation: understanding cause and effect. Trends Immunol. 33, 84–90 (2012).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Holtappels, R., Pahl-Seibert, M. F., Thomas, D. & Reddehase, M. J. Enrichment of immediate-early 1 (m123/pp89) peptide-specific CD8 T cells in a pulmonary CD62L(lo) memory-effector cell pool during latent murine cytomegalovirus infection of the lungs. J. Virol. 74, 11495–11503 (2000).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Torti, N., Walton, S. M., Brocker, T., Rulicke, T. & Oxenius, A. Non-hematopoietic cells in lymph nodes drive memory CD8 T cell inflation during murine cytomegalovirus infection. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002313 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dekhtiarenko, I. et al. Peptide processing is critical for T-cell memory inflation and may be optimized to improve immune protection by CMV-based vaccine vectors. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1006072 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Hutchinson, S. et al. A dominant role for the immunoproteasome in CD8+ T cell responses to murine cytomegalovirus. PLoS ONE 6, e14646 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Profound early control of highly pathogenic SIV by an effector memory T-cell vaccine. Nature 473, 523–527 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Effector memory T cell responses are associated with protection of rhesus monkeys from mucosal simian immunodeficiency virus challenge. Nat. Med. 15, 293–299 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Klyushnenkova, E. N. et al. A cytomegalovirus-based vaccine expressing a single tumor-specific CD8+ T-cell epitope delays tumor growth in a murine model of prostate cancer. J. Immunother. 35, 390–399 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Qiu, Z. et al. Cytomegalovirus-based vaccine expressing a modified tumor antigen induces potent tumor-specific CD8(+) T-cell response and protects mice from melanoma. Cancer Immunol. Res. 3, 536–546 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Tsuda, Y. et al. A replicating cytomegalovirus-based vaccine encoding a single Ebola virus nucleoprotein CTL epitope confers protection against Ebola virus. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 5, e1275 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tsuda, Y. et al. A cytomegalovirus-based vaccine provides long-lasting protection against lethal Ebola virus challenge after a single dose. Vaccine 33, 2261–2266 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Welten, S. P. M., Baumann, N. S. & Oxenius, A. Fuel and brake of memory T cell inflation. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. 208, 329–338 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ynga-Durand, M. A., Dekhtiarenko, I. & Cicin-Sain, L. Vaccine vectors harnessing the power of Cytomegaloviruses. Vaccines (Basel) 7, 152 (2019) https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines7040152.Beyranvand Nejad, E. et al. Demarcated thresholds of tumor-specific CD8 T cells elicited by MCMV-based vaccine vectors provide robust correlates of protection. J. Immunother. Cancer 7, 25 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Smith, C. J., Turula, H. & Snyder, C. M. Systemic hematogenous maintenance of memory inflation by MCMV infection. PLoS Pathog. 10, e1004233 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Takamura, S. et al. Specific niches for lung-resident memory CD8+ T cells at the site of tissue regeneration enable CD69-independent maintenance. J. Exp. Med. 213, 3057–3073 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Baumann, N. S. et al. Tissue maintenance of CMV-specific inflationary memory T cells by IL-15. PLoS Pathog. 14, e1006993 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Morabito, K. M. et al. Memory inflation drives tissue-resident memory CD8(+) T cell maintenance in the lung after intranasal vaccination with murine Cytomegalovirus. Front. Immunol. 9, 1861 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Morabito, K. M. et al. Intranasal administration of RSV antigen-expressing MCMV elicits robust tissue-resident effector and effector memory CD8+ T cells in the lung. Mucosal Immunol. 10, 545–554 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zheng, X. et al. Mucosal CD8+ T cell responses induced by an MCMV based vaccine vector confer protection against influenza challenge. PLoS Pathog. 15, e1008036 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pizzolla, A. et al. Resident memory CD8+ T cells in the upper respiratory tract prevent pulmonary influenza virus infection. Sci. Immunol. 2, eaam6970 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aam6970.Slutter, B. et al. Dynamics of influenza-induced lung-resident memory T cells underlie waning heterosubtypic immunity. Sci. Immunol. 2, eaag2031 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aag2031.Goulding, J. et al. CD8 T cells use IFN-gamma to protect against the lethal effects of a respiratory poxvirus infection. J. Immunol. 192, 5415–5425 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nie, S., Cornberg, M. & Selin, L. K. Resistance to vaccinia virus is less dependent on TNF under conditions of heterologous immunity. J. Immunol. 183, 6554–6560 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Beura, L. K. et al. Intravital mucosal imaging of CD8(+) resident memory T cells shows tissue-autonomous recall responses that amplify secondary memory. Nat. Immunol. 19, 173–182 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Park, S. L. et al. Local proliferation maintains a stable pool of tissue-resident memory T cells after antiviral recall responses. Nat. Immunol. 19, 183–191 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Moran, A. E. et al. T cell receptor signal strength in Treg and iNKT cell development demonstrated by a novel fluorescent reporter mouse. J. Exp. Med. 208, 1279–1289 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Osborn, J. F. et al. Enzymatic synthesis of core 2 O-glycans governs the tissue-trafficking potential of memory CD8(+) T cells. Sci. Immunol. 2, eaan6049 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aan6049.Thomsen, A. R., Nansen, A., Madsen, A. N., Bartholdy, C. & Christensen, J. P. Regulation of T cell migration during viral infection: role of adhesion molecules and chemokines. Immunol. Lett. 85, 119–127 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wu, T. et al. Lung-resident memory CD8 T cells (TRM) are indispensable for optimal cross-protection against pulmonary virus infection. J. Leukoc. Biol. 95, 215–224 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Redeker, A., Welten, S. P. & Arens, R. Viral inoculum dose impacts memory T-cell inflation. Eur. J. Immunol. 44, 1046–1057 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Snyder, C. M. et al. Memory inflation during chronic viral infection is maintained by continuous production of short-lived, functional T cells. Immunity 29, 650–659 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gordon, C. L. et al. Induction and maintenance of CX3CR1-intermediate peripheral memory CD8(+) T cells by persistent viruses and vaccines. Cell Rep. 23, 768–782 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Collins, P. L. & Graham, B. S. Viral and host factors in human respiratory syncytial virus pathogenesis. J. Virol. 82, 2040–2055 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Quantius, J. et al. Influenza virus infects epithelial stem/progenitor cells of the distal lung: impact on Fgfr2b-driven epithelial repair. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005544 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Lambert Emo, K. et al. Live imaging of influenza infection of the trachea reveals dynamic regulation of CD8+ T cell motility by antigen. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005881 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Salek-Ardakani, S. et al. The TNFR family members OX40 and CD27 link viral virulence to protective T cell vaccines in mice. J. Clin. Investig. 121, 296–307 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hoekstra, M. E. et al. Long-distance modulation of bystander tumor cells by CD8(+) T cell-secreted IFNgamma. Nat. Cancer 1, 291–301 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Schenkel, J. M., Fraser, K. A., Vezys, V. & Masopust, D. Sensing and alarm function of resident memory CD8(+) T cells. Nat. Immunol. 14, 509–513 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jeyanathan, M. et al. CXCR3 signaling is required for restricted homing of parenteral tuberculosis vaccine-induced T cells to both the lung parenchyma and airway. J. Immunol. 199, 2555–2569 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Slutter, B., Pewe, L. L., Kaech, S. M. & Harty, J. T. Lung airway-surveilling CXCR3(hi) memory CD8(+) T cells are critical for protection against influenza A virus. Immunity 39, 939–948 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Abboud, G. et al. Tissue-specific programming of memory CD8 T cell subsets impacts protection against lethal respiratory virus infection. J. Exp. Med. 213, 2897–2911 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gilchuk, P. et al. A distinct lung-interstitium-resident memory CD8(+) T cell subset confers enhanced protection to lower respiratory tract infection. Cell Rep. 16, 1800–1809 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sakai, S. et al. Cutting edge: control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection by a subset of lung parenchyma-homing CD4 T cells. J. Immunol. 192, 2965–2969 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Groom, J. R. et al. CXCR3 chemokine receptor-ligand interactions in the lymph node optimize CD4+ T helper 1 cell differentiation. Immunity 37, 1091–1103 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jenkins, M. R., Webby, R., Doherty, P. C. & Turner, S. J. Addition of a prominent epitope affects influenza A virus-specific CD8+ T cell immunodominance hierarchies when antigen is limiting. J. Immunol. 177, 2917–2925 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Dekhtiarenko, I., Jarvis, M. A., Ruzsics, Z. & Cicin-Sain, L. The context of gene expression defines the immunodominance hierarchy of cytomegalovirus antigens. J. Immunol. 190, 3399–3409 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Welten, S. P. et al. The viral context instructs the redundancy of costimulatory pathways in driving CD8(+) T cell expansion. Elife 4, e07486 (2015) https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.07486.Zurbach, K. A., Moghbeli, T. & Snyder, C. M. Resolving the titer of murine cytomegalovirus by plaque assay using the M2-10B4 cell line and a low viscosity overlay. Virol. J. 11, 71 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Hickman, H. D. et al. Direct priming of antiviral CD8+ T cells in the peripheral interfollicular region of lymph nodes. Nat. Immunol. 9, 155–165 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mercer, J. & Helenius, A. Vaccinia virus uses macropinocytosis and apoptotic mimicry to enter host cells. Science 320, 531–535 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Beerli, C. et al. Vaccinia virus hijacks EGFR signalling to enhance virus spread through rapid and directed infected cell motility. Nat. Microbiol. 4, 216–225 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Altman, J. D. et al. Phenotypic analysis of antigen-specific T lymphocytes. Science 274, 94–96 (1996).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank N. Oetiker and F. Wagen for excellent technical assistance and members of the Oxenius, Joller, and Sallusto groups for helpful discussion. This work was supported by the ETH post-doctoral Fellowship program (FEL29 15-2 to S.P.M.W.), the Helmut Horten foundation (S.P.M.W.), by the SNF (IZHRZ0_180552 to A.O.), the MRC program grant (MC_UU12018/7 to J.M.), and the European Research Council (649101-UbiProPox to J.M.).FundingOpen Access funding provided by ETH Zurich.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsInstitute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 4, 8093, Zürich, SwitzerlandSuzanne P. M. Welten, Josua Oderbolz, Vural Yilmaz, Roman Spörri & Annette OxeniusMRC-Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UKSusanna R. Bidgood, Victoria Gould & Jason MercerInstitute of Microbiology and Infection, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UKJason MercerAuthorsSuzanne P. M. WeltenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJosua OderbolzView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarVural YilmazView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSusanna R. BidgoodView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarVictoria GouldView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJason MercerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRoman SpörriView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnnette OxeniusView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsS.P.M.W. and A.O. conceived and designed the project and the experiments. S.P.M.W., J.O., V.Y., S.R.B., and V.G. performed experiments. S.P.M.W. analyzed the data. J.O., V.Y., S.R.B., V.G., J.M., and R.S. provided essential tools. S.P.M.W. writing original draft. A.O. and R.S. writing review and editing. A.O. supervised the study. S.P.M.W., J.M., and A.O. acquired funding. All authors reviewed the paper.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Annette Oxenius.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary figuresRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleWelten, S.P.M., Oderbolz, J., Yilmaz, V. et al. Influenza- and MCMV-induced memory CD8 T cells control respiratory vaccinia virus infection despite residence in distinct anatomical niches. Mucosal Immunol 14, 728–742 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41385-020-00373-4Download citationReceived: 24 July 2020Revised: 25 November 2020Accepted: 14 December 2020Published: 21 January 2021Issue Date: May 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41385-020-00373-4Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Mucosal T-cell responses to chronic viral infections: Implications for vaccine design Mohammed Al-TalibSandra DimonteIan R. Humphreys Cellular & Molecular Immunology (2024) Tissue resident memory T cells in the respiratory tract Ming Z.M. ZhengLinda M. Wakim Mucosal Immunology (2022) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Information Open access publishing About the Editors Contact Press Releases About the Partner For Advertisers Subscribe Publish with us For Authors & Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Mucosal Immunology (Mucosal Immunol) ISSN 1935-3456 (online) ISSN 1933-0219 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedFlu vaccine effectiveness low among immunocompromised patients News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Account Account Anonymous User Log In Log In Log Out Log Out News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Specialties Choose a specialty All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Menu Close Specialties All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Infectious Disease Subspecialties Antimicrobials Dermatology Emerging Diseases Fungal Diseases Gastrointestinal Infections Hepatitis C HIV/AIDS Influenza MRSA Nosocomial Infections Pediatric ID Practice Management Respiratory Infections STDs Vaccination Viral Hepatitis Zoonotic Infections Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Account Account Log In Log In Log Out Log Out Account Account Anonymous User Close Searchbar Healio News Infectious Disease Influenza ByCaitlyn Stulpin Read more January 17, 2021 2 min read Save Flu vaccine effectiveness low among immunocompromised patients ByCaitlyn Stulpin Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Influenza vaccine effectiveness was significantly lower among immunocompromised adults compared with nonimmunocompromised adults during the severe 2017-2018 influenza season, according to a study. “The number of immunocompromised individuals has increased in the last several years, due to higher life expectancy and higher numbers of patients undergoing solid organ and stem cell transplants, advanced cancer treatment, and new immunomodulating and immunosuppressive drugs to treat autoimmune and inflammatory conditions,” Fernanda P. Silveira, MD, MS, FIDSA, associate professor of medicine and director of clinical operations for transplant infectious diseases at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, told Healio. Vaccine effectiveness among immunocompromised adults was lower compared with that of nonimmunocompromised adults (5% vs. 41%). Credit: Adobe Stock “These immunocompromised individuals face an increased risk of infections, including influenza, and are at higher risk of influenza-related complications, such as increased frequency of hospitalization, intensive care unit admission, and death,” Silveira said. According to Silveira, yearly influenza vaccination is recommended for immunocompromised patients, but there are few data regarding to what extent influenza vaccination protects them. Fernanda P. Silveira In their study, Silveira and colleagues analyzed data from 10 hospitals to understand influenza vaccine effectiveness among hospitalized immunocompromised adults. They included parients aged 18 years or older who were hospitalized with acute respiratory illness (ARI). Vaccine effectiveness (VE) was evaluated with a test-negative case-control design using multivariable logistic regression, with PCR-confirmed influenza as the outcome and vaccination status as the exposure, according to the study. Among 3,524 adults hospitalized with ARI, 1,210 (34.3%) had an immunocompromising condition, Silveira and colleagues reported. These adults were more likely to be vaccinated than non immunocompromised individuals (69.5% vs. 65.2%), and less likely to have influenza (22% vs. 27.8%). According to the study, the overall VE against influenza hospitalization, including immunocompetent adults, was 33% (95% CI, 21%-44%), whereas VE among immunocompromised vs. nonimmunocompromised adults was lower at 5% (–29% to 31%) vs. 41% (27% to 52%) (P < .05 for interaction term). Silveira said other studies have shown that patients with certain immunocompromising conditions such as organ transplant recipients and cancer patients have reduced humoral immune responses to influenza vaccination compared with healthy individuals. “We don't know if different vaccine types improve VE, such as the use of high-dose or adjuvanted influenza vaccine,” she said. “We did not have enough power in our study to analyze different vaccine types or different causes of immunocompromise.” According to Silveira, it is important to continue to study VE in the immunocompromised population, including studying if different vaccine formulations are associated with improved VE, but also to improve the vaccination rates of close contacts of immunocompromised patients, to create a circle of protection. For now, she said vaccine recommendations for immunocompromised patients are no different from the general public, “except for the use of live-attenuated influenza vaccine, which is contraindicated in immunocompromised individuals.” “Until we know whether enhanced vaccines such as the high-dose and adjuvanted vaccines improve flu VE in the immunocompromised, decreasing the burden of influenza in immunocompromised individuals may be more dependent on improving vaccination rates of close contacts,” Silveira said. “Given these results, it is important to remember antiviral treatments for immunocompromised persons who contract influenza.” Published by: Sources/DisclosuresCollapse Source: Hughes K, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2020;doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1927. Disclosures: Silveira reports no relevant financial disclosures. Please see the study for all other authors’ relevant financial disclosures. Read more about influenza vaccination immunocompromised host Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print Comment Continue Reading Related Content Play on Healio Follow Healio Twitter Facebook Instagram Threads LinkedIn About About Healio About Healio About the Wyanoke Group About the Wyanoke Group Editorial Policy and Philosophy Editorial Policy and Philosophy Sitemap Sitemap Account Information My Account Login My Account My Account Help Help Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Unknown Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Contact Us Email Us Email Us Contact Newsroom Contact Newsroom Advertising Information Advertising Information Permissions and Reprints Permissions and Reprints Legal Do Not Sell My Personal Information Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms and Conditions Terms and Conditions Medical Disclaimer Medical Disclaimer Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Sign Up for Email Get the latest news and education delivered to your inbox Email address Enter your email Update email address Specialty All Specialties Allergy & Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology/Hepatology Hematology Oncology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women’s Health & OB/GYN Subscribe Update email address The email address associated with your Healio account is: If you would like to edit or change the email address that your subscriptions and alerts are sent to, use the "Update email address" link. Update email address © Healio All Rights Reserved. Job board for health care professionals Job Opportunities We’re sorry, but an unexpected error has occurred. Please refresh your browser and try again. If this error persists, please contact ITSupport@wyanokegroup.com for assistance. Close Would you like to receive email reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME? Yes No Activity saved! You'll receive reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME. UnsubscribeHow Long Did It Take to Develop the Flu Vaccine? | The Weather Channel AdvertisementSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelpThe Weather ChannelType at least three characters to start auto complete. Recently searched locations will be displayed if there is no search query. The first option will be automatically selected. Use up and down arrows to change selection. Use escape to clear.Search City or Zip CodeSearchrecentsClear AllYou have no recent locationsGlobeUS°FArrow down°F°CHybridImperial - F / mph / miles / inchesAmericasArrow DownAntigua and Barbuda | EnglishArgentina | EspañolBahamas | EnglishBarbados | EnglishBelize | EnglishBolivia | EspañolBrazil | PortuguêsCanada | EnglishCanada | FrançaisChile | EspañolColombia | EspañolCosta Rica | EspañolDominica | EnglishDominican Republic | EspañolEcuador | EspañolEl Salvador | EspañolGrenada | EnglishGuatemala | EspañolGuyana | EnglishHaiti | FrançaisHonduras | EspañolJamaica | EnglishMexico | EspañolNicaragua | EspañolPanama | EspañolPanama | EnglishParaguay | EspañolPeru | EspañolSt. Kitts and Nevis | EnglishSt. Lucia | EnglishSt. Vincent and the Grenadines | EnglishSuriname | NederlandsTrinidad and Tobago | EnglishUruguay | EspañolUnited States | EnglishUnited States | EspañolVenezuela | EspañolAfricaArrow DownAlgeria | العربيةAlgeria | FrançaisAngola | PortuguêsBenin | FrançaisBurkina Faso | FrançaisBurundi | FrançaisCameroon | FrançaisCameroon | EnglishCape Verde | PortuguêsCentral African Republic | FrançaisChad | FrançaisChad | العربيةComoros | FrançaisComoros | العربيةDemocratic Republic of the Congo | FrançaisRepublic of Congo | FrançaisCôte d'Ivoire | FrançaisDjibouti | FrançaisDjibouti | العربيةEgypt | العربيةEquatorial Guinea | EspañolEritrea | العربيةGabon | FrançaisGambia | EnglishGhana | EnglishGuinea | FrançaisGuinea-Bissau | PortuguêsKenya | EnglishLesotho | EnglishLiberia | EnglishLibya | العربيةMadagascar | FrançaisMali | FrançaisMauritania | العربيةMauritius | EnglishMauritius | FrançaisMorocco | العربيةMorocco | FrançaisMozambique | PortuguêsNamibia | EnglishNiger | FrançaisNigeria | EnglishRwanda | FrançaisRwanda | EnglishSao Tome and Principe | PortuguêsSenegal | FrançaisSierra Leone | EnglishSomalia | العربيةSouth Africa | EnglishSouth Sudan | EnglishSudan | العربيةSwaziland | EnglishTanzania | EnglishTogo | FrançaisTunisia | العربيةUganda | EnglishAsia PacificArrow DownAustralia | EnglishBangladesh | বাংলাBrunei | Bahasa MelayuChina | 中文Hong Kong SAR | 中文East Timor | PortuguêsFiji | EnglishIndia (English) | EnglishIndia (Hindi) | हिन्दीIndonesia | Bahasa IndonesiaJapan | 日本語Kiribati | EnglishSouth Korea | 한국어Kyrgyzstan | РусскийMalaysia | Bahasa MelayuMarshall Islands | EnglishMicronesia | EnglishNew Zealand | EnglishPalau | EnglishPhilippines | EnglishPhilippines | TagalogSamoa | EnglishSingapore | EnglishSingapore | 中文Solomon Islands | EnglishTaiwan | 中文Thailand | ไทยTonga | EnglishTuvalu | EnglishVanuatu | EnglishVanuatu | FrançaisVietnam | Tiếng ViệtEuropeArrow DownAndorra | CatalàAndorra | FrançaisAustria | DeutschBelarus | РусскийBelgium | DutchBelgium | FrançaisBosnia and Herzegovina | HrvatskiCroatia | HrvatskiCyprus | ΕλληνικάCzech Republic | ČeštinaDenmark | DanskEstonia | РусскийEstonia | EestiFinland | SuomiFrance | FrançaisGermany | DeutschGreece | ΕλληνικάHungary | MagyarIreland | EnglishItaly | ItalianoLiechtenstein | DeutschLuxembourg | FrançaisMalta | EnglishMonaco | FrançaisNetherlands | NederlandsNorway | NorskPoland | PolskiPortugal | PortuguêsRomania | RomânăRussia | РусскийSan Marino | ItalianoSlovakia | SlovenčinaSpain | EspañolSpain | CatalàSweden | SvenskaSwitzerland | DeutschTurkey | TurkçeUkraine | УкраїнськаUnited Kingdom | EnglishState of Vatican City (Holy See) | ItalianoMiddle EastArrow DownBahrain | العربيةIran | فارسىIraq | العربيةIsrael | עִבְרִיתJordan | العربيةKuwait | العربيةLebanon | العربيةOman | العربيةPakistan | اردوPakistan | EnglishQatar | العربيةSaudi Arabia | العربيةSyria | العربيةUnited Arab Emirates | العربيةWeather ForecastsTodayHourly10 DayWeekendMonthly & AlmanacYesterdayExternal LinkRadar & MapsInteractive Radar MapUS ForecastUS Satellite & RadarWorld SatelliteUS Severe AlertsUS HealthNews & MediaTop Weather StoriesHurricane CentralScience & EnvironmentSpace & SkywatchingSafety & PrepVideosProductsAlexa SkillExternal LinkWeather UndergroundExternal LinkStorm RadarExternal LinkHealth & WellnessHealthEczemaPsoriasisDiabetesHealthy LivingAllergy TrackerAir Quality IndexCold & Flu TrackerSkin HealthPrivacyData RightsPrivacy PolicyLifestyleGrilling SeasonHome & GardenTravel & OutdoorsPets & AnimalsGamesExternal LinkArrow LeftArrow RightMy DashboardNEWTodayHourly10 DayWeekendMonthlyRadarVideoVideoMore ForecastsMoreArrow downSpecialty ForecastsYesterday's WeatherExternal LinkAllergy TrackerCold & FluAir Quality ForecastAdvertisementHealthHow Long Did It Take to Develop the Flu Vaccine?By Jan Wesner ChildsJanuary 22, 2021A flu vaccine syringe rests on a table at a flu vaccination clinic Oct. 14, 2020, in Lakewood, California. (Mario Tama/Getty Images)At a GlanceThe first flu vaccine was licensed for civilian use in the U.S. in 1945.Dr. Jonas Salk was one of the lead researchers.Nearly 200 million doses of vaccine were expected to be manufactured this flu season.The 1918 influenza pandemic infected an estimated 500 million people worldwide and left 675,000 people dead in the United States, according to the CDC.But it wasn't until 1945 - nearly three decades later - that the first flu vaccine was licensed for civilian use in the U.S. In contrast, an effective and safe COVID-19 vaccine was developed in less than a year. Historically, vaccines have taken years to make it to distribution. (MORE: Lyme Disease May Be Far More Prevalent Than Thought)The first-ever vaccine to be developed was for smallpox in 1796, according to the World Health Organization.Today, vaccines are available for more than two dozen diseases. Many of the shots, like those for measles and chickenpox, are considered routine.Scientists dedicate their entire careers to researching vaccines. Dr. Jonas Salk, famous for creating the polio vaccine in the 1950s, was one of the lead researchers on the flu vaccine a decade earlier. Before Salk died at age 80 in 1995, he worked on a vaccine for HIV, which still hasn't come to fruition.Since Salk's early work on the flu vaccine, it's become one of the most common shots given. Here's a look back at some of the key moments in the history of influenza and the flu vaccine, based on a timeline from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:-1933: Scientists isolate influenza A viruses, proving flu is not caused by bacteria. -1936: The influenza B virus is isolated, and, separately, it was discovered that the flu virus can be grown in hen's eggs.Advertisement-1942: A two-component vaccine is produced that offers protection against both influenza A and B viruses.-1945: The first flu vaccine is licensed for civilian use in the U.S.-1947: It's discovered that flu viruses change from year to year and the vaccine will need to be adjusted annually to be effective. -1957: A new flu pandemic emerges that kills more than 1 million people nationwide. -1960: The U.S. surgeon general recommends annual flu shots for people with chronic debilitating diseases, anyone 65 years or older and pregnant women.-1968: Another pandemic causes about 100,000 deaths in the U.S., mostly in people aged 65 and older. -1976: An outbreak among Army recruits at Fort Dix, New Jersey, leads to a vaccination program that inoculates about 25% of the U.S. population in 10 months. But the program was halted due to cases of a neurologic condition called Guillain-Barre syndrome that in rare cases has been associated with vaccination. Today the CDC says that "If there is an increased risk of GBS following flu vaccination it is small, on the order of one to two additional GBS cases per million doses of flu vaccine administered."-2003: The first nasal spray flu vaccine is licensed for use. -2008: The CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends children 5 to 18 years old be vaccinated against the flu each year. The move expanded a previous recommendation for younger children. -2020-21: Nearly 200 million doses were expected to be distributed in the U.S. alone, and health officials urge everyone to get a flu vaccine to prevent the double threat of COVID-19 and the flu. The Weather Company’s primary journalistic mission is to report on breaking weather news, the environment and the importance of science to our lives. This story does not necessarily represent the position of our parent company, IBM. Check This Out, TooVideoDermatologists Warn UV Exposure Isn’t Just Summer ProblemVideoTop Tips For National Healthy Skin Month This NovemberVideoPrepare Your Skin For WinterVideoWhy Humidifiers And Air Purifiers Are All-Weather Must-HavesSee MoreWe Love Our CrittersVideoElephants Rescued From Thailand FloodsVideoHelp Arrives For Pets, Owners After HeleneVideoSan Diego Zoo Welcomes Baby Sumatran TigerVideoFlying Spaghetti Monsters, Never-Before-Seen Squid RecordedSee MoreAdvertisementTrending NowVideoWildfire Burning In New Jersey And New York Turns DeadlyVideoChristmas Begins In NYC As Rockefeller Center Tree ArrivesVideoThis Drought-Tolerant Nut Is Booming In CaliforniaVideoHeavy Rain Fueled By Rafael Triggers Louisiana Flash FloodsSee MoreAdvertisementOur WorldVideoAn Unprecedented Percentage Of The US Is Facing DroughtVideoWhere Did The Water Go? Mysterious Sinkhole Drains ReservoirVideoChanges To Comfortable Outdoor Days In A Warming WorldVideoForest Trolls Hope To Inspire Recycling And Protect TreesSee MoreAdvertisementWeather in your inboxYour local forecast, plus daily trivia, stunning photos and our meteorologists’ top picks. All in one place, every weekday morning.EmailForecast LocationInfoSign UpBy signing up, you're opting in to receive the Morning Brief email newsletter. To manage your data, visit Data Rights. Terms of Use | Privacy PolicyAdvertisementStay SafeAdvertisementAdvertisementWeather UndergroundFeedbackMissionCareersNews RoomAdvertise With UsTVNewsletter Sign UpTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyAdChoicesAd ChoicesAccessibility StatementData VendorsGeorgiaeSSENTIAL AccessibilityWe recognize our responsibility to use data and technology for good. We may use or share your data with our data vendors. Take control of your data.Data Rights© The Weather Company, LLC 2024Hidden Weather Icon MasksHidden Weather Icon SymbolsPhotos: How the 1918 flu and COVID-19 pandemics compare - ABC News ABC NewsVideoLiveShowsElections538ShopStream onLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 10, 11:43 PM ETNational Election Results: presidential Projection: Trump is President-elect226312226312Harris71,145,751270 to winTrump74,673,847Expected vote reporting: 94%Recent ProjectionsColo. Dist. 8Projected WinnerGabe Evans•R5 hours agoAriz.PresidentProjected WinnerDonald Trump•R1 day agoNational Election Results: house205214205214Dem.214 up for electionLost: 2218 for controlestimateRep.221 up for electionGained: 2Election 2024 updates: With Arizona, Trump sweeps all 7 swing statesLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 9, 9:49 PM ET9:46 PMWith Arizona, Trump sweeps all 7 swing states8:59 PMTrump projected winner in ArizonaPhotos: How the 1918 flu and COVID-19 pandemics compareAs the U.S. surpass 675,000 COVID-19 deaths, we look back at the 1918 pandemic.ByRadhika ChalasaniSeptember 20, 2021, 12:00 AM2:32Red Cross volunteers fighting against the Spanish flu epidemic in the United States in 1918.Apic/Getty ImagesEditors note: Some of the images below are animations showing two images and may take longer to load.There are strong parallels between the COVID-19 pandemic and the 1918 flu pandemic, which killed at least 50 million worldwide, including an estimated 675,000 Americans, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.The U.S. has now surpassed 675,000 deaths from COVID-19 making the current pandemic the deadliest in U.S. history. As of Sept. 20, more than 228 million people have been infected with COVID-19 worldwide, More than 4.6 million have died across the globe, according to real time data compiled by Johns Hopkins University.Photos: Red Cross volunteers fight against the flu pandemic in the U.S. in 1918. | A doctor collects details of a person suffering from fever before conducting a swab test for COVID-19 at Guwahati Medical College Hospital in Gauhati, India, May 17, 2020. Credit: Anupam Nath/APHere’s a look at how the two pandemics compare.In 1918, the first flu cases were reported in March at an Army base in Kansas. Without testing capabilities, the flu spread widely and easily. The movement of military during World War I aided the spread.SLIDESHOW: Timeline of the global COVID-19 pandemicThe first confirmed COVID-19 case in the U.S. was on Jan. 21, 2020. A man in his 30s from Washington state had traveled from Wuhan, China, where the novel coronavirus is believed to have originated. The highly contagious coronavirus spread quickly across the globe, aided by air travel.Social distancing and mask wearingDuring the flu pandemic, the only hope was social mitigation efforts. The development of flu vaccines didn't happen until the 1940s. Health officials understood that mask wearing, social distancing and frequent hand-washing helped slow the spread. Cities that embraced efforts such as mask mandates and social distancing, along with the closures of businesses, schools, theaters and houses of worship, saw lower numbers of deaths. A similar pattern has occurred now.Back then, many masks were made of gauze and cheesecloth and held in place with elastic or tape.With COVID, people were encouraged to make homemade cloth masks because of a shortage of medical masks that left even hospital workers without sufficient supplies of masks as well as other personal protective equipment.Photos: Seattle police officers wear protective gauze face masks during 1918 flu pandemic. Credit: The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images | New York City police officers wear face masks at the Fordham bus hub in the Bronx borough of New York, April 2, 2020. Credit: David Dee Delgado/Bloomberg via Getty ImagesPhotos: A man receives a shave from a barber during the flu pandemic in Chicago, 1918. Credit: Chicago Sun-Times/Chicago Daily News collection/Chicago History Museum/Getty Images | Barbers Steve Grimaldi and Chris Pouch cut hair for customers at Grimaldi's Barber Shop on May 13, 2020, in Chesterton, Indiana. Credit: Scott Olson/Getty ImagesThough medical professionals urged mask wearing in 1918, many people resisted, just as they have during the current pandemic for similar reasons. Mask mandates came and went across the country during the flu pandemic. Officials worked to characterize mask use as a patriotic effort.Photos: Two men wearing face masks advocate the use of masks in Paris during the flu epidemic. Credit: Topical Press Agency/Getty Images | Nurses protest in front of the White House against the lack of personal protection equipment for COVID-19 on April 21, 2020, in Washington, D.C. Credit: Win McNamee/Getty ImagesSan Francisco was the first U.S. city to mandate the wearing of face masks in October 1918. People were fined and imprisoned for failing to comply. The mandate was only in place for four weeks initially, with the spread of the flu curtailed briefly. The ordinance was re-instituted again in January 1919 as cases spiked.The Anti-Mask League, formed in San Francisco in January 1919, protested the wearing of masks, viewing it as an unconstitutional limit of individual liberty. The refusal to wear masks and socially distance didn’t become as politicized or as organized as it has these days, however. The League’s efforts seemed to have been a rare exception. Most people complied with the ordinances.Photos: Court is held outdoors in a park due to the flu pandemic in San Francisco, 1918. Credit: Hulton Archive/Getty Images | New York City Criminal Court Judge Paul McDonnell works remotely from his Brooklyn apartment due to the coronavirus pandemic on April 09, 2020, in New York City. Credit: Spencer Platt/Getty ImagesReopening too earlyThe 1918 pandemic occurred in three waves: the first in the spring, the second, far deadlier wave, in the fall, and then the final wave in the winter/spring of 1919.Cities, such as New York, were hard hit by the coronavirus in the spring of 2020. Then case numbers subsided through the summer and mitigation efforts were eased in many places. Then a resurgence of cases emerged in the fall and winter in both urban and rural settings as well as worldwide.During the flu pandemic various measures to contain the spread were taken inconsistently across the country. In 1918, there was a first wave and then a flattening of the curve. Many places such as California lifted restrictions too early, leading to a second wave of infections. The same situation has occurred with the COVID-19 pandemic. California was initially successful in the battle against COVID-19, but then faced a dire situation this past winter. Photos: Naval Aircraft Factory float passes crowds in the Liberty Loan Parade in Philadelphia, Sept. 28, 1918. Credit: U.S. Naval History and Heritage Command | Motorcyclists ride down Main Street during the 80th Annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally on Aug. 7, 2020, in Sturgis, South Dakota. Rally officials estimated there were more than 250,000 attendees. Credit: Getty ImagesIn late September 1918, Philadelphia’s decision not to cancel its Liberty Loan parade, held to pay for the war effort, took a toll. In October, more than 10,000 people died from the flu in the city. At one point, the city had more than 500 bodies waiting for burial. Cold-storage plants needed to be used as temporary morgues and packing crates were utilized as coffins, according to the CDC.In parts of the country, hospitals were so overwhelmed with patients that makeshift hospitals were created in schools and other buildings. The 1918 flu took an estimated 195,000 American lives in October 1918 -- the deadliest month of the pandemic.Photos: Warehouses were converted to keep the infected people quarantined during the 1918 flu pandemic. Credit: Universal History Archive/Universal Images Group via Getty Images | A new field hospital built by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and members of the National Guard, featuring 437 beds for coronavirus patients, is opened at the Walter E. Washington Convention Center, May 11, 2020, in Washington, D.C. Credit: Win McNamee/Getty ImagesDuring the current pandemic, many parts of the U.S. never shut down to slow the spread of the coronavirus. For example, South Dakota welcomed hundreds of thousands of people for a 10-day biker rally in Sturgis. According to The Associated Press, at least 290 people in 12 states who attended the rally tested positive for COVID-19. The Washington Post reported that South and North Dakota, along with Wyoming, Montana and Minnesota, led the country in new infections per capita weeks after the rally. With attendees from all across the country, however, and the lack of contact tracing, documenting the full extent of the spread from the event was difficult.SchoolsWhile many places closed schools in 1918, three cities -- New York, Chicago and New Haven, Connecticut -- did not. In New York, classroom windows were kept open and children studied on rooftops and other outdoor spaces even through the cold winter months. Schools in the city were deemed to provide better health conditions than crowded and unsanitary tenements.Photos: Children stand in food line with open windows for ventilation at Public School 51 in New York City, 1900-1920. Credit: Library of Congress | A student follows along remotely with their regular school teacher's online live lesson from a desk separated from others by plastic barriers on Sept. 10, 2020 in Culver City, Calif. Credit: Getty ImagesIn late 2020, New York City was the only major U.S. city to reopen public schools for in-person learning with a hybrid model, with some days in-person and others involving remote learning. A mask mandate and social distancing measures were put in place. COVID-19 testing protocols were also implemented. Schools opened and closed in the city based on city-wide infection rates and cases within individual schools. A patchwork response across the country included fully remote learning and a return to school with no mitigation measures such as mask mandates.Holiday periodsBoth pandemics saw spikes in case numbers due to family gatherings and holiday celebrations. In a Dec. 12, 1918, Boston Globe article, Dr. M. Victor Safford of Boston’s Health Department was quoted as stating, “Most of the influenza cases reported in Boston today are traceable to visits to homes of persons who have been or are ill with influenza.”Despite an explosion in COVID-19 cases across the U.S. and warnings from the CDC, more than three million travelers passed through TSA screening checkpoints in the run-up to Thanksgiving in 2020. The American Automobile Association (AAA) predicted almost 48 million Americans would travel by road for the holiday and another 84.5 million would travel between Dec. 23 and Jan. 3. In the four-day period right before Christmas, more than four million people traveled by air. That was the largest period of air travel since the pandemic began last March.The holiday surge put coronavirus hospitalizations at their highest levels since the spring of 2020.On Jan. 19, 2021, it was reported by Philadelphia ABC station WPVI that 18 members in one family tested positive after a holiday party in Pennsylvania.In the spring of 2021, young people flocked to spring break locations despite the ongoing pandemic. Miami Beach police faced unruly crowds and dispersed a crowd with pepper balls after two officers were injured. Dr. Fauci attributed the rise in cases in part to people traveling and states easing restrictions too soon.LeadershipIn 1918, “there was no leadership or guidance of any kind directly from the White House,” historian John M. Barry, author of "The Great Influenza: The Story of the Deadliest Pandemic in History," told TIME magazine. President Woodrow Wilson was so focused on the war effort. “Hundreds of thousands of Americans died without President Wilson saying anything or mobilizing nonmilitary components of the U.S. government to help the civilian population,” according to the book “Shall We Wake the President: Two Centuries of Disaster Management from the Oval Office” by Tevi Troy. Wilson suffered from the flu in April 1919 in the middle of peace negotiations to end World War I.Photos: Patients rest in beds in The American Ward at Fourth Scottish General Hospital, where most patients were influenza cases from incoming military convoys, in Glasgow, Scotland, Nov. 1918. Credit: Getty Images | COVID-19 patients are treated inside a non-invasive ventilation system named the 'Vanessa Capsule' at the municipal field hospital Gilberto Novaes in Manaus, Brazil, May 18, 2020. Credit: Felipe Dana/APThe federal government response to the COVID-19 pandemic throughout 2020 was widely criticized. Former President Donald Trump repeatedly downplayed the severity of the crisis. States were largely left to manage the crisis on their own. Many in the White House, including the president and vice president, as well as Republican members of Congress, openly refused to wear masks. Trump contracted COVID-19 in October 2020. One coronavirus outbreak infected 34 White House staffers. Photos: Woodrow Wilson. Credit: Getty Images | President Donald Trump removes his mask upon return to the White House from Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, where he was hospitalized for COVID-19, on Oct. 05, 2020 in Washington. Credit: Getty ImagesThe 1918 flu took a heavy toll. The pandemic lasted two years. Entire families were wiped out and many of those who survived were widowed or orphaned. There was a significant economic impact as well. The pandemic finally ebbed after a third wave by the summer of 1919. It is believed the flu strain became so widespread that a level of herd immunity developed from infection as flu vaccines were not available.Coronavirus death toll in US eclipses 1918 influenza pandemic estimatesCOVID-19 vaccinesMedicine and science have come a long way since the 1918 pandemic. Vaccines for COVID-19 were developed with unprecedented speed, but not before a huge loss of life, economic devastation and the suspension of normal life. Within nine months, the U.S. authorized the first COVID-19 vaccine for people 16 and older on December 11, 2020. Vaccination programs in the U.S. began ramping up in late 2020 in the U.S.By early 2021, the U.S. had three vaccines given emergency authorization, the federal government secured hundreds of millions doses and opened up more and more vaccination sites. Incoming President Joe Biden set a goal of 100 million COVID-19 vaccine doses to be administered in his first 100 days in office beginning Jan. 20, 2021. That goal was reached on Day 59.U.S. vaccination rates in the spring of 2021 allowed for the easing of pandemic restrictions across the country. Cases declined and vaccination rates rose with more than half American adults fully vaccinated. Memorial Day weekend marked a dramatic return to more normal life.The "hot vax summer" of 2021, meant to celebrate the return to normalcy and fun activities, hit roadblocks. The politicization of vaccines, like masks, along with the emergence of a new, more infectious virus variant, delta, complicated the ability to end the pandemic. Vaccination rates stalled. Just 63.8% of the U.S. population over 12-years-old is fully vaccinated, according to the CDC as of September 20. Many parts of the country have much lower rates with many Americans refusing to be vaccinated. Twenty one months into the pandemic, we still don't have enough people vaccinated to slow the virus in the U.S., much less the rest of the world.Dr. Rochelle Walensky, CDC's director, said on September 19 that well over 90% of people in the U.S. hospitalized now for COVID-19 are unvaccinated. Breakthrough infections among vaccinated people are happening and there are concerns about waning vaccine immunity. There is still no vaccine authorized for children under 12-years-old.The ideological battle continues to rage across the country over vaccine and mask mandates. In several states, Republican governors have banned mask mandates in schools as students nationwide returned to their classrooms this fall. Some have also banned vaccine passports.Many experts view what is happening now as a preventable tragedy. The current pandemic is far from over.ABC News Photo Editor Alex Scott contributed to this report.Related TopicsCoronavirusPopular ReadsCalifornia fire grows over 20,000 acresNov 7, 9:47 PMSeattle stabbings: 10 attacked in 2 daysNov 8, 7:04 PMFEMA probing supervisor over Trump sign orderNov 9, 3:46 PMWhat Trump's win reveals about American votersNov 9, 5:09 AM538's final forecasts for the 2024 electionNov 5, 7:49 AMABC News Live24/7 coverage of breaking news and live eventsABC News NetworkAbout Nielsen MeasurementChildren's Online Privacy PolicyContact UsDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationInterest-Based AdsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseYour US State Privacy Rights © 2024 ABC NewsOptimists learn about 1918 influenza pandemic | Features | marshallnewsmessenger.com Skip to main content You are the owner of this article. Edit Article Add New Article Close You have permission to edit this article. Edit Close Activate Subscribe My Account Logout Login/Register Newsletter Signups Home Subscribe Contact Us News Local News School News Police Counties State News National & World Local Weather Photos/Videos Business Sports College sports ETVarsity Sports columns Features Calendar Lifestyles Religion Special Sections Obituaries Classifieds/Advertising Jobs Place An Ad Business Directory Legal Notices Events Celebrations Opinion Letters to the Editor Editorials Columns Blogs Subscriber e-Edition Contests Hometown Best ETX View Site search Search Facebook Twitter Contact Us e-Edition Subscribe Archives Activate Subscribe My Account Logout Login/Register My Account 58° Clear Marshall, TX (75670) Today Generally clear. Areas of patchy fog. Low 52F. Winds light and variable.. Tonight Generally clear. Areas of patchy fog. Low 52F. Winds light and variable. Updated: November 10, 2024 @ 11:25 pm Full Forecast Sunday, November 10, 2024 Site search Search Menu Newsletter Signups Home Subscribe Contact Us News Local News School News Police Counties State News National & World Local Weather Photos/Videos Photos Galleries Videos Business The Street Stock Market Sports College sports ETVarsity Player of the Week Sports columns Features Calendar Lifestyles Religion Special Sections Breast Cancer awareness Women in Business Wonderland of Lights Obituaries Classifieds/Advertising Jobs Place An Ad Business Directory Legal Notices Events Celebrations Opinion Letters to the Editor Editorials Columns Blogs For_the_kids It's the Farm-ily Life Subscriber e-Edition Contests Hometown Best ETX View Optimists learn about 1918 influenza pandemic Special to the News Messenger Wyndi Veigel Editor Wyndi Veigel is the editor of The Marshall News Messenger and a 2007 graduate of Texas A&M University-Commerce. She has been a reporter, photographer, page designer and social media expert for several publications. Jan 17, 2021 Jan 17, 2021 Updated Feb 21, 2022 Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Buy Now Thanks to Optimist John Fortune for enhancing this image of the frontpage of the Nov. 2, 1918 Marshall Messenger. Dating from before the Armistice on the 11th, it includes among the many war notices a report that the influenza has hurt business. Courtesy John R. Fortune Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save The Noon Optimist Club met online Jan. 13 under the leadership of Vice president Julie Brock with prayers for President Ned Calvert and his family (especially his wife Sarah) as they suffer from the effects of the Covid-19 virus.Optimist Charles Dixon is busy this week keeping the Triple M Backpack program in operation as the club begins its 12th year of seeing that students at Wm. B. Travis, Price T. Young and David Crockett Elementary do not go hungry on the weekends. This week Kendall Harper, Don Parrish and Jane Ogden delivered the backpacks and Steve Horton, Don Parrish and Mark Correro transferred 35 boxes of food from Mission Marshall to the MISD storage facility.Optimist Le Ila Dixon shared good news with the club from Seattle-based Community Loaves. A group of 500 home bread bakers, Community-Loaves, have been donating their bread to food banks since the start of the pandemic. The founder of the group, Katherine Kehrli, hopes to grow the organization to other cities in 2021 with a goal of donating 30,000 loaves over the course of the year.Dr. Rose Mary Magrill, who with Pat Odom and Optimist John Fortune, is working on the history of Karnack, shared the story of the 1918 influenza pandemic in Marshall and Harrison County.Optimist Richard Magrill noted that this event was important in the earliest history of optimism. David E. Bruns in his centennial history says that at the end of 1917 there were 25 clubs officially associated with the American Optimists’ Clubs. (Optimists International was not organized until 1919.) After the end of World War I in 1918 only 15 clubs remained.Those that survived the war and pandemic did so “by shifting their focus to helping raise funds for the war effort, supporting military families, and providing assistance to families devastated by the flu.”Dr. Magrill noted that the great influenza outbreak of 1918 has often been described as the deadliest pandemic to strike the world since the Black Death of the Middle Ages. Experts estimate that 500 million people were infected and that 3-5 percent of the world’s population died from it.The earliest virus strain of 1918 has been identified as the H1N1, a virus, of avian origin; it is the same virus strain that caused the so-called “swine flu” outbreak in 2000. One of the unusual aspects of the 1918 influenza was that the very young and the very old survived relatively well; healthy young adults were the ones most likely to die.In the United States the worse part of the pandemic began in early 1918 and lasted through the spring of 1919. There was, of course, no legal requirement in 1918 for doctors to report cases of influenza to public health officials; but a doctor in Kansas, near the large army base of Fort Riley, reported unusual influenza activity in Jan. 1918.This first wave spread quickly to Fort Riley and later to other bases both in the U.S. and in Europe, but it was not particularly severe. Most recovered after a few miserable days. However, this strain did show a worrying tendency to attack the lower respiratory system, which meant pneumonia could easily become a secondary infection.By mid-August 1918 a second surge appeared in the U.S., first in Massachusetts. This wave was much more deadly. The month of October was the worst, because 195,000 Americans died in that month alone. Near the end of Dec. 1918, it was estimated that about 6 million persons had died world-wide in the past three months.Although most communities were taking stringent precautions by October to stop the spread of the disease, the Armistice on Nov. 11, marked the end of World War I and caused many people to gather for celebrations. The Canadian government even tried — without success — to keep people from gathering publicly to celebrate the Armistice!By January 1919 another severe wave was starting in the U.S, and Canada.In some communities, during the fall of 1918, quarantine laws were strictly enforced. If anyone in a household was diagnosed with influenza, then no one was allowed to leave or enter the house until the quarantine on that house was lifted.This left some people dependent for their food on friendly and healthy neighbors who might leave a big container of soup on the porch.The enforcement of this kind of household quarantine was quite effective in slowing the spread of the disease in the places where it was instituted. And later studies indicated that these communities did not suffer any more economically than those that did not enforce such laws.Schools were closed in many places and some — but not all — college football games were canceled. There were also reports that some cities looked like ghost towns at the height of the epidemic. Any actions that were taken to control the spread of the virus appear to have been local; there were no state or national orders in the United States.Marshall does not appear to have enforced any quarantine laws on individual households — at least the newspaper does not report any.However, the chairman of the Marshall City Commission issued a proclamation “that all public and private schools, theaters, moving picture shows, live shows and all other places of amusement, soda water fountains, all churches, Sunday schools, and prayer meetings, pool halls, private and public clubs, within the limits of the city of Marshall, be and remain closed… .” (MM, Oct. 9, 1918)This first proclamation was intended to be in effect for 10 days, but on Oct. 19, the proclamation was reissued “until further notice.” In addition to restrictions previously noted, the proclamation forbade “the assembling of crowds or people in any of the public or private places in said city of Marshall … and the number of persons assembling in any one place or crowds except in works of emergency or charity or necessity shall not exceed six persons.” (MM, Oct. 19, 1918)It is not clear when the Marshall City Commission decided to rescind the above order, but it may have happened by the end of October. On Oct. 30, a Liberty Bond rally (money was still needed for the war) was held at the Grand Theater in Marshall. This might have evaded the six-person limit because it was a “work of charity or necessity;” but, in any case, the attendance was described as “excellent, though the recent quarantine and fear of infection kept many away.” (MM, Oct. 31, 1918)The drafting of men for the war had been suspended during October, but it was resumed in the first week of November. During October 1918 and for several months following, the Marshall newspaper contained many obituaries which listed influenza as the cause of death. Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save Wyndi Veigel Editor Wyndi Veigel is the editor of The Marshall News Messenger and a 2007 graduate of Texas A&M University-Commerce. She has been a reporter, photographer, page designer and social media expert for several publications. Follow Wyndi Veigel Local Events Most Popular Articles Images Videos ArticlesSorry, there are no recent results for popular articles. ImagesSorry, there are no recent results for popular images. VideosSorry, there are no recent results for popular videos. Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Tweets by News_Messenger Sections Home News Sports Features Business Celebrations Obituaries Opinion Photos/Videos Online Features Services Local Events Promote Your Event Submission Forms Classifieds Place an Ad Business Directory Email Alerts Search Weather Subscribe Contact Information 100 North Bolivar Street, Suite 301 Marshall, TX 75670 Phone: 1-903-935-7914 Email: news@marshallnewsmessenger.com Facebook Twitter × Browser Compatibility Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.We recommend switching to one of the following browsers: Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox © Copyright 2024 Marshall News Messenger 100 North Bolivar Street, Suite 301, Marshall, TX | Terms of Use | Privacy PolicyWe’ve Been Here Before | Denison Magazine | Denison University Skip to main content Denison University Home Close Menu About Denison + Academics + Admission & Aid + Campus Life + Career Exploration + News & Events + Arts Athletics & Recreation Alumni Parents Title IX / Non-Discrimination Schedule A Visit Make a Gift Prefer browsing? Check out the A-Z directory Popular Fast Facts Where to Stay Denison Forward Academic Calendar Majors Employment MyDenison Your Most Viewed Search Prefer browsing? Check out the A-Z Directory Popular Fast Facts Where to Stay Denison Forward Academic Calendar Majors Employment MyDenison Your Most Viewed No Results Clear Back About Denison Explore Granville & Columbus Fast Facts Inclusion, Diversity, Equity & Antiracism Our History President's Office Sustainability Back Academics Denison’s purpose is to inspire and educate its students to become autonomous thinkers, discerning moral agents and active citizens of a democratic society. Majors Courses Academic Calendar Library Center for Global Programs Study Abroad Back Admission & Aid We are thrilled that you are considering Denison during your college search, and we look forward to getting to know more about you. Apply for Admission Discover the Advantage Apply for Financial Aid Visit Campus Virtual Tour Request Information Meet the Staff Back Campus Life Our students bring diverse talents, interests, backgrounds, and experiences to campus; see how Denison helps them make this college their own. Belonging & Inclusion Clubs & Organizations Housing Sustainability Wellness Center Back Career Exploration Career Center Entrepreneurship & Consulting Fellowships & Research Professional Development & Certificates Back News & Events Denison's latest news, stories, and upcoming events from all around the hill and beyond. Events & Athletics Schedule Academic Calendar Press Releases Big Red Athletics Denison Magazine Latest University News A bigger, better Big Red WeekendNovember 5, 2024 Former attorney general finds optimism on The HillOctober 25, 2024 Denison receives $7 million gift to support scholarshipsOctober 22, 2024 Denison University Home Map / Tour Events Give Apply Search Menu Home Denison Magazine Winter 2021 We’ve Been Here Before We’ve Been Here Before written by By James Hale ’78 Fall term was about to begin and almost every aspect of normal college life was upended. Global politics were in turmoil, and an aggressive virus that had reached American shores had been gaining steam all summer and was soon to reach a second, much more destructive wave. At Denison, there was a scramble to prepare for new academic, social, logistical, and health care realities. Faculty and students were seeing that norms and traditions weren’t going to be possible for the foreseeable future and were mourning the loss of “the old days and the old ways.” But there was no choice but to quickly adapt to the circumstances and work through one problem at a time with good spirit and common sense.Without the help of computers: no Google, no Zoom. This was 1918, not 2020. issue 02 | winter 2021 When classes resumed in October 1918, Denison was facing two powerful crises: an impending pandemic, and also the more visible and immediate disruption of World War I. The virus still hadn’t reached Granville at the start of term, but it was expected, as news from the east coast reached Ohio. Commonly called the “Spanish Influenza,” it’s now understood to have been a variation of the H1N1 virus similar to the bird flu we know today. A major outbreak was first reported in Spain, where the press was uncensored due to that country’s neutrality in the ongoing war, so Spain’s news coverage of the epidemic earned it the unfortunate name. While the reality of the flu was genuine but still invisible, the senior class of 1918—96 men and women—had been nearly halved, as most of the men weren’t returning to Granville but had boarded ships to fight in Europe. They took with them the academic, cultural, and athletic leadership expected of the rising senior class, and it was a strongly felt loss on campus. The U.S. War Department was introducing the Denison Unit of the Student Army Training Corps (the S.A.T.C.), a program that made use of existing university facilities to train young men for war, specifically for officer positions. There was a great demand in that patriotic moment, and young men wanting the leg-up in rank and opportunity (as well as to earn pay and avoid conscription) flocked to Denison to fill the promised 400 positions. In return, the War Department took control of the men’s curriculum and the campus’s few facilities to create barracks, a mess hall, study halls, and spaces for regular drills. On October 11, 1918, the first issue of the Denisonian describes the early autumn scene of Denison men taking the Oath of Allegiance: “virtually the entire male registration of an American college assembled to pledge their allegiance to the flag and turn their college work into the channel of enlisted preparation for service on the field of battle.” The war effort and specifically the S.A.T.C. was getting front page attention, but the same issue of the Denisonian set out some sensible rules regarding the Spanish influenza. No students at Denison had yet fallen ill, but it was known that the virus was attacking young healthy people, and most of the fatalities in Spain had been vigorous citizens between the ages of 15 and 40. Many died within three days—fevers quickly turned into pneumonia, with fatal accumulations of fluid in the lungs through bacterial infection. Antibiotics like penicillin wouldn’t be invented for another ten years, and there were no vaccines. By the summer of 1918, 10,000 people were dead from the virus, adding to the thousands dying in the war. The second, deadlier wave hit in September on both sides of the Atlantic, and after a large Philadelphia “Liberty Loan” parade that month, the city was brought to its knees with new cases. Nearly 14,000 Philadelphians died within six weeks. Workers from the Bureau of Highways dug mass graves using steam shovels. To quell panic, residents were told to “Live a clean life. Do not even discuss influenza … Worry is useless. Talk of cheerful things instead of the disease.” News of the Philadelphia outbreak and death toll likely reached Granville by October, but there was little to report from here at the start of the month beyond vigilance. In spite of the flu and the war, early October meant that football season was on the minds of many, and there was a lot of talk about how to build a team when every senior varsity star had gone to war. Freshmen had always been barred from varsity teams, but Coach Livingston opened eligibility to the eager fellows, with special permission from the War Department. Denison’s opening game was with Ohio State at “Ohio Field” in Columbus, and the gung-ho scrappy optimism of Denison comes across in the anticipation, and just as much in reporting the loss. A different point of view just ahead of that game was published in Ohio State’s paper, The Lantern which reported a mistaken view of Denison’s circumstances at a time when there were no cases of the influenza on Denison’s campus. Denison’s football “stars” were actually fighting in Europe. But Ohio State itself was struggling with a flu outbreak, and classes were canceled for a week, something that never happened at Denison. By the next weekly issue of the Denisonian, October 18th, the virus had arrived in town and on The Hill, with 132 cases in and around Granville, two of which had developed into pneumonia. No deaths were reported. At Denison, the women in Shepardson College had no cases yet, only a few students with “grippe,” or regular flu symptoms. The S.A.T.C. men had “about a dozen mild casualties” who were being quarantined in the Phi Delta Theta house. This house, once owned by the Colwell family, was used for many years as administrative staff offices, where it stood in front of Gilpatrick House on chapel walk until 2003. The original Bandersnatch was in an extension built onto the back end of Colwell House. But in 1918, it was the men’s hospital for the pandemic. In 1918, Granville and Denison both had much smaller populations, and were more insulated from the outside world, a strong advantage in a pandemic. The total number of regular Denison students that year was 411, plus 330 additional S.A.T.C. men. Train and interurban allowed people to come and go from Granville, but the streets were still unpaved, automobiles were relatively scarce, and people were following directions to stay at home. Compared with the cumulative total of 132 Granville flu cases, nearby Newark reported ‘Nine Deaths and 184 New Cases of ‘Flu’” in just one 24-hour period, October 14. That same day, the military base at Camp Sherman in Chillicothe, south of Columbus, added one more man to its count of 938 deaths so far from the flu. While Denison’s cases appeared to have started with the S.A.T.C. men, it wasn’t long before the women of Shepardson joined their numbers, and a second infirmary was created for them in the nearby Kappa Phi sorority house on Cherry Street. Granville’s newspaper and local printer, The Granville Times, suspended publication indefinitely in October due to war shortages, but Denison’s administration decided to support the Denisonian as a valued part of university life and found special funding for it. A page of the college paper was reserved for local Granville news, including social notes and observations from Mrs. Burton Case. With men distracted by war, the Denisonian was largely handed over to the women of Shepardson for the duration, and their voices brought an unmistakable shift of tone and topic to the weekly. Case’s was a popular candy and soda joint with students, especially the women of Shepardson who could easily walk to the Opera House from their lower campus living quarters. The pandemic didn’t appear to be at the very top of their list of serious concerns. This was a time of transition from separate men’s and women’s institutions, which hadn’t quite fully merged by 1918. The women, who lived on the lower campus, referred to themselves as Shepardson, or “The Sem” after the old Seminary for women, and sometimes wittily called themselves “Semites.” The men on The Hill were generally called “Granville College,” the name for Denison prior to the mid-1850s. “Denison” was used when men and women were referenced in aggregate. Housing for the men was in town, where fraternities were scattered in houses through the village. The S.A.T.C. required all the men move into the campus academic buildings—Marsh, Talbot, and Barney—to set up their cots barracks-style. Shepardson was short on space for its women, so the overflow was moved into the emptied fraternity houses. Gender roles were of course carefully prescribed at that time, but the changed circumstances of 1918 were actually opening up new opportunities for the women, including publishing the Denisonian and Adytum, and to read the editorials in the Denisonian is to witness a somewhat uneven growth spurt for the Semites. They were frivolous, playful, and flirtatious, but at the same time increasingly less shy about voicing their grievances and defining their own potential. Many women felt marginalized by the war emphasis and S.A.T.C.’s takeover of both the campus and the attention of the men. They also saw themselves as protectors of tradition and civility at a time when “soldiers” thought they could get away with bad behavior. By the start of November, the front page of the Denisonian began to reflect the realities of the war: Denison men arriving in Europe, Denison men missing in action, escaping the enemy, and more and more Denison men losing their lives. Fortunately, the losses in Europe weren’t being matched by losses at home, at least in Granville. After a month and a half of quarantine, there were still no deaths from influenza, unlike so much of the country. It was clearly to Granville’s advantage to be located off the beaten path in those days, and also fortunate that the local health officer, Dr. C.J. Loveless, was holding to the quarantine and giving sensible advice. At the same time that flu update was being written for the Denisonian, the Armistice of November 11, 1918 was signed between the Allies and Germany, and the great event was reported by Mrs. Case. As abruptly as Denison had adopted the many changes required by the war and the flu two months earlier, plans were adopted to disband the Student Army Training Corps and return the college back to its former self. While a number of the men who survived the war planned to return to Denison, most of the S.A.T.C. men were not interested in staying to pursue a college degree, and they dispersed after December. Denison had more than 800 stars on its service flag, representing students and alumni who served in the war. Eight gold stars represented the Denison men who died. With almost the perfect timing of a melodrama, the end of autumn term at Denison also coincided with the final waning of Spanish Influenza in Granville. The university and town were unusually fortunate, having had no fatalities, and unlike most other colleges, having no days of closing due to the flu. Worldwide, the final death toll from the pandemic was between 50 and 100 million, 600,000 in the United States alone — claiming more lives than all the battles of World War I combined. A final coda for the women of Shepardson, who worked and waited and ate ice cream at Casey’s while the boys had their war. As the men returned to campus and reclaimed their old turf, from housing to journalism, the women found their voices. Go back to the expectations for women before the Armistice of November 11? Not likely. Tolerate punishment unequal to the men for social offenses (especially when it was so often the men’s idea to break the rules)? Not anymore. The worm had turned. Share this: Published January 2021 100 West College Street Granville, Ohio 43023 1-740-587-0810 Footer menu Make a Payment MyDenison Title IX / Non-Discrimination Library Shop Denison Make a Gift Stay up to date with the latest campus news and upcoming events.FacebookTwitterInstagramYoutube Our Home: Granville, OH » Employment Consumer Information Forms & Policies Privacy Policy Cookie Notice Social Media Community Guidelines Report a Bug Back to topRespiratory tract infections in children with allergic asthma on allergen immunotherapy during influenza season | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Respiratory tract infections in children with allergic asthma on allergen immunotherapy during influenza season Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 22 January 2021 Respiratory tract infections in children with allergic asthma on allergen immunotherapy during influenza season Yuyun Li1, Dongming Wang2, Lili Zhi1,9, Yunmei Zhu1, Lan Qiao1, Yan Zhu1, Xin Hu1, Qian Wang1, Yuan Cao3, Yan Gao4, Yousheng Chen5, Zeng Zhang6, Fangjie Bi7 & …Guangxing Yan8 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 11, Article number: 2083 (2021) Cite this article 1990 Accesses 3 Citations Metrics details Subjects DiseasesMedical research AbstractTo describle how respiratory tract infections (RTIs) that occurred in children with allergic asthma (AA) on allergen immunotherapy (AIT) during an influenza season. Data including clinical symptoms and treatment history of children (those with AA on AIT and their siblings under 14 years old), who suffered from RTIs during an influenza season (Dec 1st, 2019–Dec 31st, 2019), were collected (by face to face interview and medical records) and analyzed. Children on AIT were divided into 2 groups: stage 1 (dose increasing stage) and stage 2 (dose maintenance stage). Their siblings were enrolled as control. During the study period, 49 children with AA on AIT (33 patients in stage 1 and 16 patients in stage 2) as well as 49 children without AA ( their siblings ) were included. There were no significant differences in occurrences of RTIs among the three groups (p > 0.05). Compared with children in the other two groups, patients with RTIs in stage 2 had less duration of coughing and needed less medicine. Children on AIT with maintenance doses had fewer symptoms and recovered quickly when they were attacked by RTIs, which suggested that AIT with dose maintenance may enhance disease resistance of the body. Similar content being viewed by others Efficacy of three different budesonide treatments in Chinese preschool children with recurrent wheezing Article Open access 11 October 2022 Multicenter study of seasonal and regional airborne allergens in Chinese preschoolers with allergic rhinitis Article Open access 27 February 2024 The effects of antibiotic exposure on asthma in children with atopic dermatitis Article Open access 19 April 2021 IntroductionAllergic diseases have increased in children and adults with time1,2,3,4. Among them, allergic asthma (AA) is a chronic airway inflammation disease. It represents a significant health problem worldwide and is associated with much morbidity, mortality, and loss of productivity5, which has attracted much attention from patients and medical practitioners. The treatments of AA include avoidance of allergens, education of patients, medicines and allergen immunotherapy (AIT). And AIT is the only causal treatment of AA6. Patients can achieve AA well controlled in post-treatment follow-up over a recommended period of 3–4 years of AIT7,8. Then more and more patients with AA have accepted AIT, which should sustain for 3 years at least.Respiratory tract infections (RTIs) are common for human beings in influenza seasons. For patients with AA, RTIs are very common causes of exacerbations of asthma, being implicated in 80% of exacerbations in children and 50% of exacerbations in adults9,10,11. The most commonly identified viruses associated with exacerbations of asthma are rhinovirus, coronavirus, influenza virus, parainfluenza virus and respiratory syncytial virus9,12, which are frequently identified in patients with RTIs in influenza seasons.It is reported that AIT can enhance host defence against RTIs in mouse model with AA13. However, no reports have been found about how RTIs occur in children with AA on AIT. In our clinical practice, many children with AA sensitized to house dust mites (HDM) on AIT often suffered from RTIs. The aim of this study was to discuss how RTIs occurred in children with AA sensitized to HDM on AIT by face to face interview and medical records.Materials and methodsSubjectsChildren with AA sensitized to HDM under 14 years old, who were receiving AIT during Dec 1st and Dec 31st of the year 2019 and whose clinical symptoms were well controlled, were included in this research. At the same time, their siblings of the patients who didn’t suffer from allergic diseases were also enrolled in this research as control. The diagnosis of AA had to comply with the diagnostic criteria of AA according to the GINA guidelines14. All patients enrolled in this study had not received any influenza vaccines. The exclusion criteria were suspected cases of digestive tract infections, chronic RTIs such as tuberculosis, chronic respiratory diseases, immunosuppressive status (e.g., HIV infection, chemotherapy) and leukaemia. Patients with no siblings, or with siblings suffering from allergic diseases, or with siblings under 5 years old, or with siblings older than 14 years old, or accepting any influenza vaccines, or with rhinitis, or with bad controlled asthmas, and or refusing the research were also excluded from this research.Ethics statementThe study was conducted in accordance with the Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Zibo Central Hospital according to the ethical principles that have their origins in the Declaration of Helsinki and its subsequent amendments. Written informed consents were obtained from guardians of children.Data collectionData including age, gender, medical records of AIT, flu vaccination history, RTIs attack, coughing, fever, sore throat, wheezing, chest tightness, nasal congestion, sneezing, nasal itching, runny nose, medicine for RTIs, hospitalization, fluid therapy, other symptoms of RTIs (e.g. headache, vomiting) and seeking medical help were collected from children with AA sensitized to HDM who were receiving AIT and their siblings without allergic diseases by a face to face interview and medical records. Presence or absence of RTIs was determined by the health professionals according to symptoms and medical records. The courses of AIT treatment were acquired from medical records of the children with AA. AIT consisted of dose increasing treatment (stage 1) and dose maintenance treatment (stage 2). The number of Children with RTIs who visited paediatric clinic of Zibo Central Hospital and the number of those who were hospitalized from Jan 1st to Dec 31st of the year 2019 were also collected.Statistical analysisAll statistical analyses were performed with SPSS software, version 21.0 (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA). Continuous variables were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. The method of t-test was used to compare means of 2 groups while ANOVA were used to compare means of multiple groups. LSD test were used for the inter-comparison of 2 means in the multiple groups. Categorical variables were assessed by the Chi-square test. p < 0.05 was indicated as a statistically significant difference.ResultsSubjectsFrom Jan 1st to Dec 31st of the year 2019, there were 152,440 children in total who visited paediatrics of Zibo Central Hospital for RTIs. In December of 2019, there were 20,540 children outpatients with RTIs and 425 children inpatients with RTIs, which were much higher than those in any other month of the year (Figs. 1, 2). And during the study period, there were 353 children with AA sensitized to HDM on SCIT in the allergy clinic. Among them, 304 children with AA sensitized to HDM were excluded from this research for no siblings (109 cases), accepting influenza vaccines (49 cases), siblings with allergic diseases (42 cases), siblings under 5 years old (33 cases), siblings older than 14 years old (26 cases), rhinitis (22 cases), bad controlled asthmas (18 cases), and refusing the research (5 cases). Then 49 children with AA sensitized to HDM who were receiving SCIT as well as their siblings (49 children) were included in this research. Among them, 33 children with AA sensitized to HDM were receiving dose increasing treatment of SCIT (stage 1) while 16 children with AA sensitized to HDM were receiving dose maintenance treatment of SCIT (stage 2). Their siblings were also enrolled in this research as control. There were no significant differences in ages (F = 0.12, p > 0.05) and genders (χ2 = 0.05, p > 0.05) among the 3 groups.Figure 1The numbers of outpatients with RTIs in months of the year 2019.Full size imageFigure 2The numbers of children with RTIs hospitalized in months of the year 2019.Full size imageRTIs in children with AA on SCIT and controlDuring the study period, there were 21 cases, 7 cases and 32 cases with RTIs occurred in stage1, stage 2 and control, respectively. There were no significant differences in occurrences of RTIs among the 3 groups (p > 0.05). The occurrences of lower RTIs, fever, high fever, coughing, wheezing, medicine, seeking medical help, recurrent infections, fluid therapy and hospitalization were lower in stage 2 than those in stage 1 and control, respectively. However, no significant differences were observed in these indicators among the 3 groups (p > 0.05). (Table 1).Table1 RTIs in children with AA on SCIT and control.Full size tableClinical characteristics of children with RTIsIn order to discuss the severity of the RTIs, children with RTIs were divided into 3 groups: stage1, stage 2 and control, respectively. Duration of coughing was significantly less in stage 2 than those in stage 1 and control (p < 0.05), respectively. But no significant difference was observed in duration of coughing between stage 1 and control (p > 0.05). It was suggested that children with RTIs in stage 2 were susceptible to suffer less duration of coughing. The duration of medicine used for RTIs in stage 2 was less than that in stage 1 and control respectively, but there were no significant differences among them (p > 0.05). No seeking medical help, recurrent infections, fluid therapy and hospitalization occurred in stage 2, which suggested that patients with dose maintenance treatment may have mild symptoms during influenza season. More frequent seeking medical help were found in stage 1 than in stage 2 and control (p < 0.05), respectively. (Table 2).Table2 Clinical characteristics of children with RTIs.Full size tableDiscussionsAA is a multi-factorial disease of the airway that precipitates from genetic predisposition and environmental triggers. The World Health Organization estimates that 235 million people have asthma and an additional 100 million people will develop the disease over the next 15 years15,16. Patients with AA are susceptible to suffer from RTIs due to an impaired antimicrobial defence17,18,19,20. A prospective study during the 2009 influenza pandemic showed that H1N1 preferentially infected asthmatics more than non-asthmatics21. AA exacerbations could be caused by RTIs frequently22. However, subsequent studies noted that asthmatics had fewer severe outcomes (including reduced bacterial pneumonia) compared to non-asthmatics23,24,25,26,27, which may be explained by the accelerated clearance of viruses in patients with AA15,28. But it was regretful that we could get few children with AA qualified who didn’t receive AIT in allergy clinic. So we could not acquire medical data of RTIs in this kind of patients for comparison during the study period in this research.RTIs including common cold, acute tonsillitis, acute rhinosinusitis, flu-like illness, acute bronckitis, and pneumonia are the most common diseases in human beings29. Typical symptoms of patients with RTIs include sneezing, nasal congestion and discharge, sore throat, cough, fever, headache, and malaise, which were similar to those of patients with allergic rhinitis and asthma. RTIs are usually diagnosed clinically, based on symptoms. In this research, fever or sore throat was necessary in the diagnosis of RTIs. RTIs consist of upper RTIs and lower RTIs. Compared with upper RTIs, lower RTIs such as pneumonia is considered more severe. Most RTIs occur in winter days in northern hemisphere30. In our research, RTIs outbreak occurred in December, which suggested an influenza season. During that time, many patients with AA who were receiving AITs also suffered from RTIs. In order to discuss how RTIs occurred in children with AA who were receiving AIT, the research on RTIs in children with AA sensitized to HDM on AIT as well as their siblings in December of 2019 were conducted.In the research, the occurrences of RTIs in patients with AA were similar to those in patients without AA, which was not consistent with the previous report21. And the occurrences of lower RTIs, fever, high fever, coughing, wheezing, medicine, seeking medical help, recurrent infections, fluid therapy and hospitalization in children with AA receiving dose maintenance treatment were less than those in patients with AA receiving dose increasing treatment and in patients without AA, which suggested that AIT with dose maintenance treatment may enhance RTIs resistance of the body. It was difficult to explain the phenomenon and further study should be needed.Frequent seeking medical help, recurrent infections, fluid therapy and hospitalization were important indicators in evaluating the severity of RTIs. In our research, no seeking medical help, recurrent infections, fluid therapy and hospitalization occurred in children with AA on dose maintenance SCIT. Especially, the duration of coughing in children with AA on dose maintenance SCIT was significantly less than those in children with AA on dose increasing SCIT and their siblings. All those above suggested that children with AA on dose maintenance SCIT were prone to have mild symptoms after RTIs attack. The explanation may be that SCIT can play important role in the protection of children from RTIs, which was consistent with the previous results31. Frequent seeking medical help was very high in children with AA on dose increasing SCIT. For guardians of the children with AA often worried about the health of children. They couldn’t stop visiting doctors for medical help at the beginning of SCIT. The occurrence of RTIs in children with AA on dose increasing SCIT was similar to that in children without AA, which suggested that SCIT at dose increasing treatment could not protect the children from RTIs attacks.However, this research still had some limitations. First, the number of the patients was limited.. And many variables couldn’t get statistical significances. Second, limited to our research equipment, we couldn’t detect the microbes of the RITs in laboratory. The influenza season was judged by the number of children with RTIs visiting our hospital and clinical experiences. Third, it was a retrospective research. Many data couldn’t be acquired. Fourth, almost all the patients who came to allergy clinic for SCIT, no enough children with AA qualified who didn’t accept SCIT could be acquired for comparison. Fourth, diagnoses were based on clinical symptoms; however, that is a rule in general practice29.In summary, Children on AIT with maintenance dose had fewer symptoms and recovered quickly when they were attacked by RTIs, which suggested that AIT with dose maintenance may enhance disease resistance of the body. ReferencesEder, W., Ege, M. J. & von Mutius, E. The asthma epidemic. N. Engl. J. Med. 355, 2226–2235 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Matricardi, P. M. 99th Dahlem conference on infection, inflammation and chronic inflammatory disorders: controversial aspects of the ‘hygiene hypotheses’. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 160, 98–105 (2010).Article CAS Google Scholar Huang, K. et al. Prevalence, risk factors, and management of asthma in China: a national cross-sectional study. Lancet 394, 407–418 (2019).Article Google Scholar Zhao, J. et al. Self-reported prevalence of childhood allergic diseases in three cities of China: a multicenter study. BMC Public Health. 10, 551 (2010).Article Google Scholar Larsen, J. N., Broge, L. & Jacobi, H. Allergy immunotherapy: the future of allergy treatment. Drug Discov. Today. 21, 26–37 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Yu, H. Q. et al. Sublingual immunotherapy efficacy of Dermatophagoidesfarinae vaccine in a murine asthma model. Int. ArchAllergy Immunol. 152, 41–48 (2010).Article CAS Google Scholar EMEA. Guideline on the clinical development on products for specific immunotherapy for the treatment of allergic diseases. EMEA; 2008. Report No. CHMP/EWP/18504/2006. http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientific_guideline/2009/09/WC500003605.pdf.Eifan, A. O., Shamji, M. H. & Durham, S. R. Long-term clinical and immunological effects of allergen immunotherapy. Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 6, 586–593 (2011).Article Google Scholar Johnston, S. L. et al. Community studyof role of viral infections in exacerbations of asthma in 9–11 yearold children. BMJ 310, 1225–1229 (1995).Article CAS Google Scholar Jacoby, D. B. Virus-induced asthma attacks. JAMA 287, 755–761 (2002).Article Google Scholar Murray, C. S. et al. Study of modifiable riskfactors for asthma exacerbations: virus infection and allergenexposure increase the risk of asthma hospital admissions inchildren. Thorax 61, 376–382 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Nicholson, K. G., Kent, J. & Ireland, D. C. Respiratory viruses and exacerbations of asthma in adults. BMJ 307, 982–986 (1993).Article CAS Google Scholar Wang, J. et al. Allergen specific immunotherapy enhanced defense against bacteria via TGF-β1-induced CYP27B1 in asthma. Oncotarget 8, 68681–68695 (2017).Article Google Scholar Global strategy for asthma management and prevention: update 2018. Global initiative for asthma. http://www.ginaasthma.org/Samarasinghe, A. E. et al. The immune profile associated with acute allergicasthma accelerates clearance of influenza virus. Immunol. Cell Biol. 92, 449–459 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar WHO Asthma. 2011 Asthma Fact Sheet. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs307/en/index.html. Accessed July 29th 2013.Bogefors, J., Kvarnhammar, A. M., Millrud, C. R., Georen, S. K. & Cardell, L. O. LEAP-2, LL-37 and RNase7 in tonsillartissue: downregulated expression in seasonal allergicrhinitis. Pathog Dis. 72, 55–60 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Beisswenger, C. et al. Allergic airway inflammation inhibits pulmonary antibacterial hostdefense. J. Immunol. 177, 1833–1837 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Juhn, Y. J. et al. Increased risk of serious pneumococcal disease in patients with asthma. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 122, 719–723 (2008).Article Google Scholar Talbot, T. R. et al. Asthma as a risk factor for invasive pneumococcal disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 352, 2082–2090 (2005).Article CAS Google Scholar Kloepfer, K. M. et al. Increased H1N1 infection rate in children with asthma. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 185, 1275–1279 (2012).Article Google Scholar Papadopoulos, N. G. et al. Viruses and bacteria in acute asthma exacerbations—a GA(2) LEN-DARE systematic review. Allergy 66, 458–468 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Veerapandian, R., Snyder, J. D. & Samarasinghe, A. E. Influenza in asthmatics: for better or for worse?. Front. Immunol. 9, 1843 (2018).Article Google Scholar Gilca, R. et al. Risk factors for hospitalization and severe outcomes of 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza in Quebec, Canada. . Influenza Other Respir. Viruses. 5, 247–255 (2011).Article Google Scholar Bramley, A. M. et al. Intensive care unit patients with 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1pdm09) virus infection - United States, 2009. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 6, e134-142 (2012).Article Google Scholar Louie, J. K. et al. Factors associated with death or hospitalization due to pandemic 2009 influenza A(H1N1) infection in California. JAMA 302, 1896–1902 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Van Kerkhove, M. D. et al. Risk factors for severe outcomes following 2009 influenza A (H1N1) infection: a global pooled analysis. PLoS Med. 8, e1001053 (2011).Article Google Scholar Hu, Q., Gilley, R. P. & Dube, P. H. House dust mite exposure attenuates influenza A infection in a mouse model of pulmonary allergic inflammation. Microb. Pathog. 129, 242–249 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Heikkinen, T. & Jarvinen, A. The common cold. Lancet 361, 51–59 (2003).Article Google Scholar Shao, W., Li, X., Goraya, M. U., Wang, S. & Chen, J. L. Evolution of influenza a virus by mutation and re-assortment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18, 1650 (2017).Article Google Scholar Bogefors, J., Kvarnhammar, A. M. & Cardell, L. O. Upregulated levels of human β-defensins in patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis after allergen-specific immunotherapy treatment. Int. Forum Allergy Rhinol. 3, 99–103 (2013).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThe authors thank Professor Deyun Wang for his valuable advices and all the workers in pediatrics clinic.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsZibo Central Hospital, No. 54, Gongqingtuan West Road, Zibo, 255036, Shandong Province, People’s Republic of ChinaYuyun Li, Lili Zhi, Yunmei Zhu, Lan Qiao, Yan Zhu, Xin Hu & Qian WangPeople’s Hospital of Huantai County, No. 2198, Huantai Street, Zibo City, 256400, Shandong Province, ChinaDongming WangZibo Central Hospital, No. 54, Gongqingtuan West Road, Zibo, 255036, Shandong Province, People’s Republic of ChinaYuan CaoZhangdian District Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 184, Xincun West Road, Zibo, 255000, Shandong Province, ChinaYan GaoRespiratory Medicine Department, Zibo Central Hospital, No. 54, Gongqingtuan West Road, Zibo, 255036, Shandong Province, People’s Republic of ChinaYousheng ChenDepartment of ENT, Zibo Central Hospital, No. 54, Gongqingtuan West Road, Zibo, 255036, Shandong Province, People’s Republic of ChinaZeng ZhangInternal Cardiovascular Department, Zibo Central Hospital, No. 54, Gongqingtuan West Road, Zibo, 255036, Shandong Province, People’s Republic of ChinaFangjie BiPediatrics, Zibo Municipal Hospital, No. 139, Huangong Road, Zibo, 255400, Shandong Province, ChinaGuangxing YanShandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical University, Shandong Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Jinan, 250013, ChinaLili ZhiAuthorsYuyun LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDongming WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLili ZhiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYunmei ZhuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLan QiaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYan ZhuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXin HuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarQian WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYuan CaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYan GaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYousheng ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZeng ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFangjie BiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGuangxing YanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsY.Y.L. and L.L.Z. conceptualized the study. Y.Y.L. was responsible for data curation, formal analysis and wrote the original draft. L.L.Z. was responsible for data curation, formal analysis and revised the original draft critically. Y.M.Z., L.Q., Y.Z., Q.W. and X.H. were responsible for acquisition of data. Y.C. and Y.G. were responsible for data analysis. Y.S.C., Z.Z., D.M.W., F.J.B. and G.X.Y. was responsible for interpretation of data.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Lili Zhi.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleLi, Y., Wang, D., Zhi, L. et al. Respiratory tract infections in children with allergic asthma on allergen immunotherapy during influenza season. Sci Rep 11, 2083 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81558-0Download citationReceived: 07 May 2020Accepted: 17 December 2020Published: 22 January 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81558-0Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingBird flu outbreak: Natural and ayurvedic tips to keep avian influenza at bay | TheHealthSite.com ENG LatestNewsDiseasesType 1 DiabetesType 2 DiabetesCancerHeart AttackPneumoniaDiseases A-ZDiet & FitnessPregnancyConceivingInfertilityLabour & DeliveryPregnancy week-by-weekBreastfeedingBaby NamesWomen's HealthMen's HealthSexual HealthVideosMental HealthYogaPhotosWeb StoriesHome remediesAYUSHHerbsUnaniSiddhaHomeopathyNaturopathyParentingAyurveda LatestNewsDiseasesType 1 DiabetesType 2 DiabetesCancerHeart AttackPneumoniaDiseases A-ZDiet & FitnessPregnancyConceivingInfertilityLabour & DeliveryPregnancy week-by-weekBreastfeedingBaby NamesWomen's HealthMen's HealthSexual HealthVideosMental HealthYogaPhotosWeb StoriesHome remediesAYUSHHerbsUnaniSiddhaHomeopathyNaturopathyParentingAyurveda Select Language English इंग्लिश Hindi हिंदी Home Diseases Conditions Bird Flu Bird flu in India: Natural and Ayurvedic tips to keep yourself safe from avian influenza Bird flu is a highly infectious and severe respiratory disease in birds caused by the H5N1 influenza virus, which can occasionally infect humans as well. Read to know how to keep yourself safe. Bird flu outbreak: Natural and Ayurvedic tips to keep avian influenza at bay Written by Satata Karmakar |Updated : January 19, 2021 11:09 PM IST Amid the Covid-19 pandemic, India is apparently hit by another disease outbreak. In the last few days, avian influenza or bird flu cases have been detected in many parts of the country.Bird flu, also called avian influenza, has come as a double whammy for states that are already fighting their biggest battle against Covid-19. Again the sign and symptoms are related to the respiratory system only along with fever. Since there is not much clarity about its complications and other issues that patients can face, there is no one way to deal with this situation.What Exactly Is Bird Flu Or An Avian Flu?Bird flu is a highly infectious and severe respiratory disease in birds caused by the H5N1 influenza virus, which can occasionally infect humans as well. Also Read New Bird Flu Variant In India: H9N2 Avian Flu Outbreak Reported; Top 7 Signs You Are InfectedWHO Confirms World's First Human Death From H5N2 Bird Flu In Mexico: Experts Reveal 7 Unusual SymptomsWHO Confirms Presence of H5N1 Bird Flu in Raw Milk For The First Time In US, Urges People To Drink Pasteurized Milk More News Technically, H5N1 is a highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus. It's deadly to most birds. And it's deadly to humans and to other mammals that catch the virus from birds. Since the first human case in 1997, H5N1 has killed nearly 60% of the people who have been infected. Here's How Bird Flu Virus Enters Your BodyLike the coronavirus, the bird flu virus can also be fatal. These viruses can also kill humans like birds. In humans, the virus of the Bird Flu enters the eye, nose, and mouth. Therefore, your best effort should be not to be infected with this virus.Warning Signs And Symptoms Of Bird Flu You Should Look ForBird flu symptoms in humans can vary and range from "typical" flu symptoms (fever, sore throat, muscle pain) to eye infections and pneumonia. The disease caused by the H5N1 virus is a particularly severe form of pneumonia that leads to viral pneumonia and multiorgan failure in many people who become infected. You may like to read You may have an H5N1 infection if you experience typical flu-like symptoms such as cough, diarrhea, respiratory difficulties, fever (over 100.4 F or 38 C), headache, muscle aches, malaise, runny nose, and sore throat.What Does Ayurveda Suggests In Keeping Bird Flu Under Check?As per the available data and as a general rule of Ayurveda strength of diseases can be reduced by only good immunity. So, the best way to protect yourself from any kind of disease is to boost your immunity and follow a healthy lifestyle that can go beyond opting for good eating habits. Daily routine, waking up early morning, and sleeping on time is also part of a healthy lifestyle.With work-from-home in place, people nowadays tend to work overnight resulting in a disturbed sleep cycle. Such lifestyles affect our immunity and various 'doshas' of the body, says Dr. Pooja Kohli.Keep A Check On What You Are Eating To Keep Bird Flu At BaySo, first of all, we all need to follow a healthy lifestyle which includes a healthy meal on time, sound sleep, daily exercise, and meditation, offering food for our mind as well as the soul.To keep your immune system in shape and strengthen your body's fighting mechanism try to follow these simple yet impactful tips:#Give That Extra Herbs' TouchYou can add a few herbs like Ginger, garlic, turmeric to your daily diet to avoid bird flu kind of infections. These herbs give strength to the body for fighting back and also protect our body from getting infected. #Nasya To Keep Your Respiratory System In ShapeEvery morning putting two to four drops of Anu tail in each nostril will give strength to the respiratory system, this therapy is known as Nasya. This also helps in flushing out pollutants or foreign bodies from the nasal cavity and prevents them from crossing the nasal pathway. #Remove Toxins With Oil Pulling Therapy, Gargling, And Steam InhalationOne of the other important therapy is oil pulling therapy, it can be done by holding lukewarm oil in the mouth for a few seconds followed by gargling with lukewarm water with a pinch of salt and turmeric along with steam inhalation. Oil pulling therapy, gargling, and steam inhalation helps in removing toxins and boost the immunity of the person. #Start Your Morning With One Spoon Of ChyawanprashOne more important add on in daily life is Chyawanprash. Every morning during breakfast taking one spoon of Chyawanprash helps in boosting immunity and strengthens the respiratory system. #Golden MilkBefore sleeping, taking golden milk (Milk with sugar and pinch of turmeric) is one of the best remedies to get rid of symptoms like fever, cold and running nose, etc.Can You Eat Eggs Or Chicken?Yes, eggs can be eaten, however, these should be hard-boiled or well-cooked. According to the WHO, eating at a temperature of 60 to 70 degrees Celsius does not cause virus infection.Those who eat chicken should be careful as only well-cooked chicken should be eaten, eating half-cooked chicken can be dangerous. People who give food to pigeons should be careful too.Also, maintain the following: Keep wearing facemasks Make sure to keep your surroundings clean. Washing hands are of utmost importance. TRENDING NOW (With inputs from IANS) Avian influenza Bihar bird flu Bird Flu in India Bird flu symptoms Don’t Miss Out on the Latest Updates. Subscribe to Our Newsletter Today! Subscribe Now Subscribe Now Enroll for our free updates Thank You for Subscribing Thanks for Updating Your Information Latest Articles Safe Listening Practices: 4 Lifestyle Changes To Protect Your Ears In The Digital Age Understanding Your Anesthesia: What To Expect Before, During, And After Surgery 7 Health Benefits of Eating Soaked Almonds On Empty Stomach Daily AQI In Delhi: How Do Changes In Air Quality Affect The Human Health Balancing Individual Growth And Shared Goals: Strategies For A Harmonious Relationship Prince William Shares Update On Kate Middleton's Health Following Cancer Treatment View more Latest Articles in Hindi Erectile Dysfunction Treatment: अब भारत में भी होगा बिना दवाई और इंजेक्शन के इर्रेक्टाइल डिसफंक्शन का इलाज सुबह खाली पेट पानी में भिगोकर खा लें ये ड्राई फ्रूट, पेशाब के रास्ते निकल जाएगा जोड़ों में जमा यूरिक एसिड ब्लॉक नसों को खोलने मदद कर सकते हैं ये 4 योगासन, शरीर में बढ़ेगा खून का संचार ब्रेन स्ट्रोक आने से 7 दिन पहले दिखते हैं ये 9 लक्षण, दिखते ही भागें डॉक्टर के पास दिल्ली-एनसीआर में प्रदूषण की मार जारी, AQI पहुंचा 400 के पार, गुरुग्राम में कराई गई आर्टिफिशियल बारिश नेगेटिव थिंकिंग और ओवरथिंकिंग से परेशान हैं? लाइफ सेट हो जाएगी अगर अपना लेंगे ये 5 आदतें View more Popular Baby Names Hindu Baby Names Hindu Baby Names Starting With A Muslim Baby Names Hindu Baby Girl Names Hindu Baby Boy NamesView more By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookie Policy. Reject all Accept all cookiesRostec - Media - News - Rostec's Ultrix Quadri Influenza Vaccine Registered in Kazakhstan About Key Industries Media Careers Русский English Русский English About History Innovation Key Industries Aviation Transport Radioelectronics Medicine Environment Engine Manufacturing Weapons Optics New materials Manufacturing technologies Media News Event calendar Multimedia Careers Corporate culture Social policy Social responsibility Anti-Corruption Hotline Оpen Innovation Window Disclosure of Information in the Securities Market Sale of non-core assets Search Media News Event calendar Multimedia / News / 21.01.2021 10:00 Rostec's Ultrix Quadri Influenza Vaccine Registered in Kazakhstan Rostec's flu prevention drug protects against four topical virus strains The latest generation influenza vaccine Ultrix Quadri, developed by FORT (part of the Nacimbio holding company of the Rostec State Corporation), has been registered in the Republic of Kazakhstan for a period of five years. The company plans to start deliveries in 2021. The export volumes to the republic are forecast at up to three million doses of influenza vaccines per year. The Ultrix Quadri vaccine provides protection against four current influenza virus strains: two subtypes of both A virus and B virus. The vaccine contains 15 μg of antigens of each virus strain, total of 60 μg in each dose. This is the exact composition recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) for inactivated vaccines. The drug is produced at the FORT production facility using a full cycle technology in compliance with international GMP standards. The biopharmaceutical company FORT is the largest Russian manufacturer of influenza vaccines, producing more than 30 million doses of prophylactic medicine each year. In 2020, the company entered the international market, exporting over a million doses of vaccine. Over 90% of these consisted of the Ultrix Quadri tetravalent vaccine. “In 2019, Rostec launched the Ultrix Quadri vaccine on the market last year to carry out the federal strategy of transition to quadrivalent vaccines for prevention of influenza. Without exaggeration, I can call this vaccine an innovative world-class product that simultaneously protects against four strains of the virus. It is safe and effective. The vaccine is in demand on the international market and, based on the requests of 2020, we plan to significantly expand its export. At the same time, meeting the needs of the Russian market remains an unconditional priority for us. The last year we produced more than 10 million doses of the Ultrix Quadri vaccine and are planning to increase supplies to the domestic market” said Oleg Yevtushenko, Chief Operating Officer of Rostec. FORT is soon preparing to undergo prequalification by the World Health Organization, which will allow to expand the geography of the company's exports. Currently FORT vaccines are used for immunoprophylaxis of the population in the Republics of Belarus and Moldova, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. About History Innovation Key Industries Aviation Transport Radioelectronics Medicine Environment Engine Manufacturing Weapons Optics New materials Manufacturing technologies Media News Event calendar Multimedia Careers Corporate culture Social policy Social responsibility Anti-Corruption Hotline PHONE +7 (495) 287-25-25 E-MAIL info@rostec.ru Please note that any information sent to the Corporation's official email that is marked as restricted or classified will not be processed and will be deleted. Press contacts pressa@rostec.ru HEAD OFFICE ADDRESS 75A Volokolamskoye Highway, Moscow, 125424 MAILING ADDRESS 21 Gogolevskiy Boulevard, Moscow, 119991 Оpen Innovation Window Disclosure of Information in the Securities Market Sale of non-core assets English Русский English Copyright © 2024 Rostec. All Rights Reserved We use cookies to enhance your experience on our website. By continuing to use the site, you agree to our privacy policy. CONTINUEPhilippines declared free of H5N6 bird flu, but is monitoring another strain | The Poultry Site About us Contact us Advertise with us Events Our Sites The Poultry Site The Pig Site The Cattle Site The Dairy Site The Beef Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio Porcino Europe Europe Africa South America North America Asia Oceania Menu Home Genetics & breeding Egg layers Meat poultry Health & disease Processing Equipment & innovation Markets & policy Knowledge centre Europe Africa South America North America Asia Oceania About us Contact us Advertise with us Events Our Sites The Poultry Site The Pig Site The Cattle Site The Dairy Site The Beef Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio Porcino Europe Africa South America North America Asia Oceania How can we help you? esc All Articles Sponsors Events Markets and economics Market trends Markets & policy Philippines declared free of H5N6 bird flu, but is monitoring another strain The Philippines is now free of highly pathogenic H5N6 avian influenza, saying the last wild case of the disease has been resolved. 19 January 2021 3 minute read By: The Poultry Site Asia Reuters reports that the Philippines’ Department of Agriculture cited a declaration by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) regarding its H5N6 caseload. "As of 8 January, the country is now free of the last remaining A(H5N6) strain of the avian Influenza," having resolved the outbreaks in Pampanga province and a village in Rizal, near the capital region, it said in a statement. However, the Southeast Asian country, a major importer of chicken and other poultry products, was not dropping its guard against the disease, it said. © Gregg Yan The agriculture department had imposed a temporary ban on the importation of domestic and wild birds and their products from France, South Korea, the Netherlands, and Poland, where another highly pathogenic strain - H5N8 - has been detected. The Philippines is among the world's biggest meat importers and consumers, with chicken, pork and beef all a mainstay in the Filipino diet. In a report to the OIE, the Bureau of Animal Industry (BAI) - an agency under the agriculture department - said the affected farms in Pampanga and Rizal had shown no further evidence of the presence of the H5N6 virus. "We had not detected any case...among the poultry and other bird population in the last 90 days after the completion of cleaning and disinfection in the affected farms," BAI Director Ronnie Domingo said. Avian flu outbreaks are a recurring concern for the agriculture department and the local poultry industry, having recorded outbreak cases in 2017 and 2018. Read more about this story here. Our Partners Targan Lallemand Lanxess BioZyme Hy-Line International The Poultry Site More from this author More News View all Subway Canada adds Egg Quality Assurance certification mark to menu Markets & policy Policy and regulation Labelling and traceability 8 November 2024 2 minute read EU lawmakers in talks to further weaken deforestation law, document shows Markets & policy Policy and regulation 8 November 2024 2 minute read The law impacts key commodities, including soy and beef Ukraine hopes to boost pea, poultry and livestock feed exports Markets & policy Market trends Markets and economics 8 November 2024 1 minute read China seen as potential new customer Our Partners Targan Lallemand Lanxess BioZyme Hy-Line International Global Ag Media provides a knowledge sharing platform offering premium news, analysis and information resources for the global agriculture industry. Useful Links About us Contact our team Advertise with us Newsletter Terms & Conditions Cookie & Privacy Policy Events Subscribe to our newsletter Subscribe Sign up to our newsletter esc Email Address Country Country Brazil Canada India Indonesia Kenya Nigeria Philippines South Africa United Kingdom United States Afghanistan Åland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Congo, The Democratic Republic of The Cook Islands Costa Rica Cote D'ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czechia Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and Mcdonald Islands Holy See (Vatican City State) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Republic of Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia, Federated States of Moldova, Republic of Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory, Occupied Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Reunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Helena Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and The South Sandwich Islands Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan, Province of China Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States United States Minor Outlying Islands Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Viet Nam Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Postcode/Zip Code Company Industry Position Opt in to another list The Pig Site The Beef Site The Dairy Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio Porcino I would like to sign up to receive email updates from Global Ag Media Sign up to our regular newsletter and access news from across the Global AG Media network © 2000 - 2024 - Global Ag Media. All Rights Reserved | No part of this site may be reproduced without permission. Our Sites The Poultry Site The Pig Site The Cattle Site The Dairy Site The Beef Site The Meat Site The Crop Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio PorcinoCoronavirus vs flu and colds: how to tell the difference between symptoms of Covid-19 Jump to content UK News Website of the Year 2024 Poppy Search Icon News Sport Business Money Opinion Ukraine US election Travel Health Lifestyle Culture Puzzles Podcasts UK Edition US Edition Search Icon Subscribe now Log in Health Search Diet Weight loss Alcohol Supplements Gut health Nutrition Fitness Workouts Running Cycling Walking Strength Conditions Heart health Cancer Diabetes Ageing Dementia Bones & joints Cold & flu Skin Wellbeing Mental health Sleep Stress Menopause Sex Parenting Fertility Pregnancy Children Guides Diet guides Fitness guides Conditions guides Wellbeing guides Parenting guides Tools Sections UK Edition US Edition News News home UK news Politics World Health news Defence Science Education Environment Investigations Global Health Security Royals Sport Sport home Football Rugby Union Cricket F1 Golf Tennis Women's Sport Racing Cycling Boxing Betting More... Business Business home Economy Companies Markets Tech Money Money home Property Tax Pensions Banking Investing Net Zero Calculators Guides Opinion Opinion home Obituaries Letters to the Editor Telegraph View Our columnists Cartoons Ukraine Ukraine home Daily podcast Daily newsletter US election Travel Travel home Europe UK Worldwide City breaks Hotels Cruise Ski Advice Health Health home Diet Fitness Conditions Wellbeing Parenting Guides Tools Lifestyle Lifestyle home Recipes Food & Drink Fashion Beauty Luxury Cars Gardening Recommended Culture Culture home TV Film Music Books Theatre Comedy Dance Opera Classical Art Telegraph Tickets Puzzles Podcasts UK Edition US Edition Subscribe now Log in Login icon Follow us on: Facebook icon Instagram icon X icon Snapchat icon LinkedIn icon YouTube icon More from The Telegraph Download our app Newsletters Telegraph Extra Recommended Financial Solutions Events Dating Offers Travel offers Shop Garden shop Bookshop Tickets Puzzles Fantasy Football Work at The Telegraph Telegraph Corporate Help and support The Chelsea Magazine Company Broadband and Mobile Deals Voucher codes See top shops Samsung Nike ASOS eBay Currys Wayfair TUI JD Sports Travelodge Adidas Broadband deals Cheap broadband Broadband in my area Broadband and TV deals Mobile deals SIM-only deals Coronavirus vs flu and colds: how to tell the difference between symptoms of Covid-19 How to tell the difference between coronavirus, flu and colds Save Comment speech bubble icon Share icon Alice Hall 20 January 2021 9:26am GMT Related Topics UK coronavirus lockdown, Vitamins, Viruses, Flu, Department for Health & Social Care, Coronavirus 20 January 2021 9:26am GMT Save Comment speech bubble icon X Icon Facebook Icon WhatsApp Icon Flu season starts in December, and shares similar symptoms to coronavirus Credit: PeopleImages/E+ Alice Hall 20 January 2021 9:26am GMT With its debilitating symptoms of aches, shivers and a pounding headache, a nasty bout of flu can leave even the toughest of us bedridden for several days. But while that used to be the only infectious virus to dread each year, now we have coronavirus to contend with, too. And by the looks of things, both viruses could make an unwelcome appearance this winter. In August, it was revealed that “on the spot” swab DNA tests that can distinguish between Covid-19 and other seasonal illnesses - such as the flu - will be rolled out in care homes, schools and laboratories from next week. The health secretary Matt Hancock has said this move will be “hugely beneficial” over the winter months. Experts are in agreement that chilly temperatures raise the risk of respiratory infections, heart attacks, strokes, and now, Covid-19. A study undertaken in July by researchers at Kings College London found that the virus is more severe in colder months than warmer ones, and that dry indoor air may encourage its spread. With both illnesses sharing many of the same symptoms, but differing in severity, how can we spot the difference between the two? When is flu season? According to Bupa UK, people usually get seasonal flu between December and March, when the temperature begins to significantly drop. However, outbreaks can happen as early as October and late May. The annual outbreak of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) generally occurs even earlier than the flu, in October or November. This causes mild colds in people of all ages, but sometimes severe lung infections in the youngest and oldest among us. What are the similarities between flu and Covid-19? Both the flu and Covid-19 are contagious respiratory illnesses, and experts warn that their symptoms can be virtually indistinguishable. While the main symptoms of coronavirus are a continuous cough and a high temperature, in recent months this has been widened to include a loss of taste and smell, a sore throat and chills, to name a few. Alongside this, a growing number of people have reported unusual symptoms, from post-viral fatigue to stomach pains. Even the loss of taste and smell isn’t unique to Covid. "There’s a spectrum of different symptoms you can get with respiratory viruses. You really really cant tell which virus it is unless you get a PCR test,” says Professor Peter Openshaw, a Professor of Experimental Medicine at Imperial College London. "Both flu and Covid-19 cause malaise, fatigue, fever and shivering." What’s even more confusing is that both illnesses can present as asymptomatic, meaning you could be spreading the virus without even knowing. A 2014 study carried out by Flu Watch found that 77 per cent of flu infections have no symptoms. Meanwhile, a study published in the Nature journal found that over 40 per cent of coronavirus cases are asymptomatic. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), a fever, cough, shortness of breath, fatigue, sore throat, runny nose, muscle pain and body aches and a headache can all be symptoms of coronavirus and the flu. Some people report vomiting and diarrhea, but this is thought to be more common in children than adults. The two could be similar in terms of transmission, too. According to the CDC, both Covid-19 and flu are spread through aerosol droplets that are made when people cough, sneeze or talk. These droplets can land in the mouth or noses of people nearby, and possibly be inhaled into the lungs. However, Prof Openshaw warns that we can’t “assume that what we know about transmission of influenza automatically applies to Covid. “Influenza tends to be more of a lung infection. It also replicates in the nose, but isn’t found so much in saliva and in spittle, so that may be a difference” he says. “Coronavirus also causes blood clotting effects, which are not seen in the flu.” The only way to know for certain whether you have coronavirus is by receiving a diagnostic test. In depth: Coronavirus symptoms and how to spot the signs Coronavirus symptoms and compared to other common conditions How can you tell the difference between Covid-19 and the flu? Without a test, it’s tricky, but there are things that you can note. The flu is caused by infection with influenza viruses, while Covid-19 is caused by a new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2. While both illnesses can cause a cough, the severity of yours might be a giveaway. “The cough some people describe with Covid can be particularly severe, almost as bad as the one people could get with Whooping Cough,” says Prof Openshaw. “With influenza, the cough tends to be relatively short lived.” Indeed, another key difference to note is the severity of the two illnesses. While it’s unusual for flu to have long-lasting symptoms, many people experience a slow recovery from Covid; even mild cases have left some people feeling exhausted for weeks on end. The data around how many people will develop post-viral fatigue is uncertain, but its prevalence led the symptom to be included as a marker in the new Covidence UK study, which is looking into risk factors and long-term complications for Covid-19. Doctors and scientists are working to estimate the mortality rate of coronavirus, but at present, it is thought to be substantially higher than that of the flu. According to Prof Openshaw, another giveaway could be whether flu is “circulating in your community.” “We know that the likelihood of an illness being influenza depends on whether it is spreading. It’s much more likely to be flu if there is flu around,” he said. Symptoms aside, Covi-19 and flu are different in the rate in which they can infect people. While a person can develop flu symptoms anywhere from 1 - 4 days after infection, a person infected with coronavirus typically develops symptoms five days after infection. However, they can appear as early as 2 days or as late as 14 days after the initial infection. Read more: How to prevent catching the flu Telegraph 365 newsletter REFERRAL (article) What should you do if you have symptoms of a cold? While you might normally battle through a day at work with a cold, experts are in agreement that you should stay at home if you experience any symptoms, such as coughing, sneezing, a high temperature or a runny nose. Dr Michael-Fitzpatrick, the Telegraph’s GP columnist, previously told this paper that he would advise anyone with a "productive cough" or cold to stay at home. "The virus is transmitted by coughing and sneezing, droplet transmission. Anything that is likely to increase that risk of transmission, such as getting on public transport, should be avoided until the symptoms settle." He says usually that would only be a period of two to three days for a regular cold or a viral infection. However, if you have coronavirus you must isolate for at least ten days - which is why it's important to get tested as soon as you can. According to the NHS website, you'll usually need to self-isolate for 14 days if: someone you live with has symptoms or tested positivesomeone in your support bubble has symptoms or tested positiveyou've been told to self-isolate by NHS Test and Trace How are they treated? "Feed a cold, starve a fever," the saying goes. And although unpleasant, it is generally agreed that cases of the flu can usually be treated with bed rest and plenty of fluids. However, if you have a severe infection, or you're categorised as high risk - in the case of flu, this includes elderly people, pregnant women and those who have asthma - doctors may prescribe an antiviral medication, such as Oseltamivir. There are no drugs in primary care that clear a coronavirus infection. Experts recommend treating the fever with ibuprofen or paracetamol and plenty of fluids. A spoonful of honey can help to ease the pesky cough. In an exciting development, scientists working on a vaccine for Covid-19 have made a major breakthrough. 30 million doses of coronavirus vaccine could be heading to the UK before Christmas after US multinational Pfizer and German biotech firm BioNTech revealed on November 9 that their coronavirus vaccine was more than 90 per cent effective in preventing Covid-19 among those without evidence of prior infection. In August, scientists at Oxford University revealed that initial trials on 1,077 British adults found that their vaccine induced strong antibody and T-cell responses - a breakthrough in their research. How else can we stay healthy? Vitamin D supplements: Normally, the skin produces Vitamin D after spending time in the sunlight; however, those at most risk have spent a significant amount of time inside while shielding from Covid-19. On November 28, health officials shared that over 2.5 million vulnerable people across England will be given free Vitamin D supplements to assist them through the winter months. Those in care homes and those who are categorised as clinically extremely vulnerable will be offered the vitamin, which is renewed for its bone and muscle health benefits. Officials suggest that everybody should consume ten micrograms of Vitamin D over the winter period; however, there is no evidence that vitamin D will protect against catching, or treating the virus. Should we be worried about flu season combined with the second wave? The short answer is yes, although preparations are in place. A report published in July in the Academy of Medical Sciences warned that a resurgence of coronavirus could happen at the same time as a flu epidemic. Combined with the backlog of cases that the NHS are already battling, this could have a disruptive impact on the health service. The UK recently reported its highest number of cases throughout the entire pandemic, with 39,237 positive cases being recorded on December 24. 744 deaths from coronavirus were also reported on the same day; the highest figure since April 29. As part of “the biggest flu vaccination programme in history”, the Government has pledged to extend the eligibility to half the population, with 30 million people to be offered it this year. The plan has been widened to include everybody aged 50 to 64, a group thought to be more at risk of Covid-19 than younger adults; anyone shielding from Covid-19 and the people they live with; plus children aged 11 to 12 in their first year of secondary school. There are some stumbling blocks. Now, patients have been told that it's likely they will have to wait until December at the earliest for the jab - despite the fact the flu season may well start earlier, and amid fears of the second wave of Covid. However, there is a silver lining. In the case of a winter lockdown, Prof Openshaw suggests that it may be harder for the flu virus to circulate, as fewer people will be coming into contact with each other. Join the conversation Show comments The Telegraph values your comments but kindly requests all posts are on topic, constructive and respectful. Please review our commenting policy. X Icon Facebook Icon WhatsApp Icon The Telegraph values your comments but kindly requests all posts are on topic, constructive and respectful. Please review our commenting policy. Related Topics UK coronavirus lockdown, Vitamins, Viruses, Flu, Department for Health & Social Care, Coronavirus License this content You need to be a subscriber to join the conversation. Find out more here. Log In Subscribe Advertisement More stories More from telegraph health Why coffee is good for your muscles too Save New Covid variant XEC: What are the symptoms and is it in the UK? Covid Save I took a pill to help fix my drinking problem Alcohol Save ‘I was fat, old and widowed – then I found love and lost a stone’ Weight-loss Save Why you’re more at risk of cancer in your 40s and 50s – and how to protect yourself Cancer Save The six worst foods for gut health Gut health Save Prediabetes diet: What to eat if you’re at risk Save More from The Telegraph Voucher Codes The latest offers and discount codes from popular brands on Telegraph Voucher Codes Wiggle promo code Ninja discount code Simba discount code Blacks discount code LookFantastic discount code Eve Sleep discount codes The Telegraph Poppy Back to top Follow us on: Facebook icon Instagram icon X icon Snapchat icon LinkedIn icon YouTube icon Download the Telegraph App Help Centre About us Telegraph Extra Reader Prints Branded Content Syndication and Commissioning Fantasy Sport UK Voucher Codes Betting Offers Tax Strategy Broadband and Mobile Deals Newsletters Privacy Terms & Conditions Modern Slavery Advertising terms Guidelines The Chelsea Magazine Company © Telegraph Media Group Holdings Limited 2024Ministry of Health Urges Residents To Stay Calm and Safe as Influenza Season Picks Up | WINNFM 98.9 Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube HomeNewsLocal NewsRegional NewsInternational NewsPress ReleaseSportsFootballCricketAthleticsOtherEntertainmentWeatherDigitalNewscastProgramsNoticesAboutLISTEN LIVE Search 24.1 CBasseterre Monday, November 11, 2024 FacebookInstagramTwitterYoutube HomeNews AllLocal NewsRegional NewsInternational NewsPress Release Local NewsSIDS at COP29: Advocating for Climate Finance and Resilience November 9, 2024 Regional NewsParty politics aside: Landmark appointment of Montserrat MP Crenston Buffonge to Parliamentary Secretary November 9, 2024 Local NewsOECS Member states advancing 30×30 Vision for the Ocean at COP16 November 9, 2024 Regional NewsLondon’s Metropolitan Police to assist in investigation of MP Asot Michael’s murder; Antiguan Government accords official funeral November 9, 2024 Sports AllFootballCricketAthleticsOther SportsCWI Cricket West Indies Announces Suspension of Alzarri Joseph for Two Matches November 8, 2024 SportsVillage Superstars win trilogy of SKNFA Youth League titles November 8, 2024 SportsRangpur Riders confirm squad for 2024 Global Super League November 6, 2024 SportsDodgers to celebrate World Series victory with parade and stadium celebration November 1, 2024 Entertainment EntertainmentQuincy Jones, music titan who worked with everyone from Frank Sinatra to Michael Jackson, dies at 91 November 4, 2024 Local NewsSKN teen beauties sashed; Republic Bank earmarks $5,000 for winning school November 1, 2024 EntertainmentSean ‘Diddy’ Combs accused in new lawsuits of sexually assaulting 10- and 17-year-old boys October 29, 2024 EntertainmentRock & Roll Hall of Fame turns up starpower to induct Cher, Foreigner, Mary J. Blige, Ozzy and more October 21, 2024 EntertainmentLiam Payne, former One Direction member, dies at 31 in Argentina hotel fall October 16, 2024 WeatherDigitalNewscastProgramsNoticesAboutLISTEN LIVE Search HomeNewsPress ReleaseMinistry of Health Urges Residents To Stay Calm and Safe as Influenza... Press Release Ministry of Health Urges Residents To Stay Calm and Safe as Influenza Season Picks Up January 22, 2021 0 539 WhatsAppFacebookTwitterLinkedinEmailPrint Basseterre, St. Kitts (SKNIS): Health authorities in St. Kitts and Nevis are noting a gradual increase in the number of persons exhibiting flu-like symptoms. However, Chief Medical Officer Dr. Hazel Laws said that this is common as the country is in the midst of the influenza season that typically runs from October to April.“We want to reassure the public there is no need to get fearful or be alarmed that they have COVID. Remember that we are in the middle of the influenza season and so my recommendation to you is if you are experiencing the symptoms of the flu, make contact with your regular physician,” CMO Laws advised during the National Emergency Operations Centre COVID-19 Briefing on Wednesday (January 20, 2021).Some of the symptoms being reported include sore throat, runny nose, redness of the eye, malaise, and fatigue. Experts note that persons with flu are considered to be most contagious in the first three to four days after the illness starts. As such, Dr. Laws urged persons to contact their physician.“I am not sending you to your doctor’s office,” she stated. “Please call, send a WhatsApp message to your primary care physician, explain your symptoms and he or she will make the appropriate recommendations in terms of your management.”To avoid getting the flu persons were encouraged to continue practicing the measures that have proven effective against the novel coronavirus.“If you wear your facemasks in public places, if you are impacted by the flu, you won’t pass it, and if you wear your facemask that would protect you too from picking up the general regular influenza that we usually experience at this time of year,” Dr. Laws said. WhatsAppFacebookTwitterLinkedinEmailPrint Previous articleElderly Saddler’s Man Badly Beaten, Circumstances UnclearNext articleCMO Laws Calls on Residents to Help Keep St Kitts and Nevis Dengue Free RELATED ARTICLES Press ReleaseHistoric Milestone in Healthcare as Federation’s First Corneal Transplant Performed at Nevis’ Alexandra Hospital November 8, 2024 Press ReleaseNevis Unveils Upgraded Bath Hot Springs- A Modernized Wellness Oasis for Locals and Visitors November 8, 2024 Press ReleaseNATTA SCHOLARSHIP FUND MARKS OVER A DECADE OF SUPPORTING LOCAL STUDENTS WITH ANNUAL SCHOOL SUPPLIES DONATION November 7, 2024 Most PopularSIDS at COP29: Advocating for Climate Finance and Resilience November 9, 2024 Party politics aside: Landmark appointment of Montserrat MP Crenston Buffonge to Parliamentary Secretary November 9, 2024 OECS Member states advancing 30×30 Vision for the Ocean at COP16 November 9, 2024 London’s Metropolitan Police to assist in investigation of MP Asot Michael’s murder; Antiguan Government accords official funeral November 9, 2024 Regional Renewable Energy Push: Weighing the Pros and Cons November 9, 2024 What is the Likelihood of Achieving the 25 by 2025 Goals? November 8, 2024 Nevis Premier Optimistic About Economic Growth Ahead of New Budget November 8, 2024 Concerns about violence among Caribbean youth continue to linger despite efforts to curb the issue November 8, 2024 Argentine prosecutors charge 3 people linked to the death of former One Direction star Liam Payne November 8, 2024 Defiant Giuliani says he’s a victim of ‘political persecution’ as he’s told again to give up assets November 8, 2024 Load more Advertisement This message is only visible to admins. Problem displaying Facebook posts. Backup cache in use. Click to show error Error: Error validating access token: The session has been invalidated because the user changed their password or Facebook has changed the session for security reasons. Type: OAuthException Twitter feed is not available at the moment. 🔥 Get in a mellow mood on Tuesday’s Lovers Ro Winn Media has a such a diverse catalog of Digital St. Kitts and Nevis (WINN): Head of the Traffic De The St. Kitts & Nevis Customs and Excise Departmen The St.Kitts & Nevis Fire & Rescue Services is enc Wipe away the Monday blues with Mainstream Monday Prime Minister Hon. Dr. Terrance Drew joins host D Catch an all new episode of our riveting “Voices More details coming soon‼️ Click the link in Load More... Follow on Instagram OPEN IN NEW WINDOW Unit C24, The Sands Complex Newtown Bay Road, Basseterre, St. Kitts, W.I ABOUT US Email: info@winnmediaskn.com or sales@winnmediaskn.com Local Call In Numbers: 466- 0989 l 662-0989 l 762-0989 UK Call In Number: 033-344-0065: U.S.A. Call In Number: 718-285-6984 Canada Call In Number: 305-921-4619 Office Number: 869-466-9586: FOLLOW US FacebookInstagramTwitterYoutube © WinnFM 98.9 by NavinDesigns.com DisclaimerPrivacyAdvertisementContact us Contact a ProgramIf you are interested in a program or advertising, send us a message.Send MessageSelect ProgramCOMMUNITY DIARYDAILY WINN FM NEWSFRIDAY NIGHT LIME WITH DJ RABUKAHEADLINE NEWSMUSICAL SURGE WITH DEEJAY FLAMESINSIDE THE NEWSISLAND TEALATING TWIST WITH DJ DON JERRYLET'S TALKONLY GOOD NEWS WITH ENOETE INANGATHE BENCH MEETING WITH KENNETH BOBTRAFFIC TALKVOICESWINN FM SPORTS NEWSWINN WEATHER Signup for our NewsletterWe'll only be in touch when we've something exciting to share.We never share your detailsNo thanksSubscribeRostec - Media - Press releases - Rostec's Ultrix Quadri Influenza Vaccine Registered in Kazakhstan About Key Industries Media Careers Русский English Русский English About History Innovation Key Industries Aviation Transport Radioelectronics Medicine Environment Engine Manufacturing Weapons Optics New materials Manufacturing technologies Media News Event calendar Multimedia Careers Corporate culture Social policy Social responsibility Anti-Corruption Hotline Оpen Innovation Window Disclosure of Information in the Securities Market Sale of non-core assets Search Media News Event calendar Multimedia / Press releases / 21.01.2021 02:46 Rostec's Ultrix Quadri Influenza Vaccine Registered in Kazakhstan Download PDF, 113.7 Kb January 21, 2021 The latest generation influenza vaccine Ultrix Quadri, developed by FORT (part of the Nacimbio holding company of the Rostec State Corporation), has been registered in the Republic of Kazakhstan for a period of five years. The company plans to start deliveries in 2021. The export volumes to the republic are forecast at up to three million doses of influenza vaccines per year. The Ultrix Quadri vaccine provides protection against four current influenza virus strains: two subtypes of both A virus and B virus. The vaccine contains 15 μg of antigens of each virus strain, total of 60 μg in each dose. This is the exact composition recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) for inactivated vaccines. The drug is produced at the FORT production facility using a full cycle technology in compliance with international GMP standards. The biopharmaceutical company FORT is the largest Russian manufacturer of influenza vaccines, producing more than 30 million doses of prophylactic medicine each year. In 2020, the company entered the international market, exporting over a million doses of vaccine. Over 90% of these consisted of the Ultrix Quadri tetravalent vaccine. “In 2019, Rostec launched the Ultrix Quadri vaccine on the market last year to carry out the federal strategy of transition to quadrivalent vaccines for prevention of influenza. Without exaggeration, I can call this vaccine an innovative world-class product that simultaneously protects against four strains of the virus. It is safe and effective. The vaccine is in demand on the international market and, based on the requests of 2020, we plan to significantly expand its export. At the same time, meeting the needs of the Russian market remains an unconditional priority for us. The last year we produced more than 10 million doses of the Ultrix Quadri vaccine and are planning to increase supplies to the domestic market” said Oleg Yevtushenko, Chief Operating Officer of Rostec. FORT is soon preparing to undergo prequalification by the World Health Organization, which will allow to expand the geography of the company's exports. Currently FORT vaccines are used for immunoprophylaxis of the population in the Republics of Belarus and Moldova, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. The National Immunobiological Company (Nacimbio) was established to create a holding company (integrated structure) of Rostec in the sphere of development and production of immunobiological products. The holding company aims to ensure Russia's independence from imports in healthcare and provision of various medicines. To realize these objectives, the holding company acts as executive body for three companies: NPO Microgen, LLC FORT and JSC Sintez. Rosteс State Corporation is one of the largest industrial companies in Russia. It unites more than 800 scientific and industrial organizations in 60 regions of the country. Its key areas of activity are aircraft engineering, radioelectronics, medical technologies, innovative materials, etc. The corporation’s portfolio includes such well-known brands as AvtoVAZ, KAMAZ, UAC, Russian Helicopters, UEC, Uralvagonzavod, Shvabe, Kalashnikov, etc. Rostec is active in the implementation of all 12 national projects. The company is a key provider of Smart City technology, it is engaged in the digitalization of public administration, industry and social sectors, and it is developing plans for the development of 5G wireless technologies, an Industrial Internet of Things, big data and blockchain systems. Rostec partners with leading world manufacturers such as Boeing, Airbus, Daimler, Pirelli and Renault. The corporation’s products are delivered to more than 100 countries worldwide. Almost a third of the company's revenue comes from the export of high-tech products. About History Innovation Key Industries Aviation Transport Radioelectronics Medicine Environment Engine Manufacturing Weapons Optics New materials Manufacturing technologies Media News Event calendar Multimedia Careers Corporate culture Social policy Social responsibility Anti-Corruption Hotline PHONE +7 (495) 287-25-25 E-MAIL info@rostec.ru Please note that any information sent to the Corporation's official email that is marked as restricted or classified will not be processed and will be deleted. Press contacts pressa@rostec.ru HEAD OFFICE ADDRESS 75A Volokolamskoye Highway, Moscow, 125424 MAILING ADDRESS 21 Gogolevskiy Boulevard, Moscow, 119991 Оpen Innovation Window Disclosure of Information in the Securities Market Sale of non-core assets English Русский English Copyright © 2024 Rostec. All Rights Reserved We use cookies to enhance your experience on our website. By continuing to use the site, you agree to our privacy policy. CONTINUE﻿ Does microwaving chicken kill bird flu virus? Here’s how to safely handle and cook poultry | Health Tips and News मराठी हिंदी Times Now Follow us on : INDIABUSINESSPersonal FinanceMarketsEconomyCompaniesReal EstateLeaders of TomorrowIndustry VIRAL NEWS HEALTH EDUCATIONSPORTSCricketFootballTennisOthersBadmintonWWEEsportsVIDEOSTimes NowElectionsIndiaIndia UpfrontNewshourSpecialsShowsWorldET NowCompaniesExclusiveFinancial ReportsMarketsNewsShowsMirror NowCrimeInterviewsPoliticsShowsSocietyUrban DebateSpecialsTimes DriveCar ReviewsBike ReviewsCar NewsBike NewsBike ComparisonsCar ComparisonsTN+SinglesShorts WORLD LATEST NEWS LIVE TV MORE+ VIDEOS ET Now Companies Financial Reports Markets News Shows Mirror Now Crime Politics Shows Society Urban Debate Specials Times Drive Car Reviews Bike Reviews Bike Comparisons Car Comparisons Times Now India India Upfront Newshour Shows World TN+ Singles WORLD Times Channel Packs BUSINESS Economy Markets Companies Industry Personal Finance Real Estate MIRROR NOW Crime In Focus SPORTS Cricket Football Tennis Badminton ENTERTAINMENT NEWS TECH & GADGETS Viral SPIRITUALITY Auto Cars Car News Car Reviews Bikes Bike News Bike Reviews Features Videos HEALTH EDUCATION PHOTOS ASTROLOGY LATEST NEWS LIVE TV Visual stories Cities Delhi Mumbai Hyderabad Ahmedabad Pune Kolkata Bengaluru Chennai INDIA News> Health News Does microwaving chicken kill bird flu virus? Here’s how to safely handle and cook poultry Health Salome Phelamei Updated Jan 21, 2021 | 11:12 IST So many of us are right now concerned about avian influenza and whether it's really safe to eat chicken and eggs amid bird flu outbreak. Does microwaving chicken kill bird flu virus? Here’s how to safely handle and cook poultry | &nbspPhoto Credit:&nbspiStock Images Key Highlights Bird flu illness in humans can range from mild to severe Bird flu, or avian influenza, is caused by a type of influenza virus that rarely infects humans Expert give advice for making chicken and eggs safe to eat in wake of bird flu outbreak across various states in India New Delhi: The outbreak of bird flu, or avian influenza, in several states has not only increased fears among the public, but also created confusion about eating poultry. While experts and health agencies, including the World Health Organization (WHO), said that individuals cannot get the bird flu from consuming properly cooked chickens and eggs, you may still have a lot of questions - whether it’s really safe to eat poultry, what’s the safest method to cook, if the virus can be eliminated by microwaving, what precautions should you take while buying or handling raw meat, etc. Bird flu infections in humans are rare but possible. In most reported cases, the infection in people occurred through unprotected contact with infected birds or contaminated surfaces. But experts worry the virus could mutate into a form that transmits more easily from person to person and may lead to a global outbreak. Perhaps, so many of us are right now concerned about bird flu and will poultry be safe to eat. So, we spoke with Dr SN Aravinda, consultant, internal medicine, Aster RV Hospital, Bangalore, to help clear all your doubts regarding the matter, from handling poultry properly to cooking it to the right temperature. Read on. How safe is it to eat chicken and eggs during a bird flu outbreak? Dr SN Aravinda: It is safe to eat as long as the meat is cooked properly and provided by a poultry supplier, which is being managed and handled hygienically. The virus cannot survive at the normal cooking temperature, so properly cooked meat does not have any risks. In case people are concerned about their meat sources or would prefer to be on the safer side, they can avoid eating chicken until the bird flu virus subsides and opt for other sources of protein are soya bean, tofu, chickpeas, etc. Do microwaves kill viruses and bacteria such as the bird flu virus? Dr SN Aravinda: Microwave will not be able to kill all viruses and bacteria, it depends on the temperature at which the bacteria or virus can survive and for how long. For the bird flu virus, microwave can kill it, as it typically heats up to 100°C and the bird flu virus cannot survive beyond 70°C. However, microwaves are mostly used for re-heating food rather than cooking. In the normal cooking stage on the stove-top or in the oven, the bird flu virus would be eliminated. What is the safest way to handle and cook poultry during bird flu? Dr SN Aravinda: Ensure that the poultry is coming from a trusted and hygienic source. Wash meat and eggs thoroughly before handling and cook well. Check the meat properly to ensure it is cooked properly, it should not be transparent, should look white and should be fibrous. Also, avoid eating raw eggs. What are some precautionary measures that people can take to prevent contracting bird flu virus? Dr SN Aravinda: This virus usually travels from bird to bird and it is rare for it to travel to humans. Only certain strains of the virus can get transmitted to humans, and so far, these have not been identified here. People who come into contact with birds - like the poultry farmers - must maintain hygiene. The farm should be disinfected properly, diseased birds must be identified and handled properly. RELATED NEWS Afraid of eating chicken due to bird flu? Try these five vegetarian foods high in protein for a balanced diet Is bird flu fatal? Know the various ways avian influenza can be transmitted to humans Bird flu can spread to humans: Know the symptoms, prevention of the viral infection Disclaimer: Tips and suggestions mentioned in the article are for general information purposes only and should not be construed as professional medical advice. Always consult your doctor or a professional healthcare provider if you have any specific questions about any medical matter. Get the Latest health news, healthy diet, weight loss, Yoga, and fitness tips, more updates on Times Now Latest health News Doctors baffled as man watching TV feels strange neck pain, left paralysed for life It's time for voodles! Bid goodbye to wheat-based noodles with these vegetable based spaghetti, pasta types High-fiber diet reduces risk of dementia: Study Study: Check your medicine box; an ingredient in paracetamol can cause heart attack Unintentional burnout - These habits could be draining you mentally NEXT STORY Now Available On News Home India Business Viral News Health Education Sports Videos World Latest News Auto Cryptonow Company About Us Contact Us Advertise with us Syndication Editorial Guidelines Reference Interconnect Offers Terms of Use Privacy Policy Disclaimer Complaint Redressal Watch Live TV Times NOW ET NOW Mirror NOW © Bennett Coleman & Company LimitedBird Flu's Origin Story — Where It Came From, and Where It Is Now×orSign in with lockrMailSmall ChangesHomeParentingFoodSustainable LivingZero-WasteHealth & WellnessStylePetsAll Small ChangesBig ImpactNewsPolitics & PolicyCommunityRenewablesTechnologyWeather & Global WarmingAll Big ImpactClimate ActionEnvironmental LeadersEnvironmental JusticeGreen InfluencersAll Climate ActionGo Green My Green RoutineGreenovationGreen City GuidesAll Go Green Green Matters ApprovedLink to FacebookLink to InstagramLink to XLink to Email SubscribeSign IntoggleSmall ChangesHomeParentingFoodSustainable LivingZero-WasteHealth & WellnessStylePetsAll Small ChangesBig ImpactNewsPolitics & PolicyCommunityRenewablesTechnologyWeather & Global WarmingAll Big ImpactClimate ActionEnvironmental LeadersEnvironmental JusticeGreen InfluencersAll Climate ActionGo Green My Green RoutineGreenovationGreen City GuidesAll Go Green Green Matters ApprovedLink to FacebookLink to InstagramLink to XLink to Email SubscribeSign InSign InHome > Big Impact > Community > Sustainable AgricultureEverything You Need to Know About the Recent Bird Flu OutbreaksBy Lizzy RosenbergUpdated Jan. 20 2021, 1:05 p.m. ETSource: GettyWhile COVID-19 vaccine distributions finally seem to be underway, another disease is unfortunately on the rise in Europe. A massive bird flu outbreak has forced a foie gras farm in France to kill hundreds of thousands of ducks, only a few months after a turkey farm in the U.K. was affected by the same strain, which also forced a mass culling.Article continues below advertisementWhat is the bird flu's origin story? Stay tuned for everything you need to know regarding the latest outbreaks of what's known as the avian influenza, where the disease seemingly originated, and if it poses any risks to humans.Source: GettyArticle continues below advertisementRecent bird flu outbreaks may reflect a bigger issue.As previously mentioned, about 400,000 ducks being raised for foie gras in France are going to be culled after a bird flu strain was detected on the farm, according to Plant Based News. There have been over 100 outbreaks of the H5N8 bird flu virus in France since Christmas Eve 2020, and since then, over 350,000 ducks have been slaughtered, to avoid further spreading the highly contagious disease.However, a bird flu resurgence doesn't seem to solely be taking place in France — in November 2020, strains of the H5N2 bird flu were detected at various U.K. farms, which resulted in the culling of hundreds of birds. There were also several outbreaks across Germany and the Netherlands, and each strain was proven to be extremely fatal, and are subject to spread even more through migratory birds such as geese and ducks.Article continues below advertisementSource: GettyWhere did the bird flu originate? The bird flu's origin story began in China back in 1996, when the disease was initially detected among geese, according to the CDC, and it was proven to be incredibly contagious and fatal. It seemed to affect migrant, aquatic birds more than others, but it appeared to be affecting livestock as well. A year later in Hong Kong, the first human case of avian influenza was confirmed, and ever since, the disease has affected livestock and people alike in more than 50 countries across the globe.Article continues below advertisementFor a few years, the bird flu appeared to be relatively dormant, but unfortunately, it reemerged in 2003, affecting birds, as well as a few humans, in Asia, Africa, and Europe. However, in 2014, the first human case of the disease was detected in North America, when a man contracted the bird flu in Canada. Source: GettyArticle continues below advertisementCan humans get the bird flu?As previously mentioned, there have been very few human cases of the bird flu — over 800 in various countries around the world, although it's rare. The bird flu predominantly spreads from birds to humans when humans come into direct contact with an affected live or recently slaughtered bird. According to The Wire, it predominantly affects farmers, butchers, and veterinarians that may come into contact with infected animals' respiratory secretions, poop, blood, or organs.Bird flu outbreaks in the past have greatly affected the poultry industry, with many people temporarily stopping consuming chicken and eggs. However, it’s been deemed relatively safe to consume eggs and poultry during bird flu outbreaks by the WHO, so long as you practice good hygiene and thorough cooking.Article continues below advertisementSource: GettyAlthough the low number of bird flu cases among humans is relatively reassuring, experts hope what happened to the COVID-19 pandemic doesn't repeat itself. Animal viruses are constantly evolving, and if the human-animal relationship doesn't change within the foreseeable future, it could ultimately result in yet another pandemic.AdvertisementMore from Green MattersThe Bird Flu Resurgence in the U.K. Could Potentially Lead to Another Pandemic Opinion: To Prevent Future Pandemics, We Need to End Animal Agriculture Subsidies Conservation Groups and Health Experts Ask WHO to Permanently Close Live Animal MarketsLatest Sustainable Agriculture News and UpdatesAdvertisementAdvertisementAdvertisementAdvertisementAdvertisementAdvertisementAdvertisementABOUT Green MattersAbout UsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseDMCASitemapCONNECT with Green MattersLink to FacebookLink to XLink to InstagramContact us by EmailOpt-out of personalized ads© Copyright 2024 Engrost, Inc. Green Matters is a registered trademark. All Rights Reserved. People may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.Bird flu in India update: Avian Influenza confirmed at Red Fort, Delhi; big worry for 9 states - Life News | The Financial Express English English தமிழ் தமிழ் বাংলা বাংলা മലയാളം മലയാളം ગુજરાતી ગુજરાતી हिंदी हिंदी मराठी मराठी Business Business बिज़नेस बिज़नेस Insurance Insurance The Financial Express Facebook Twitter Linkedin FELifestyleMy LeisureLifestyle GalleryLifestyle VideoLifestyle Web Stories Latest NewsSwiggy IPO 2024 LiveNiva Bupa Health Insurance IPOShortsNifty 50-Sensex PerformanceSensex PerformanceGold Rates TodayNewslettersUpcoming IPO’sMutual FundsIndia Vs South Africa Live Cricket Score HomeAssembly ElectionsBudget 2024Market Stock Market Quotes Mutual Fund IPO Stock Stats Top Gainers Top Losers Indices Nifty 50 Sensex CaFE Invest IPO NEWS Investing AbroadCommodities Gold Rate in India Silver Rate in India Petrol Rate in India Diesel Rate in IndiaEconomyTechnologyAutoSMEExpress MobilityIndustry Banking & FinanceEducationMoney Insurance Income Tax Mutual FundsTransformXInfrastructure Railways Aviation RoadwaysIndia NewsDefenceLifestyle Travel & Tourism ScienceHealthcareBrand WagonEntertainmentEventsJobsSports IPL 2024Multimedia Photos Videos Audio Web Stories Auto Web Stories InfographicsePaperToday’s PaperFrom The Print Opinion Economy Personal Finance Print Front PageIFSC CODEAbout usPRIVACY POLICYTERMS AND CONDITIONSContact Us Search X MUST READ Trump 2.0: Should Indian markets be worried about these 4 factors?Amazon India’s marketplace arm narrows losses by 28% in FY24; revenue jumps 14%Trump urges Putin to de-escalate Ukraine crisis in recent phone call: ReportVistara takes final flight today before Air India merger – Key information to note for passengers, club members Pause slide Business NewslifeBird flu in India update: Avian Influenza confirmed at Red Fort, Delhi; big worry for 9 states Bird flu in India update: Avian Influenza confirmed at Red Fort, Delhi; big worry for 9 states Bird flu in India update: Avian Influenza has been confirmed in samples of the dead heron from Tis Hazari in New Delhi and in crow from Red Fort. Written by FE OnlineNew Delhi January 19, 2021 12:02 IST Follow Us The central team, formed for monitoring the situation in the affected areas of the country, is visiting the affected sites. (Representative image by IE) Avian Influenza or popularly known as Bird flu has been confirmed in five states for poultry birds and in 9 states for crow or migratory or wild birds, the Central government has warned. Avian Influenza has been confirmed in samples in New Delhi, as per the latest details provided by the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying. India has been witnessing the outbreak of Avian Influenza in various parts of the country in the past few weeks.Avian Influenza has been confirmed in samples of the dead heron from Tis Hazari in New Delhi and in crow from Red Fort. An advisory in this regard has been issued to Delhi for taking necessary action, according to the Central government.In Harda and Mandsaur districts of Madhya Pradesh and Balod district of Chhattisgarh, Rapid Response Teams (RRTs) have been deployed for culling of poultry birds around 1 km radius of epicentres of the outbreak in poultry. Culling operation of poultry is continuing in the epicentres of Panchkula district of Haryana, the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry, and Dairying said.In Maharashtra, RRTs have been deployed and culling of poultry birds is underway in all the affected epicentres. Culling operations have been completed in CPDO, Mumbai, and cleaning and disinfection are in process. Similarly, culling and sanitization operations have been completed in the epicenters of Latur district in Village Kendrewadi, Ahmedpur, Village Sukani, and Village Tondar (Vajrawadi) in Udgir taluk and village Kurdwadi in Ausa taluk, the Central government stated.The central team, formed for monitoring the situation in the affected areas of the country, is visiting the affected sites, and has visited Maharashtra to monitor the epicenters of the Avian Influenza outbreak and conducting epidemiological studies. The visit to Kerala is over, the Central government said. Get live Share Market updates, Stock Market Quotes, and the latest India News … Read More and business news on Financial Express. Download the Financial Express App for the latest finance news. First published on: 19-01-2021 at 12:02 IST Stock Market Stats Market Stats Top Gainers Top Losers Indices Performance Gold Rate Today Silver Rate Today Petrol Rate Today Diesel Rate Today Nifty 50 Mutual Funds IPO Related News Understanding panic attacks: Symptoms, causes, and how to cope Naga Chaitanya and Sobhita Dhulipala to tie the knot at iconic 22-acre Annapurna Studios in Hyderabad – Here’s how the lavish property is related to the Akkineni family Sidhu Moosewala’s parents share baby Shubhdeep’s picture – A look at how much iconic singer earns after his death through YouTube, royalties, and more Diabetes-friendly superfoods: How sprouted moong can help control blood sugar levels Mukesh Ambani revives Campa Cola after 12 years: The brand’s history and reasons for its decline Petrol, Diesel Price Today 11 November 2024 in Tripura, New Delhi, Nashik and GuwahatiMarket42 min agoOil prices are decreasing due to supply disruptions and low demand from China. Brent crude futures fell to $73.56 per barrel and US West Texas Intermediate crude futures dropped to $70 per barrel. Petrol rationing has started in Tripura after a railway track derailment. Prices for petrol and diesel in different cities on November 11, 2024 are also mentioned. View all shorts Photo Gallery 9 Photos US Election 2024 In Pictures: Trump’s victory fills the air with excitement but Harris’ ‘heart is full’ 4 days agoNovember 7, 2024 10 Photos In photos: Sacred moments from Chhath Puja festivities across India 5 days agoNovember 6, 2024 8 Photos Illuminating Diwali 2024: A visual journey through the festival of lights | In Images 2 weeks agoOctober 31, 2024 View All Trending Topics income tax calculator Silver rate today Gold rate today IPO sTOCK MARKET QUOTES Mutual funds Waaree Energies IPO 2024 Live Top Categories MarketJobsIndia NewsBusinessMoneyHealth CareJob CarrierLifePhotosLifestyleNDA vs INDIA Lok Sabha ElectionMaharashtra Election Stock Market Stats Market StatsNSE Top GainersNSE Top LosersBSE Top GainersBSE Top LosersIndices PerformanceNifty 50BSE Sensex PerformanceStock Market Quotes Top NSE/BSE Companies Share Price TOP NSE/BSE COMPANIES SHARE PRICERELIANCE SHARE PRICESBI SHARE PRICETATA MOTORS SHARE PRICEHDFC SHARE PRICEINFOSYS SHARE PRICEICICI SHARE PRICETCS SHARE PRICEITC SHARE PRICEBAJAJ FINANCE SHARE PRICEMARUTI SHARE PRICETATA STEEL SHARE PRICEBAJAJ FINSERV SHARE PRICEL&T SHARE PRICEINDUSIND BANK SHARE PRICEBSE SensexBPCL SHARE PRICETITAN SHARE PRICEINDIAN OIL CORPORATION SHARE PRICEAXIS BANK SHARE PRICEHOUSING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE CORP SHARE PRICEKOTAK MAHINDRA BANK SHARE PRICEHINDUSTAN UNILEVER SHARE PRICEBHARTI AIRTEL SHARE PRICETech Mahindra Share PriceASIAN PAINTS SHARE PRICEHCL SHARE PRICENTPC SHARE PRICENifty BankADANI ENTERPRISES SHARE PRICEPGCIL SHARE PRICEHINDALCO SHARE PRICEJSW STEEL PRICENESTLE SHARE PRICETECH MAHINDRA SHARE PRICEGRASIM SHARE PRICEWIPRO SHARE PRICEHDFC LIFE SHARE PRICEONGC SHARE PRICECIPLA SHARE PRICESBI LIFE SHARE PRICEDR REDDYS LABS SHARE PRICEBRITANNIA SHARE PRICECOAL INDIA SHARE PRICEADANI PORTS SHARE PRICEEICHER MOTORS SHARE PRICEAPOLLO HOSPITALS SHARE PRICETATA CONS. PROD SHARE PRICEBAJAJ AUTO SHARE PRICEDIVIS LABS SHARE PRICEUPL SHARE PRICEHERO MOTOCORP SHARE PRICE Stock Price Quotes ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZOthers Popular Car Models Alto K10Alto K10Maruti BalenoErtigaSwiftDzireFronxWagon RMaruti Suzuki BrezzaGrand VitaraHyundai CretaHyundai VenueMahindra TharScorpio NXuv 3XoKia SeltosKia SonetTata NexonTata PunchToyota FortunerToyota Innova CrystaTata CurvvMahindra Thar RoxxHyundai AlcazarMahindra BoleroMahindra ScorpioHonda ElevateMaruti Suzuki EecoMaruti Suzuki Celerio Popular Brands Hyundai CarHyundai CarMahindra CarMaruti SuzukiTata CarToyota CarKia CarHonda CarBest Popular Cars Top Commodities Gold Rate TodayGold Rate in ChennaiGold Rate in KeralaGold Rate in HyderabadGold Rate in BangaloreGold Rate in MumbaiGold Price in DelhiGold Price in AhmedabadGold Price in KolkataSilver Rate TodaySilver Rate in BangaloreSilver Rate in AhmedabadSilver Rate in HyderabadSilver Rate in ChennaiSilver Rate in JaipurSilver Rate in MumbaiSilver Rate in DelhiSilver Rate in LucknowPetrol PricePetrol Price in DelhiPetrol Price in MumbaiPetrol Price in BangalorePetrol Price in HyderabadPetrol Price in ChennaiPetrol Price in KolkataPetrol Price in PuneDiesel PriceDiesel Price in DelhiDiesel Price in BangaloreDiesel Price in MumbaiDiesel Price in HyderabadDiesel Price in ChennaiDiesel Price in ChandigarhDiesel Price in JaipurDiesel Price in Lucknow Trending Topics Budget 2024 Live Trending Stories Five Indian full service carriers disappear in 17 years, Air India remains sole playerRG Kar case: Trial in rape and murder of junior doctor to begin at special courtIs your child using gadgets too much? Beware! Excessive screen time may lead to myofascial pain in kidsQ2 Result 2024 Live Updates: ONGC, Hindalco, Britannia, Godfrey Phillips, Devyani International, others releasing Q2 results todayAmazon India’s marketplace arm narrows losses by 28% in FY24; revenue jumps 14%After Hours with Upasana Taku, co-founder and CFO, MobiKwikPetrol, Diesel Price Today 11 November 2024 in Tripura, New Delhi, Nashik and GuwahatiCCPA cracks down on surrogate advertising in alcohol and tobacco industries: New guidelines target celebrities and brandsFrom Lohar Chawl to Forbes India Rich List: How Inder Jaisinghani built Polycab India into a Rs 1 lakh crore electrical giantVistara takes final flight today before merging with Air India – Key information for passengers, club membersIndia Election Results 2024 Highlights: Nitish Kumar, Chandrababu Naidu attend NDA meet at Modi residence, INDIA huddle shortlyPSEB 10th Result 2024 Highlights: Results OUT at pseb.ac.in, how to check, direct link to scoreboardBSEB Bihar Board 10th Result 2024 Live Updates: Result declared at bsebmatric.orgHappy International Women’s Day 2024: Share wishes, greetings, and messages with friends and familyMaha Shivratri 2024: Spread festive wishes and quotes to commemorate this special occasionLok Sabha Elections 2024: Congress CEC clears Rahul Gandhi’s candidacy for Wayanad seat, first candidate to be out soonPM Modi LIVE: PM Modi congratulates participants and awardees of National Creators AwardsJM Financial says will fully cooperate with Sebi in probe into public issue of debt securities More From Life From Lohar Chawl to Forbes India Rich List: How Inder Jaisinghani built Polycab India into a Rs 1 lakh crore electrical giantHow avocado can reduce the risk of Type 2 diabetes and improve heart health?Black coffee with a little bit of salt before workout-How does it help?HONOR PAD X8A KIDS EDITION: Launch your kids safely into the digital ageVeteran Tamil actor Delhi Ganesh passes away at 80 – All you need to know about himImmersive experiences new coffee add-ons at cafesBenefits of smoothie that you must knowScreen Time: Your entertainment bucket list for this weekStay fit in pollution monthsWorld’s only autumn cherry blossom fest in Meghalaya IndianExpress Justice Sanjiv Khanna sworn in as 51st Chief Justice of IndiaJaishankar: A lot of countries are nervous about US, we are not one of themAyushman expanded: Over 2 lakh elderly join in week after rolloutCOP29: Return of Donald Trump hangs heavy on climate summit as world meets to talkIn the fields of Maharashtra, anger takes root: soyabean farmers feel cheated by prices Follow Us Facebook Twitter Linkedin Download Apps Play_stor Apple_stor Express Group INDIAN EXPRESS GROUPThe Indian ExpressLoksattaJansattaInuthRamnath Goenka AwardsMyInsuranceClubIE TamilIE MalayalamIE BanglaIE GujaratiIE EducationThis website follows the DNPA’s code of conductCompare Term Insurance Quick Links T&CPrivacy PolicyHindiPan CardAadhaar CardInsuranceWorld NewsEntertainmentAirlines/AviationCONTACT USAbout Us Copyright © 2024 The Indian Express [P] Ltd. All Rights Reserved Market Data ✕Market DataMutual Funds IPO’s Open and Upcoming 6Top Indices Performance Stock Analysis Stock Market Stats Financial Literacy Gold Rate Today NSE Top Gainers 1011NSE Top Losers 1654BSE Top Gainers 2353BSE Top Losers 2756NSE 52-Week High 53NSE 52-Week Low 31BSE 52-Week High 193BSE 52-Week Low 39NSE Price Shocker NSE Volume Shocker BSE Price Shocker BSE Volume Shocker NSE Buyers NSE Sellers BSE Buyers BSE Sellers Silver Rate Today Petrol Rate Today Diesel Rate TodayBird flu: Food regulator asks consumers to avoid eating undercooked chicken, half-boiled eggs Newsletters Gift Membership Become a member Subscribe Get app Sign in Take Scroll With You Download the app to read our award-winning journalism on the go and stay up-to-date with our notifications. Get the app ANDROID iOS Gift Membership Home Common Ground The India Fix Eco India The Latest The Reel Magazine Video Trending Why have Indian historians failed to combat ‘WhatsApp history’? How the Sassoons of Bombay became one of China’s wealthiest families ‘We Solve Murders’: Richard Osman’s new murder mystery promises – and delivers – a good time In Maharashtra’s crowded field, Opposition could stand out by tapping state’s progressive tradition Family history: A writer investigates why her great-grandfather chose to sail to South Africa As outsiders swamp party, BJP cadre in UP struggle to keep the faith On the Great Nicobar island, why the future is fearful Start the week with a film: In ‘Donnie Brasco’, betrayal is hard when Al Pacino is around Konnichiwa, India: Can Hello Kitty assimilate into the subcontinent’s diverse art aesthetic? With millions due to Adani Power, Bangladesh struggles with green energy shift UP CM Adityanath calls for caste-based reservation in AMU a day after SC paved way for minority tag ‘Iru’: A biography in motion about anthropologist Irawati Karve, who lived life on her own terms Sections Politics Culture India World Film and TV Music Books and Ideas Business and Economy Science and Technology In Pictures Announcements Bookshop The Field Pulse Elections 2024 Ad OTHERS ARE Reading 1 Why have Indian historians failed to combat ‘WhatsApp history’? 2 How the Sassoons of Bombay became one of China’s wealthiest families 3 ‘We Solve Murders’: Richard Osman’s new murder mystery promises – and delivers – a good time 4 In Maharashtra’s crowded field, Opposition could stand out by tapping state’s progressive tradition 5 Family history: A writer investigates why her great-grandfather chose to sail to South Africa 6 As outsiders swamp party, BJP cadre in UP struggle to keep the faith 7 On the Great Nicobar island, why the future is fearful 8 Start the week with a film: In ‘Donnie Brasco’, betrayal is hard when Al Pacino is around 9 Konnichiwa, India: Can Hello Kitty assimilate into the subcontinent’s diverse art aesthetic? 10 With millions due to Adani Power, Bangladesh struggles with green energy shift National News Bird flu: Food regulator asks consumers to avoid eating undercooked chicken, half-boiled eggs The Food and Safety Standards Authority said there was no need to panic for as long as all poultry products are properly cooked before consumption. Scroll Staff Jan 22, 2021 · 11:17 am Read in App Image for representation. | Maxpixel [Public Domain] The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India on Thursday advised consumers to avoid eating half-boiled eggs and undercooked chicken in view of the countrywide outbreak of avian flu among poultry, reported PTI. At the same time, the regulator urged consumers to not panic, saying there was no need to stop buying poultry products as long as they are cooked properly. The Centre on January 18 said that the outbreak of avian influenza or bird flu had been confirmed in 14 states. In India, the disease spreads mostly through migratory birds entering the country during the winter season. While H5N1 poses no apparent threat to humans, its highly pathogenic strains can be deadly to domestic poultry and sometimes, wild birds. Cases of human bird flu infections are due to contact with infected poultry or surfaces that are contaminated with infected bird excretions such as saliva, nasal secretions or feces. In a document titled “Safe handling, processing and consumption of poultry meat and eggs during bird flu outbreak’’, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India on Thursday listed the precautionary steps to be taken at retail meat shops, by consumers, and by those who work in the poultry industry. The food regulator noted that most strains of avian influenza virus are mainly found in the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts of infected birds, and not in meat. But highly pathogenic versions of the viruses, such as the H5N1 strain, can spread to virtually all parts of an infected bird, it said. Besides, highly pathogenic avian influenza can be found inside and on the surface of eggs laid by infected birds, FSSAI added. Although sick birds will normally stop producing eggs, eggs laid in the early phase of the disease could contain viruses in the egg-white and yolk as well as on the surface of the shell.Food Safety and Standards Authority of India also mentioned that the World Health Organization has stated it is safe to consume poultry meat and eggs, and that there is no epidemiological data to suggest the disease can be transmitted to humans through cooked food. Also read: Bird flu makes a comeback in Kerala’s Alappuzha district as new case reported in Kainakary But consumers should properly cook meat and eggs before eating to err on the side of caution, the regulator said. This “inactivates the virus present inside” the products.Further, the regulator advised consumers not to purchase eggs or poultry meat sourced from bird flu- affected areas. “Poultry meat and eggs from areas with outbreaks in poultry should not be consumed raw or partially cooked,” it added. Guidelines for retail stores, other sellersFor retail stores, the FSSAI asked sellers to avoid bringing live or dead poultry birds from the infected areas so that the virus does not enter the food chain.People handling raw meat should wear gloves, masks and wash their hands properly with water and soap, especially before and after handling the raw poultry and eggs. Further, contact should be avoided with bird droppings, it added.As per the guidelines, all surfaces and utensils that have been in contact with the raw meat should be washed and disinfected. Meat sellers must also clean and sanitise the knives and chopping boards between cutting, or slaughtering two birds, the food regulator said, adding that all the waste generated from the retail poultry shop must be properly disposed.While handling and cooking of poultry meat, the FSSAI suggested not to wash the chicken in running water as it may cause water splashing and spread of droplets contaminating the surroundings. Get the app ANDROID iOS We welcome your comments at letters@scroll.in. Bird Flu Avian Influenza Polutry Food Safety and Standards Authority of India Related FIR against Union minister Suresh Gopi for ‘misusing’ ambulance during Thrissur Pooram festival Trending Why have Indian historians failed to combat ‘WhatsApp history’? How the Sassoons of Bombay became one of China’s wealthiest families ‘We Solve Murders’: Richard Osman’s new murder mystery promises – and delivers – a good time In Maharashtra’s crowded field, Opposition could stand out by tapping state’s progressive tradition Family history: A writer investigates why her great-grandfather chose to sail to South Africa AdBirds in India are dying due to Bird flu, not due to 5G testing by Jio - FACTLY FacebookTwitterYoutubeInstagramSubscribe Navigate StoriesIndiaInfographicsPoliticsFact CheckElectionsBusinessCrimeLife Featured Data: UAE was the Destination for 28% of The Indian Nationals’ Departures from India in 2022 By Pavithra K MNovember 11, 2024 0 Recent Data: UAE was the Destination for 28% of The Indian Nationals’ Departures from India in 2022 November 11, 2024 0 Data: BRSR Data Indicates That Over 40% of Water is Discharged Without Treatment November 8, 2024 0 Review: Madras HC Rules Right to Privacy as a Fundamental Right Encompasses Spousal Privacy November 6, 2024 0ElectionsFact ChecksEnglishTeluguCoronavirusOthersVideosData ToolsData DashboardsCounting IndiaAbout UsOur StoryTeamFact CheckingFact Check MethodologyFact-Check TeamNon-partisanship PolicyCorrections PolicyFAQ’sContact UsSubscribeCareersCompliance of IT Rules 2021Privacy PolicyGOVT. DATA ROUNDUP English, Fake News Birds in India are dying due to Bird flu, not due to 5G testing by Jio 0 By Akhil Reddy on January 18, 2021 A A A Twitter Facebook Reddit Update (21 November 2022): Multiple posts are being shared recently claiming that birds are dying due to 5G radiation. However, as mentioned below, experts stated that the levels of exposure in the 5G frequency range are comparable to existing technology, and it very unlikely that that the 5G exposure could cause mortality in birds.A post is being shared on social media with a claim that birds in India are dying due to 5G technology testing by Jio whereas people are being fooled into believing that birds are dying due to Bird flu. Let’s fact-check the claim made in the post.The archived version of the post can be seen here. Claim: Birds in India are dying due to 5G testing by Jio, not due to Bird flu.Fact: Reliance Jio is yet to begin its 5G trials in India. The Press Information Bureau has reported about the outbreaks of Avian Influenza/Bird flu in migratory birds, wild and domestic crows, and poultry in certain States of the country. Hence the claim made in the post is FALSE.When we searched about Reliance Jio’s 5G trails, the statements made by Mukesh Ambani at Reliance Industries Annual General Meeting in July 2020 were found in the search results. He said – “This Made-in-India 5G solution will be ready for trials as soon as 5G spectrum is available and can be ready for field deployment next year”. The transcript of his full speech can be read here. In October 2020, ‘ANI’ has reported – “Jio, Qualcomm align efforts on 5G, achieve over 1Gbps speed in trials in US.” The press release by Reliance Industries Limited regarding these trials can be found here. The ‘Financial Express’ in December 2020 reported that IT and telecom minister Ravi Shankar Prasad has said – “4G is working here and for 5G, we are going to start trials very soon”.Mukesh D. Ambani announces a roadmap to Jio 5G and upgrading India's digital experience.#RILAGM #NayeIndiaKaNayaJosh #Jio #JioPlatforms #JioDigitalLife pic.twitter.com/5WTtvlKCl2— Reliance Jio (@reliancejio) July 15, 2020 Also, talking at the virtual India Mobile Congress (IMC) 2020, Mukesh Ambani said – “Jio will pioneer the 5G revolution in India in the second half of 2021.” His full speech at the event can be seen here."Jio will pioneer the 5G revolution in India in the second half of 2021."– Mukesh D. AmbaniOne more reason to look forward to the new year 😊. #JioAtIMC #Jio5GInternet #IMC2020Virtual #DigitalIndia #JioDigitalLife #5G @exploreIMC— Reliance Jio (@reliancejio) December 10, 2020 The Department of Telecommunications has tweeted that it issued a “Notice Inviting Applications for auction of Spectrum in 700 MHz, 800 MHz, 900 MHz, 1800 MHz, 2100 MHz, 2300 MHz and 2500 MHz bands. Last date for submission of applications for participation in auction is 5 Feb 2021. Auction to commence online from 1st March 2021”. More information regarding the notice can be found here and here.DoT issues Notice Inviting Applications for auction of Spectrum in 700 MHz, 800 MHz, 900 MHz, 1800 MHz, 2100 MHz, 2300 MHz and 2500 MHz bands. Last date for submission of applications for participation in auction is 5 Feb 2021. Auction to commence online from 1st March 2021.— DoT India (@DoT_India) January 6, 2021 On 13 January 2020, the ‘Financial Express’ has reported – “telecom firms have sought clarity if 5G can be launched on the airwaves bought through this sale……A total of 2,251 MHz spectrum in seven bands ranging from 700 MHz to 2500 MHz will be auctioned. Airwaves for 5G (3300 MHz-3600 MHz) won’t be auctioned this time. The DoT has asked the operators to send their written queries by Friday, after which a clarification will be issued……Reliance Jio has said in the past that it plans to roll out 5G services in the second half of 2021, but as 5G spectrum is not being auctioned, the telco may have to use spectrum bought through this sale to launch 5G.” So, it can be concluded that Reliance Jio is yet to begin its 5G trials in India.The Press Information Bureau has reported about the outbreaks of Avian Influenza/Bird flu in migratory birds, wild and domestic crows, and poultry in certain States of the country. In the same press release, it can be read that the disease spreads mainly by migratory birds coming into India during the winter months i.e. from September – October to February – March. The ‘Status of Avian Influenza in the country’, as of 17 January 2020, can be found here. More information regarding the Avian Influenza can be read here, here, and here.Few people are sharing an old article photo (archived) with a similar claim made in the post. The article was published by ‘Punjab Kesari’ in December 2018. It reported that 297 birds have died during 5G testing in the Netherlands. FACTLY has already debunked this claim in June 2019. The fact-check article can be read here.In one of the stories on the UNICEF website, it can be read – “Although the expert public has repeatedly warned that the fifth generation of mobile internet is neither killing the living world nor spreading the virus, misinformation about 5G continues to be published in the media and spread on social networks.’ Talking to ‘Snopes’, Dr Eric van Rongen (a member of the Health Council of the Netherlands and the Chairman of the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection) said – “the levels of exposure in the 5G frequency range are comparable to existing technology. Even if there would have been 5G exposure, it is very unlikely that could cause the [bird]mortality.” A video by ‘Huawei’ on this issue can be watched here.To sum it up, birds in India are dying due to Bird flu, not due to 5G testing by Jio. Share. Twitter Facebook Google+ Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Email Previous Articleపూణేలో జరిగిన ఆక్సిడెంట్ వీడియోని గచ్చిబౌలి ఫ్లైఓవర్ పై జరిగినట్టు తప్పుగా షేర్ చేస్తున్నారుNext Article These warning messages against possible malware attacks on WhatsApp are a hoaxAbout Author Akhil ReddyRelated Posts Digital Art from 2019 is being falsely shared as a video of Cyclone ...ఈ వీడియోలో కేక్ కట్ చేసింది కాంగ్రెస్ అవతరణ దినోత్సవం రోజు, మన్మోహన...పాత ఫోటో పెట్టి, ‘లాక్ డౌన్ లో ముస్లిం యువతికి ఆహారం పెట్టినందుకు పె...Comments are closed. RECENT POSTS Data: UAE was the Destination for 28% of The Indian Nationals’ Departures from India in 2022 November 11, 2024 0 Data: BRSR Data Indicates That Over 40% of Water is Discharged Without Treatment November 8, 2024 0 Review: Madras HC Rules Right to Privacy as a Fundamental Right Encompasses Spousal Privacy November 6, 2024 0 Review: What Types of Education Related Data is Available in the Public Domain, and Released by the Government? November 5, 2024 0 Data: Among IITs Where Detailed Data is Available, Admissions to Computer Science Related Courses Top the List November 4, 2024 0 Data: Number of Industrial Disputes Decrease Significantly Coinciding with Reducing Share of Workers Who Are Part of Unions November 1, 2024 0 Review: Supreme Court Rules That Aadhaar is Not Definitive Proof of Age or Date of Birth October 30, 2024 0 Data: 300 Passengers placed in the ‘No Fly List’ between 2020 & 2024 October 28, 2024 0 Data: Southern Cities like Hyderabad, Bengaluru, Visakhapatnam also experienced days with ‘Poor’ Air Quality in 2023 October 25, 2024 0 Review: Children Cannot Resume Indian Citizenship if Parents Acquired Foreign Citizenship Resulting in Automatic Termination of Their Indian Citizenship says Supreme Court October 23, 2024 0 About FactlyFACTLY is one of the well known Data Journalism/Public Information portals in India. Each news story on FACTLY is backed by factual evidence/data from official sources that is either available in the public domain or that is collated/gathered/collected using tools such as the Right to Information (RTI).Subscribe to our Newsletter Wisdom is nothing but Data Understood. Get a weekly roundup of stories covered by the Factly Team delivered to your email. We promise to never spam you. Leave this field empty if you're human: © 2014-2021 Factly Media & Research | Except for videos, content on this site is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.Fresh cases of Avian Influenza reported in Maharashtra and MP: Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry, and Dairying - The Indian Wire Skip to content Mon. Nov 11th, 2024 Home Story Archives News Automobiles Business Education Entertainment Gadgets Politics Sports World Editorial Opinion News Fresh cases of Avian Influenza reported in Maharashtra and MP: Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry, and Dairying ByAbhishek Sharma Jan 18, 2021 #and Dairying, #Animal Husbandry, #Fresh cases of Avian Influenza, #madhya pradesh, #maharashtra, #Ministry of Fisheries Mumbai: Amid the scare of bird flu in India, poultry farms at Central Poultry Development Organization (CPDO, Mumbai, and Kheda Road, in Mandsaur district of Madhya Pradesh, have confirmed new cases of Avian Influenza as of January 17. Further, Avian Influenza has been confirmed in crows at Panna, Sanchi, Raisen, Balaghat, and in birds at Sheopur (crow, owl) and Mandsaur(swan, pigeon) districts of Madhya Pradesh; Bastar (crow, pigeon) and Dantewada (crow) districts of Chhattisgarh; crow samples from Haridwar and Lansdowne forest range of Uttarakhand, said the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry, and Dairying. Additionally, in Delhi, Heron samples in Rohini have been tested positive for avian influenza. In Maharashtra, RRTs have been deployed and culling of poultry birds is underway in all the affected epicentres including CPDO, Mumbai. Further, in Madhya Pradesh, RRTs have been deployed. Culling operation of poultry is continuing in the epicentres of Haryana. On Sunday, samples tested from Rajasthan and Gujarat have been found negative for AI. The central team formed for monitoring the situation in the affected areas of the country are visiting the affected sites and conducting epidemiological studies. States have been requested to rethink their decisions to impose a ban on the sale of poultry and poultry products and allow such selling sourced from the non-infected areas and states, said the Ministry. Consumption of well-cooked chicken and eggs is safe for humans. Further, consumers should not pay heed to baseless rumours that are unscientific and often lead to confusion. These adversely affect not only poultry and egg markets but also poultry and maize farmers, who are already affected by the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown. Maharashtra Animal Husbandry Department has started a Toll Free Helpline Number for farmers to report any unusual mortality of birds. The state government has put requisite information on Avian Influenza in line with the revised Avian Influenza Action Plan 2021 for both, the departmental officials and the general public. As gathered, necessary notifications regarding “infected area”, etc. to check the spread of the disease, have already been issued by the state. It is also informed that in order to contain the incidences of Bird Flu without delay, the exercise of the powers conferred under Prevention And Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Act, 2009, the state government has delegated all its requisite powers on District Collectors within their local jurisdiction in the state for prevention, control, and eradication of Avian Influenza. Post navigation COVID-19 Update: India reports 13,788 new cases and 145 deaths in last 24 hours Cold Wave in India: Delhi, Punjab, Haryana, UP witness dense fog By Abhishek Sharma Related Post News World ILO’s Report on World Employment and Social Outlook Showcases Income Inequality Sep 15, 2024 Zaheena Naqvi News CITU Demands Centre To Release Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers Data May 23, 2024 Harshita Sharma News Travel Issues Related to Boeing’s Alaska Airways Blowout Rises to Criminal Inquiry Apr 5, 2024 The Indian Wire Staff Reach out to The Indian Wire! Want to work with us? Looking to share some feedback or suggestion? Have a business opportunity to discuss? You can reach out to us at [email protected]. You missed Entertainment Mr. India To Mom: Boney Kapoor’s Iconic Films That Redefined Bollywood November 11, 2024 Ocean Rana Sports Sanju Samson Becomes First Indian to Hit Back-to-Back Centuries in T20Is November 9, 2024 Himanshu Patel Entertainment Kiran Rao’s Top 5: Films That Shaped New Era In Indian Cinema November 7, 2024 Ocean Rana Sports Australia Cruise to Victory Over Pakistan in First ODI of Three-Match Series November 6, 2024 Himanshu Patel Law Firm Ocala Scholarship Money Proudly powered by WordPress | Theme: Newsup by Themeansar. Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Go to mobile version