Influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2: pathogenesis and host responses in the respiratory tract | Nature Reviews Microbiology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature reviews microbiology review articles article Influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2: pathogenesis and host responses in the respiratory tract Download PDF Download PDF Review Article Published: 06 April 2021 Influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2: pathogenesis and host responses in the respiratory tract Tim Flerlage1 na1, David F. Boyd2 na1, Victoria Meliopoulos ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1442-91771, Paul G. Thomas ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-7955-02562 & …Stacey Schultz-Cherry ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2021-727X1 Show authors Nature Reviews Microbiology volume 19, pages 425–441 (2021)Cite this article 65k Accesses 200 Citations 475 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects ImmunopathogenesisInfluenza virusSARS-CoV-2Viral host responseViral pathogenesis AbstractInfluenza viruses cause annual epidemics and occasional pandemics of respiratory tract infections that produce a wide spectrum of clinical disease severity in humans. The novel betacoronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged in December 2019 and has since caused a pandemic. Both viral and host factors determine the extent and severity of virus-induced lung damage. The host’s response to viral infection is necessary for viral clearance but may be deleterious and contribute to severe disease phenotypes. Similarly, tissue repair mechanisms are required for recovery from infection across the spectrum of disease severity; however, dysregulated repair responses may lead to chronic lung dysfunction. Understanding of the mechanisms of immunopathology and tissue repair following viral lower respiratory tract infection may broaden treatment options. In this Review, we discuss the pathogenesis, the contribution of the host response to severe clinical phenotypes and highlight early and late epithelial repair mechanisms following influenza virus infection, each of which has been well characterized. Although we are still learning about SARS-CoV-2 and its disease manifestations in humans, throughout the Review we discuss what is known about SARS-CoV-2 in the context of this broad knowledge of influenza virus, highlighting the similarities and differences between the respiratory viruses. Similar content being viewed by others SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis Article 30 March 2022 The trinity of COVID-19: immunity, inflammation and intervention Article 28 April 2020 Distinct airway epithelial immune responses after infection with SARS-CoV-2 compared to H1N1 Article Open access 15 July 2022 IntroductionInfluenza viruses are enveloped viruses of the Orthomyxoviridae family, which are classified into four genera, which include influenza virus A–D (IAV, IBV, ICV and IDV). With regard to human health, IAVs and IBVs are of main concern; ICVs are endemic and cause only mild disease in humans, and IDVs primarily cause infection in cattle1. IBVs are restricted to humans and are classified into two circulating lineages (B/Victoria and B/Yamagata)2. IAVs, the cause of the majority of annual epidemic and all occasional pandemic human disease, are further subtyped on the basis of two surface glycoproteins located within the host-derived lipid membrane of virions, haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA)3. Sixteen HAs and nine NAs have been described in avian species, the main natural animal reservoir of influenza viruses; two additional HAs and NAs have been described in bats3,4. The IAVs H1N1 and H3N2 currently cause most epidemic disease in humans2. Influenza viruses are in a constant state of evolution within animal and human reservoirs facilitated by high mutation rates due to low-fidelity RNA polymerase proofreading capabilities4. Cumulative changes in sequences encoding HA and NA lead to antigenic drift in IAVs and IBVs, which alters fitness for human infection as the structure of antigenic surfaces recognized by previously protective humoral responses changes and contributes to epidemic disease5. HA (and to a lesser extent NA) gene segments from avian reservoirs may also reassort with contemporaneously circulating human influenza viruses to produce novel strains capable of causing pandemics, a process termed antigenic shift4,5. Since 1889 there have been five IAV pandemics, the most severe of which was in 1918 and the most recent of which was in 2009 (refs4,6). IAV infection may additionally arise as an epizootic infection frequently leading to severe disease. Fortunately, thus far there has been limited human-to-human transmissibility potential demonstrated by these viruses. An example is the highly pathogenic H5N1 IAV that is associated with case fatality rates as high as 60%7.Coronaviruses are enveloped single-stranded non-segmented RNA viruses of the Coronaviridae family, subfamily Coronavirinae, which are further subdivided into four genera based on phylogenetic analyses: alphacoronaviruses, betacoronaviruses, gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses8. Similarly to influenza viruses, coronaviruses circulate within non-human reservoirs. Mammalian coronavirus infection is predominantly caused by alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses, which share bats and rodents as natural reservoirs9,10. Avian coronavirus infections are caused by gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses, which share birds as natural reservoirs9. To date, seven coronaviruses associated with human coronavirus (HCoV) infections have been identified. Four (HCoV-NL63, HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1) tend to cause mild seasonal respiratory infections in otherwise healthy individuals11. The other identified human coronaviruses, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV, which emerged in 2002 and was identified in 2003 (ref.12)), Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV, which emerged and was identified in 2012 (ref.13)) and the recently identified severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2, which emerged in 2019 and was identified in 2020 (ref.14)), cause more severe clinical manifestations. Coronaviruses have the largest genome of any RNA virus11 and use a replication strategy, including ribosomal frameshifting and generation of subgenomic RNAs, that predisposes to recombination events that confer the ability to develop novel host specificity15,16. Indeed, after the emergence of SARS-CoV in 2003, numerous SARS-like coronaviruses were identified in bat populations17. When SARS-CoV-2 was initially sequenced in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples from patients identified early in the pandemic in December 2019, the analysis demonstrated 96.2% sequence similarity to a bat coronavirus, Bat CoV RaTG13 (ref.18). Human infection with a coronavirus from its natural reservoir is thought to arise after adaptation in an intermediate host, during which time the ability for efficient human infection and human-to-human transmission develops (for example, camels in the case of MERS-CoV)10. A number of potential intermediate hosts have been proposed for SARS-CoV-2, although none has been definitively proved to date19.In the following sections, we discuss influenza virus and coronavirus infection in humans, pathogenesis of viral infection, the contribution of the host response to severe disease and late epithelial repair mechanisms following viral infection. Although the mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis are still being uncovered, throughout the Review we discuss what is known about SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 in the context of the wealth of knowledge of influenza virus pathogenesis, highlighting similarities and differences between these respiratory viruses.Infection in humansInfluenza virus and diseaseHuman infection with influenza viruses produces a broad spectrum of clinical disease severity, which ranges from asymptomatic infection to death. Adaptive immune memory from prior exposure by either natural infection or immunization can prevent infection or limit the development of symptoms or severe complications (Table 1). Young children without prior exposure who are immunologically naive to influenza virus are at risk of severe disease20. The effectiveness of adaptive immune memory in preventing infection can be subtype specific, and there is evidence suggesting that the first exposure to influenza virus antigen can influence the quality of immune memory acquired over a lifetime21. In individuals who do become infected, complex interactions between viral and host factors influence the site of replication and the corresponding immune response, which determine disease severity. As influenza virus infections are not always medically attended owing to variability in disease manifestations, only estimates are available for yearly infection burden on a global and local basis (Fig. 1a). In a meta-analysis of human volunteer challenge studies, viral shedding is detected in most individuals on the first day after inoculation. Viral titres then peak 2–3 days after inoculation and subsequently fall to undetectable levels by 6–7 days after inoculation. In some individuals, however, viral shedding persists for longer periods of time. Total symptom scores increase on day 1 after inoculation and generally peak by day 2 or 3 with a subsequent return to an asymptomatic baseline by days 8–9 after infection22. Most commonly, upper respiratory tract (URT) signs of tracheobronchitis and pharyngitis coupled with constitutional symptoms, including fever, malaise and myalgia, are reported by symptomatic individuals23. However, severe disease phenotypes, including hospitalization, pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and death are witnessed more frequently in high-risk patient populations (Fig. 1b; Table 1). Multiple organ dysfunctions have been described in the case of human H5N1 infection with evidence of viral replication outside of lung tissue, although the contribution of direct viral cytopathic effect to these extrapulmonary manifestations is unclear7.Table 1 Selected comparisons between influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2Full size tableFig. 1: Patient-related risk factors for severe influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infections.a | Estimates of yearly influenza virus infections worldwide2 and in the United States (2018–2019 season)25. b | Risk factors associated with severe influenza virus infection in epidemiological and genetic studies. c | Global estimated number of cases and deaths from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection46. d | Risk factors identified thus far to be associated with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Type 2 bias, bias towards type 2 immune responses.Full size imageA number of risk factors for complications have been identified through epidemiological studies or genomic analysis (Fig. 1b; reviewed elsewhere24). Individuals >65 years or <6 months of age suffer severe outcomes of influenza virus more often than those not at the extremes of age25. Immunosenescence, characterized by impaired humoral responses26 and reduction in T cell receptor diversity27 and T cell function28 are thought to contribute to the increased disease severity witnessed in elderly populations. In infants, an immature immune system characterized by a bias towards type 2 immunity in response to infection is thought to contribute to increased disease severity early in life29. Individuals with obesity suffer poor outcomes compared with lean individuals when challenged with IAV, an epidemiological observation well recapitulated in murine models30. A predisposition towards severe disease in individuals with obesity is thought to be multifactorial and related to defective adaptive immune responses31, chronic dysfunction of inflammatory signalling related to adiposity32 and insufficient responses to annual epidemic influenza virus vaccination33. Pregnancy increases the risk of hospitalization34, which has been attributed to the development of immune tolerance as a mechanism to prevent the fetus from rejection. As a consequence, there is a shift to type 2 immunity characterized by a cytokine profile that suppresses cytotoxic T lymphocytes and alters antibody class switching to result in less effective responses to viral infections35,36. Men appear to have disproportionate hospitalization rates compared with non-pregnant women37, presumably related to differences in immune responses mediated by sex hormones, which may be age-dependent24,38. Comorbid chronic health conditions, including metabolic syndrome39, heart failure40 and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease41, also increase an individual’s risk of severe disease. Finally, environmental factors, such as cigarette smoke exposure, contribute to disease severity42, potentially as a result of alterations in epithelial and immune cell function43 as well as in fibroblast repair responses to viral infection44.SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19Since the recognition of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19; the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2), a wide range of disease severity has been described, from asymptomatic infection45 (defined by the WHO as an infected individual who never eventually develops clinically apparent symptoms) to severe disease and death. Following its emergence, there have been >115 million cases identified and >2.5 million attributable deaths globally46 (Fig. 1c). Symptoms arise after a median incubation period of 4.8 days, and 95% of symptomatic individuals will display symptoms by 14 days after exposure47. A pre-symptomatic period has been defined by the WHO as an infected individual who does not presently have symptoms but who eventually manifests clinical disease. SARS-CoV-2 RNA is detected by RT–PCR in respiratory tract specimens for weeks after symptom onset48. Peak infectivity has been estimated to occur between 2 days before and 1 day after onset of symptoms in pre-symptomatic people48. The most frequently identified symptom of COVID-19 is cough, followed by fever, myalgia, dyspnoea and headache. Sore throat, diarrhoea and nausea are also reported, although less frequently49,50. Disturbances of smell and/or taste have been increasingly recognized as frequent symptoms of COVID-19 (refs51,52). Although loss of smell (anosmia) following viral URT infection has been recognized previously, anosmia caused by SARS-CoV-2 is potentially due to a different mechanism, which leads to clinical differences in the duration of sensory deficit52,53. As seen in MERS-CoV54 and SARS-CoV55 infection, extrapulmonary manifestations are additionally described with SARS-CoV-2 infection (Table 1). These include acute kidney injury56,57, skin findings58 and thrombosis59.Several risk factors for severe disease have been identified in early reports detailing the clinical manifestations and outcome of COVID-19 (Fig. 1d). Genome-wide association and epidemiological studies have implicated blood type (A being higher risk than O, and Rhesus factor (Rh)-positive being higher risk than Rh-negative) as a potential heritable trait predisposing to SARS-CoV-2 infection and severe disease60. The mechanism of potential protection afforded by blood type identified in these large population-based studies requires further investigation. Metabolic disorders such as obesity61, diabetes62 and kidney disease63 have been associated with enhanced disease severity. Although the mechanisms remain unknown, obesity as a risk factor could be a consequence of the dampened type I interferon response found in individuals with obesity64; one study that did not include body mass index (BMI) as a factor found individuals with severe disease requiring mechanical ventilation were more likely to have decreased type I interferon levels in the plasma65. Cardiovascular conditions including hypertension, congenital heart disease and coronary artery disease66 have also been linked not only with severe disease but also with exacerbation of pre-existing conditions post-recovery66,67. Age has consistently been identified as an important risk factor for COVID-19 disease severity. Persons of advanced age are more likely to develop severe disease, including ARDS, during SARS-CoV-2 infection68. SARS-CoV-2 has been diagnosed in children and adolescents of all ages, including neonates; however, disease severity is typically milder and outcome is generally more favourable than in adult individuals69,70. Although correlations between disease severity caused by SARS-CoV-2 and certain pre-existing conditions are coming to light, it is important to consider that the novelty of the virus limits our ability to draw conclusions.Pathological findings in infectionsInfluenza virus infection and pathologyPathological analysis of IAV infection in humans is skewed towards a more thorough understanding of severe disease, especially when it occurs during pandemic influenza infection, on examination at autopsy71,72. Owing to the preferential cellular tropism of human influenza viruses, pathological changes of the tracheobronchial epithelium are characteristic (Table 1). With uncomplicated IAV infection in the absence of concurrent bacterial superinfection, the surface of the larynx, trachea and bronchi appear inflamed on visual inspection71. Early in infection, microscopic evaluation of tracheal and bronchial biopsy specimens demonstrates diffuse epithelial sloughing71. Mononuclear cells are the predominant inflammatory cells present73; neutrophils are typically absent early, but may be present with increasing degrees of epithelial necrosis with severe disease or with the presence of a concurrent bacterial superinfection72. More distally, in bronchioles, nearly complete epithelial sloughing may again be present along with bloody exudate in the airway lumen, accompanied by interstitial swelling, mixed inflammatory infiltrates and small-vessel thrombosis in the bronchiolar walls72. Alveolar involvement generates similar general findings of epithelial necrosis and sloughing to more proximal locations but requires different repair mechanisms and leads to severe disease owing to compromised gas exchange. Proteinaceous alveolar fluid, which may be bloody, develops along with cellular debris and impairs efficient diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide across the alveolar–capillary interface, leading to severe clinical symptomatology74,75.SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19Lung pathology at autopsy following fatal SARS-CoV-2 infection frequently demonstrates diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) manifest as alveolar septal changes coupled with deposition of proteinaceous, potentially bloody, alveolar fluid, which compromises gas exchange (Table 1). Reactive type II pneumocytes and interstitial oedema are additionally seen76. Neutrophils are common in the inflammatory infiltrate in the lower respiratory tract (LRT)77. Inflammation of the bronchi and bronchioles is also found at autopsy, although less frequently than DAD. Corresponding to known areas of cellular tropism by single-cell gene expression analyses, immunohistochemistry staining for SARS-CoV-2 is seen in alveolar pneumocytes and ciliated epithelial cells. Tracheitis is also witnessed at autopsy with SARS-CoV-2 staining in submucosal glands and lymphocytes77. As described above, COVID-19 is increasingly being recognized as a disease affecting not only the respiratory tract. Intracellular staining by immunohistochemistry for SARS-CoV-2 in renal epithelial cells has been demonstrated in individuals with kidney injury, but it is unclear whether pathological changes are a consequence of pre-existing renal conditions, virus-induced damage or a contribution of both77. Ultrastructural evaluation by electron microscopy has additionally found SARS-CoV-2 particles in the enterocytes of the intestine77. In autopsy specimens, SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been detected in the lung, kidney, large intestine, blood, spleen and heart, with the lowest cycle threshold (Ct) values in pulmonary tissue77. Finally, lung tissue from individuals with COVID-19 exhibits unique vascular findings, including thrombosis, endothelial damage and abnormal angiogenesis patterns, compared with H1N1 infected or control lung tissue, as well as intracellular localization of SARS-CoV-2 particles within endothelial cells76.Host defence in the respiratory tractA fundamental challenge to all hosts facing infection is achieving a balance between clearance of the pathogen and maintenance of tissue function. A robust immune response may rapidly clear the pathogen but can also cause extensive collateral damage and compromise tissue function, as described above for influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Achieving this balance is particularly important in the respiratory tract as the host cannot survive long without sufficient gas exchange carried out by the lungs. Hosts employ different defence strategies depending on the type of pathogen, chronicity of the infection and the tissue affected. A useful paradigm for characterizing host defence strategies is in terms of disease resistance and tolerance78,79,80. Disease resistance refers to the set of host processes that actively reduce the burden of the pathogen, which include both innate and adaptive immunity. Disease tolerance refers to a host response that acts to limit the damage in the affected tissue and support its function, thus ‘tolerating’ the pathogen burden. In the respiratory tract, a strategy of tolerance would maintain the essential function of gas exchange and blood oxygenation, and preserve the health of the host. The concepts of resistance and tolerance are often employed at a systems level, considering the host or a specific organ as a system of mechanisms that are connected79. The respiratory system is made up of numerous compartments, including the nasal passages, trachea, bronchioles and alveoli, which carry out distinct functions in supporting respiratory health81. Complex interactions between structural and immune cells ultimately determine the type of tissue environment — resistant or tolerant. The main structural cell types in the respiratory tract — epithelial, endothelial and mesenchymal — have distinct and integral roles in generating these tissue environments (Fig. 2). Each cell type is capable of acquiring distinct activation states that promote resistance or tolerance. Integration of activation signals at both the cellular and tissue level has consequences for innate and adaptive host immune responses, which ultimately determine the outcome of infection.Fig. 2: Mechanisms of host resistance and tolerance in lung structural cells.Recent studies have identified structural cells in the lung (epithelial, endothelial and mesenchymal) as crucial regulators of host immune responses. Cells in the lower respiratory tract must effectively communicate to promote effective viral clearance while limiting damage to endothelial cells of the blood vessels (red) and epithelial cells of the alveoli (blue), which together carry out gas exchange. Each cell type, and their phenotypically distinct subsets, contributes to disease resistance and tolerance host strategies through diverse mechanisms indicated in the boxes. The balance of these resistance and tolerance mechanisms ultimately determines the outcome and long-term consequences of respiratory viral infection. AREG, amphiregulin; ECM, extracellular matrix; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IL-6, interleukin 6.Full size imageThe effectiveness of the host strategy in response to influenza virus or SARS-CoV-2 infection may depend on the compartment in the respiratory tract. For example, the URT, which is typically the initial site of infection and source of replication for transmission82, may benefit from a resistant host defence that favours a robust immune response to control viral spread. Type I and type III interferons have a crucial role in initially controlling viral replication in the URT and limiting spread to the lower airways83,84. When this resistance is broken, and the virus spreads, the LRT may require a tolerant defence that favours preservation of the crucial alveolar structures that perform gas exchange. This idea is supported by studies in mouse models of influenza virus infection using strains of IAV that preferentially replicate in the URT instead of the LRT85. Numerous survival phenotypes, due to diverse mechanisms, are independent of viral burden, indicating that rapid viral clearance is not necessary to improve disease outcome86,87,88,89,90,91. In human disease, viral load in respiratory samples is neither a consistent correlate of disease severity nor a reliable predictor of infection outcome92,93,94. In patients with severe disease who require extended hospitalization, mortality often occurs after viral clearance, indicating that the patient continues to resist a threat that is no longer present, although there are reports of prolonged viral shedding95.In contrast to viral load, specific cytokines and inflammatory profiles in both serum or plasma and respiratory samples are consistently associated with the severity of infection, including in SARS-CoV-2 infection96,97. High systemic levels of multiple cytokines, and their association with severity, have frequently been referred to as a ‘cytokine storm’98. Although the term cytokine storm has become popular to describe an exuberant immune response during influenza virus infection, few studies have identified specific mechanisms regulating excessive production of inflammatory molecules that could be targeted by therapeutics. Framing the host response as a cytokine storm may be the result of a focus on systemic cytokine levels measured in serum or plasma from humans. Peripheral blood is easier to sample than the LRT and is amenable to longitudinal sampling in patients. However, it is still unclear whether specific inflammatory molecules drive lung pathology or serve as correlates of other tissue-level mechanisms. In studies that have compared respiratory compartment and peripheral blood cytokine levels, poor correlations are often observed94. Interestingly, animal models, which allow for in-depth sampling of respiratory compartments, have identified tissue-resident non-immune and immune cells as crucial regulators of this exuberant response99,100.The following section will highlight recent studies that have begun to define the compartment-specific mechanisms that prevent or contribute to lung damage following influenza virus infection. Migrating and tissue-resident immune cells certainly have an important role in driving lung pathology, and mechanisms have been reported for many different types of cell, including neutrophils, monocytes/macrophages and T cells. Several reviews have summarized the role of immune-cell-driven lung damage during influenza virus infection80,101. In the following section, we focus on the role of non-immune structural cells that serve as upstream regulators of the host response. Studies of structural cells, including epithelial, endothelial and fibroblast cells (Fig. 2), have primarily reported on their roles in lung function by providing structural support to the tissue or maintaining the barriers required for gas exchange. These studies have underestimated their participation in the inflammatory response. However, it is now becoming clear that these cells have crucial roles in actively coordinating the host immune response to viral infections102. Lung structural cells have many of the same tools as immune cells to respond to infection, including viral sensors, cytokine or chemokine receptors, and antiviral proteins that directly inhibit replication.Initial response of epithelial cells to influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2Epithelial cells are the primary targets of influenza virus103 and are the best-studied structural cells in the context of influenza virus infection (Table 1). The type of epithelial cells present and their relative abundance change drastically moving from the trachea to the bronchioles and eventually to the alveoli. As conducting airways, the trachea and bronchioles are rich in mucin-producing goblet cells, mucin and antimicrobial protein-producing submucosal gland cells, secretory club cells and ciliated cells that function to move mucus along the respiratory tract81,104. The alveoli are made up of thin type I pneumocytes that facilitate gas exchange and cuboidal type II pneumocytes that produce surfactant and serve as progenitor cells81,105. Influenza virus cellular tropism, as well as host specificity, is determined by HA and NA, which interact with epithelial cell surface sialosaccharides that contain a sialic acid (SA) residue linked to a galactose (Gal)106 (Fig. 3a; Table 1). Preferences in HA binding to specific SA–Gal linkages in sialosaccharides on epithelial cell surfaces contribute to host species restriction, transmissibility and clinical symptomatology107,108,109. Whereas avian and equine influenza viruses prefer to bind SAs linked to galactose by α2,3 linkage (SAα2,3Gal), human influenza viruses bind SAs linked to galactose by α(2,6) linkage (SAα2,6Gal)109. SAα2,3Gal and SAα2,6Gal are distributed along a gradient on the surface epithelial cells along the length of the human respiratory tract110. SAα2,6Gal predominates in the nasal mucosa, sinuses, trachea and bronchi; it is also present on epithelial cells of the respiratory and terminal bronchioles. Conversely, SAα2,3Gal molecules are primarily found on the surface of alveolar epithelial cells and rarely in the URT110 (Fig. 3a). Tropism for SAα2,3Gal, which predominates in the LRT, is thought to contribute to the high pathogenicity of epizootic avian IAV infections in humans. Despite the preferential binding noted in the above work, human IAVs are able to infect type I alveolar epithelial cells107.Fig. 3: Cellular tropism of influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2.a | The haemagglutinin (HA) protein of influenza viruses preferentially binds sialosaccharides on the surface of pulmonary epithelial cells. Whereas human influenza viruses prefer sialic acids (SAs) linked to galactose by α(2,6) linkage (SAα2,6Gal), avian influenza viruses prefer SAα2,3Gal. These are distributed in a gradient in the human respiratory tract. Immunohistochemistry staining demonstrates intracellular localization of influenza viruses in epithelial cells at three sites from mice challenged with influenza A virus. b | The spike (S) protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) binds angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) on the surface of certain olfactory and respiratory epithelial cells distributed along the human respiratory tract after activation by a cellular protease, such as transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) (other proteases, including cathepsin L, neuropilin 1 and furin are involved in activation). Histopathological images in part a courtesy of P. Vogel.Full size imageSimilarly to SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2 relies on angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and a host protease for host cell entry (Fig. 3b; Table 1). ACE2 is a transmembrane carboxypeptidase involved in processing angiotensin II, among other signalling proteins. It is constitutively released from the surface of airway epithelial cells as a soluble form (sACE2), which retains proteolytic activity, by the sheddases A disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 and 10 (ADAM17 and ADAM10)111. The spike (S) protein on the surface of the SARS-CoV-2 particle binds to ACE2 and requires activation by a host protease. Transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) is the most commonly implicated112. Other proteases may also have a role, including cathepsin L113, which is involved in SARS-CoV entry114, neuropilin 1 (ref.115) and furin116. The involvement of multiple host proteases in viral entry may broaden tropism. Single-cell gene expression analyses in both non-human primates and humans have demonstrated overlapping transcription ACE2 and TMPRSS2 throughout the body. In the respiratory tract, overlapping expression is seen in cells of the olfactory, nasal and bronchial epithelial surfaces as well as in alveolar type II epithelial cells52,117,118,119. For SARS-CoV-2, there is likely a gradient of infectivity along the respiratory tract with susceptible epithelial cells with high ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression more abundant in the nasal epithelium of the URT than in distal regions of the lung120. Outside of the respiratory tract, sites of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression and potential viral replication include superficial cells of the conjunctiva, enterocytes of the ileum and colon, and the gallbladder, among others117,118,119, which may account for extrapulmonary clinical manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 (Table 1), although further work defining the mechanistic pathophysiology of this association is required.Despite being the initial and primary cell type infected by respiratory viruses, infected epithelial cells and bystander epithelial cells initiate carefully regulated responses to both cell-intrinsic and extrinsic signals. Epithelial cells are equipped with many of the same host defence tools that professional immune cells are well known for, including viral sensors, direct antiviral molecules and inflammatory mediators, such as type I/III interferons, tumour necrosis factor, interleukin 6 (IL-6) and other chemokines (for example, CXCL10 and IL-8)100,103. Indeed, in vitro models using influenza virus infection of normal human bronchial epithelial cells have demonstrated that epithelial cells are capable of producing inflammatory cytokines in the absence of other professional immune cells103. The epithelial influence on the immune response begins early. Upon infection, the influenza virus HA protein binds to surface sialosaccharides to initiate receptor-mediated endocytosis of the virion, which subsequently fuses with the endosomal membrane and releases viral ribonucleoproteins (vRNPs) into the cytoplasm. vRNPs are trafficked to the nucleus where replication occurs. Pathogen-associated molecular patterns in the form of viral nucleic acids are recognized by the pattern recognition receptors retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and Toll like receptor 3 (TLR3)80,86,121,122,123,124 (Table 1). TLR7 is also important for endosomal recognition of IAV in some immune cells125,126. An additional early mediator of the epithelial response to IAV infection is NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3), which forms a complex with other proteins termed the NLRP3 inflammasome that functions to moderate immunopathology86,123. The initial signalling cascades necessary for a coordinated host response to influenza virus entry culminate in the production of hundreds of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and pro-inflammatory cytokines via activation of the transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor κB (NF-κB). Interestingly, influenza viruses encode proteins, such as nonstructural protein (NS1)127 and polymerase basic protein 2 (PB2)128, among others, that interfere with interferon signalling at multiple steps. Although the initial epithelial response to SARS-CoV-2 requires more study, on the basis of recently published data and knowledge extrapolated from other coronaviruses, it is likely that TLR3, RIG-I and RIG-I-like receptor melanoma differentiation-associated 5 (MDA5) also participate in innate sensing of intracellular SARS-CoV-2 and are intrinsic to induction of interferon signalling pathways129,130,131,132 (Table 1). Recent evidence suggests that the NLRP3 inflammasome is also activated in response to SARS-CoV-2 infection in CD14+ lung cells obtained from deceased individuals as well as in peripheral blood mononuclear cells133.Activated interferon pathways and their pleiotropic effects highlight the importance of balancing defence strategies of resistance and tolerance. As two studies recently demonstrated in mice, persistence of antiviral signalling in particular in the LRT during viral inflammation may oppose proliferation of epithelial cells, which are crucial for tissue repair and restoration of lung function90,91. Thus, compartmentalization of interferon and careful regulation of timing are likely crucial to surviving a severe respiratory infection. As in the case of other coronaviruses134, the type I interferon response to SARS-CoV-2 may be crucial. Decreased type I interferon levels in peripheral immune cells was associated with severe disease despite increased interferon-α in the lung65. Loss-of-function variants of TLR7 resulted in a decrease in type I interferon signalling and decreased levels of interferon and ISG mRNA135. Similarly, the presence of neutralizing autoantibodies targeting type I interferons was associated with onset of severe disease130. Finally, compared with individuals with influenza virus, individuals with COVID-19 demonstrate downregulation of interferon signalling pathways in subsets of peripheral blood mononuclear cells136. As in the case of influenza virus, SARS-CoV-2 also produces proteins that interfere with interferon signalling137 (Table 1).In addition to an interferon and pro-inflammatory response to infection, altruistic programmed cell death (PCD) is an essential component of the initial cellular response to IAV infection. In benefit to the host, PCD serves to limit viral replication and prevent pathological immune responses138,139. However, because there appears to be a threshold of alveolar type I epithelial cell loss of 10%, beyond which gas exchange and survival are impaired85, it is imperative for host survival that PCD responses to prevent continued viral replication are contained139. PCD pathways are intertwined with various levels of crosstalk, which may lead to significantly different inflammatory outcomes with imbalances or preferential activation of one pathway over another139,140. Whereas necroptosis and pyroptosis are inflammatory forms of PCD that result in the release of damage-associated molecular patterns that serve to propagate inflammatory responses, apoptosis is a relatively anti-inflammatory form of PCD140,141. In the context of IAV infection, Z-DNA binding protein 1 (ZBP1), which recognizes Z-RNA, has an integral role in mediating PCD responses124,142,143,144. Immediately downstream of ZBP1 is receptor interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3), which contains a RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM) domain complementary to the ZBP1 RHIM124,145. Following ZBP1-dependent RIPK3 activation, necroptosis is mediated by mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) disruption of the plasma membrane after phosphorylation by RIPK3 (refs146,147) while apoptosis is mediated by RIPK3 interaction with a complex of proteins that includes receptor interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), Fas-associated via death domain (FADD) and caspase 8 (ref.148). It was previously unclear whether both pathways were simultaneously activated in an individual cell or whether they were mutually exclusive. Recently, using a knock-in model in which caspase 8 was engineered to be unable to signal for apoptosis, but still able to carry out its other functions necessary for animal viability, it was demonstrated that necroptosis and apoptosis fates are mutually exclusive events following IAV infection within an individual cell149. Beyond influenza viruses directly activating these PCD pathways, it is important to note that interferons also lead to increased expression of many genes involved in cell death, including ZBP1 and MLKL144,150. Furthermore, proteins produced by influenza viruses themselves, such as PB1-F2, may induce apoptosis151. Early evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 results primarily in apoptosis of infected human airway epithelial cells152. Additionally, SARS-CoV-2 encodes the protein ORF3a, which has been shown to induce epithelial cell apoptosis dependent on caspase 8 activity, although to a lesser degree than SARS-CoV ORF3a153.By releasing inflammatory mediators or other bioactive molecules, either as a result of PCD or by active secretion, epithelial cells help to define the tissue microenvironment. In addition, epithelial cells produce molecules that promote tissue repair and tolerance by interacting with diverse cell types in the LRT. One of these key molecules is granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). During IAV-induced lung injury, alveolar type II epithelial cells are primary producers of GM-CSF in the distal lung154. GM-CSF not only has well-documented roles in promoting inflammatory responses by inducing proliferation and differentiation of myeloid cells, but also helps maintain epithelial barrier integrity by promoting the activity of alveolar macrophages, enhancing adaptive responses through dendritic cell activity, or acting directly on epithelial cells155. Another important molecule is amphiregulin (AREG), a member of the epidermal growth factor family of molecules, which is capable of inducing both cell proliferation and differentiation156. A number of studies in mice have demonstrated that AREG has a protective effect during influenza virus infection and that multiple different cell types, including both immune and parenchymal cells, can produce the molecule87,88,157,158,159. Although it is unclear which cell type is the primary source of protective AREG during influenza virus infection, epithelial cells are a likely candidate157,159.Epithelial cells can also alter the tissue microenvironment through regulation of surface molecules and communication with nearby cells. One example is the upregulation of class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules that present viral peptides to CD8+ T cells. Influenza virus-specific CD8+ T cells recognize the peptide–MHC complex and release cytolytic molecules to kill the infected cell160. This cell killing can further amplify the immune response through the release of inflammatory molecules from the infected cell. Killing of both infected and bystander alveolar type II cells by CD8+ T cells can drive acute lung damage and compromise tissue function161,162.Epithelium-derived cell adhesion and integrin molecules, which mediate cell–cell and cell–extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions and can activate other extracellular molecules, also regulate the host response during influenza infection. One example is the epithelium-specific αvβ6 integrin, which is upregulated during infection and can modulate the lung microenvironment and collagen deposition through the regulation of transforming growth factor-β and type I and III interferon signalling89,163. β6 integrin-deficient mice are unable to form the functional αVβ6 homodimer and as a consequence have increased interferon signalling, activated alveolar macrophages and enhanced repair, resulting in greater protection from influenza virus and other respiratory pathogens89. This protection extends to high-risk populations164. Although epithelial cells are the most studied structural lung cell involved in host response to influenza virus infection, other structural lung cells have important roles in the response to and, therefore, outcome of infection.Mesenchymal cellsMesenchymal cells are a broad group that encompasses fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, pericytes and other stromal cell types in the respiratory tract. These cells make up the connective tissue in the lung and exhibit diverse functions including regulation of the ECM, production of growth factors, cytokines and chemokines, and the generation of stem cell niches, among others165. As cells of the connective tissue, mesenchymal cells define the tissue environments by generating the ECM and providing signals to nearby cells, which determine their migration, proliferation and differentiation. These functions have been well studied during lung homeostasis but have not been well defined during acute respiratory infection, despite the fact that they communicate with essentially every cell type in the lung either through direct cell–cell interactions or through the ECM. One of the crucial tools that mesenchymal cells use to define the tissue environment is ECM proteases. Mesenchymal cells produce an impressive array of proteases and glycosidases that degrade or modify specific components of the ECM, including structural proteins, cytokines or growth factors, and other proteases166. ECM proteases regulate each stage of lung injury or infection by degrading ECM barriers to facilitate cell migration through the tissue, activating cytokines and growth factors, and modifying the ECM during repair. Bioactive degradation products of the ECM, often referred to as matrikines, can further amplify lung inflammation by stimulating nearby cells167. Several studies in mouse models of influenza virus infection have found that ECM proteases, including members of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) and A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) family members, have both pathogenic (MMP9, MMP14 and ADAMTS4) and protective functions (ADAMTS5) by degrading diverse ECM proteins168,169,170,171. Studies in human cases of influenza virus infection have also established correlations between the levels of ECM proteases and the severity of disease and respiratory failure172. Mechanistic studies in mice have demonstrated that the activity of specific proteases can compromise lung function by directly altering the ECM structure and relatedly by regulating immune cell migration to the site of infection or damage. Although both immune and structural cells produce ECM proteases, recent evidence suggests that mesenchymal cells are the primary producers of proteases that contribute to pathogenesis. One crucial protease is the versican-degrading enzyme ADAMTS4. During influenza virus infection, inflammatory fibroblasts produce ADAMTS4, promoting robust CD8+ T cell infiltration into the lung tissue. In both paediatric and adult cases of influenza virus infection, protein levels of ADAMTS4 in the lower respiratory tract were strongly associated with respiratory failure and mortality173. Thus, fibroblasts serve as gatekeepers of immune cell access to the tissue and their exuberant inflammatory activity can drive lung damage and respiratory failure.In addition to ECM remodelling activities, mesenchymal cells produce growth factors that directly stimulate epithelial cells to promote tissue repair. In mice, fibroblast growth factor 10 (FGF10), produced by lung mesenchymal cells, has a protective role following severe IAV infection by stimulating a subset of epithelial progenitor cells to undergo proliferation174. Taken together, these studies identify lung mesenchymal cells as crucial regulators of disease resistance and tolerance and of the transition between resolution of inflammation and initiation of tissue repair.Endothelial cellsPulmonary endothelial cells make up another barrier that is essential for gas exchange and lung function. The endothelium not only moves blood into the lung for oxygenation but also helps to circulate inflammatory molecules and migratory immune cells. During influenza virus infection, the endothelium becomes activated as cells upregulate surface expression of cell adhesion molecules, including P- and E-selectins74. The endothelium is the entry point for immune cells migrating to the lung tissue. Migrating immune cells interact with cell adhesion molecules on endothelial cells and traverse this barrier on the way to the site of infection. Activation of the endothelium and extravasation of immune cells from blood capillaries into the alveoli can result in vascular permeability and an increase in fluid in the lungs175. Thus, endothelial cells are also important decision-makers in determining resistant and tolerant tissue environments as they balance recruitment of immune cells to clear infected cells with integrity of the vasculature. Although human and avian influenza viruses can infect primary human endothelial cells in vitro176,177,178, the extent to which they productively infect endothelial cells in vivo remains controversial74,179.Whether or not endothelial cells become productively infected in vivo, they do respond robustly to infection. In addition to upregulating adhesion molecules to recruit immune cells, endothelial cells have a crucial role in amplifying cytokine and chemokine production, which can lead to lethal immunopathology99. The sphingosine 1-phosphate 1 receptor (S1P1R), which binds to lipid metabolites, regulates this excessive cytokine production, and agonism of S1P1R with small molecules can significantly reduce cytokine levels in the lung99,180. Amplification of inflammation in endothelial cells depends on signalling through the IL-1 receptor and is independent of endosomal or cytosolic sensing of the virus. Dependence on IL-1 receptor signalling suggests that endothelial cells respond to damage signals released from epithelial cells, such as IL-1α, or those produced by professional immune cells, likely IL-1β181.Like the other major structural cell types in the lung, endothelial cells exhibit heterogeneity based on compartment (microvascular, macrovascular or lymphatic). Single-cell gene expression studies have begun to characterize this heterogeneity during influenza virus infection, identifying groups of cells with distinct transcriptional responses that are highly proliferative and involved in tissue repair182. The tolerogenic potential of pulmonary endothelial cells has been largely unexplored.As described above, SARS-CoV-2 infection appears to involve the pulmonary endothelium more than other respiratory viruses, such as influenza virus. Observations of severe COVID-19 in humans indicate extensive endothelial cell activation, thrombosis and angiogenesis76,183,184. This endothelial activation and thrombosis has also been observed in a non-human primate model of SARS-CoV-2 infection185. The mechanisms leading to such extensive endothelial involvement are unclear, but possibilities include direct infection of endothelial cells183 and microvascular complement protein deposition186. During infection in humans, endothelial cells express ACE2 (ref.76), and the virus readily infects human blood vessel organoids187.Lung repair and recovery from infectionTissue repair in the respiratory tract presents a challenge because of its distinct compartments, the diverse cell types affected and the heterogeneity of infection188. A pair of excellent, recent reviews have detailed the contribution of different subsets of structural cells, including epithelial, endothelial and mesenchymal, to tissue repair and the complex crosstalk between these cells during both pathogen-induced and sterile lung damage188,189.An important theme that has emerged in studies of tissue regeneration during influenza virus infection is that the severity of infection and extent of lung damage determine which progenitor cells mobilize in response to injury and the quality of the repair that they mediate105,190,191,192,193,194 (Fig. 4). Fortunately for the influenza virus field, severe influenza virus infection in mice has become a popular model for lung biologists to study acute lung injury and repair. In general, local proliferation of alveolar epithelial progenitor cells (AEPs), which are alveolar type II cells, mediate rapid and effective repair by differentiating into both alveolar type I and type II cells105,195,196. The stemness of the AEPs is maintained by WNT signalling in a close alveolar niche165,195,196. This type of repair typically occurs when there is localized damage to the alveoli. However, when there is more extensive alveolar damage and severe influenza virus infection ablates alveolar type II cells, including the AEPs, alternative progenitor cell populations fulfill this regenerative role188. In mice, several different alternative progenitor cells have been identified, termed bronchioalveolar stem cells, lineage-negative epithelial progenitors (LNEPs) — also known as distal airway stem cells (DASCs) — and another group of club-like epithelial progenitors174,190,191,194,197,198,199. Several recent studies indicate that IAVs preferentially infect club-like epithelial progenitors, which express stem cell antigen 1 (SCA1) and elevated levels of MHC class I174,194. Although these cells are able to facilitate alveolar epithelial repair following sterile lung damage, viral infection of the club-like progenitors may limit their ability to participate in effective tissue repair following severe IAV infection, requiring alternative progenitors to take on this role.Fig. 4: Alveolar epithelial repair along the severity continuum.The regeneration of alveolar tissue and restoration of function is essential for survival following a severe respiratory infection. Recent studies have demonstrated that the extent and severity of influenza virus infection determines the quality of alveolar epithelial repair. Repair by self-renewing type II alveolar cells occurs during less severe infection and is efficient. During infection with extensive tissue damage when type II alveolar cells are ablated, additional epithelial progenitor cells (p63− and p63+) mobilize to mediate repair. WNT and NOTCH signalling pathways determine localized differentiation of these progenitor cells. In severe damage, mobilization of p63+ progenitors can result in dysplastic alveolar repair characterized by the formation of cyst-like structures with high expression of Krt5 leading to reduced lung function. This dysplastic repair may lead to persistent lung dysfunction.Full size imageOne of the apparent consequences of mobilizing LNEPs and/or DASCs is that they do not fully differentiate into alveolar type II cells, leaving areas of the lung with cyst-like structures with cytokeratin 5 (KRT5) expression and persistent pathology190,192,193. In these areas of the lung that never fully repair, hypoxia drives NOTCH signalling, which prevented differentiation of Krt5+ cells into alveolar epithelial lineages in mice193. Areas of persistent pathology maintain distinct microenvironments with gene expression signatures of type 2 immunity and the presence of tuft-like cells200,201. The physiological consequences of these signatures and the extent to which this happens in severe influenza virus infection in humans is unknown. It should be noted, however, that ongoing lung dysfunction, evident by both lung imaging and pulmonary function testing, has been described following severe IAV and SARS-CoV-2 infection202,203,204.Together, these exciting advances define the mechanistic basis for how the extent and severity of infection determine the quality of tissue repair following influenza virus infection and provide a foundation for developing both cellular and molecular therapies to influence the trajectory of lung regeneration.Experimental models of SARS-CoV-2The complexities of the host response to SARS-CoV-2 necessitate in vivo studies, and it is crucial to consider both pathogenesis and transmission when modelling a novel disease (Table 2). Initial reports have described SARS-CoV-2 infection in rodents, ferrets, non-human primates and cats205,206,207; however, it is unclear which model best recapitulates human infection. Mice are not susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 owing to the inability of murine ACE2 to bind the viral spike protein. Therefore, infection of mice requires either introduction of the human ACE2 receptor or adaptation of SARS-CoV-2 to the murine receptor208. Human ACE2 transgenic mouse lines have been developed with different promoters driving ACE2 expression. The tissue distribution and abundance of human ACE2 expression differ between these transgenic lines and in part determine the severity of disease being modelled208. In mice in which ACE2 expression is driven by the epithelial cytokeratin 18 promoter, unadapted SARS-CoV-2 causes severe pathology and respiratory distress209,210; however, recently reported mouse-adapted strains also cause severe disease in BALB/c mice211,212. Ferrets, the gold-standard model for influenza virus transmission studies, also transmit SARS-CoV-2 by both direct and respiratory contact213. However, disease severity is mild, and viral replication is generally restricted to the URT205,208. Pathogenesis in non-human primates varies by species. African green monkeys develop acute pneumonia and lung injury persisting for >1 month despite viral clearance207, whereas rhesus macaques manifest pulmonary infiltration similar to humans with only mild to moderate disease severity206. Interestingly, hamsters can efficiently transmit SARS-CoV-2 (ref.214) and experience severe disease including weight loss, DAD and high viral load in the alveolar space215. As in the human experience, aged animals, including BALB/c mice211 and Syrian golden hamsters216, demonstrate more severe clinical manifestations of infection. Because human SARS-CoV-2 disease severity is variable, in vivo systems spanning the spectrum of disease could prove invaluable.Table 2 Animal models of influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection and pathogenesisFull size tableOutlook: current and potential therapiesAt both the individual and community level, annual seasonal influenza virus vaccination remains a mainstay of influenza control. However, several considerations make reliance on vaccination alone inadequate. In certain populations at high risk of severe complications from influenza virus infection (that is, elderly individuals and individuals with obesity) vaccine response is less robust. Antigenic drift may reduce vaccine efficacy at population level, placing large communities at risk. Finally, antigenic shifts resulting in pandemic influenza virus as well as epizootic infections with highly pathogenic strains of IAV are not covered by vaccines and may result in severe disease in large numbers of individuals. For these reasons, the availability of effective therapies for influenza virus is crucial. Aside from supportive care to correct physiological derangements, the currently available treatments are all antivirals. Those available are well tolerated and shorten symptom duration, although are most efficacious when given early.Currently available therapeutics for influenza virus infection are antiviral compounds (Box 1), many of which need to be started in the first 2–3 days of infection (when viral replication is at its peak) to demonstrate benefit. As described above, severe influenza (as well as COVID-19) results in profound disruption of lung integrity, which is only in part driven by viral cytopathic effect. In severe infections, deleterious immune responses and inadequate repair mechanisms contribute to disease outcomes. Given the short therapeutic window for antivirals, targeting host factors that drive excessive inflammation and immunopathology offer a promising alternative treatment strategy. Any host therapeutic aimed at reducing lung injury, however, must consider the potential negative effect of delaying viral clearance and leaving patients with severe disease vulnerable to secondary infections. Broadly immunosuppressive agents, such as corticosteroids, are frequently given to patients in other scenarios to reduce inflammation, but are not recommended as treatment for influenza infection, unless a separate indication for their use exists217. However, in the case of SARS-CoV-2 infection leading to hospitalization, dexamethasone (a corticosteroid) given for a median of 7 days (up to 10 days) has been shown to reduce mortality, which was most evident in patients requiring higher levels of support at randomization218.As broadly acting immunosuppressants do not appear efficacious in the case of influenza virus infection and have potentially harmful side effects, more targeted therapeutics are needed that modulate specific immunological pathways. Ideally, these agents would target host factors that are active at the site of infection or injury and would avoid systemic effects. Recent work on the role of lung structural cells in determining tissue resistant or tolerant states has identified several promising classes of cellular and molecular targets. Each of the main structural cell types (mesenchymal, endothelial and epithelial) has a distinct role in determining local tissue environments that could be modulated to maintain tissue function. Mesenchymal cells are professional tissue remodellers and produce key lung ECM proteases that drive immunopathology by causing direct damage to the lung structure and regulating the movement of immune cells168,169. Inhibitors that selectively target these proteases may promote tissue tolerance by preserving lung integrity for gas exchange and preventing colonization by opportunistic bacteria. Mesenchymal cells are also primary producers of IL-6, which is consistently associated with severity94,219,220. The IL-6 receptor antagonist tocilizumab is approved to treat chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. Although it is unclear whether IL-6 is causal for influenza virus infection severity, as the cytokine has pleiotropic effects on the host response, there is continued interest in using tocilizumab to dampen excessive inflammation in severe respiratory infection, including influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection97,221, although a recent trial result did not show a benefit of a single dose of tocilizumab over usual care in adult patients hospitalized with COVID-19 (ref.222). As potent amplifiers of cytokine or chemokine production, endothelial cells represent an attractive target to reduce inflammation that is initiated in the respiratory tract. Several agonists of the S1P receptor have been developed to dampen inflammation and could potentially be used for numerous inflammatory diseases180,223. None has yet been approved for respiratory viral infections, but their use in humans, including for COVID-19, has been proposed.In contrast to targeting the mechanisms driving inflammation and disease resistance, an alternative approach could be to enhance directly the mechanisms of lung repair and disease tolerance. Preclinical studies in animal models of severe IAV infection described above indicate that the growth factors GM-CSF, FGF10 and AREG all have the potential to enhance epithelial cell proliferation in vivo. An added benefit of directly promoting these repair mechanisms to promote recovery from severe infection is that it is possible that the antiviral, or more generally anti-pathogen, host response could be left intact to continue clearance of an ongoing infection or protect against a secondary bacterial infection.The past decade of research on epithelial cells during lung injury has identified numerous pathways that could be manipulated with therapeutics, from early interferon responses and integrin signalling89, to cell death mechanisms143,144,145, to repair190,191,193. A better understanding of how these pathways function in severe human infections is needed to identify the most promising targets to advance from preclinical studies. Moreover, it is unclear how these epithelial pathways might be dysregulated in high-risk groups, such as elderly individuals and individuals with obesity. The qualitative differences in epithelial repair from heterogeneous epithelial progenitor populations provide the opportunity to target specific pathways to influence the repair process and improve both short- and long-term outcomes.Box 1 Antiviral medications for influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2Neuraminidase inhibitors (NAIs) were developed on the basis of rational drug design in the early 1990s224 and are influenza virus-specific antiviral medications. Oseltamivir, zanamivir, peramivir and laninamivir are available NAIs, each with different routes of administration. Of the NAIs, oseltamivir is the most studied and used. As their name suggests, these inhibit the function of viral neuraminidase (NA), which serves to limit viral progeny from being released from infected cells, thus reducing the number of cells subsequently infected. In adults with uncomplicated illness, oseltamivir has been shown to reduce the duration of symptomatic illness by ~24 h225. Although there are no randomized controlled trials of oseltamivir for the treatment of severe influenza virus infection, which may call into question the validity of the data226, observational studies have shown that oseltamivir has also been associated with a reduced risk of mortality in hospitalized adults with H3N2 seasonal influenza A virus (IAV)227 and the 2009 pandemic H1N1 IAV228, particularly when given early in hospital admission. Oseltamivir reduces the risk of death in patients hospitalized with highly pathogenic H5N1 IAV infection229. Resistance, conferred by the amino acid substitutions H275Y in N1 viruses or R292K in N2 viruses (among others), has been described230 and may emerge in high-risk groups on prolonged courses of NAI therapy231.Baloxavir is a newer influenza virus antiviral that inhibits the polymerase acidic (PA) cap-snatching endonuclease activity of the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) complex, halting viral replication. It has been shown to reduce the duration of symptoms by ~26 h after influenza virus infection and reduce viral load more quickly than oseltamivir232. No resistance was reported in surveillance efforts in the United States25, although resistance may emerge during treatment with baloxavir233.Other antiviral compounds, including favipiravir, which inhibits viral RdRPs (not influenza virus specific and with some interest for potential treatment of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2))230, and pimodivir, which inhibits influenza virus polymerase basic protein 2 (PB2)234, have activity against influenza virus and have been studied in human clinical trials, but are not currently widely available (favipiravir is approved in Japan for novel or emerging influenza viruses235). Finally, monoclonal antibodies targeting influenza virus haemagglutinin have been developed and tested in human clinical trials236; however, the role that these compounds have in influenza virus treatment strategies is currently unclear.Remdesivir (GS-5734) is a RdRP inhibitor with in vivo activity against Ebola virus237, in vitro and in vivo activity against Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)238, and in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2 (ref.239). A large randomized clinical trial using time to recovery as a primary end point demonstrated the benefit of 10 days of remdesivir over placebo in adults hospitalized with lower respiratory tract infection due to SARS-CoV-2 (ref.240). The benefit was most evident if given early in disease and in patients requiring low-flow oxygen at enrolment240. Notably, however, a recent multinational WHO effort to study ‘repurposed’ antiviral medications (including remdesivir) to treat SARS-CoV-2 infection, which used in-hospital mortality as the primary end point, found no apparent benefit of 10 days of remdesivir therapy241. Differences in treatment strategies, patient population and end points may account for variability in trial outcomes, and more study of remdesivir for SARS-CoV-2 infection may be necessary242. As above, favipiravir for the treatment of human infection with SARS-CoV-2 is being studied243. As more is learnt about viral tropism, host response and in vivo replication, additional therapeutic targets throughout the viral life cycle will likely present themselves. Finally, monoclonal antibodies against the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 have been developed and studied in clinical trials244. ReferencesHause, B. M. et al. Characterization of a novel influenza virus in cattle and swine: proposal for a new genus in the Orthomyxoviridae family. mBio 5, e00031–14 (2014).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar WHO. Influenza (Seasonal). https://www.who.intews-room/fact-sheets/detail/influenza-(seasonal) (2018).Houser, K. & Subbarao, K. Influenza vaccines: challenges and solutions. Cell Host Microbe 17, 295–300 (2015).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Webster, R. G. & Govorkova, E. A. Continuing challenges in influenza. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1323, 115–139 (2014).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Treanor, J. Influenza vaccine — outmaneuvering antigenic shift and drift. N. Engl. J. Med 350, 218–220 (2004).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Saunders-Hastings, P. R. & Krewski, D. Reviewing the history of pandemic influenza: understanding patterns of emergence and transmission. Pathogens 5, 66 (2016).PubMed Central Google Scholar Gambotto, A., Barratt-Boyes, S. M., de Jong, M. D., Neumann, G. & Kawaoka, Y. Human infection with highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza virus. Lancet 371, 1464–1475 (2008).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Payne, S. in Viruses 149–158 (Elsevier, 2017).Woo, P. C. Y. et al. Discovery of seven novel mammalian and avian coronaviruses in the genus deltacoronavirus supports bat coronaviruses as the gene source of alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus and avian coronaviruses as the gene source of gammacoronavirus and deltacoronavirus. J. Virol. 86, 3995–4008 (2012).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cui, J., Li, F. & Shi, Z.-L. Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17, 181–192 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rota, P. A. et al. Characterization of a novel coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome. Science 300, 1394–1399 (2003).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Peiris, J. S. M. et al. Coronavirus as a possible cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet 361, 1319–1325 (2003).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zaki, A. M., van Boheemen, S., Bestebroer, T. M., Osterhaus, A. D. M. E. & Fouchier, R. A. M. Isolation of a novel coronavirus from a man with pneumonia in Saudi Arabia. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 1814–1820 (2012).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhu, N. et al. A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 727–733 (2020). An early characterization of SARS-CoV-2 isolated from patients from Wuhan, China, early in the pandemic.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lai, M. M. & Cavanagh, D. The molecular biology of coronaviruses. Adv. Virus Res. 48, 1–100 (1997).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Woo, P. C. Y. et al. Comparative analysis of 22 coronavirus HKU1 genomes reveals a novel genotype and evidence of natural recombination in coronavirus HKU1. J. Virol. 80, 7136–7145 (2006).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, W. et al. Bats are natural reservoirs of SARS-like coronaviruses. Science 310, 676–679 (2005).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270–273 (2020). An early characterization of SARS-CoV-2 isolated from patients from Wuhan, China, early in the pandemic.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao, J., Cui, W. & Tian, B.-P. The potential intermediate hosts for SARS-CoV-2. Front. Microbiol. 11, 2400 (2020). Google Scholar Munoz, F. M. Influenza virus infection in infancy and early childhood. Paediatr. Respir. Rev. 4, 99–104 (2003).PubMed Google Scholar Davenport, F. M., Hennessy, A. V. & Francis, T. Jr. Epidemiologic and immunologic significance of age distribution of antibody to antigenic variants of influenza virus. J. Exp. Med. 98, 641–656 (1953).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Carrat, F. et al. Time lines of infection and disease in human influenza: a review of volunteer challenge studies. Am. J. Epidemiol. 167, 775–785 (2008).PubMed Google Scholar Zambon, M. C. Epidemiology and pathogenesis of influenza. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 44 (Suppl. B), 3–9 (1999).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mettelman, R. C. & Thomas, P. G. Human susceptibility to influenza infection and severe disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a038711 (2020).Article Google Scholar Xu, X. et al. Update: influenza activity in the United States during the 2018-19 season and composition of the 2019-20 influenza vaccine. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 68, 544–551 (2019).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jiang, N. et al. Lineage structure of the human antibody repertoire in response to influenza vaccination. Sci. Transl Med. 5, 171ra19 (2013).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Egorov, E. S. et al. The changing landscape of naive T cell receptor repertoire with human aging. Front. Immunol. 9, 1618 (2018).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Miller, R. A. The aging immune system: primer and prospectus. Science 273, 70–74 (1996).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Simon, A. K., Hollander, G. A. & McMichael, A. Evolution of the immune system in humans from infancy to old age. Proc. Biol. Sci. 282, 20143085 (2015).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Honce, R. & Schultz-Cherry, S. Impact of obesity on influenza A virus pathogenesis, immune response, and evolution. Front. Immunol. 10, 1071 (2019). A comprehensive review of influenza virus pathogenesis in obesity.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Paich, H. A. et al. Overweight and obese adult humans have a defective cellular immune response to pandemic H1N1 influenza A virus. Obesity 21, 2377–2386 (2013).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen, Y. et al. Adipose tissue dendritic cells enhances inflammation by prompting the generation of Th17 cells. PLoS ONE 9, e92450 (2014).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Karlsson, E. A. et al. Obesity outweighs protection conferred by adjuvanted influenza vaccination. mBio 7, e01144-16 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vazquez-Pagan, A., Honce, R. & Schultz-Cherry, S. Impact of influenza virus during pregnancy: from disease severity to vaccine efficacy. Future Virol. 15, 441–453 (2020).CAS Google Scholar Littauer, E. Q. et al. H1N1 influenza virus infection results in adverse pregnancy outcomes by disrupting tissue-specific hormonal regulation. PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006757 (2017).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Moran, T. M., Park, H., Fernandez-Sesma, A. & Schulman, J. L. Th2 responses to inactivated influenza virus can be converted to Th1 responses and facilitate recovery from heterosubtypic virus infection. J. Infect. Dis. 180, 579–585 (1999).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wang, X.-L. et al. Age and sex differences in rates of influenza-associated hospitalizations in Hong Kong. Am. J. Epidemiol. 182, 335–344 (2015).PubMed Google Scholar Gubbels Bupp, M. R., Potluri, T., Fink, A. L. & Klein, S. L. The confluence of sex hormones and aging on immunity. Front. Immunol. 9, 1269 (2018).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Smith, M., Honce, R. & Schultz-Cherry, S. Metabolic syndrome and viral pathogenesis: lessons from influenza and coronaviruses. J. Virol. 94, e00665-20 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Panhwar, M. S. et al. Effect of influenza on outcomes in patients with heart failure. JACC Heart Fail. 7, 112–117 (2019).PubMed Google Scholar Mulpuru, S. et al. Effectiveness of influenza vaccination on hospitalizations and risk factors for severe outcomes in hospitalized patients with COPD. Chest 155, 69–78 (2019).PubMed Google Scholar Godoy, P. et al. Smoking may increase the risk of hospitalization due to influenza. Eur. J. Public Health 26, 882–887 (2016).PubMed Google Scholar Mehta, H., Nazzal, K. & Sadikot, R. T. Cigarette smoking and innate immunity. Inflamm. Res. 57, 497–503 (2008).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lee, S. W. et al. Impact of cigarette smoke exposure on the lung fibroblastic response after influenza pneumonia. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 59, 770–781 (2018).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mizumoto, K., Kagaya, K., Zarebski, A. & Chowell, G. Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020. Euro Surveill. 25, 2000180 (2020).PubMed Central Google Scholar Coronavirus Resource Center. COVID-19 Map - Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html (2021).Bi, Q. et al. Epidemiology and transmission of COVID-19 in 391 cases and 1286 of their close contacts in Shenzhen, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Infect. Dis. 20, 911–919 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar He, X. et al. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19. Nat. Med. 26, 672–675 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Burke, R. M. et al. Symptom profiles of a convenience sample of patients with COVID-19 - United States, January-April 2020. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 69, 904–908 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stokes, E. K. et al. Coronavirus disease 2019 case surveillance - United States, January 22-May 30, 2020. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 69, 759–765 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Butowt, R. & von Bartheld, C. S. Anosmia in COVID-19: underlying mechanisms and assessment of an olfactory route to brain infection. Neuroscientist https://doi.org/10.1177/1073858420956905 (2020).Article PubMed Google Scholar Brann, D. H. et al. Non-neuronal expression of SARS-CoV-2 entry genes in the olfactory system suggests mechanisms underlying COVID-19-associated anosmia. Sci. Adv. 6, eabc5801 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Welge-Lüssen, A. & Wolfensberger, M. Olfactory disorders following upper respiratory tract infections. Adv. Otorhinolaryngol. 63, 125–132 (2006).PubMed Google Scholar Arabi, Y. M. et al. Middle east respiratory syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 376, 584–594 (2017).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gu, J. et al. Multiple organ infection and the pathogenesis of SARS. J. Exp. Med. 202, 415–424 (2005).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yang, X. et al. Clinical course and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a single-centered, retrospective, observational study. Lancet Respir. Med. 8, 475–481 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Robbins-Juarez, S. Y. et al. Outcomes for patients with COVID-19 and acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Kidney Int. Rep. 5, 1149–1160 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Galván Casas, C. et al. Classification of the cutaneous manifestations of COVID-19: a rapid prospective nationwide consensus study in Spain with 375 cases. Br. J. Dermatol. 183, 71–77 (2020).PubMed Google Scholar Poissy, J. et al. Pulmonary embolism in patients with COVID-19. Circulation 142, 184–186 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ray, J. G., Schull, M. J., Vermeulen, M. J. & Park, A. L. Association between ABO and Rh blood groups and SARS-CoV-2 infection or severe COVID-19 illness: a population-based cohort study. Ann. Intern. Med. 174, 308–315 (2021).PubMed Google Scholar Cai, Q. et al. Obesity and COVID-19 severity in a designated hospital in Shenzhen, China. Diabetes Care 43, 1392–1398 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kumar, A. et al. Is diabetes mellitus associated with mortality and severity of COVID-19? A meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab. Syndr. 14, 535–545 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Henry, B. M. & Lippi, G. Chronic kidney disease is associated with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection. Int. Urol. Nephrol. 52, 1193–1194 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Honce, R. et al. Obesity-related microenvironment promotes emergence of virulent influenza virus strains. mBio 11, e03341-19 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hadjadj, J. et al. Impaired type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in severe COVID-19 patients. Science 369, 718–724 (2020). This study identifies low levels of type I interferon in the blood as a marker of COVID-19 disease severity.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tan, W. & Aboulhosn, J. The cardiovascular burden of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) with a focus on congenital heart disease. Int. J. Cardiol. 309, 70–77 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhou, F. et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 395, 1054–1062 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, C. et al. Risk factors associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome and death in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA Intern. Med. 180, 934–943 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Raschetti, R. et al. Synthesis and systematic review of reported neonatal SARS-CoV-2 infections. Nat. Commun. 11, 5164 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mehta, N. S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19): what do we know about children? A systematic review. Clin. Infect. Dis. 71, 2469–2479 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Walsh, J. J., Dietlein, L. F., Low, F. N., Burch, G. E. & Mogabgab, W. J. Bronchotracheal response in human influenza. Type A, Asian strain, as studied by light and electron microscopic examination of bronchoscopic biopsies. Arch. Intern. Med. 108, 376–388 (1961).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Taubenberger, J. K. & Morens, D. M. The pathology of influenza virus infections. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 3, 499–522 (2008). An excellent and comprehensive review of the pathological manifestations of influenza virus.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shieh, W.-J. et al. 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1): pathology and pathogenesis of 100 fatal cases in the United States. Am. J. Pathol. 177, 166–175 (2010).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Short, K. R., Kroeze, E. J. B. V., Fouchier, R. A. M. & Kuiken, T. Pathogenesis of influenza-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome. Lancet Infect. Dis. 14, 57–69 (2014).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kuiken, T. & Taubenberger, J. K. Pathology of human influenza revisited. Vaccine 26 (Suppl. 4), D59–D66 (2008).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ackermann, M. et al. Pulmonary vascular endothelialitis, thrombosis, and angiogenesis in Covid-19. N. Engl. J. Med 383, 120–128 (2020). A study highlighting the unique pathological lung tissue findings of SARS-CoV-2 infections compared with H1N1 influenza virus-infected tissue and uninfected lung tissue samples.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bradley, B. T. et al. Histopathology and ultrastructural findings of fatal COVID-19 infections in Washington State: a case series. Lancet 396, 320–332 (2020). A study examining pulmonary and extrapulmonary histopathological and ultrastructural findings of fatal SARS-CoV-2 infection.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Medzhitov, R., Schneider, D. S. & Soares, M. P. Disease tolerance as a defense strategy. Science 335, 936–941 (2012). A comprehensive discussion of the concept of tissue tolerance in the context of infectious challenge.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ayres, J. S. & Schneider, D. S. Tolerance of infections. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 30, 271–294 (2012).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Iwasaki, A. & Pillai, P. S. Innate immunity to influenza virus infection. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 315–328 (2014). An excellent review of the early innate immune response to influenza virus infection in humans.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Meyerholz, D. K., Suarez, C. J., Dintzis, S. M. & Frevert, C. W. in Comparative Anatomy and Histology 2nd Edn (eds Treuting, P. M., Dintzis, S. M. & Montine, K. S.) 147–162 (Elsevier, 2018).Lakdawala, S. S. et al. The soft palate is an important site of adaptation for transmissible influenza viruses. Nature 526, 122–125 (2015).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Klinkhammer, J. et al. IFN-λ prevents influenza virus spread from the upper airways to the lungs and limits virus transmission. eLife 7, e33354 (2018).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Galani, I. E. et al. Interferon-λ mediates non-redundant front-line antiviral protection against influenza virus infection without compromising host fitness. Immunity 46, 875–890.e6 (2017).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sanders, C. J. et al. Compromised respiratory function in lethal influenza infection is characterized by the depletion of type I alveolar epithelial cells beyond threshold levels. Am. J Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 304, L481–L488 (2013). This study identifies a quantitative threshold of pulmonary epithelial loss beyond which survival is compromised.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thomas, P. G. et al. The intracellular sensor NLRP3 mediates key innate and healing responses to influenza A virus via the regulation of caspase-1. Immunity 30, 566–575 (2009).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Monticelli, L. A. et al. Innate lymphoid cells promote lung-tissue homeostasis after infection with influenza virus. Nat. Immunol. 12, 1045–1054 (2011).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Arpaia, N. et al. A distinct function of regulatory T cells in tissue protection. Cell 162, 1078–1089 (2015).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Meliopoulos, V. A. et al. An epithelial integrin regulates the amplitude of protective lung interferon responses against multiple respiratory pathogens. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005804 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Major, J. et al. Type I and III interferons disrupt lung epithelial repair during recovery from viral infection. Science 369, 712–717 (2020). This study identifies the potentially deleterious effects of prolonged interferon signalling on epithelial regeneration following virus-induced acute lung injury.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Broggi, A. et al. Type III interferons disrupt the lung epithelial barrier upon viral recognition. Science 369, 706–712 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Granados, A., Peci, A., McGeer, A. & Gubbay, J. B. Influenza and rhinovirus viral load and disease severity in upper respiratory tract infections. J. Clin. Virol. 86, 14–19 (2017).PubMed Google Scholar Lee, C. K. et al. Comparison of pandemic (H1N1) 2009 and seasonal influenza viral loads, Singapore. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 17, 287–291 (2011).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Oshansky, C. M. et al. Mucosal immune responses predict clinical outcomes during influenza infection independently of age and viral load. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 189, 449–462 (2014).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, N. et al. Viral loads and duration of viral shedding in adult patients hospitalized with influenza. J. Infect. Dis. 200, 492–500 (2009).PubMed Google Scholar Lucas, C. et al. Longitudinal analyses reveal immunological misfiring in severe COVID-19. Nature 584, 463–469 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Teijaro, J. R. in Influenza Pathogenesis and Control Volume II (eds Oldstone, M. B. A. & Compans, R. W.) 3–22 (National Library of Medicine, 2015).de Jong, M. D. et al. Fatal outcome of human influenza A (H5N1) is associated with high viral load and hypercytokinemia. Nat. Med. 12, 1203–1207 (2006).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Teijaro, J. R. et al. Endothelial cells are central orchestrators of cytokine amplification during influenza virus infection. Cell 146, 980–991 (2011). First report of the role of non-immune lung cells in amplifying inflammatory cytokine production and driving lethal immunopathology in a mouse model of influenza virus infection.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Heaton, N. S. et al. Long-term survival of influenza virus infected club cells drives immunopathology. J. Exp. Med. 211, 1707–1714 (2014).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Herold, S., Becker, C., Ridge, K. M. & Budinger, G. R. S. Influenza virus-induced lung injury: pathogenesis and implications for treatment. Eur. Respir. J. 45, 1463–1478 (2015).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Krausgruber, T. et al. Structural cells are key regulators of organ-specific immune responses. Nature 583, 296–302 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sanders, C. J., Doherty, P. C. & Thomas, P. G. Respiratory epithelial cells in innate immunity to influenza virus infection. Cell Tissue Res. 343, 13–21 (2011).PubMed Google Scholar Whitsett, J. A. & Alenghat, T. Respiratory epithelial cells orchestrate pulmonary innate immunity. Nat. Immunol. 16, 27–35 (2015).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Barkauskas, C. E. et al. Type 2 alveolar cells are stem cells in adult lung. J. Clin. Invest. 123, 3025–3036 (2013).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Edinger, T. O., Pohl, M. O. & Stertz, S. Entry of influenza A virus: host factors and antiviral targets. J. Gen. Virol. 95, 263–277 (2014).CAS PubMed Google Scholar van Riel, D. et al. Human and avian influenza viruses target different cells in the lower respiratory tract of humans and other mammals. Am. J. Pathol. 171, 1215–1223 (2007).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tumpey, T. M. et al. A two-amino acid change in the hemagglutinin of the 1918 influenza virus abolishes transmission. Science 315, 655–659 (2007).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Connor, R. J., Kawaoka, Y., Webster, R. G. & Paulson, J. C. Receptor specificity in human, avian, and equine H2 and H3 influenza virus isolates. Virology 205, 17–23 (1994).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Shinya, K. et al. Avian flu: influenza virus receptors in the human airway. Nature 440, 435–436 (2006). This study demonstrates different anatomical distributions of sialosaccharides preferred by avian and human influenza viruses for epithelial cell binding.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Jia, H. P. et al. Ectodomain shedding of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 in human airway epithelia. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 297, L84–L96 (2009).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and is blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell 181, 271–280.e8 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ou, X. et al. Characterization of spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 on virus entry and its immune cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV. Nat. Commun. 11, 1620 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Simmons, G. et al. Inhibitors of cathepsin L prevent severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus entry. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 11876–11881 (2005).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Daly, J. L. et al. Neuropilin-1 is a host factor for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Science 370, 861–865 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Xia, S. et al. The role of furin cleavage site in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein-mediated membrane fusion in the presence or absence of trypsin. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 5, 92 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ziegler, C. G. K. et al. SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 is an interferon-stimulated gene in human airway epithelial cells and is detected in specific cell subsets across tissues. Cell 181, 1016–1035.e19 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zou, X. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq data analysis on the receptor ACE2 expression reveals the potential risk of different human organs vulnerable to 2019-nCoV infection. Front. Med. 14, 185–192 (2020).PubMed Google Scholar Sungnak, W. et al. SARS-CoV-2 entry factors are highly expressed in nasal epithelial cells together with innate immune genes. Nat. Med. 26, 681–687 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hou, Y. J. et al. SARS-CoV-2 reverse genetics reveals a variable infection gradient in the respiratory tract. Cell 182, 429–446.e14 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Crotta, S. et al. Type I and type III interferons drive redundant amplification loops to induce a transcriptional signature in influenza-infected airway epithelia. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003773 (2013).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Takeuchi, O. & Akira, S. Pattern recognition receptors and inflammation. Cell 140, 805–820 (2010).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Allen, I. C. et al. The NLRP3 inflammasome mediates in vivo innate immunity to influenza A virus through recognition of viral RNA. Immunity 30, 556–565 (2009).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thomas, P. G., Shubina, M. & Balachandran, S. ZBP1/DAI-dependent cell death pathways in influenza a virus immunity and pathogenesis. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. https://doi.org/10.1007/82_2019_190 (2020).Article PubMed Google Scholar Diebold, S. S., Kaisho, T., Hemmi, H., Akira, S. & Reis e Sousa, C. Innate antiviral responses by means of TLR7-mediated recognition of single-stranded RNA. Science 303, 1529–1531 (2004).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lund, J. M. et al. Recognition of single-stranded RNA viruses by Toll-like receptor 7. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 5598–5603 (2004).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jia, D. et al. Influenza virus non-structural protein 1 (NS1) disrupts interferon signaling. PLoS ONE 5, e13927 (2010).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Graef, K. M. et al. The PB2 subunit of the influenza virus RNA polymerase affects virulence by interacting with the mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein and inhibiting expression of beta interferon. J. Virol. 84, 8433–8445 (2010).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Züst, R. et al. Ribose 2′-O-methylation provides a molecular signature for the distinction of self and non-self mRNA dependent on the RNA sensor Mda5. Nat. Immunol. 12, 137–143 (2011).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bastard, P. et al. Autoantibodies against type I IFNs in patients with life-threatening COVID-19. Science 370, eabd4585 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, Q. et al. Inborn errors of type I IFN immunity in patients with life-threatening COVID-19. Science 370, eabd4570 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Frieman, M., Heise, M. & Baric, R. SARS coronavirus and innate immunity. Virus Res. 133, 101–112 (2008).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rodrigues, T. S. et al. Inflammasomes are activated in response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and are associated with COVID-19 severity in patients. J. Exp. Med. 218, e20201707 (2021).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Channappanavar, R. et al. IFN-I response timing relative to virus replication determines MERS coronavirus infection outcomes. J. Clin. Invest. 129, 3625–3639 (2019).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar van der Made, C. I. et al. Presence of genetic variants among young men with severe COVID-19. JAMA 324, 1–11 (2020).PubMed Central Google Scholar Mudd, P. A. et al. Distinct inflammatory profiles distinguish COVID-19 from influenza with limited contributions from cytokine storm. Sci Adv 6, eabe3024 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lei, X. et al. Activation and evasion of type I interferon responses by SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Commun. 11, 3810 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yatim, N. & Albert, M. L. Dying to replicate: the orchestration of the viral life cycle, cell death pathways, and immunity. Immunity 35, 478–490 (2011).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rodrigue-Gervais, I. G. et al. Cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein cIAP2 protects against pulmonary tissue necrosis during influenza virus infection to promote host survival. Cell Host Microbe 15, 23–35 (2014).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Creagh, E. M. Caspase crosstalk: integration of apoptotic and innate immune signalling pathways. Trends Immunol. 35, 631–640 (2014).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Frank, D. & Vince, J. E. Pyroptosis versus necroptosis: similarities, differences, and crosstalk. Cell Death Differ. 26, 99–114 (2019).PubMed Google Scholar Zhang, T. et al. Influenza virus Z-RNAs induce ZBP1-mediated necroptosis. Cell 180, 1115–1129.e13 (2020). This study identifies Z-form RNA as the pathogen-associated molecular pattern that is recognized by the sensor ZBP1.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thapa, R. J. et al. DAI senses influenza a virus genomic RNA and activates RIPK3−dependent cell death. Cell Host Microbe 20, 674–681 (2016). This study is one of two reports to identify ZBP1/DAI as a host protein sensor of influenza virus RNA and upstream regulator of multiple cell death pathways.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kuriakose, T. et al. ZBP1/DAI is an innate sensor of influenza virus triggering the NLRP3 inflammasome and programmed cell death pathways. Sci. Immunol. 1, aag2045 (2016). This study is one of two reports to identify ZBP1/DAI as a host protein sensor of influenza virus RNA and upstream regulator of multiple cell death pathways.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nogusa, S. et al. RIPK3 activates parallel pathways of MLKL-driven necroptosis and FADD-mediated apoptosis to protect against influenza a virus. Cell Host Microbe 20, 13–24 (2016).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, J., Yang, Y., He, W. & Sun, L. Necrosome core machinery: MLKL. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 73, 2153–2163 (2016).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sun, L. et al. Mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein mediates necrosis signaling downstream of RIP3 kinase. Cell 148, 213–227 (2012).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Newton, K. et al. Activity of protein kinase RIPK3 determines whether cells die by necroptosis or apoptosis. Science 343, 1357–1360 (2014).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Shubina, M. et al. Necroptosis restricts influenza A virus as a stand-alone cell death mechanism. J. Exp. Med. 217, e20191259 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sarhan, J. et al. Constitutive interferon signaling maintains critical threshold of MLKL expression to license necroptosis. Cell Death Differ. 26, 332–347 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hsu, A. C.-Y. Influenza virus: a master tactician in innate immune evasion and novel therapeutic interventions. Front. Immunol. 9, 743 (2018).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhu, N. et al. Morphogenesis and cytopathic effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection in human airway epithelial cells. Nat. Commun. 11, 3910 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ren, Y. et al. The ORF3a protein of SARS-CoV-2 induces apoptosis in cells. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 17, 881–883 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Unkel, B. et al. Alveolar epithelial cells orchestrate DC function in murine viral pneumonia. J. Clin. Invest. 122, 3652–3664 (2012).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rösler, B. & Herold, S. Lung epithelial GM-CSF improves host defense function and epithelial repair in influenza virus pneumonia-a new therapeutic strategy? Mol Cell Pediatr 3, 29 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zaiss, D. M. W., Gause, W. C., Osborne, L. C. & Artis, D. Emerging functions of amphiregulin in orchestrating immunity, inflammation, and tissue repair. Immunity 42, 216–226 (2015).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hall, O. J. et al. Progesterone-based therapy protects against influenza by promoting lung repair and recovery in females. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005840 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Guo, X.-Z. J. et al. Lung γδ T cells mediate protective responses during neonatal influenza infection that are associated with type 2 immunity. Immunity 49, 531–544.e6 (2018).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vermillion, M. S. et al. Production of amphiregulin and recovery from influenza is greater in males than females. Biol. Sex Differ. 9, 24 (2018).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Duan, S. & Thomas, P. G. Balancing immune protection and immune pathology by CD8+ T-cell responses to influenza infection. Front. Immunol. 7, 25 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Moskophidis, D. & Kioussis, D. Contribution of virus-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T cells to virus clearance or pathologic manifestations of influenza virus infection in a T cell receptor transgenic mouse model. J. Exp. Med. 188, 223–232 (1998).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Enelow, R. I. et al. Structural and functional consequences of alveolar cell recognition by CD8+ T lymphocytes in experimental lung disease. J. Clin. Invest. 102, 1653–1661 (1998).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jolly, L. et al. Influenza promotes collagen deposition via αvβ6 integrin-mediated transforming growth factor β activation. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 35246–35263 (2014).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Meliopoulos, V., Livingston, B., Van de Velde, L.-A., Honce, R. & Schultz-Cherry, S. Absence of β6 integrin reduces influenza disease severity in highly susceptible obese mice. J. Virol. 93, e01646-18 (2019).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zepp, J. A. et al. Distinct mesenchymal lineages and niches promote epithelial self-renewal and myofibrogenesis in the lung. Cell 170, 1134–1148.e10 (2017).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bonnans, C., Chou, J. & Werb, Z. Remodelling the extracellular matrix in development and disease. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15, 786–801 (2014).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gaggar, A. & Weathington, N. Bioactive extracellular matrix fragments in lung health and disease. J. Clin. Invest. 126, 3176–3184 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bradley, L. M., Douglass, M. F., Chatterjee, D., Akira, S. & Baaten, B. J. G. Matrix metalloprotease 9 mediates neutrophil migration into the airways in response to influenza virus-induced toll-like receptor signaling. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002641 (2012).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Talmi-Frank, D. et al. Extracellular matrix proteolysis by MT1-MMP contributes to influenza-related tissue damage and mortality. Cell Host Microbe 20, 458–470 (2016).CAS PubMed Google Scholar McMahon, M. et al. ADAMTS5 is a critical regulator of virus-specific T cell immunity. PLoS Biol. 14, e1002580 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rojas-Quintero, J. et al. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 deficiency protects mice from severe influenza A viral infection. JCI Insight 3, 21 (2018). Google Scholar Guan, W. et al. Clinical correlations of transcriptional profile in patients infected with avian influenza H7N9 virus. J. Infect. Dis. 218, 1238–1248 (2018).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Boyd, D. F. et al. Exuberant fibroblast activity compromises lung function via ADAMTS4. Nature 587, 466–471 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Quantius, J. et al. Influenza virus infects epithelial stem/progenitor cells of the distal lung: impact on Fgfr2b-driven epithelial repair. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005544 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Matthay, M. A. et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 5, 18 (2019).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chan, M. C. W. et al. Influenza H5N1 virus infection of polarized human alveolar epithelial cells and lung microvascular endothelial cells. Respir. Res. 10, 102 (2009).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chan, L. L. Y. et al. Risk assessment of the tropism and pathogenesis of the highly pathogenic avian influenza A/H7N9 virus using ex vivo and in vitro cultures of human respiratory tract. J. Infect. Dis. 220, 578–588 (2019).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sumikoshi, M. et al. Human influenza virus infection and apoptosis induction in human vascular endothelial cells. J. Med. Virol. 80, 1072–1078 (2008).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Short, K. R., Kuiken, T. & Van Riel, D. Role of endothelial cells in the pathogenesis of influenza in humans. J. Infect. Dis. 220, 1859–1860 (2019).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Walsh, K. B. et al. Suppression of cytokine storm with a sphingosine analog provides protection against pathogenic influenza virus. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 12018–12023 (2011).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Teijaro, J. R., Walsh, K. B., Rice, S., Rosen, H. & Oldstone, M. B. A. Mapping the innate signaling cascade essential for cytokine storm during influenza virus infection. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 3799–3804 (2014).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Niethamer, T. K. et al. Defining the role of pulmonary endothelial cell heterogeneity in the response to acute lung injury. eLife 9, e53072 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Varga, Z. et al. Endothelial cell infection and endotheliitis in COVID-19. Lancet 395, 1417–1418 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Goshua, G. et al. Endotheliopathy in COVID-19-associated coagulopathy: evidence from a single-centre, cross-sectional study. Lancet Haematol. 7, e575–e582 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Aid, M. et al. Vascular disease and thrombosis in SARS-CoV-2 infected rhesus macaques. Cell 183, 1354–1366 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Magro, C. et al. Complement associated microvascular injury and thrombosis in the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 infection: a report of five cases. Transl Res. 220, 1–13 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Monteil, V. et al. Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 infections in engineered human tissues using clinical-grade soluble human ACE2. Cell 181, 905–913.e7 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Basil, M. C. et al. The cellular and physiological basis for lung repair and regeneration: past, present, and future. Cell Stem Cell 26, 482–502 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zepp, J. A. & Morrisey, E. E. Cellular crosstalk in the development and regeneration of the respiratory system. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 551–566 (2019).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vaughan, A. E. et al. Lineage-negative progenitors mobilize to regenerate lung epithelium after major injury. Nature 517, 621–625 (2014). This study identifies a progenitor cell population that mobilizes to sites of damage following severe influenza virus infection linking severity of infection to the quality of epithelial repair.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zuo, W. et al. p63+Krt5+ distal airway stem cells are essential for lung regeneration. Nature 517, 616–620 (2014).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kanegai, C. M. et al. Persistent pathology in influenza-infected mouse lungs. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 55, 613–615 (2016).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xi, Y. et al. Local lung hypoxia determines epithelial fate decisions during alveolar regeneration. Nat. Cell Biol. 19, 904–914 (2017). This study defines the signalling pathways that determine the quality of epithelial repair in response to localized signals associated with the severity of lung damage.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kathiriya, J. J., Brumwell, A. N., Jackson, J. R., Tang, X. & Chapman, H. A. Distinct airway epithelial stem cells hide among club cells but mobilize to promote alveolar regeneration. Cell Stem Cell 26, 346–358.e4 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nabhan, A. N., Brownfield, D. G., Harbury, P. B., Krasnow, M. A. & Desai, T. J. Single-cell Wnt signaling niches maintain stemness of alveolar type 2 cells. Science 359, 1118–1123 (2018).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zacharias, W. J. et al. Regeneration of the lung alveolus by an evolutionarily conserved epithelial progenitor. Nature 555, 251–255 (2018).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kim, C. F. B. et al. Identification of bronchioalveolar stem cells in normal lung and lung cancer. Cell 121, 823–835 (2005).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kumar, P. A. et al. Distal airway stem cells yield alveoli in vitro and during lung regeneration following H1N1 influenza infection. Cell 147, 525–538 (2011).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Salwig, I. et al. Bronchioalveolar stem cells are a main source for regeneration of distal lung epithelia in vivo. EMBO J. 38, e102099 (2019).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Keeler, S. P. et al. Influenza a virus infection causes chronic lung disease linked to sites of active viral RNA remnants. J. Immunol. 201, 2354–2368 (2018).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rane, C. K. et al. Development of solitary chemosensory cells in the distal lung after severe influenza injury. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 316, L1141–L1149 (2019).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao, Y.-M. et al. Follow-up study of the pulmonary function and related physiological characteristics of COVID-19 survivors three months after recovery. EClinicalMedicine 25, 100463 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, J. et al. Long term outcomes in survivors of epidemic Influenza A (H7N9) virus infection. Sci. Rep. 7, 17275 (2017).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Huang, C. et al. 6-month consequences of COVID-19 in patients discharged from hospital: a cohort study. Lancet 397, 220–232 (2021).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shi, J. et al. Susceptibility of ferrets, cats, dogs, and other domesticated animals to SARS-coronavirus 2. Science 368, 1016–1020 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Munster, V. J. et al. Respiratory disease in rhesus macaques inoculated with SARS-CoV-2. Nature 585, 268–272 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cross, R. W. et al. Intranasal exposure of African green monkeys to SARS-CoV-2 results in acute phase pneumonia with shedding and lung injury still present in the early convalescence phase. Virol. J. 17, 125 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Muñoz-Fontela, C. et al. Animal models for COVID-19. Nature 586, 509–515 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Oladunni, F. S. et al. Lethality of SARS-CoV-2 infection in K18 human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 transgenic mice. Nat. Commun. 11, 6122 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Winkler, E. S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 infection of human ACE2-transgenic mice causes severe lung inflammation and impaired function. Nat. Immunol. 21, 1327–1335 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gu, H. et al. Adaptation of SARS-CoV-2 in BALB/c mice for testing vaccine efficacy. Science 369, 1603–1607 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Leist, S. R. et al. A mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 induces acute lung injury and mortality in standard laboratory mice. Cell 21, 1070–1085.e12 (2020). Google Scholar Richard, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted via contact and via the air between ferrets. Nat. Commun. 11, 3496 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sia, S. F. et al. Pathogenesis and transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in golden hamsters. Nature 583, 834–838 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chan, J. F.-W. et al. Simulation of the clinical and pathological manifestations of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in golden Syrian hamster model: implications for disease pathogenesis and transmissibility. Clin. Infect. Dis. 71, 2428–2446 (2020). This study characterizes the golden Syrian hamster as a susceptible animal model for SARS-CoV-2.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Imai, M. et al. Syrian hamsters as a small animal model for SARS-CoV-2 infection and countermeasure development. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 16587–16595 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Uyeki, T. M. et al. Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America: 2018 update on diagnosis, treatment, chemoprophylaxis, and institutional outbreak management of seasonal influenza. Clin. Infect. Dis. 68, 895–902 (2019).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar RECOVERY Collaborative Group. Dexamethasone in hospitalized patients with Covid-19 - Preliminary Report. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 693–704 (2020). Google Scholar Hagau, N. et al. Clinical aspects and cytokine response in severe H1N1 influenza A virus infection. Crit. Care 14, R203 (2010).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kaiser, L., Fritz, R. S., Straus, S. E., Gubareva, L. & Hayden, F. G. Symptom pathogenesis during acute influenza: interleukin-6 and other cytokine responses. J. Med. Virol. 64, 262–268 (2001).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Guaraldi, G. et al. Tocilizumab in patients with severe COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Rheumatol. 2, e474–e484 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stone, J. H. et al. Efficacy of tocilizumab in patients hospitalized with covid-19. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 2333–2344 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhao, J. et al. Combination of sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 (S1PR1) agonist and antiviral drug: a potential therapy against pathogenic influenza virus. Sci. Rep. 9, 5272 (2019).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar von Itzstein, M. et al. Rational design of potent sialidase-based inhibitors of influenza virus replication. Nature 363, 418–423 (1993). Google Scholar Dobson, J., Whitley, R. J., Pocock, S. & Monto, A. S. Oseltamivir treatment for influenza in adults: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet 385, 1729–1737 (2015).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hurt, A. C. & Kelly, H. Debate regarding oseltamivir use for seasonal and pandemic influenza. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 22, 949–955 (2016).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lytras, T., Mouratidou, E., Andreopoulou, A., Bonovas, S. & Tsiodras, S. Effect of early oseltamivir treatment on mortality in critically Ill patients with different types of influenza: a multiseason cohort study. Clin. Infect. Dis. 69, 1896–1902 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Muthuri, S. G. et al. Effectiveness of neuraminidase inhibitors in reducing mortality in patients admitted to hospital with influenza A H1N1pdm09 virus infection: a meta-analysis of individual participant data. Lancet Respir Med 2, 395–404 (2014).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Adisasmito, W. et al. Effectiveness of antiviral treatment in human influenza A(H5N1) infections: analysis of a Global Patient Registry. J. Infect. Dis. 202, 1154–1160 (2010).PubMed Google Scholar Yen, H.-L. Current and novel antiviral strategies for influenza infection. Curr. Opin. Virol. 18, 126–134 (2016).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lee, N. & Hurt, A. C. Neuraminidase inhibitor resistance in influenza: a clinical perspective. Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis. 31, 520–526 (2018).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hayden, F. G. et al. Baloxavir marboxil for uncomplicated influenza in adults and adolescents. N. Engl. J. Med. 379, 913–923 (2018).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Uehara, T. et al. Treatment-emergent influenza variant viruses with reduced baloxavir susceptibility: impact on clinical and virologic outcomes in uncomplicated influenza. J. Infect. Dis. 221, 346–355 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Finberg, R. W. et al. Phase 2b study of pimodivir (JNJ-63623872) as monotherapy or in combination with oseltamivir for treatment of acute uncomplicated seasonal influenza A: TOPAZ trial. J. Infect. Dis. 219, 1026–1034 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Shiraki, K. & Daikoku, T. Favipiravir, an anti-influenza drug against life-threatening RNA virus infections. Pharmacol. Ther. 209, 107512 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ali, S. O. et al. Evaluation of MEDI8852, an anti-influenza a monoclonal antibody, in treating acute uncomplicated influenza. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 62, e00694-18 (2018).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Warren, T. K. et al. Therapeutic efficacy of the small molecule GS-5734 against Ebola virus in rhesus monkeys. Nature 531, 381–385 (2016).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sheahan, T. P. et al. Comparative therapeutic efficacy of remdesivir and combination lopinavir, ritonavir, and interferon beta against MERS-CoV. Nat. Commun. 11, 222 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wang, M. et al. Remdesivir and chloroquine effectively inhibit the recently emerged novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro. Cell Res. 30, 269–271 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Beigel, J. H. et al. Remdesivir for the treatment of covid-19 - final report. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 1813–1826 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar WHO Solidarity Trial Consortium. Repurposed antiviral drugs for covid-19 - interim WHO solidarity trial results. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 497–511 (2020). Google Scholar McCreary, E. K. & Angus, D. C. Efficacy of remdesivir in COVID-19. JAMA 324, 1041–1042 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Cai, Q. et al. Experimental treatment with favipiravir for COVID-19: an open-label control study. Engineering 6, 1192–1198 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen, P. et al. SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody LY-CoV555 in outpatients with Covid-19. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 229–237 (2020).PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) under HHS contract HHSN27220140006C-OPT18I for the St. Jude Center of Excellence for Influenza Research and Surveillance (P.G.T.), NIH grant R01 AI121832 (P.G.T.), Children’s Infection Defense Center (CIDC) Award (St. Jude) (T.F.), HHS contract HHSN27220140006C for the St. Jude Center of Excellence for Influenza (S.S.C.) and ALSAC. The authors thank P. Vogel for providing the histopathological specimens of respiratory tissue from mice experimentally infected with influenza A virus displayed in Fig. 3a.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Tim Flerlage, David F. Boyd.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USATim Flerlage, Victoria Meliopoulos & Stacey Schultz-CherryDepartment of Immunology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USADavid F. Boyd & Paul G. ThomasAuthorsTim FlerlageView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDavid F. BoydView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarVictoria MeliopoulosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPaul G. ThomasView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarStacey Schultz-CherryView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsT.F., D.F.B. and V.M. researched data for the article. T.F., D.F.B., P.G.T. and S.S.C. contributed substantially to discussion of the content. All authors wrote the article. All authors reviewed and/or edited the manuscript before submission.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Paul G. Thomas or Stacey Schultz-Cherry.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPeer review informationNature Reviews Microbiology thanks A. Wack and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.GlossaryTracheobronchitis Inflammation of the tracheal and bronchial mucosa. Pharyngitis Inflammation of the mucosa between the mouth and nasal cavities and the upper portion of the oesophagus (the throat). Myalgia Muscle ache. Acute respiratory distress syndrome Abrupt onset of respiratory failure characterized by inability to get oxygen into the blood owing to accumulation of lung fluid in the absence of heart failure. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease A group of diseases that restricts air movement in the lungs. Dyspnoea Shortness of breath. Thrombosis Formation of a blood clot in a blood vessel. Interstitial oedema Fluid build-up in tissues outside of cells. Angiogenesis Development of new blood vessels. Extracellular matrix An intricate supportive collection of proteins and other macromolecules present in all tissues. Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleFlerlage, T., Boyd, D.F., Meliopoulos, V. et al. Influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2: pathogenesis and host responses in the respiratory tract. Nat Rev Microbiol 19, 425–441 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-021-00542-7Download citationAccepted: 08 March 2021Published: 06 April 2021Issue Date: July 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-021-00542-7Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by An RNA-hydrolyzing recombinant minibody prevents both influenza A virus and coronavirus in co-infection models Quynh Xuan Thi LuongPhuong Thi HoangSukchan Lee Scientific Reports (2024) Blocking cell death limits lung damage and inflammation from influenza Nishma GuptaJohn Silke Nature (2024) Mucosal IFNλ1 mRNA-based immunomodulation effectively reduces SARS-CoV-2 induced mortality in mice Anna MachtYiqi HuangThomas Langenickel EMBO Reports (2024) Developing a Coccidioides posadasii and SARS-CoV-2 Co-infection Model in the K18-hACE2 Transgenic Mouse Daniel R. KollathFrancisca J. GrillBridget M. Barker Communications Medicine (2024) SARS-CoV-2 immunity in animal models Zhao ChenYaochang YuanJing Sun Cellular & Molecular Immunology (2024) Download PDF Associated content Series COVID-19 Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Editorial policies About the Editors Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Journal Credits Editorial input and checks Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Publishing model Calendars Conferences Posters Web Feeds Contact Publish with us For Authors For Referees Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Reviews Microbiology (Nat Rev Microbiol) ISSN 1740-1534 (online) ISSN 1740-1526 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingNanoparticle-based flu vaccine | National Institutes of Health (NIH) Skip to main content U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Search the NIH Website Virtual Tour Staff Directory En Español Site Menu Home Health Information Health Care Providers & Facilities Health Info Lines HealthCare.gov Science Education Resources NIH Clinical Research Trials and You Talking to Your Doctor More » Search Health Topics Quick Links MedlinePlus Health Info NIH News in Health Wellness Toolkits Grants & Funding Grants Home Page Find Funding Due Dates How to Apply About Grants Policy & Compliance Grants News/Blog Contracts Loan Repayment More » Quick Links RePORT eRA Commons NIH Common Fund News & Events News Releases Digital Media Kits Media Resources Media Contacts Images and B-roll Events Social Media More » Quick Links NIH News in Health NIH Research Matters NIH Record Research & Training Medical Research Initiatives Science Highlights Science Education Research in NIH Labs & Clinics Training Opportunities Library Resources Research Resources Clinical Research Resources Safety, Regulation and Guidance More » Quick Links PubMed Stem Cell Information OppNet NIDB NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research Institutes at NIH List of Institutes and Centers NIH Office of the Director Directors of NIH Institutes and Centers NIH Institute and Center Contact Information More » Quick Links NCI NEI NHLBI NHGRI NIA NIAAA NIAID NIAMS NIBIB NICHD NIDCD NIDCR NIDDK NIDA NIEHS NIGMS NIMH NIMHD NINDS NINR NLM CC CIT CSR FIC NCATS NCCIH About NIH Who We Are What We Do Jobs at NIH Visitor Information Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us More » Quick Links The NIH Director Take the Virtual Tour NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health® Impact of NIH Research Science, Health, and Public Trust You are hereHome » News & Events » NIH Research Matters NIH Research Matters April 6, 2021Nanoparticle-based flu vaccineAt a Glance A nanoparticle-based vaccine protected against a broad range of flu virus strains in animals. The vaccine may prevent flu more effectively than current seasonal vaccines. Illustration of a “mosaic nanoparticle vaccine,” which contains proteins from many different flu strains. UW Medicine Institute for Protein Design Influenza, or flu, kills an estimated 290,000-650,000 people each year worldwide. In the U.S., it killed an estimated 12,000-61,000 per flu season from 2010 to 2020. The flu virus changes, or mutates, quickly. Researchers try to predict which flu strains will be the most prevalent each year. These predictions are then used to develop that season’s flu vaccine. If the predictions aren’t correct, the resulting vaccine will be less effective. As a result, seasonal flu vaccines vary in their effectiveness, from as high as 60% to as low as 10%. A single vaccine that conferred protection against a wide variety of strains would provide a major boost to global health. A research team led by Drs. Barney Graham and Masaru Kanekiyo at the Vaccine Research Center of NIH’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) and Neil King at UW Medicine have been working to develop such a vaccine. The study was also supported in part by NIH’s National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS). Results appeared on March 24, 2021, in Nature. Flu vaccines use a viral protein called hemagglutinin (HA). To create their vaccine, the researchers fused HA proteins to protein building blocks that assemble into nanometer-sized particles (nanoparticles). The resulting nanoparticles display the HA proteins for the immune system to react to. The team made four types of nanoparticles, each using HA from a different flu strain. They also made “mosaic” nanoparticles that incorporated all four HAs on each nanoparticle. Dr. Neil King explains the nanoparticle flu vaccine. UW Medicine The researchers tested their vaccines in mice, ferrets, and monkeys. They compared them to a commercial flu vaccine from 2017-2018 that used the same four flu strains. The nanoparticle vaccines elicited antibody responses against these strains that were as good or better than those elicited by the commercial vaccine. But the nanoparticle vaccines also provided near-complete protection against flu strains that the commercial vaccine did not protect against. The nanoparticle vaccines included only two of the 18 influenza A virus HA subtypes, H1 and H3. But a cocktail vaccine of the four HA nanoparticles conferred 73% protection against viruses containing H5 and H7 subtypes, and the mosaic vaccine conferred 92% protection. In contrast, the commercial vaccine provided only 12% protection. H5 and H7 appear in avian flu strains that are recognized pandemic threats. To determine how the mosaic nanoparticle vaccine protects against such a broad range of viral strains, the researchers examined the interactions between HA and vaccine-elicited antibodies using electron microscopy. Antibodies that recognized H1 viruses did so primarily via the HA receptor-binding domain (RBD). But antibodies that recognized H5 did so via the stem region of HA, which doesn’t change much across the HA subtypes. This ability to elicit antibodies against both the RBD and the stem region makes the mosaic nanoparticle vaccine an attractive candidate for further study. Such a vaccine could provide protection against many more strains than current seasonal vaccines. The protection might also last beyond one season, which would reduce the need for repeated seasonal vaccinations. NIAID’s Vaccine Research Center is already planning a phase I clinical trial for a version of the nanoparticle vaccine. “The responses that our vaccine gives against strain-matched viruses are really strong, and the additional coverage we saw against mismatched strains could lower the risk of a bad flu season,” says Dr. Daniel Ellis of the University of Washington, a lead author of the study. —by Brian Doctrow, Ph.D.Related LinksDrug Mimics Human Antibody Against FluStudy Suggests Way to Improve Flu VaccinesMicroneedle Patch for Flu VaccineStrategy May Improve Seasonal Flu VaccinesProgress Toward an H7N9 Avian Flu VaccineAntibodies Protect Against Range of Flu VirusesFlu Pandemic Study Supports Social DistancingSafeguarding Our Health: Vaccines Protect Us AllInfluenzaVaccine Research CenterReferences: Quadrivalent influenza nanoparticle vaccines induce broad protection. Boyoglu-Barnum S, Ellis D, Gillespie RA, Hutchinson GB, Park YJ, Moin SM, Acton OJ, Ravichandran R, Murphy M, Pettie D, Matheson N, Carter L, Creanga A, Watson MJ, Kephart S, Ataca S, Vaile JR, Ueda G, Crank MC, Stewart L, Lee KK, Guttman M, Baker D, Mascola JR, Veesler D, Graham BS, King NP, Kanekiyo M. Nature. 2021 Mar 24. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03365-x. Online ahead of print. PMID: 33762730.Funding: NIH’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) and National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS); Open Philanthropy Project; The Audacious Project; Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA); Pew Charitable Trusts; Burroughs Wellcome Fund; University of Washington Arnold and Mabel Beckman Cryo-EM Center. In this Edition Drug prescriptions in older adults with dementia SARS-CoV-2 may infect mouth cells Nanoparticle-based flu vaccine Search NIH Research Matters Search NIH Research Matters' stories Connect with Us Subscribe to get NIH Research Matters by email RSS feed Facebook Email us Mailing Address: NIH Research Matters Bldg. 31, Rm. 5B52, MSC 2094 Bethesda, MD 20892-2094 Popular Stories Brain waste-clearance system shown in people for first time Why protective antibodies fade after COVID-19 vaccines Accurate blood test for Alzheimer’s disease Sex differences in how the body reduces pain Different exercise patterns bring health benefits About NIH Research Matters Editor: Harrison Wein, Ph.D. Assistant Editors: Vicki Contie and Brian Doctrow, Ph.D. NIH Research Matters is a weekly update of NIH research highlights reviewed by NIH’s experts. It's published by the Office of Communications and Public Liaison in the NIH Office of the Director. ISSN 2375-9593 Connect with Us Contact Us X Facebook Instagram YouTube Flickr More Social Media from NIH Footer NIH Home Virtual Tour En Español Visitor Information Frequently Asked Questions Privacy Policy Disclaimers Accessibility NIH Website Archives Nondiscrimination Notice Freedom of Information Act No Fear Act HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Office of Inspector General USA.gov NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health® National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, Maryland 20892 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Back to TopDifferences in antibiotic and antiviral use in people with confirmed influenza: a retrospective comparison of rapid influenza PCR and multiplex respiratory virus PCR tests | BMC Infectious Diseases | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search BMC Infectious Diseases Home About Articles Submission Guidelines Join the board Collections Submit manuscript Differences in antibiotic and antiviral use in people with confirmed influenza: a retrospective comparison of rapid influenza PCR and multiplex respiratory virus PCR tests Download PDF Download PDF Research article Open access Published: 07 April 2021 Differences in antibiotic and antiviral use in people with confirmed influenza: a retrospective comparison of rapid influenza PCR and multiplex respiratory virus PCR tests Victor Au Yeung1, Kiran Thapa2, William Rawlinson2,3, Andrew Georgiou4, Jeffrey J. Post1,5 & …Kristen Overton1,5 Show authors BMC Infectious Diseases volume 21, Article number: 321 (2021) Cite this article 2712 Accesses 10 Citations 12 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundInfluenza is a highly contagious respiratory virus with clinical impacts on patient morbidity, mortality and hospital bed management. The effect of rapid nucleic acid testing (RPCR) in comparison to standard multiplex PCR (MPCR) diagnosis in treatment decisions is unclear. This study aimed to determine whether RPCR influenza testing in comparison to standard MPCR testing was associated with differences in antibiotic and antiviral (oseltamivir) utilisation and hospital length of stay in emergency department and inpatient hospital settings.MethodsA retrospective cohort study of positive influenza RPCR and MPCR patients was performed utilising data from the 2017 influenza season. Medical records of correlating patient presentations were reviewed for data collection. An analysis of RPCR versus MPCR patient outcomes was performed examining test turnaround time, antibiotic initiation, oseltamivir initiation and hospital length of stay for both emergency department and inpatient hospital stay. Subgroup analysis was performed to assess oseltamivir use in high risk populations for influenza complications. Statistical significance was assessed using Mann-Whitney test for numerical data and Chi-squared test for categorical data. Odds ratio with 95% confidence intervals were calculated where appropriate.ResultsOverall, 122 RPCR and 362 MPCR positive influenza patients were included in this study. Commencement of antibiotics was less frequent in the RPCR than MPCR cohorts (51% vs 67%; p < 0.01, OR 0.52; 95% CI 0.34–0.79). People at high risk of complications from influenza who were tested with the RPCR were more likely to be treated with oseltamivir compared to those tested with the MPCR (76% vs 63%; p = 0.03, OR 1.81; 95% CI 1.07–3.08). Hospital length of stay was not impacted when either test was used in the emergency department and inpatient settings.ConclusionsThese findings suggest utilisation of RPCR testing in influenza management can improve antibiotic stewardship through reduction in antibiotic use and improvement in oseltamivir initiation in those at higher risk of complications. Further research is required to determine other factors that may have influenced hospital length of stay and a cost-benefit analysis should be undertaken to determine the financial impact of the RPCR test. Peer Review reports IntroductionInfluenza is a highly contagious respiratory virus with significant impacts on morbidity and mortality in the elderly, immunocompromised and those with chronic health conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [1]. Early detection can lead to treatment with antiviral therapy in high risk individuals [2] and could impact hospital bed management and resource allocation such as isolation rooms, subsequent bed flow and personal protective equipment. The 2017 Australian influenza season recorded some of the highest levels of influenza activity since the 2009 pandemic with 2.3 times more influenza related admissions compared to the average number of admissions from 2012 to 2016 [3]. Globally, it has been estimated that approximately 9.5 million influenza associated hospitalisations occur annually, with approximately 145,000 deaths [4]. The highest mortality rate is in those greater than 70 years old at 16.4 deaths per 100,000 [4]. Though the majority of influenza illnesses may be self-limiting, it has been estimated to be associated with 4–6 working days lost per infection case [5].As influenza may present with a lower respiratory tract infection it is frequently treated as bacterial pneumonia. A diagnosis of influenza may reduce unnecessary antibacterial prescriptions and increase the appropriate use of antivirals for influenza. Oseltamivir treatment for influenza can reduce the duration of illness by approximately 1 day and has benefit in people with severe influenza [6, 7]. Unnecessary antibacterial therapy is associated with risks of Clostridioides difficile infection, adverse effects such as acute kidney injury and the development of antimicrobial resistance [8,9,10].Earlier rapid influenza tests that were antigen based demonstrated poor sensitivity in detecting influenza and randomised controlled trials (RCT) failed to demonstrate improvement in clinical outcomes [11, 12]. Rapid PCR (RPCR) testing has greater specificity and sensitivity than rapid antigen testing [13]. Data on the effects of RPCR testing on antiviral and antibacterial therapy prescribing are limited. Most of the available data on the effects of rapid influenza testing on outcomes for people presenting to Emergency Departments include non-comparative cohort studies [14,15,16] or use historical controls [17,18,19,20,21,22,23]. These studies have generally compared a RPCR test to a multiplex PCR (MPCR) test with longer turnaround times. They have suggested the potential for reductions in antibacterial therapy prescription, increased antiviral prescription or effects on admission rates or infection control procedures. The lack of controls or the use of before and after test implementation design may affect the conclusions of these studies as there is significant variation in circulating seasonal influenza viruses and magnitude of cases which may affect clinician decision making.We aimed to determine whether RPCR influenza testing was associated with differences in antibacterial and antiviral prescription and hospital length of stay when compared to standard (MPCR) testing in the same influenza season.Materials and methodsIn 2017, a pilot program was introduced in the New South Wales (NSW) public health system which made available the use of RPCR for influenza (Type A and B) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) at all NSW Health Pathology services for the influenza season. The RPCR test was the Cepheid Xpert Xpress Flu/RSV Assay (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA) and expected result availability was between one and 4 h. The expected cost per RPCR test was AUD$30 and has in-house verification studies of sensitivity and specificity both at 100%. Standard MPCR testing was carried out using Allplex Respiratory Panel (Seegene Inc., Seoul, South Korea) kit with result availability between one and 4 days. This assay is used to detect Influenza A virus, Influenza B virus, Human respiratory syncytial virus A, Human respiratory syncytial virus B, and subtyping of Influenza A virus (Human Influenza A virus subtype H1, H3, and H1pdm09). The expected cost per MPCR test was AUD$17 and has in-house verification studies of sensitivity and specificity both at 100%. Standard MPCR test was expected to be used where RPCR was not indicated. Memoranda were sent by the virology laboratory to all hospital health services detailing the rationale and laboratory service suggested indications for influenza RPCR testing. The laboratory suggested that RPCR testing be utilised in high risk patients including intensive care unit (ICU) and immunocompromised patients with influenza-like-illness (ILI), emergency department (ED) presentations with respiratory tract infections and inpatients developing symptoms suggestive of influenza or “where rapid laboratory diagnosis of influenza will influence bed management (isolation rooms) and the goals of the Antimicrobial Stewardship Program in containing unnecessary antibiotic use”. Test selection decisions were at the clinician’s discretion.Retrospective data were collected on an opportunistic cohort of all patients with a positive influenza test result attending Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia during the influenza season between 1st June and 30th September 2017. We compared result turnaround time, antibiotic use, antiviral treatment and length of stay (LOS) for both ED only and inpatient admissions between the two assays.Data collectionPositive viral PCR results and associated result turnaround time were extracted from the pathology database. Test result turnaround time was calculated from time of sample collection to time of result availability. These results were then matched to corresponding patient electronic hospital medical records for review. Only those with positive RPCR or standard MPCR; greater than 18 years old and who presented to Prince of Wales ED or were admitted to Prince of Wales Hospital were included in this study.Patient demographic data collected from the electronic medical record included age, sex and degree of co-morbidity which was assessed using Charlson Comorbidity Index [24] based on documented medical history. Patient characteristics considered to be high risk for influenza disease complications were also recorded. These included age greater than 65 years, pregnant, cardiac disease, Down syndrome, obesity (BMI > 30 kg/m2), chronic respiratory condition, severe neurological condition, immunocompromise, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander, residents of aged care facilities, homeless individuals and any other chronic medical conditions requiring regular medical follow up [25, 26].Antibiotic prescriptions and duration were extracted from the electronic medical record. Antibiotic indications were based on treating team documentation. Use of antibiotics were deemed inappropriate where a viral infection was confirmed and no clear indication of potential bacterial coinfection recorded including severe influenza disease, clinical deterioration or failure to improve after 3–5 days of antiviral therapy [27]. Medical records were reviewed to assess oseltamivir use. Hospital LOS for both test groups were also collected from the electronic medical record for ED only presentations and those requiring an inpatient hospital admission.Data analysisThe main outcomes of interest were antibiotic use, oseltamivir use and hospital LOS in relation to the two available influenza tests. The two groups were also compared on age, Charlson Comorbidity score and mortality rates to ensure they did not differ significantly.Subgroup analysis was conducted for missed opportunities of oseltamivir use in high risk populations for influenza complications. Those patients with one or more risk factors [25, 26] were identified and assessed as suitable for oseltamivir prescription. These included age greater than 65 years, pregnant, cardiac disease, Down syndrome, obesity (BMI > 30 kg/m2), chronic respiratory condition, severe neurological condition, immunocompromise, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander, residents of aged care facilities, homeless individuals and any other chronic medical conditions requiring regular medical follow up [25, 26].Numerical data was assessed using Mann-Whitney test for statistical significance. Categorical data was assessed using Chi-squared (χ2) test for statistical significance and odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated. All statistic calculations were completed using VassarStats [28].Ethics approval was granted by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the South Eastern Sydney Local Health District [HREC ref. no: 2018/ETH00219 (18/161)]. This study methodology was performed in accordance with all local guidelines and regulations.ResultsDuring the study period, 484 positive results were identified from the pathology database. Of these, 362 results were positive standard MPCR tests and 122 were positive RPCR tests (Table 1). Patients who had a positive MPCR or RPCR test were not significantly different in terms of age, Charlson Comorbidity score or mortality rate. Turnaround time for results was significantly different between the testing methods with the median time to result availability for the MPCR test significantly longer than the RPCR test (p < 0.01). Table 1 Summary of results comparing standard multiplex PCR versus rapid PCR testing for influenzaFull size tableAntibiotic therapy was commenced less frequently in the RPCR than the MPCR group (χ2 = 9.01; p < 0.01; OR 0.52; 95% CI 0.34–0.79) and oseltamivir was commenced significantly more frequently in the RPCR group than the MPCR group (χ2 = 5.65; p = 0.02; OR 1.73; 95% CI 1.12–2.67). More people at risk of complications of influenza were treated with oseltamivir in the RPCR group (76%) than the MPCR group (63%) (χ2 = 4.46; p = 0.0347; OR 1.81; 95% CI 1.07–3.08).No significant differences between the two groups were identified in hospital LOS, ED LOS or proportion admitted to hospital.DiscussionThese data show that the use of RPCR instead of standard MPCR is associated with benefits in antimicrobial stewardship through reduction in unnecessary antibiotic prescribing as well as the provision of oseltamivir therapy for people at high risk of complications with confirmed influenza. Taken together these data show a very positive impact on appropriate antimicrobial prescribing following introduction of a RPCR influenza test at our institution.Antibiotic prescription significantly decreased from 67 to 51% when RPCR was used indicating a decrease in unnecessary antibiotic prescription. It is well recognised that antimicrobial resistance is a serious global threat to health of which unnecessary antibiotic use is a contributor. A key objective of the World Health Organisation (WHO) Global Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance is to optimise the use of antimicrobial medications recommending effective and rapid diagnostic tools as part of this plan [29]. In line with WHO guidelines, our results would support the use of RPCR as opposed to standard MPCR as an effective diagnostic tool to improve antimicrobial stewardship. Rapid testing has previously been suggested as a means to improve antibiotic utilisation however, previous studies have been performed using a rapid antigen test with a lower sensitivity than either of the PCR-based tests used in this study and were performed in outpatient ED, paediatric or resource limited settings [11, 30,31,32,33]. Our findings extend on and are supported by a small number of previous studies that suggested a reduction in antibiotic usage with RPCR testing [14, 17,18,19, 23]. In comparison to our study these were are mostly small studies assessing effects on ED metrics and included non-comparative cohort studies [14,15,16] or used historical controls [17,18,19,20,21,22,23]. In particular, one trial found antimicrobial stewardship improvement only occurred in their paediatric and not in their adult population [19]. Notably there has been one large, UK hospital-based, open-label randomised controlled trial comparing outcomes of routine RPCR at presentation of respiratory illness versus standard clinical care. In this UK study, those allocated to the standard clinical care group were provided treatment at the discretion of treating teams including potential conventional respiratory viral PCR testing as well as antimicrobial use. This study found that routine RPCR did not reduce duration of antibiotics overall, but did find that patients in the RPCR group received either single dose or shorter courses of antibiotics compared to the control group [34]. Though they found higher proportions of single dose/shorter courses of antibiotics in their RPCR group, the effect appeared to have been muted in the overall duration of antibiotics due to clinical populations in their study, such as pneumonia, requiring consistently longer courses of antibiotics. Our findings would suggest that earlier diagnosis could alter clinical management such that unnecessary antibiotic use can be decreased. In reducing unnecessary antibiotics, not only will this reduce antimicrobial resistance, but patients and hospitals could thereby reduce known risks associated with antibiotic overuse such as antibiotic associated adverse effects, re-attendance due to infectious disease, increased healthcare costs or increased length of stay [8].Subgroup analyses of higher risk patients for complications of influenza would suggest that RPCR testing lead to fewer missed opportunities for oseltamivir treatment compared to MPCR testing (24% vs 37%, respectively). Early oseltamivir use has benefits in improving resolution of clinical symptoms, reducing risk of lower respiratory tract infections and prevention of hospital admission when used in influenza positive patients [35]. Current Australian Therapeutic Guidelines recommend considering oseltamivir treatment for individuals at risk of poor outcomes such as elderly, pregnant women, immunocompromised, etc. [2] A recent randomised controlled trial demonstrated oseltamivir treatment in the older, co-morbid population can improve recovery by two to 3 days, further supporting the need to target early therapy especially in these higher risk individuals [6]. This is the only study to our knowledge that has looked at the use of RPCR diagnostic testing to optimise oseltamivir use in high risk individuals for complications of disease. A small, single centre US study comparing MPCR to RPCR, found that negative RPCR results lead to reduced duration of empiric antiviral therapy with no difference in intensive care admissions or antibiotic use [22]. This study, however, examined both positive and negative influenza results and those that were positive only accounted for 11% of the study population [22]. Small non-comparative studies, within the ED setting alone, have also suggested that utilisation of RPCR may improve oseltamivir prescription [15, 16, 21, 36]. Both our study, in conjunction with the US study and non-comparative studies would support the idea that a RPCR test compared to a MPCR test improves the utilisation of oseltamivir.Utilisation of either diagnostic test did not appear to affect LOS in the ED or as an inpatient, as neither result achieved statistical significance. Logistical factors occurring within the ED or inpatient wards that were not assessed within this study may have played a role. There have been a small number of studies published on RPCR testing and its impact on LOS both in ED and inpatient settings [34, 37,38,39]. Overall, these studies have been of varying design and have demonstrated different outcomes. Factors identified that affected LOS included being provided positive RPCR results during hospital stay or delays in timing of patient diagnostic sampling [38, 39]. Our study did not examine time difference of patient presentation to sampling nor had we analysed patient disposition at time of result availability which may have impacted LOS and contributed to our findings. The present study had a smaller sample size and may not have sufficient power to detect a difference in LOS.This study’s limitations include that data were from a single hospital, were collected retrospectively and could have been subject to selection bias at the time of test selection (MPCR vs RPCR). However, to try and account for this we checked to ensure that the groups did not differ significantly on the basis of age, mortality or morbidity. Data were collected through reviewing each individual’s medical record, and therefore relied on the accuracy of documentation at time of presentation. Medical history and clinical data were extracted from the medical records, therefore, to minimise bias, the same author collected all the data reducing variability in interpretation. Population numbers in the RPCR group were lower than the multiplex group, likely reflecting lower utilisation after introduction of a new testing method.Future studies could utilise larger, prospective, randomised trials with direct comparison of standard multiplex and rapid PCR testing to monitor outcomes. Larger uptake in test utilisation and influenza positive cases may improve the statistical power and would be of interest in comparison to this study. Research questions that could be further explored in a prospective randomised trial include effects on bed management, patient flow and an exploration of the multi-level factors that impact LOS. Cost-benefit analyses was not assessed in this study. We note that the RPCR is significantly more expensive than the standard MPCR with an expected cost of approximately AUD$30 versus AUD$17, respectively. Future studies could examine the cost-benefit of the RPCR test.ConclusionThe use of a rapid influenza PCR test was associated with reduced inappropriate antibiotic use and increased appropriate oseltamivir use in patients at high risk of influenza complications. A cost benefit analysis and review of the RPCR in a typical influenza season could examine better the impact on length of stay and bed management. Availability of data and materials The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. ReferencesAustralian Bureau of Statistics. 3303.0 - Causes of Death, Australia, 2017. Deaths due to Influenza 2017. 2018. https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/by Subject/3303.0~2017~Main Features~Deaths due to influenza~5. Accessed 14 Apr 2019.eTG Complete. Influenza. In: eTG Complete [digital]. June 2019. Melbourne VIC: Therapeutic Guidelines Limited; 2019. https:/gldcdp.tg.org.au.acs.hcn.com.au/viewTopic?topicfile=influenza&guidelineName=Antibiotic#toc_d1e63. Accessed 14 Apr 2019.Australian Government Department of Health. 2017 Influenza Season in Australia 2017. http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/cda-surveil-ozflu-flucurr.htm/$File/2017-season-summary-22112017.pdf. Accessed 15 Apr 2019.Troeger CE, Blacker BF, Khalil IA, Zimsen SRM, Albertson SB, Abate D, et al. Mortality, morbidity, and hospitalisations due to influenza lower respiratory tract infections, 2017: an analysis for the global burden of disease study 2017. Lancet Respir Med. 2019;7:69–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(18)30496-X.Article Google Scholar Varghese BM, Dent E, Chilver M, Cameron S, Stocks NP. Epidemiology of viral respiratory infections in Australian working-age adults (20–64 years): 2010–2013. Epidemiol Infect. 2018;146(5):619–26. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268818000286.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Butler CC, van der Velden AW, Bongard E, Saville BR, Holmes J, Coenen S, et al. Oseltamivir plus usual care versus usual care for influenza-like illness in primary care: an open-label, pragmatic, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2019;395(10217):42–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(19)32982-4.Article PubMed Google Scholar Louie JK, Yang S, Acosta M, Yen C, Samuel MC, Schechter R, et al. Treatment with neuraminidase inhibitors for critically ill patients with influenza a (H1N1)pdm09. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55(9):1198–204. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cis636.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Llor C, Bjerrum L. Antimicrobial resistance: risk associated with antibiotic overuse and initiatives to reduce the problem. Ther Adv Drug Saf. 2014;5(6):229–41. https://doi.org/10.1177/2042098614554919.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tamma PD, Avdic E, Li DX, Dzintars K, Cosgrove SE. Association of adverse events with antibiotic use in hospitalized patients. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(9):1308–15. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.1938.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Owens RC Jr, Donskey CJ, Gaynes RP, Loo VG, Muto CA. Antimicrobial-associated risk factors for Clostridium difficile infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2008;46(s1):S19–31. https://doi.org/10.1086/521859.Article PubMed Google Scholar Chartrand C, Leeflang MMG, Minion J, Brewer T, Pai M. Accuracy of rapid influenza diagnostic tests: a meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156(7):500–11. https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-156-7-201204030-00403.Article PubMed Google Scholar Nicholson KG, Abrams KR, Batham S, Medina MJ, Warren FC, Barer M, et al. Randomised controlled trial and health economic evaluation of the impact of diagnostic testing for influenza, respiratory syncytial virus and Streptococcus pneumoniae infection on the management of acute admissions in the elderly and high-risk 18- to 64-year-olds. Health Technol Assess (Rockv). 2014;18:1–viii. Google Scholar Merckx J, Wali R, Schiller I, Caya C, Gore GC, Chartrand C, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of novel and traditional rapid tests for influenza infection compared with reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Ann Intern Med. 2017;167:395–409.Article Google Scholar Chavada R, Clifford L, Weisback O. Clinical impact of rapid diagnostics using Xpert flu/RSV PCR on antimicrobial stewardship initiatives during influenza season. Infect Dis Heal. 2020;25(2):71–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idh.2019.11.001.Article Google Scholar Busson L, Bartiaux M, Brahim S, Konopnicki D, Dauby N, Gérard M, et al. Contribution of the FilmArray respiratory panel in the management of adult and pediatric patients attending the emergency room during 2015–2016 influenza epidemics: an interventional study. Int J Infect Dis. 2019;83:32–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2019.03.027.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pedersen CJ, Rogan DT, Yang S, Quinn JV. Using a novel rapid viral test to improve triage of emergency department patients with acute respiratory illness during flu season. J Clin Virol. 2018;108:72–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2018.09.008.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Qian Y, Ai J, Wu J, Yu S, Cui P, Gao Y, et al. Rapid detection of respiratory organisms with FilmArray respiratory panel and its impact on clinical decisions in Shanghai, China, 2016-2018. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2020;14(2):142–9. https://doi.org/10.1111/irv.12701.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nesher L, Tsaban G, Dreiher J, Rolston KVI, Ifergane G, Shemer Y, et al. The impact of incorporating early rapid influenza diagnosis on hospital occupancy and hospital acquired influenza. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2019;40(8):897–903. https://doi.org/10.1017/ice.2019.159.Article PubMed Google Scholar O’Callaghan K, Jones K. Rapid testing for respiratory viruses: impact on antibiotic use and time to patient discharge. Infect Dis Heal. 2019;24(3):147–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idh.2019.05.001.Article Google Scholar Vos LM, Weehuizen JM, Hoepelman AIM, Kaasjager KHAH, Riezebos-Brilman A, Oosterheert JJ. More targeted use of oseltamivir and in-hospital isolation facilities after implementation of a multifaceted strategy including a rapid molecular diagnostic panel for respiratory viruses in immunocompromised adult patients. J Clin Virol. 2019;116:11–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCV.2019.04.003.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mitchell SL, Chang YC, Feemster K, Cárdenas AM. Implementation of a rapid influenza a/B and RSV direct molecular assay improves emergency department oseltamivir use in paediatric patients. J Med Microbiol. 2018;67(3):358–63. https://doi.org/10.1099/jmm.0.000676.Article PubMed Google Scholar Chu HY, Englund JA, Huang D, Scott E, Chan JD, Jain R, et al. Impact of rapid influenza PCR testing on hospitalization and antiviral use: a retrospective cohort study. J Med Virol. 2015;87(12):2021–6. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.24279.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Weiss ZF, Cunha CB, Chambers AB, Carr AV, Rochat C, Raglow-Defranco M, et al. Opportunities revealed for antimicrobial stewardship and clinical practice with implementation of a rapid respiratory multiplex assay. J Clin Microbiol. 2019;57:1–10.Article Google Scholar Quan H, Li B, Couris CM, Fushimi K, Graham P, Hider P, et al. Updating and validating the charlson comorbidity index and score for risk adjustment in hospital discharge abstracts using data from 6 countries. Am J Epidemiol. 2011;173(6):676–82. https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwq433.Article PubMed Google Scholar Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI). Statement on the administration of seasonal influenza vaccines in 2018. 2018. https://www2.health.vic.gov.au/about/publicationsesearchandreports/ATAGI-statement-administration-seasonal-influenza-vaccines-2018. Accessed 7 Sep 2018.Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI). Influenza (flu). In: Australian Immunisation Handbook. Canberra, ACT: Australian Government Department of Health; 2018. https://immunisationhandbook.health.gov.au/vaccine-preventable-diseases/influenza-flu. Accessed 7 Sep 2018.Uyeki TM, Bernstein HH, Bradley JS, Englund JA, File TM, Fry AM, et al. Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America: 2018 update on diagnosis, treatment, chemoprophylaxis, and institutional outbreak Management of Seasonal Influenza. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;68:1–47.Article Google Scholar Lowry R. VassarStats: website for statistical computation. 2019. http://vassarstats.net/. Accessed 25 Jun 2019.World Health Organisation. Objective 4: Optimize the use of antimicrobial medicines in human and animal health. In: Global Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press; 2015. p. 10.Blaschke AJ, Shapiro DJ, Pavia AT, Byington CL, Ampofo K, Stockmann C, et al. A national study of the impact of rapid influenza testing on clinical care in the emergency department. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc. 2014;3(2):112–8. https://doi.org/10.1093/jpids/pit071.Article PubMed Google Scholar Sharma V, Dowd MD, Slaughter AJ, Simon SD. Effect of rapid diagnosis of influenza virus type a on the emergency department management of febrile infants and toddlers. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2002;156(1):41–3. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.156.1.41.Article PubMed Google Scholar Bhavnani D, Phatinawin L, Chantra S, Olsen SJ, Simmerman JM. The influence of rapid influenza diagnostic testing on antibiotic prescribing patterns in rural Thailand. Int J Infect Dis. 2007;11(4):355–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2006.09.009.Article PubMed Google Scholar Tillekeratne LG, Bodinayake CK, Nagahawatte A, Vidanagama D, Devasiri V, Arachchi WK, et al. Use of rapid influenza testing to reduce antibiotic prescriptions among outpatients with influenza-like illness in southern Sri Lanka. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2015;93(5):1031–7. https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.15-0269.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Brendish NJ, Malachira AK, Armstrong L, Houghton R, Aitken S, Nyimbili E, et al. Routine molecular point-of-care testing for respiratory viruses in adults presenting to hospital with acute respiratory illness (ResPOC): a pragmatic, open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2017;5(5):401–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(17)30120-0.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dobson J, Whitley RJ, Pocock S, Monto AS. Oseltamivir treatment for influenza in adults: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet. 2015;385(9979):1729–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62449-1.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Busson L, Mahadeb B, De Foor M, Vandenberg O, Hallin M. Contribution of a rapid influenza diagnostic test to manage hospitalized patients with suspected influenza. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2017;87(3):238–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DIAGMICROBIO.2016.11.015.Article PubMed Google Scholar Wabe N, Li L, Lindeman R, Yimsung R, Dahm MR, Clezy K, et al. The impact of rapid molecular diagnostic testing for respiratory viruses on outcomes for emergency department patients. Med J Aust. 2019;210(7):316–20. https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.50049.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wabe N, Li L, Dahm MR, Lindeman R, Yimsung R, Clezy K, et al. Timing of respiratory virus molecular testing in emergency departments and its association with patient care outcomes: a retrospective observational study across six Australian hospitals. BMJ Open. 2019;9(8):e030104. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2019-030104.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wabe N, Li L, Lindeman R, Yimsung R, Dahm MR, McLennan S, et al. Impact of rapid molecular diagnostic testing of respiratory viruses on outcomes of adults hospitalized with respiratory illness: a multicenter quasi-experimental study. J Clin Microbiol. 2018;57:1–11.Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsNot applicable.FundingThis research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Infectious Diseases, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, Sydney, NSW, AustraliaVictor Au Yeung, Jeffrey J. Post & Kristen OvertonSerology and Virology Division (SAViD), Prince of Wales Hospital, Barker Street, Randwick, NSW, AustraliaKiran Thapa & William RawlinsonSchool of Medical Sciences, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, School of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, AustraliaWilliam RawlinsonAustralian Institute of Health Innovation, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, AustraliaAndrew GeorgiouPrince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Randwick, NSW, AustraliaJeffrey J. Post & Kristen OvertonAuthorsVictor Au YeungView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKiran ThapaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWilliam RawlinsonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrew GeorgiouView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeffrey J. PostView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKristen OvertonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsAll authors meet the ICMJE criteria for authorship. VAY and KO conceived of and designed the studies. KT and WR were responsible for pathology record data extraction. VAY was responsible for collection of medical records, analysis and interpretation. VAY, JJP and KO performed statistical analysis. VAY drafted the manuscript. VAY, AG, WR, JJP and KO provided critical revision of the manuscript. KO provided overall supervision of the project. All authors contributed to the development and refining of the article, and approved the final submitted version.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Kristen Overton.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate Ethics approval and waiver of patient consent was granted by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the South Eastern Sydney Local Health District [HREC ref. no: 2018/ETH00219 (18/161)]. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests The authors declare they have no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleAu Yeung, V., Thapa, K., Rawlinson, W. et al. Differences in antibiotic and antiviral use in people with confirmed influenza: a retrospective comparison of rapid influenza PCR and multiplex respiratory virus PCR tests. BMC Infect Dis 21, 321 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-021-06030-wDownload citationReceived: 17 November 2020Accepted: 30 March 2021Published: 07 April 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-021-06030-wShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsInfluenzaRapid polymerase chain reactionOseltamivirAntimicrobial stewardship Download PDF Advertisement BMC Infectious Diseases ISSN: 1471-2334 Contact us General enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.The common cold might protect you from coronavirus – here’s how Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair The common cold might protect you from coronavirus – here’s how Published: April 7, 2021 10.36am BST Matthew James, Queen's University Belfast Author Matthew James Research Assistant, Wellcome-Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, Queen's University Belfast Disclosure statement Matthew James receives funding from the Department for the Economy, Asthma UK and the Medical Research Foundation. Partners Queen's University Belfast provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK. View all partners The common cold is usually caused by a rhinovirus. Shutterstock/fizkes Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger We often assume that viral infections are caused by individual virus types. But in reality, we’re exposed to many viruses on a day to day basis, and co-infection – where someone is simultaneously infected by two or more virus types – is quite common. The cells lining our throat and lower airways are exposed to the environment around us, making them a prime target for co-infection by respiratory viruses. These range from common-cold-causing rhinoviruses to the more serious influenza viruses, which are often the cause of global pandemics. One of the most frequent outcomes of co-infection is viral interference, a phenomenon where one virus out-competes and suppresses the replication of the other co-infecting viruses. Interestingly, a growing body of evidence suggests rhinoviruses may interfere with the replication of other respiratory viruses that tend to be more serious. They may even offer the host temporary protection from them. The good news is that this appears to include SARS-CoV-2 – the virus responsible for COVID-19. In a new study, rhinoviruses have been shown to suppress the replication of this virus. Rhinoviruses The majority of respiratory viruses that infect humans are rhinoviruses (from the Greek “rhino” for “of the nose”). First identified in 1953, rhinoviruses are extremely small respiratory viruses that are present all over the world. As far as we know, they are only capable of infecting humans. Rhinovirus infections can be serious in some cases. However, they usually infect us to cause the common cold, a relatively mild disease. In response to such an infection, our immune system produces virus-killing molecules called interferons. Interferons are produced in response to infections by all types of viruses, but they’re produced much faster and in greater quantities in response to rhinovirus compared to other respiratory viruses. Despite this, rhinoviruses have evolved complex mechanisms that allow them to evade interferons and replicate efficiently. It’s widely accepted that the rhinovirus-induced interferon response is what produces the symptoms of the common cold, rather than the virus itself. Rhinos without horns. Shutterstock/Kateryna Kon While rhinoviruses are pretty resistant to interferons, some other respiratory viruses are extremely sensitive to them. Influenza viruses, for example, can’t replicate properly in the presence of interferons. Since rhinovirus infections trigger such a huge interferon response, researchers had the idea that they might offer protection against infection by more deadly, interferon-sensitive viruses, such as influenza. In recent years, several research groups have investigated this phenomenon in the lab. They found that when cells are infected with rhinovirus, it triggers an interferon response which prevents them from being infected with the influenza virus. If rhinovirus infections block the replication of other respiratory viruses, this could affect their spread and patterns of distribution. For instance, evidence suggests that rhinovirus may have interrupted the spread of the H1N1, or “swine flu”, influenza virus during the 2009 global pandemic. The cold and COVID-19 If rhinovirus infections can interfere with the replication and spread of pandemic influenza viruses, could it do the same for interferon-sensitive coronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV-2? A team of scientists at the University of Glasgow recently set out to answer this question. They infected lab-grown layers of cells that replicates the conditions in the human respiratory tract with rhinovirus, SARS-CoV-2 and both viruses simultaneously. Interestingly, SARS-CoV-2 replicated much slower in the co-infection scenario. But rhinovirus replication didn’t change in the presence or absence of SARS-CoV-2. To better replicate real-life conditions, the authors also infected the cells with either rhinovirus or SARS-CoV-2 24 hours prior to co-infecting them with the other virus. Rhinovirus was able to suppress the replication of SARS-CoV-2 regardless of whether it was added before or after SARS-CoV-2, suggesting that rhinovirus infection actively protects the cells from SARS-CoV-2. Next, the authors wanted to confirm that the inhibitory effect on SARS-CoV-2 replication was specifically caused by a rhinovirus-induced interferon response. They co-infected cells with both rhinovirus and SARS-CoV-2 in the presence of a drug which blocks the virus-killing properties of interferons, called BX795. In this part of the experiment, BX795 allowed SARS-CoV-2 to replicate at a level comparable to that of a single SARS-CoV-2 infection. This confirmed that a rhinovirus-induced interferon response is indeed responsible for the block in SARS-CoV-2 replication seen in the co-infection experiments without BX795. Using mathematical simulations, the authors also found that more frequent rhinovirus infections among the population would result in a reduced rate of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Taken together, these results confirm that rhinovirus infections suppress the replication of SARS-CoV-2, which may in turn reduce the number of new cases among the population. Read more: The end of the pandemic is coming – just don't set a date for the party So, can rhinoviruses protect us from infection by SARS-CoV-2? The short answer is yes. However, it’s essential to note that the rhinovirus-induced interferon response is an example of innate immunity, meaning that its effect only lasts as long as the invading rhinovirus is in your body. If you recover from a cold and then come into contact with SARS-CoV-2 a week later, it’s unlikely you will have enough interferons to successfully block the SARS-CoV-2 infection. Long-term immunity, which involves the production of highly specific antibodies, is only obtained by coming into direct contact with the virus in question – either in the wild or by vaccination. So, if you’re someone who has not yet had COVID-19 or are unvaccinated, you’ll only be protected if you are lucky enough to be infected at the same time that you’re experiencing a cold. Rhinoviruses may play a critical role in controlling the spread of SARS-CoV-2 among the human population. The most effective way, however, probably remains vaccination. Rhinovirus Common cold Coronavirus Viral infections COVID-19 Coronavirus insights Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationImmune markers offer clues to antibody production in response to flu | St. Jude Research Share through St. Jude Research Logo About Us Care & Treatment Research Training Get Involved Ways to Give Back More from St. Jude St. Jude Family of Websites Explore our cutting edge research, world-class patient care, career opportunities and more. St. Jude Children's Research Hospital Home Research St. Jude Research Progress: A Digital Magazine St. Jude Cloud Childhood Cancer Survivor Study Careers Careers at St. Jude Have More in Memphis Patient Information Care & Treatment at St. Jude Together by St. Jude™ online resource Long-Term Follow-Up Study St. Jude LIFE Education & Outreach Education & Training at St. Jude St. Jude Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences St. Jude Global Fundraising Get Involved Ways to Give St. Jude Research WHY ST. JUDE Back WHY ST. JUDE Data and Visualization Tools Shared Resources Why St.Jude Translation Innovation Scientific Report Scientific Milestones Faculty Honors and Prizes DEPARTMENTS & LABS Back DEPARTMENTS & LABS Departments View all departments Labs View all labs Clinical Research View all clinical researchers CENTERS & INITIATIVES Back CENTERS & INITIATIVES Comprehensive Cancer Center Pediatric Translational Neuroscience Initiative Blue Sky Centers & Initiatives St. Jude Research Collaboratives Global Impact on Infectious Disease St. Jude Centers of Excellence OUR PROGRESS Back OUR PROGRESS RECENT STORIES Advancing careers beyond the bench: the St. Jude CAP Fellowship Addressing fungal infections will take a medical mycology moonshot Like kisMET: targeted therapy and radiation synergize in pediatric high-grade glioma Innovation and collaboration in drug development helps combat antibiotic resistance Explore Progress BROWSE STORIES BY CATEGORY St. Jude On Dive into St. Jude Progress through narrative series to learn how the institution’s legacy of discovery paves the way for tomorrow’s scientific breakthroughs. Investigator Insights Personal stories of life in science Research Basic and fundamental scientific discoveries Clinical Research making a difference for patients Outreach Impact beyond the walls of St. Jude EXPLORE FURTHER About Progress Meet the Team Subscribe to Progress CAREERS Back More from St. Jude St. Jude Family of Websites Explore our cutting edge research, world-class patient care, career opportunities and more. St. Jude Children's Research Hospital Home Research St. Jude Research Progress: A Digital Magazine St. Jude Cloud Childhood Cancer Survivor Study Careers Careers at St. Jude Have More in Memphis Patient Information Care & Treatment at St. Jude Together by St. Jude™ online resource Long-Term Follow-Up Study St. Jude LIFE Education & Outreach Education & Training at St. Jude St. Jude Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences St. Jude Global Fundraising Get Involved Ways to Give Home Progress Immune markers offer clues to antibody production in response to flu Immune markers offer clues to antibody production in response to flu Mary Powers • April 7, 2021 Antibodies provide potent protection against the flu and other viruses. Vaccines are designed to stimulate antibody production. Researchers measure antibodies to gauge the strength of the immune response to the infection. But questions remain about immune factors that drive the magnitude of the antibody response, including why flu infections do not always trigger a rise in blood antibodies. Better understanding of the multistep process could improve flu diagnosis, vaccine design and strategies to track viral spread. A study led by St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital scientists identified key immune cells associated with antibody production in response to flu and other viral infections. The findings include the strongest evidence yet in humans that white blood cells called helper T cells (CD4+ cells) are associated with a strong and long-lasting antibody response to flu. Antibodies also develop in tissue lining the airways. In that tissue, the researchers found that the white blood cells correlated with antibody production were monocytes, not helper T cells. “The immune factors that explain why some people mount a strong antibody response and others don’t has not been well understood,” said Richard Webby, PhD, of the Infectious Diseases Department. “This study identifies some of those factors, providing information needed to design more effective vaccines for flu and other viruses.” “Airway monocytes often show up as correlates of severe disease, so it was interesting here to see them also associated with protective immune responses,” said Paul Thomas, PhD, of the Immunology Department. “It points to the fact that many immune factors play protective and pathogenic roles at the same time.” The findings stem from an analysis of blood collected from patients with laboratory-confirmed flu enrolled in the Southern Hemisphere Influenza and Vaccine Effectiveness, Research and Surveillance (SHIVERS) study. The study was based in Auckland, New Zealand. Researchers also studied immune markers in flu patients enrolled in the FLU09 study conducted in Memphis. The study appeared in the journal Cell Reports Medicine. Webby and Thomas were the co-corresponding authors. About the author Mary Powers is a former member of the Strategic Communications, Education and Outreach Department at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital. More Articles From Mary Powers Related Posts Like kisMET: targeted therapy and radiation synergize in pediatric high-grade glioma The “tall tail” behind ultrafast endocytosis Understanding the clinical outcomes of a rare but distinct low-grade glioma Stay ahead of the curve SUBSCRIBE St. Jude Research Why St. Jude? Collaborative Initiatives Groundbreaking Research Research Support St. Jude Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Contact Us 262 Danny Thomas Place Memphis, TN, 38105-3678 USA 866-278-5833 Join our mailing list Subscribe Follow us stjude.org Privacy Policy Disclaimer / Registrations / Copyright Statement Notice of Privacy Practices (HIPAA) Linking Policy Notice of Non-Discrimination © Copyright 2024. St. Jude Research'Nirvana': Fast, portable test diagnoses Covid-19, tracks variants • healthcare-in-europe.com Deutsch Publications LABBook RADBook Media Kits Events Newsletter Contact Latest News Diagnostic imaging Laboratory/pathology Treatment Management IT/Tech Research The "Nirvana" test kitCredit: Mo Li/KAUST News • SARS-CoV-2 detection and sequencing 'Nirvana': Fast, portable test diagnoses Covid-19, tracks variants Clinicians using a new viral screening test can not only diagnose Covid-19 in a matter of minutes with a portable, pocket-sized machine, but can also simultaneously test for other viruses—like influenza—that might be mistaken for the coronavirus. Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte (left) and Mo LiCredit: Salk/Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte At the same time, they can sequence the virus, providing valuable information on the spread of Covid-19 mutations and variants. The new test, dubbed Nirvana, was described online by a multi-institution team of scientists in the journal Med.“This is a virus detection and surveillance method that doesn’t require an expensive infrastructure like other approaches,” says Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, co-corresponding author and a professor in Salk’s Gene Expression Laboratory. “We can accomplish with one portable test the same thing that others are using two or three different tests, with different machines, to do.” Around the world, more than 100 million people have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19. A staggering 500,000 Americans have died from Covid-19 to date. Testing the population is key to stopping the spread of the virus. In addition, tracking the spread of new SARS-CoV-2 variants—some of which could respond differently to treatments or vaccines—is critical. Today, the standard approach to determining whether a nasal swab is positive for Covid-19 is to run a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test to detect genetic material from the SARS-CoV-2 virus. If the sample is negative, however, patients and clinicians don’t get any information on what might be causing the coronavirus-like symptoms—unless they run separate PCR tests, using different swab samples, for other viruses. And if the sample is positive for SARS-CoV-2, they don’t learn which Covid-19 variant a patient is infected with unless another set of tests is run; those require a large and expensive next-generation gene-sequencing machine.Last summer, Mo Li, an assistant professor of bioscience at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology in Saudi Arabia, was pondering ways he could lend his expertise in genetic engineering and nanopore sequencing to combatting the Covid-19 pandemic. Li, who previously spent six years as a Salk postdoctoral researcher in the Izpisua Belmonte lab, wondered whether a gene-detection approach called isothermal recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) coupled with real-time nanopore sequencing might be more useful—and faster, cheaper and more portable—than the current Covid-19 testing approach. He teamed up with Izpisua Belmonte to find out. The pandemic has provided two important lessons: first, test widely and quickly, and second, know your variantsIzpisua BelmonteUnlike PCR, which cycles through lower and higher temperatures to separate DNA strands and copy them, RPA uses proteins—rather than temperature changes—to accomplish the same thing in only 20 minutes. The technology lets researchers copy longer stretches of DNA, and probe for multiple genes at the same time. “We quickly realized that we could use this technique to not only detect SARS-CoV-2, but other viruses at the same time,” says Li.In the new paper, Li and Izpisua Belmonte describe a small, portable device that can screen 96 samples at the same time using the RPA assay. They call the method Nirvana, for “nanopore sequencing of isothermal rapid viral amplification for near real-time analysis.” The scientists designed Nirvana to simultaneously test samples for Covid-19, influenza A, human adenovirus, and non-SARS-CoV-2 human coronavirus. In just 15 minutes, the researchers report, the device begins to report positive and negative results. And within three hours, the device finalizes results on all 96 samples—including the sequences of five regions of SARS-CoV-2 that are particularly prone to accumulate mutations leading to new variants such as the B.1.1.7 variant identified in the UK.Li and Izpisua Belmonte tested Nirvana on 10 samples known to be positive for SARS-CoV-2, 60 samples of unknown SARS-CoV-2 status, as well as samples of municipal wastewater harboring the SARS-COV-2 virus and others. In all cases, the assay was able to correctly identify which viruses were present. The sequencing data also allowed them to narrow down the origin of SARS-CoV-2 in positive samples; differentiating strains from China and Europe, for instance. “The design of this assay is really flexible, so it’s not just limited to the examples we’ve shown,” says Li. “We can easily adapt it to tackle another pathogen, even something new and emergent.”With the small size and portability of the Nirvana workflow, it could be used for fast virus detection at schools, airports or ports, the researchers say. It also could be used to monitor wastewater or streams for the presence of new viruses. “The pandemic has provided two important lessons: first, test widely and quickly, and second, know your variants. Our Nirvana method provides a promising solution to these two challenges not only for the current pandemic but also for possible future ones,” says Izpisua Belmonte, who holds the Roger Guillemin Chair at Salk. Market analysis would be required to determine whether the initial cost of commercialization—and the constant tweaks to the test needed to make sure it detected new variants or new viruses of interest—are worth it, Belmonte adds.Source: Salk Institute for Biological Studies 07.04.2021 More on the subject:coronavirus (698) mobile devices (51) testing devices (146) Contact …Read all latest stories Related articles News • Based on image-based flow cytometryRapid test to predict severe Covid-19 infectionsResearchers have developed a method for assessing the number and structure of aggregated blood platelets (or thrombocytes) that can potentially help quantify the risk of a severe Covid-19 infection.…#blood#coronavirus#diagnostics#infections#research#testing devicesNews • Using AI nanoporesNew rapid testing method for Covid-19Researchers from Osaka University present a novel technique to detect different coronavirus variants quickly, including fast-spreading strains present in human saliva.#AI#coronavirus#research#testing devices#virusNews • Preparing for the next pandemicNew rapid electronic diagnostic test for infectious diseasesA new molecular test for bacteria and viruses, including Sars-CoV-2, has been developed at the University of Surrey, as they warn that the world needs to be prepared for the next pandemic.#coronavirus#infections#molecular#research#testing devices#virus Related products ImmunoassaysBeckman Coulter · Access 2 Immunoassay SystemBeckman Coulter DiagnosticsTesting DevicesRadcal · Accu-Gold Windows-based Systems for X-Ray QARadcal CorporationInjectorsMedtron AG · Accutron HPMEDTRON AGUltrasoundSiemens Healthineers · Acuson Freestyle Ultrasound SystemSiemens Healthineers AGTesting DevicesVacuTec · AEC ChamberVacuTec Meßtechnik GmbHMobile DROR Technology · Amadeo M miniOR Technology (Oehm und Rehbein GmbH) CategoriesDiagnostic imaging Laboratory/pathology Treatment Management IT/Tech Research More OffersCollections RADBook LABBook Manufacturer-IndexGet in TouchFacebookTwitterVimeoLinkedInRSS-FeedGeneralMedia KitsNewsletterContactNachhaltigkeits- und MenschenrechtsstandardsSocial Governance CodexPrivacy policyImprint To Homepage? Subscribe to NewsletterI am interested in ... ------------------------- All topics Surgery Health IT Oncology Research Cardiology Neurology Laboratory Pathology Radiology Ultrasound Subscribe now privacy agreement Home Deutsch Latest News Diagnostic imaging Laboratory/pathology Treatment Management IT/Tech Research Collections Manufacturer-Index Publications LABBook RADBook Media Kits Events Newsletter Contact This website uses cookies to give our readers the best website experience. Please refer to our privacy policy to find out how we use cookies and how you can edit your preferences.Refuse cookiesAccept cookiesThink wearing masks in everyday life is a new concept? Think again | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Think wearing masks in everyday life is a new concept? Think again | CBC News LoadedNL·Apocalypse ThenThink wearing masks in everyday life is a new concept? Think againWearing masks day in, day out may be new to most Canadians, but it's been part of everyday life in many East Asian countries for years.During the influenza pandemic of 1918 health authorities in many parts of the world recommended masksAinsley Hawthorn · For CBC N.L. · Posted: Apr 04, 2021 7:30 AM EDT | Last Updated: April 5, 2021Mask-wearers in Mill Valley, Calif., 1918. (Raymond Coyne/Lucretia Little History Room, Mill Valley Public Library/Public domain)Social SharingWearing masks day in, day out might be new to most Canadians, but it's been part of everyday life in many East Asian countries for years. Where did the idea of wearing a mask to curtail the spread of disease come from, and why was the practice common in places like Japan before the COVID-19 outbreak?During the influenza pandemic of 1918, commonly known as the Spanish Flu, health authorities in many parts of the world recommended or even required that members of the public wear masks to stem contagion. Scientists understood by that time that masks could go some way toward preventing the transmission of germs; masks were worn by surgeons in operating theatres and by medical staff in fever hospitals, where patients with contagious illnesses were sequestered. The health orders of 1918, though, were the first time the general public was encouraged to wear masks, too, in response to a disease outbreak. These mask mandates didn't go over well everywhere. In Alberta, where the government passed a measure requiring that masks be worn outside the home, the law was widely flouted. People either didn't bother wearing masks to begin with or let their masks dangle around their necks, pulling them up only if they saw a police officer. The Alberta government rescinded the mask measure just four weeks after it was enacted.Japan began promoting mask-wearing in February 1919 for the echo waves of the flu that continued through 1920. There, mask-wearing was embraced, with up to 80 per cent of households in some prefectures adopting the use of masks.A poster from the 1918-1920 flu pandemic in Japan shows germs infecting the air around a maskless man on a train. The text reads: 'Underestimated flu bacteria! Not wearing a mask is reckless!' (Public domain)Why was the Japanese public so receptive to face masks when many North Americans rejected them out of hand?In an interview with Alex Martin of the Japan Times, pharmacist and vintage mask collector Tamotsu Hirai suggested that Japanese people have more positive cultural images of mouth-coverings than North Americans do. He pointed out that Western superheroes, from the Lone Ranger to Batman, generally wear masks that cover their eyes but leave the mouth exposed. In Japan, on the other hand, Saturday morning cartoon heroes disguise themselves by covering their mouths.The association between heroism and mouth-coverings in Japan goes back centuries. Samurai wore face guards as part of their armour, partly as facial protection and partly to secure their top-heavy helmets to their heads. Many of these covered the nose, mouth and chin and featured fearsome expressions to intimidate opponents.Japanese students wear masks to prevent flu in February 1920. (Bettmann Archive/Public domain)Ninja, the famous spies of feudal Japan, also covered their mouths and noses. They were conventionally depicted dressed all in black with a cloth tied over the lower part of the face, leaving only the eyes bare.Traditional Japanese beliefs about purity and cleanliness laid the groundwork for face masks, too. The Shinto religion treated breath as something that could be contaminated. In shrines, worshippers were sometimes asked — and are still sometimes asked today — to cover their mouths with paper or plant leaves to keep their breath from sullying the sacred space. When medical face masks came along in 1919, not only did they dovetail nicely with Japanese ideas about breath and favourable attitudes toward face-coverings, they also represented modernity and the triumph of science over superstition, something many Japanese people of the time valued very highly.Still, mask-wearing might have died out in Japan, as it did in other places where masks where worn during the 1918 pandemic, if not for a series of events that kept masks relevant throughout the 20th century and into the 21st.A menpo-style samurai face guard covered nose to chin and sometimes the neck, too. This is an Edo-period (18th-century) mask from the Tokyo Fuji Art Museum. (Tokyo Fuji Art Museum/Creative Commons)The Great Kanto Earthquake — which occurred in 1923, just three years after the end of the Spanish flu pandemic — sparked massive fires across Tokyo, motivating people to dig their old flu masks out of storage to filter the smoke and ash lingering in the air.After the atomic detonations at Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945, masks were used as a defence against radiation, and they resumed their role in flu prevention during the 1957 Asian flu and 1968 Hong Kong flu pandemics.It wasn't until the 1980s, though, that masks truly came into their own in Japan — not to stave off infection, but as a remedy for hay fever.Following the Second World War, Japanese cedar was used to restore broad swaths of forest that had been decimated in the war effort. Although the fast-growing tree seemed ideal for reforestation, it turned out to be a serious allergen. Today, around 41 per cent of Japanese adults experience hay fever, compared with 11 per cent of Canadians. Instead of treating these allergies with medication, as we tend to do in Canada, Japanese doctors preferred prevention, recommending masks as a way for sufferers to avoid inhaling pollen.In art, ninja were traditionally pictured dressed all in black with a covering tied over the lower half of the face. (Woodblock print by Hokusai, 1817/Public domain)The SARS epidemic in 2002 and swine flu pandemic in 2009 clinched the mask's status as a Japanese wardrobe staple. Now, Japanese people don masks to filter a variety of airborne particles, from viruses, to pollen, to smog. They also turn to masks to block the sun when they don't want to tan and as coverups when they aren't wearing makeup.North American reporting often credits the popularity of mask-wearing in Japan to a culture of collectivism, and it's true that masks are worn partly out of a sense of social responsibility. If someone's feeling unwell, they might wear a mask to help protect the people around them.But mask-wearing in Japan also has an individualist appeal: masks allow people to take responsibility for their own health. Mask-wearers are seen not just as considerate but as people who look after themselves. Contrary to stereotypes, mask-wearing became firmly rooted in Japanese society not due to widespread compliance but as a result of historical circumstances that made masks attractive and practical, symbols of both courtesy and self-sufficiency.Read more from CBC Newfoundland and LabradorABOUT THE AUTHORAinsley HawthornFreelance contributorAinsley Hawthorn, PhD, is a cultural historian and author who lives in St. John’s.Follow Ainsley on InstagramFollow Ainsley on FacebookCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated StoriesApocalypse Then Plague upon the waters: How a disease-ridden steamboat spread yellow feverApocalypse Then An election in a pandemic? Let's take an old, old-school look at thatApocalypse Then Pandemics and labour: COVID-19 isn't the first time there's been upheaval at workApocalypse Then Quack cures: How fraudulent claims and pandemics sadly go togetherAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.Subscribe to our daily newsletter for the top stories in Newfoundland and Labrador.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Newfoundland and Labrador newsletter will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowThe effect of calcium and magnesium on activity, immunogenicity, and efficacy of a recombinant N1/N2 neuraminidase vaccine | npj Vaccines Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature npj vaccines articles article The effect of calcium and magnesium on activity, immunogenicity, and efficacy of a recombinant N1/N2 neuraminidase vaccine Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 06 April 2021 The effect of calcium and magnesium on activity, immunogenicity, and efficacy of a recombinant N1/N2 neuraminidase vaccine Luca T. Giurgea ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8696-69271, Jae-Keun Park2, Kathie-Anne Walters3, Kelsey Scherler3, Adriana Cervantes-Medina1, Ashley Freeman2, Luz Angela Rosas ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8743-71892, John C. Kash2, Jeffery K. Taubenberger ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9694-72282 & …Matthew J. Memoli1 Show authors npj Vaccines volume 6, Article number: 48 (2021) Cite this article 3148 Accesses 8 Citations 4 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusProtein vaccines AbstractDespite the importance of immunity against neuraminidase (NA), NA content and immunogenicity are neglected in current influenza vaccines. To address this, a recombinant N1/N2 NA vaccine (NAV) was developed. Stability assays were used to determine optimal temperature and buffer conditions for vaccine storage. The effect of divalent cation-related enhancement of NA stability and activity on N1 and N2 immunogenicity and efficacy against viral challenge was assessed. Differences in activity between N1 and N2 and cation-related activity enhancement did not translate into differences in immunogenicity or efficacy. NAV-vaccinated mice showed robust antibody titers against N1 and N2, and after challenge with influenza A (H1N1) virus, decreased viral titers and decreased antiviral and inflammatory responses by transcriptomic analysis. These findings provide guidance for optimal storage and assessment of NA-based vaccines and confirm the importance of NA in influenza vaccination strategies in attenuating viral replication and limiting inflammatory responses necessary to clear infection. Similar content being viewed by others mRNA-based VP8* nanoparticle vaccines against rotavirus are highly immunogenic in rodents Article Open access 22 December 2023 Development of the H3N2 influenza microneedle vaccine for cross-protection against antigenic variants Article Open access 16 July 2022 Unique features of a recombinant haemagglutinin influenza vaccine that influence vaccine performance Article Open access 02 December 2021 IntroductionInfluenza has precipitated four pandemics in the last century and endemic seasonal influenza continues to be responsible for significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. In the aftermath of the 1918 influenza pandemic, Smith et al. succeeded in isolating the first human influenza virus in 1933, thereby paving the way to work on development of a vaccine1,2. In 1945, Salk published the first trial evaluating an influenza vaccine, demonstrating an effectiveness of 58%3. Despite 75 years of remarkable scientific and technological advances since then, influenza vaccine effectiveness has not improved, with estimates in the twenty-first century ranging from as high as 60% to as low as 10%4. The focus of vaccine-induced immunity has generally been against influenza hemagglutinin (HA), the predominant influenza particle surface protein. However, numerous studies have implicated neuraminidase (NA) as an important correlate of protection5,6. In more recent studies, antibody titers against NA were shown to be a better predictor of clinical outcomes than antibody titers against HA7. Despite this, current influenza vaccines are only standardized with respect to HA content but not NA. Consequently, the NA content and immunogenicity of licensed influenza vaccines can vary tremendously, with some vaccines having nearly negligible amounts8. Differences in manufacturing process are likely to play a large role in NA content variability but stability of NA in vaccine preparations may be an additional important factor, especially in older vaccine lots. Homotetramer formation, an essential condition for NA enzymatic activity, is dependent on divalent cations to maintain stability9,10. Influenza vaccines are not typically formulated using buffers containing calcium or magnesium, which may lead to instability of the NA.The field of vaccinology has experienced rapid evolution, providing for a potential renaissance in influenza vaccine development. For example, recombinant protein vaccines have been developed against multiple pathogens, including influenza11. Recombinant NA strategies may provide a simple but elegant solution for increasing NA content and immunogenicity, and could be given alone or in supplementation to standard HA-focused vaccines. Research into NA-based vaccines was pioneered by Johansson, Kilbourne and others during the late twentieth century but has made little progress in the new millennium. Purified NA vaccines (NAVs), and subsequently, recombinant NAVs have demonstrated robust immunogenicity and an ability to protect against lethal infectious challenge in animal models12. In addition, the protection afforded by NAV was shown to be broader than that of HA vaccines, displaying activity against heterologous strains13. Combination purified NAVs have also been developed which demonstrated that the inclusion of multiple NA types in a single vaccine did not impair the immune response induced by each type14. Furthermore, supplementation with purified NAV broadened the protection afforded by trivalent vaccine15. However, the storage conditions necessary to optimize NA recombinant protein stability and activity and the effects these have on immunogenicity have not been clearly determined8,16. In this study, we evaluated the effect of temperature and buffer on the NA activity of a dual recombinant protein NAV, and the subsequent impact of NA activity on efficacy and immunogenicity of the vaccine in mice.ResultsThe impact of temperature and divalent-cation-containing buffer on the stability of N1 and N2The stability of recombinant N1 and N2 as measured by NA activity was tested under various storage conditions with emphasis on temperature (−80 °C vs 4 °C) and buffer solution [PBS (phosphate-buffered saline) vs divalent-cation-containing DPBS (Dulbecco’s PBS containing calcium and magnesium)]. NA activity of N1 in PBS or DPBS did not differ between samples stored at 4 °C and at −80 °C over the course of 36 weeks (Figs. 1a, b and 2a). The N2 in PBS sample appeared to maintain higher activity stored at 4 °C compared to −80 °C. The N2 in DPBS sample also appeared to maintain higher NA activity at 4 °C compared to −80 °C at weeks 24 and 36 (100% vs 76%). However, when averaged across N1 and N2 samples as well as PBS and DPBS buffer conditions, there were no statistically significant differences between freeze–thaw storage at −80 °C and storage at 4 °C (Fig. 2a and Supplemental Table 1). DPBS buffer was effective at preserving higher NA activity, compared to PBS, in both N1 and N2 over 36 weeks regardless of temperature (Fig. 2b and Supplemental Table 2). Mean activity as a percent of baseline for DPBS samples was higher than PBS at week 4 (120.8% vs 38.4%, p < 0.001), week 12 (94.2% vs 24.0%, p < 0.001), week 24 (67.8% vs 22.4%, p < 0.001), and week 36 (74.7% vs 15.0%, p = 0.002).Fig. 1: N1 and N2 NA activity over 36 weeks under different temperature and buffer conditions in vitro.NA activity of N1 and N2 stored in parallel at −80 °C and 4 °C, in PBS and DPBS (total eight samples), was measured using MU-NANA assay at weeks 0, 4, 12, 24, and 36. Activity presented as a percent (a) using week 0 as a baseline or as absolute activity (b). Points represent individual samples.Full size imageFig. 2: Grouped analysis demonstrating the effects of storage temperature, buffer choice, and NA type on NA activity in vitro over 36 weeks.NA activity measured by MU-NANA assay at weeks 0, 4, 12, 24, and 36 was grouped by temperature conditions (a), buffer choice (b), and NA type group (c). In a, N1/N2 −80 °C represents mean activity of N1 PBS −80 °C, N1 DPBS −80 °C, N2 PBS −80 °C, and N2 DPBS −80 °C and N1/N2 4 °C represents mean activity of N1 PBS 4 °C, N1 DPBS 4 °C, N2 PBS 4 °C, and N2 DPBS 4 °C. In b, N1/N2 PBS represents mean activity of N1 PBS −80 °C, N1 PBS 4 °C, N2 PBS −80 °C, and N2 PBS 4 °C and N1/N2 DPBS represents mean activity of N1 DPBS −80 °C, N1 DPBS 4 °C, N2 DPBS −80 °C, and DN2 PBS 4 °C. In c, N1 represents mean activity of N1 PBS −80 °C, N1 PBS 4 °C, N1 DPBS −80 °C, and N1 DPBS 4 °C and N2 represents mean activity of N2 PBS −80 °C, N2 PBS 4 °C, N2 DPBS −80 °C, and N2 DPBS 4 °C. Activity presented as a percent (a, b) using week 0 as a baseline or as absolute activity in mU/ml (c). Points represent means and error bars represent standard deviation.Full size imageMean N2 activity under all conditions was generally higher than N1, though this only reached statistical significance on day 0 (4346 mU/ml vs 851.4 mU/ml, p = 0.002) (Fig. 2c and Supplemental Table 3). Activity of N1 in PBS appeared to plummet by week 4 but was better maintained in DPBS. A drop in N1 activity was also apparent when stored in PBS at room temperature (RT) for 1 week and beyond (Fig. 3). Similarly, the N2 in PBS sample and the N1 and N2 in DPBS samples maintained their NA activity at RT for 8 weeks. NA activity could be increased by addition of calcium and magnesium to the 36-week-old sample of NA in PBS. While activity of N2 in PBS could be rescued to a similar level as displayed by N2 kept in DPBS for the entire 36 weeks, N1 in PBS only had a small increase in activity with addition of divalent cations (Fig. 4).Fig. 3: NA activity of N1 and N2 stored in PBS or DPBS at room temperature for 24 weeks.NA activity of N1 and N2 in PBS or DPBS at room temperature was measured using MU-NANA assay in triplicate at weeks 0, 3, 8, 12, and 24 using week 0 as a baseline. Points represent individual samples.Full size imageFig. 4: Calcium and magnesium partially rescued NA activity in vitro of N1 and N2 stored at −80 °C or 4 °C in PBS.N1 and N2 stored at −80 °C or 4 °C in PBS or DPBS for 36 weeks. PBS samples were rescued with DPBS and log2-transformed NA activities of NAV PBS, NAV rescue, and NAV DPBS samples were compared. Bars represent individual samples.Full size imageNAV PBS and NAV DPBS induce robust but similar NA inhibition titers in miceImmunogenicity to NAV PBS and NAV DPBS stored at 4 °C was robust (Figs. 5 and 6). Twenty-eight days after the first dose of vaccine, serum NA inhibition (NAI) titers against N1 increased significantly in mice given NAV PBS (mean difference (MD) = 4.00, 95% CI 2.81–5.19, p < 0.0001) and NAV DPBS (MD = 5.00, 95% CI 3.81–6.19, p < 0.001) compared to the PBS control group (Supplemental Table 4). Titers were similar between mice given NAV PBS and those given NAV DPBS (MD = 1.00, 95% CI −0.19–2.19, p = 0.11). Similar findings were observed with NAI titers against N2, which were significantly higher in mice given NAV PBS (MD = 3.60, 95% CI 2.73–4.47, p < 0.0001) and NAV DPBS (MD = 3.00, 95% CI 2.13–3.87, p < 0.0001) but not different between vaccine groups (MD = −0.60, −1.47–0.27, p = 0.20) (Supplemental Table 5). NAI titers to N1 and N2 increased further after the second vaccine dose (in some cases above the maximum limit of detection on the assay) and persisted to be high through viral challenge in both vaccine groups. ANOVA could not be performed on day 56 to compare N1 NAI titers since all NAV PBS and NAV DPBS mice had titers that reached the maximum level of detection and there was no standard error. Subsequent ANOVA analyses for both N1 and N2 NAI titers on days 59 and 62 were all significant (p < 0.0001) with post-hoc analyses all determining NAV PBS and NAV DPBS mice had significantly higher titers than the PBS control group (all p < 0.0001) while the differences in titers between NAV PBS and NAV DPBS were not significant (Supplemental Tables 6–9). The control group had serum NAI titers against N1 and N2 below the assay limit of detection throughout the entire study, including viral challenge. Of note, insufficient sample was available to test NAI against N2 on day 56.Fig. 5: Immunogenicity of NAV PBS and NAV DPBS as assessed by NAI titers against N1.Mice were vaccinated with NAV in PBS (red squares), NAV in DPBS (blue triangles), and PBS control (black circles) on days 0 and 28 and challenged with 105 TCID50 A/Bethesda/MM2/2009 (H1N1) on day 56. Blood was collected on days 28, 56, 59, and 62 for assessment of NAI titers against N1 (n = 5 mice per condition per time point except n = 10 on day 56). Points represent log2 geometric means of individual mice and error bars represent means and standard deviations. Dotted line represents minimal limit of detection. ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey test were performed where *p < 0.0001.Full size imageFig. 6: Immunogenicity of NAV PBS and NAV DPBS as assessed by NAI titers against N2.Mice were vaccinated with NAV in PBS (red squares), NAV in DPBS (blue triangles), and PBS control (black circles) on days 0 and 28 and challenged with 105 TCID50 A/Bethesda/MM2/2009 (H1N1) on day 56. Blood was collected on days 28, 59, and 62 for assessment of NAI titers against N2 (n = 5 mice per condition per time point). Points represent log2 geometric means of individual mice and error bars represent means and standard deviations. Dotted line represents minimal limit of detection. ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey test were performed where *p < 0.0001.Full size imageNAV PBS and NAV DPBS provide similar protection against influenza challenge in miceTo test the vaccine efficacy in the presence and absence of divalent cations, vaccinated mice were challenged with influenza on day 56 and viral titers were obtained (Fig. 7). Mice vaccinated with NAV PBS or NAV DPBS had lower viral loads (VLs) on day 59 (post-challenge day 3) and day 62 (post-challenge day 6) compared to control (PBS) vaccinated mice. Three days after vaccination, NAV PBS mice had −0.822 log copies/ml (95% CI, −0.989 to −0.655, p < 0.0001) compared to PBS mice while NAV DPBS mice had −0.716 log copies/ml (95% CI, −0.883 to −0.549, p < 0.0001) compared to PBS mice. Six days after vaccination, NAV PBS mice had −1.742 log copies/ml (95% CI, −2.316 to −1.168, p < 0.0001) compared to PBS mice while NAV DPBS mice had −1.430 log copies/ml (95% CI, −2.004 to −0.856, p < 0.0001) compared to PBS mice. VLs were not statistically different between mice vaccinated with NAV PBS and those vaccinated with NAV DPBS at either day 59 or day 62 (Supplemental Tables 10, 11).Fig. 7: NAV reduced pulmonary viral loads in mice challenged with A/California/04/2009 (H1N1).Mice were vaccinated with NAV in PBS, NAV in DPBS, and PBS control on days 0 and 28 and challenged with 105 TCID50 A/Bethesda/MM2/2009 (H1N1) on day 56. Pulmonary viral loads on day 3 (a) and day 6 (b) (n = 5 at each time point) after challenge were assessed by PCR. Points represent viral loads of individual mice and error bars represent means with standard deviations. ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey test were performed where *p < 0.0001.Full size imagePost-influenza challenge inflammatory and antiviral transcriptomic responses are reduced in NAV PBS- and NAV DPBS-vaccinated miceTo measure the effects of NAV PBS and NAV DPBS vaccination on the host gene expression response, cDNA expression microarray analysis was performed on total RNA isolated from whole lung on days 3 and 6 post-infection with 105 TCID50 of 2009 H1N1pdm virus (n = 5 animals per condition per timepoint). A t-test comparing mock-infected and virus-infected animals identified 2341 and 3972 sequences with expression levels that changed significantly (at least two-fold, p value <0.001) on days 3 and 6 post-challenge, respectively, in response to viral infection. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was then used to identify virus-responsive genes with expression levels that differed (two-fold, p value <0.001) between PBS-, NAV PBS-, and NAV DPBS-vaccinated groups. This analysis identified 69 and 379 sequences on days 3 and 6 post-challenge, respectively. As shown in Fig. 8a and Supplemental Fig. 1, PBS-vaccinated mice showed significantly higher expression of antiviral response and inflammatory response genes compared to NAV PBS- and NAV DPBS-vaccinated groups on day 3 post-challenge. Similarly, on day 6 post-challenge, NAV PBS and NAV DPBS groups showed significantly less expression of immune/antiviral genes compared to PBS-vaccinated mice (Fig. 8b and Supplemental Fig. 2). Shown in Fig. 1c, pathway classification indicated NAV PBS and NAV DPBS vaccination resulted in a significant reduction in many antiviral responses, including pattern recognition, IRF activation, and interferon responses; inflammatory responses, including NK cell and neutrophil responses; and chemokine/cytokine signaling, lymphocyte, and dendritic cell responses. No significant differences were observed by t-test between NAV PBS and NAV DPBS vaccination at either day 3 or day 6 post-challenge.Fig. 8: NAV PBS and NAV DPBS vaccination reduced antiviral and inflammatory response gene expression following viral challenge.Expression microarray analysis was performed on total RNA isolated from lungs on days 3 and 6 post-challenge (n = 5 mice per condition per time point). a Heatmaps showing expression of antiviral and inflammatory response genes identified by ANOVA (p < 0.001) that showed >2-fold change in expression between PBS, NAV PBS, and NAV DPBS vaccinated groups on day 3 post-viral challenge. Due to the small number of sequences (n = 69) identified at this timepoint, pathway classification analysis was not performed (gene IDs are shown in Supplemental Figs. 1 and 2). b Heatmap showing expression of antiviral/immune response genes identified by ANOVA (p < 0.001 with >2-fold change in expression) on day 6 post-viral challenge. Red indicates higher expression of sequences in infected mouse lung compared to normal unvaccinated, uninfected, age-matched mouse lung, while green indicates lower expression, and black indicates no change. c Pathway classification of genes identified by ANOVA on day 6 post-viral challenge.Full size imageDiscussionThe findings in this study are helpful in guiding storage practices for NA-based vaccines but also explore critical questions regarding the relationships between NA stability, activity, immunogenicity, and potential vaccine efficacy. Generally, NA is stored at 4 °C per manufacturer’s recommendations and investigator experience, but there is a paucity of published data available to support this practice17,18. The data from this study confirm these practices, demonstrating similar stability of activity for vaccine stored at 4 °C as compared to −80 °C. This is advantageous for NA-based vaccines, since storage at 4 °C is less resource intensive than storage at −80 °C. DPBS buffer helped to maintain activity for all samples at all temperatures and interestingly, seemed to diminish the destabilizing effect of the freeze–thaw process on N2. It is important to note, since the −80 °C samples underwent freeze–thawing at each time point, there may be an additional decrease in activity as a result of the freeze–thaw process itself rather than just storage at −80 °C. Surprisingly, the samples in DPBS were quite stable even at RT for at least 3 weeks, which is also helpful to know for vaccine storage, especially in low resource areas. However, RT storage could also increase the risk of microbial growth, which was not assessed in this study. Furthermore, the optimal temperature storage of HA, the chief antigen present in standard influenza vaccines, was not investigated in this study though these vaccines are also typically stored at 4 °C19,20,21,22,23. The RT stability experiment also showed an unexpected increase in activity of the N1 in DPBS sample above baseline from weeks 1 to 12. The reason for this is unclear, but the finding may indicate that divalent-cation-related enhancement of NA activity may not be an instantaneous process. It is also unclear why activity dropped precipitously for all samples at week 12 before rebounding to different degrees at week 24. The week 24 results were repeated the next day for N1 and N2 in DPBS (data not shown), showing similar results and confirming the NA activity was not spuriously elevated at week 24. However, since the samples were run longitudinally, the week 12 results were not able to be repeated to verify the observation of low NA activity. Factors that may affect multiple wells across different plates are limited but could be a result of suboptimal 4-methylumbelliferyl-N-acetylneuraminicacid (MU-NANA) reagent concentration at week 12.N2 activity was generally higher when compared to N1 across all sets of conditions at all time points. Though this difference only reached statistical significance on day 0, the lack of significance at other time points was largely driven by high variability across samples under different conditions. There are limited data available in the literature comparing activity of NAs of different types that may shed light whether the observed difference is reflective of N1 and N2 in general, or recombinant N1 from A/California/04/2009 and recombinant N2 from A/Switzerland/9715293/2013 specifically. In a study from 1977, all N1-containing vaccines had consistently lower NA activity than the two H3N2 vaccines, with four out of six H1N1 vaccines having undetectable activity24. The N1 samples in our study also appeared to be highly vulnerable to loss of stability in the absence of calcium and magnesium. Again, it is not clear if this holds universally true for all N1 protein or if this is specific to this particular recombinant product from A/California/04/2009. The use of the vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) tetramerization domain is an additional confounding factor since NA protein in typical split or subunit vaccines lacks this domain. Furthermore, the VASP tetramerization domain may potentially stabilize N1 and N2 to different degrees.Knowing the importance of divalent cations for stability and hence, activity of NA, it is not surprising that DPBS buffer increased the activity of both N1 and N2 under all sets of conditions. It is interesting that for N1 samples at both −80 °C and 4 °C activity appeared to be higher at week 4 compared to baseline, also supporting that divalent-cation-related enhancement of NA activity, particularly in N1, may take a long time to reach maximum effect. Similarly, calcium and magnesium were able to increase the activity of N2 in PBS at 36 weeks to similar levels as N2 in DPBS, but N1 in PBS could only be increased partially, suggesting either that there was some permanent loss of stability of N1 in PBS or that enhancement of activity occurred more slowly in N1 compared to N2. An important limitation of the in vitro portion of this study was the lack of biological replicates which limited the ability to perform statistical comparisons. This was partially addressed through grouping of conditions which allowed for statistical comparisons but suffered from increased variability due to heterogeneity of conditions. This technique could not be performed to statistically support the observations of late divalent cation rescue on PBS samples or to more clearly characterize the stability of NA at RT.Despite the differences in activity observed between N1 and N2, immunogenicity appeared to be fairly robust with N1 and N2 inducing similar NAI titers, questioning whether critical epitopes are actually lost in the setting of instability. This is in contrast to a previous study using purified NA which found modest improvement in the immunogenicity of calcium supplemented N125. The presence of the VASP tetramerization domain in recombinant NA may confound the comparison with purified NA or standard vaccines, since the domain may provide sufficient stability to preserve epitopes needed for a successful humoral response even in the absence of divalent cations. Alternatively, it may be possible that in vivo extracellular calcium and magnesium concentrations are sufficient to rescue stability leading to comparable antibody titers in mice given PBS-buffered vaccine and DPBS-buffered vaccine. However, it is important to note that multiple samples reached the maximum level possible on the NAI assay which may limit comparisons. It is also regrettable that N2 titers were not available on day 56, though considering that N1 titers were generally at or near the maximum limit of detection between days 56, 59, and 62 and N2 titers were at comparable levels on days 59 and 62, it is unlikely day 56 N2 titers would have provided additional information. These findings also confirm that the high NAI titers on days 59 and 62 are not a response to viral challenge, but rather to the second dose of vaccine on day 28.The comparable efficacy of PBS NAV and DPBS NAV in reducing the VL in vaccinated mice also supports the previous findings demonstrating a disconnect between vaccine NA activity and immunogenicity. The higher NA activity of the N1 component in NAV DPBS compared to NAV PBS did not result in any further reduction in VL after H1N1 challenge. It has been previously shown that while distinct NA types induce NAI titers to different degrees, this variance cannot be accounted for by the difference in NA activity17. In contrast, since NA amount correlates well with activity and immunogenicity, NA activity can be used to predict immunogenicity only when comparing samples containing the same NA type17,26. The observed VL reduction correlates with that seen in other studies of NA-based vaccines, though it was not quite as robust as the 4 log reduction observed in N2-immunized mice challenged with homotypic and even heterotypic H3N2 virus16.However, this study, which used a combination of N1 and N2 vaccine, demonstrated a significant effect on the overall disease response as indicated by transcriptomic analysis. The significant reduction in expression of antiviral and inflammatory responses in vaccinated mice post-challenge suggests that the pathogenesis of influenza infection was greatly muted. Compared to control animals, NAV-vaccinated animals demonstrated a superior reduction of VLs and decreased antiviral and inflammatory responses, further confirming the observed positive effects of anti-NA immunity on clinical outcomes demonstrated in human challenge trials7. Mechanistically, these findings suggest anti-NA immunity effectively impairs influenza pathogenesis and replication, necessitating decreased immune activation to clear infection, leading to decreased symptoms secondary to inflammatory responses.Although the inclusion of calcium and magnesium in vaccine buffer did not have a significant effect on immunogenicity or efficacy of the vaccine, there may still be advantages to the use of divalent-cation-containing buffer for NA-based vaccines, including a positive effect on maintaining stability over the long term. While this study used NAV that was freshly formulated with DPBS to immunize mice, this hypothesis can be readily tested by comparing efficacy and immunogenicity of PBS NAV and DPBS NAV after long-term storage. The effect of DPBS on HA should also be explored before it can be used in combination HA+NA vaccines, including as an improvement to standard vaccines already on the market.The results from this study confirm that this NA recombinant vaccine strategy, NAV, has potential as a standalone vaccine. Further work, comparing its efficacy to approved quadrivalent vaccine or using NAV as a supplement to approved influenza vaccines where it can complement HA-based immunity, will be essential. In this case, the combination of recombinant N1 and N2 in a single vaccine did not impair robust induction of anti-NA antibodies or prevent protection against H1N1 challenge, as demonstrated by a reduction in VL and decreased inflammation. This strategy could also be scaled to a 9-valent vaccine covering all nine NA subtypes, with potential as a universal vaccine. NAV was highly stable and even in the absence of a divalent-cation-containing buffer was immunogenic and protective. Studies in both animals and humans suggest that NA immunity can play a significant role in reduction of clinical illness and offer increased breadth of protection5,7,8,16. In addition, a recombinant NAV could be updated to better represent currently circulating NA strains when necessary. Evaluating this vaccine in humans will allow us to determine if these promising observations of immunogenicity and efficacy translate. Evaluation of this vaccine as an independent or combination strategy with current inactivated influenza vaccine is critical as it may offer a significant improvement in vaccine performance while more broadly protective, “universal” vaccines are developed.MethodsRecombinant protein productionN1 from A/California/04/2009 (H1N1) and N2 from A/Switzerland/9715293/2013 (H3N2) with the addition of a VASP tetramerization domain were designed as previously described27 with a Strep-tag II for purification instead of the hexahistidine tag used in the reference study. Both N1 and N2 proteins were produced in Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) insect cells using the Bac-to-Bac baculovirus expression system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and purified using Strep-Tactin Sepharose (IBA GmbH, Gottingen, Germany) as previously described28. A Bicinchoninic Acid Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used for protein quantification.Storage conditions and timepointsN1 and N2 were each diluted either in PBS (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD) or DPBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The recipe for PBS, as provided by the manufacturer, is sodium phosphate dibasic (795 mg/l, 5.6 mM), potassium phosphate monobasic (1.06 mM), and sodium chloride (9000 mg/l, 154 mM). The recipe for DPBS, as provided by the manufacturer, is calcium chloride (100 mg/l, 0.9 mM), magnesium chloride (100 mg/l, 0.49 mM), potassium chloride (200 mg/l, 2.66 mM), potassium phosphate monobasic (200 mg/l, 1.47 mM), sodium chloride (8000 mg/l, 137.93 mM), and sodium phosphate dibasic (2160 mg/l, 8.06 mM). Samples were stored at −80 °C and at 4 °C for a total of eight different sets of combinations of buffer and temperature conditions. NA stored at −80 °C was thawed at each timepoint and then returned to frozen storage until the next timepoint. NA activity was tested at weeks 0, 4, 12, 24, and 36. NA in PBS at week 36 was subsequently “rescued” through dilution in DPBS to compare its activity to NA in PBS at 36 weeks and NA in DPBS at 36 weeks. The stability experiment was also repeated with N1 in PBS, N1 in DPBS, N2 in PBS, and N2 in DPBS at RT and activity was tested at weeks 0, 3, 8, 12, and 24.NA activity measurementN1 and N2 activity was measured using MU-NANA (MilliporeSigma, St. Louis, MO) as substrate, adapted from the method used by Sultana et al.17. In brief, N1 and N2 were initially diluted to working concentration in either PBS or DPBS. Samples were prepared in a black 96-well plate. Two-fold dilutions using PBS of Vibrio cholerae NA (MilliporeSigma, St. Louis, MO) were performed in duplicate and used as a positive control to create a standard curve. Two-fold dilutions, using either PBS or DPBS, were performed in triplicate on each sample. An equal amount of 20 µM MU-NANA was added to each well. The plate was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 100 µl of 0.1 M glycine, pH 10.7, 20% EtOH. Fluorescence was measured by a Synergy HT plate reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT), with excitation at 360 nm and emission at 460 nm. Data were compiled in PRISM 8 version 8.3.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Absolute NA activity was extrapolated using the first dilution that had fluorescence readings within the linear portion of the standard curve across an entire group. NA activity (as a comparison to baseline) was also calculated by comparing and averaging optical density (OD) values at each dilution to baseline OD values. NA activity was also grouped by temperature condition, buffer choice, and NA type at each timepoint for comparison, with standard deviations calculated using PRISM 8.Vaccination and viral challenge of miceN1 and N2 were produced approximately 4 and 53 months prior to vaccination and stored at −80 °C until the day of vaccination. On the day of vaccination, NAV was diluted either in PBS (NAV PBS) or DPBS (NAV DPBS) as buffer solutions to target concentrations of 100 µg/ml of N1 and 100 µg/ml of N2. NAV was stored at 4 °C in between administration of the first and second doses of vaccine. The same lot was used for first and second doses in each group. BALB/c mice (8-week-old female BALB/c mice, Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) were vaccinated intramuscularly (IM) with NAV DPBS (n = 10), NAV PBS (n = 10), or PBS control (n = 10). Vaccination occurred on day 0 with 10 µg of each NA and on day 28 with 1 µg of each NA in the two vaccine groups. Mice were bled 200 µl on day 28 and day 56 to collect serum for assessment of immunogenicity. Mice were challenged intranasally with 105 TCID50 A/Bethesda/MM2/2009 (H1N1) on day 56 and observed daily for adverse effects. Of note, A/Bethesda/MM2/2009 (H1N1) was derived via reverse genetics from A/California/04/2009 (H1N1) and differs by three amino acid changes, one in the HA (A388V) and two in the NA (V106I and N248D). Mice in each group were euthanized in equal numbers on day 59 and day 62 for assessment of VL and transcriptomic analysis of lung tissue. Serum was collected from sacrificed mice. All experimental animal work was performed in accordance with United States Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory in Animals at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) following approval of the animal safety protocols by the NIAID Animal Care and Use Committee.Assessment of immunogenicityImmunogenicity of the vaccine was assessed through the use of a standard NAI assay on serum collected from vaccinated mice. Titers for N1 NAI were generated using an H6N1 assay virus with an identical N1 to the vaccine N1 and titers for N2 NAI were generated using an H6N2 assay virus with an identical N2 to the vaccine N2, as per previously reported standard methods29,30. All measurements were made in triplicate. Raw NAI titers were transformed into geometric means using log2. Immunogenicity was tested on days 28, 56, 59, and 62. Data were compiled and standard deviations were calculated using PRISM 8.Assessment of VLLungs were obtained from euthanized mice on days 59 and 62 and homogenized. After RNA extraction, VLs were measured using a one-step real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) for the influenza A virus matrix 131. A standard curve with an external standard was used to calculate copy number as previously described32. Data were compiled and 95% confidence intervals were calculated using PRISM 8.RNA isolation and expression microarray analysisLungs from euthanized mice were collected and homogenized in Trizol, total RNA was isolated following manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and purified using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Cat #74106). Gene expression profiling experiments were performed using Agilent Mouse Whole Genome 44K microarrays. Fluorescent probes were prepared using Agilent QuickAmp Labeling Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each RNA sample was labeled and hybridized to individual arrays. Spot quantitation was performed using Agilent’s Feature Extractor software. The complete MIAME-compliant33 microarray dataset has been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus34.Statistical analysesPRISM 8 was used to make comparisons between NA activity of grouped samples with respect to storage temperature, buffer choice, and NA type. Two-tailed t-tests were performed to compare groups at each timepoint, with the two-stage step-up method of Benjamini et al. used to correct for multiplicity35. PRISM 8 was used to perform ANOVA on NAI titers to identify presence of differences between groups vaccinated with PBS, NAV PBS, and NAV DPBS at each time point for both N1 and N2. Tukey’s post-hoc test was used to perform comparisons on pairs of groups. ANOVA and Tukey testing were also performed to compare VL titers between groups on days 3 and 6 post-challenge. Statistical analysis of transcriptomic data was performed using Genedata Analyst 9.0 (Genedata, Basel, Switzerland). Data normalization was performed using central tendency followed by relative normalization using pooled RNA from mock infected mouse lung (n = 4) as a reference. Transcripts showing differential expression (two-fold, p < 0.001) between infected and control animals were identified by standard t-test. ANOVA was used to identify transcripts showing differential expression (two-fold, p value <0.001) between PBS-, NAV PBS-, and NAV DPBS-vaccinated groups. The Benjamini–Hochberg procedure was used to correct for false-positive rate in multiple comparisons. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used for gene ontology and pathway classification.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The transcriptomic data have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus with GEO Series accession number GSE160010. ReferencesSmith, W., Andrewes, C. H. & Laidlaw, P. P. A virus obtained from influenza patients. Lancet 222, 66–68 (1933).Article Google Scholar Smorodintseff, A., Tushinsky, M., Drobyshevskaya, A., Korovin, A. & Osetroff, A. Investigation on volunteers infected with the influenza virus. Am. J. Med. Sci. 194, 159–170 (1937).Article Google Scholar Salk, J. E., Menke Jr, W. J. & Francis Jr, T. A clinical, epidemiological and immunological evaluation of vaccination against epidemic influenza. Am. J. Epidemiol. 42, 57–93 (1945).Article Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Past seasons vaccine effectiveness estimates. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/vaccines-work/past-seasons-estimates.html (2019).Monto, A. S. et al. Antibody to influenza virus neuraminidase: an independent correlate of protection. J. Infect. Dis. 212, 1191–1199 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Eichelberger, M. C., Morens, D. M. & Taubenberger, J. K. Neuraminidase as an influenza vaccine antigen: a low hanging fruit, ready for picking to improve vaccine effectiveness. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 53, 38–44 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Memoli, M. J. et al. Evaluation of antihemagglutinin and antineuraminidase antibodies as correlates of protection in an influenza A/H1N1 virus healthy human challenge model. mBio 7, https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.00417-16 (2016).Wohlbold, T. J. et al. Vaccination with adjuvanted recombinant neuraminidase induces broad heterologous, but not heterosubtypic, cross-protection against influenza virus infection in mice. mBio 6, https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.02556-14 (2015).Varghese, J. N., Laver, W. G. & Colman, P. M. Structure of the influenza virus glycoprotein antigen neuraminidase at 2.9 A resolution. Nature 303, 35–40 (1983).Article CAS Google Scholar Johansson, B. E. & Brett, I. C. Variation in the divalent cation requirements of influenza a virus N2 neuraminidases. J. Biochem. 134, 345–352 (2003).Article CAS Google Scholar Treanor, J. J. et al. Protective efficacy of a trivalent recombinant hemagglutinin protein vaccine (FluBlok(R)) against influenza in healthy adults: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Vaccine 29, 7733–7739 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Giurgea, L. T., Morens, D. M., Taubenberger, J. K. & Memoli, M. J. Influenza neuraminidase: a neglected protein and its potential for a better influenza vaccine. Vaccines (Basel) 8, 409 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Johansson, B. E., Matthews, J. T. & Kilbourne, E. D. Supplementation of conventional influenza A vaccine with purified viral neuraminidase results in a balanced and broadened immune response. Vaccine 16, 1009–1015 (1998).Article CAS Google Scholar Johansson, B. E. & Kilbourne, E. D. Immunization with purified N1 and N2 influenza virus neuraminidases demonstrates cross-reactivity without antigenic competition. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91, 2358–2361 (1994).Article CAS Google Scholar Johansson, B. E., Pokorny, B. A. & Tiso, V. A. Supplementation of conventional trivalent influenza vaccine with purified viral N1 and N2 neuraminidases induces a balanced immune response without antigenic competition. Vaccine 20, 1670–1674 (2002).Article CAS Google Scholar Johansson, B. Immunization with influenza A virus hemagglutinin and neuraminidase produced in recombinant baculovirus results in a balanced and broadened immune response superior to conventional vaccine. Vaccine 17, 2073–2080 (1999).Article CAS Google Scholar Sultana, I. et al. Stability of neuraminidase in inactivated influenza vaccines. Vaccine 32, 2225–2230 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Roche. Neuraminidase (Sialidase). https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/content/dam/sigma-aldrich/docs/Roche/Bulletin/1/11080725001bul.pdf (2017).Sanofi. Fluzone Quadrivalent [package insert] (Sanofi, 2020).Seqirus. Flucelvax Quadrivalent [package insert] (Seqirus, 2020).GlaxoSmithKline. Flulaval Quadrivalent [package insert] (GlaxoSmithKline, 2020).Seqirus. Afluria Quadrivalent [package insert] (Seqirus, 2020).Sanofi. Flublok Quadrivalent [package insert] (Sanofi, 2020).Kendal, A. P., Noble, G. R. & Dowdle, W. R. Neuraminidase content of influenza vaccines and neuraminidase antibody responses after vaccination of immunologically primed and unprimed populations. J. Infect. Dis. 136, S415–S424 (1977).Article Google Scholar Brett, I. C. & Johansson, B. E. Variation in the divalent cation requirements of influenza A virus N1 neuraminidases. J. Biochem. 139, 439–447 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Sultana, I., Gao, J., Markoff, L. & Eichelberger, M. C. Influenza neuraminidase-inhibiting antibodies are induced in the presence of zanamivir. Vaccine 29, 2601–2606 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Margine, I., Palese, P. & Krammer, F. Expression of functional recombinant hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins from the novel H7N9 influenza virus using the baculovirus expression system. J. Vis. Exp. e51112, https://doi.org/10.3791/51112 (2013).Park, J. K. et al. Evaluation of preexisting anti-hemagglutinin stalk antibody as a correlate of protection in a healthy volunteer challenge with influenza A/H1N1pdm virus. mBio 9, https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02284-17 (2018).Potter, C. W. & Oxford, J. S. Determinants of immunity to influenza infection in man. Br. Med. Bull. 35, 69–75 (1979).Article CAS Google Scholar Wan, H. et al. Molecular basis for broad neuraminidase immunity: conserved epitopes in seasonal and pandemic H1N1 as well as H5N1 influenza viruses. J. Virol. 87, 9290–9300 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Krafft, A. E. et al. Evaluation of PCR testing of ethanol-fixed nasal swab specimens as an augmented surveillance strategy for influenza virus and adenovirus identification. J. Clin. Microbiol. 43, 1768–1775 (2005).Article CAS Google Scholar Memoli, M. J. et al. Validation of the wild-type influenza A human challenge model H1N1pdMIST: an A(H1N1)pdm09 dose-finding investigational new drug study. Clin. Infect. Dis. 60, 693–702 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Brazma, A. et al. Minimum information about a microarray experiment (MIAME)-toward standards for microarray data. Nat. Genet. 29, 365–371 (2001).Article CAS Google Scholar Edgar, R., Domrachev, M. & Lash, A. E. Gene Expression Omnibus: NCBI gene expression and hybridization array data repository. Nucleic Acids Res. 30, 207–210 (2002).Article CAS Google Scholar Benjamini, Y., Krieger, A. M. & Yekutieli, D. Adaptive linear step-up procedures that control the false discovery rate. Biometrika 93, 491–507 (2006).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, NIAID.FundingOpen Access funding provided by the National Institutes of Health (NIH).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsLID Clinical Studies Unit, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USALuca T. Giurgea, Adriana Cervantes-Medina & Matthew J. MemoliViral Pathogenesis and Evolution Section, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAJae-Keun Park, Ashley Freeman, Luz Angela Rosas, John C. Kash & Jeffery K. TaubenbergerInstitute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USAKathie-Anne Walters & Kelsey ScherlerAuthorsLuca T. GiurgeaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJae-Keun ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKathie-Anne WaltersView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKelsey ScherlerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdriana Cervantes-MedinaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAshley FreemanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLuz Angela RosasView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJohn C. KashView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeffery K. TaubenbergerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMatthew J. MemoliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsL.T.G. contributed to study design, stability assays, animal work, and manuscript preparation. J.K.P. contributed to study design, antigen preparation, and manuscript preparation. K.W. contributed to transcriptomic analysis and manuscript preparation. K.S. contributed to transcriptomic analysis. A.C. contributed to immunogenicity assays. A.F. contributed to animal work. L.A.R. contributed to viral titers. J.C.K. contributed to study design, to transcriptomic analysis, and manuscript preparation. J.K.T. contributed to study design and manuscript preparation. M.J.M. contributed to study design and manuscript preparation.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Luca T. Giurgea.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationReporting SummaryRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleGiurgea, L.T., Park, JK., Walters, KA. et al. The effect of calcium and magnesium on activity, immunogenicity, and efficacy of a recombinant N1/N2 neuraminidase vaccine. npj Vaccines 6, 48 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-021-00310-xDownload citationReceived: 28 October 2020Accepted: 07 March 2021Published: 06 April 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-021-00310-xShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Structure-based design of stabilized recombinant influenza neuraminidase tetramers Daniel EllisJulia LederhoferMasaru Kanekiyo Nature Communications (2022) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Content types Journal Information About the Editors Contact Open Access Calls for Papers Editorial policies Article Processing Charges Journal Metrics About the Partner Publish with us For Authors and Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies npj Vaccines (npj Vaccines) ISSN 2059-0105 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingSecond wave of COVID-19: Causes and solutions ORF हिन्दी ORF मराठी ORF বাংলা Subscribe RESEARCH Essay Series Expert Speak Commentaries Young Voices Series Long-form Issue Briefs Special Reports Occasional Papers GP-ORF Series Books and Monographs Monitors Videos Browse by Topics CENTRES Progammes & Centres SUFIP Development Network Centre for New Economic Diplomacy Centre for Security, Strategy & Technology Urban Studies Neighbourhood Studies Inclusive Growth and SDGs Strategic Studies Programme Energy and Climate Change Economy and Growth Location Delhi Kolkata Mumbai Middle East America FORUMS Cape Town Conversation Sagarmanthan: The Great Oceans Dialogue Yerevan Dialogue Raisina Dialogue The Energy Transition Dialogues CyFy CyFy Africa Kigali Global Dialogue BRICS Academic Forum Colaba Conversation Asian Forum on Global Governance Dhaka Global Dialogue Kalpana Chawla Annual Space Policy Dialogue Tackling Insurgent Ideologies Climate Action Champions Network EVENTS All Events Event Reports About Us About ORF Who We Are Code of Conduct ORF Social Media Advisory Committee Against Sexual Harassment Declaration of Contributions Partners Founder Chairman Engage Work With Us Write For Us Intern With Us People ORF Faculty Contributors Chairman President Trustees Global Advisory Board Advisors × RESEARCH Essay Series Expert Speak Commentaries Young Voices Series Long-Form Issue Briefs Special Reports Occasional Papers GP-ORF Series Books and Monographs Monitors Videos Browse by Topics CENTRES Progammes & Centers SUFIP Development Network Centre for New Economic Diplomacy Centre for Security, Strategy & Technology Urban Studies Neighbourhood Studies Inclusive Growth and SDGs Strategic Studies Programme Energy and Climate Change Economy and Growth Location Delhi Kolkata Mumbai Middle East America FORUMS EVENTS All Events Event Reports ABOUT US About ORF Who We Are Code of Conduct ORF Social Media Advisory Committee Against Sexual Harassment Declaration of Contributions People Founder Chairman Engage Work With Us Write For Us Intern With Us People ORF Faculty Contributors Chairman President Trustees Global Advisory Board Advisors WRITE FOR US CONTACT US ☰ Home Research Essay Series Expert Speak Second wave of COVID-19: Causes and solutions Author : Amit Thadani Expert Speak Health Express Published on Apr 04, 2021 The behaviour of the COVID-19 pandemic is not particularly unusual with regard to its resurgence as “waves.” Most of the great pandemics in recent recorded history have lasted several years. • The Antonine Plague of 165 AD afflicted and devastated the Roman Empire. The Emperor of Rome Marcus Aurelius also succumbed to it. It continued until 180 AD. • The “black death” pandemic of pneumonic plague too lasted for four years, from 1347 to 1350. It spent considerable time in each area it infested, ravaging the local population completely before moving on to the next. • Between the years 1831 to 1837, an influenza pandemic swept across Europe in three waves: one each in 1831, 1833 and 1837. • The Russian Flu of 1889 lasted for almost two years, killing 360,000 people. • The influenza pandemic of 1899 lasted for five years. Over one lakh British citizens perished in this pandemic. • The 1918 Spanish Flu influenza pandemic, arguably the most devastating in history, killed an estimated 50 million people in three waves between March 1918 and November 1919. Each wave had as high mortality as the previous one. However, the first outbreaks of this disease had been recorded in 1917 by two separate groups of researchers. And as you read this article, COVID-19 has entered its third calendar year: the first cases were reported towards the end of 2019, spread across the globe rapidly in 2020 and is raging on in the first half of 2021, having taken over 2.8 million lives worldwide. Going by the history of pandemics, one can say with some degree of confidence that the behaviour of the COVID-19 pandemic is not particularly unusual with regard to its resurgence as “waves.” Phases of pandemics The above chart by the World Health Organisation shows the natural course of pandemics. We are in phases 5-6 of the COVID-19 pandemic, as the number of cases are still rising globally. Most experts agree that COVID-19 too would eventually become a post-pandemic seasonal illness. Factors responsible for “pandemic waves” Several factors have been identified for ebb and wave patterns in the transmission of pandemics. Daihai et al. proposed a simple model for the three waves of the 1918 influenza pandemic, that involved: • Schools opening and closing. • Temperature changes during the outbreak. • Changes in human behaviour in response to the outbreak. Kissler et al. have identified the following factors for the post-pandemic transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2: • Degree of seasonal variation in transmission. • Duration of immunity. • Degree of cross-immunity between SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses. • Intensity and timing of control measures. Viral mutation is an additional factor that can lead to fresh outbreaks even in people who have been infected earlier. The SARS-COV2 virus has shown significant mutations and some of the mutant strains have been found to have higher infectivity. India has reported that up to 20% of its fresh cases are from a double mutant strain. The UK and South Africa variants do not seem to have played a major role in India. The rise and fall in the number of cases is dependent on the complex interaction between these factors. Certain other peculiarities have been identified. For example, studies on the 1918 pandemic suggested that the pandemic hit the poor in the first wave and the rich in the next. This certainly seems to corroborate with the behaviour of the COVID-19 pandemic in the city of Mumbai, where the first wave devastated the slums while the second one is raging chiefly in the high-rises. Learning from history The traditional methods of control of pandemics have remained virtually unchanged for several centuries: • Isolation and treatment of infected persons. • Containment of disease spread through quarantine measures. • Personal protective barriers. • Proper communication and spread of information to the population at large. Failure in proper implementation of one or more of these factors leads to loss of control over the situation. And there have been several failures on this front, as a result of which India is now in the grip of a huge second wave. Though the bulk of cases are from Maharashtra, several states are showing a sharp increase in the number of fresh cases. The provisions of the Epidemic Act are still in force throughout the country, and there are restrictions on mass gatherings in most states. However, the restrictions have been repeatedly, blatantly and publicly violated. A fact-finding team from Central government visited Maharashtra and found that the causes for the present second wave were most likely “Covid-inappropriate behaviour due to lack of fear of disease, pandemic fatigue; miss outs and super spreaders; and enhanced aggregations due to recent gram panchayat elections, marriage season and opening of schools, crowded public transport, etc.” In short, every principle of pandemic management has been thrown to the winds. The political class is guilty of holding huge political rallies in the middle of a raging pandemic. The current outbreak of COVID-19 that has gripped Maharashtra started immediately after intensive local campaigning for Panchayat elections across the state throughout January 2021. West Bengal is already showing a huge spike in the number of fresh cases following huge rallies by various political parties. Assam has not shown any significant increase, probably owing to the fact that there were only around 515 active cases in the entire state during the time the rallies were held. In any case, it does not help that lakhs of people are seen gathering together, most of them without masks, in mega rallies that are highly televised. The hard lessons of history, such as the 1918 devastation of Philadelphia due to influenza following a large parade, have obviously not been learnt. Every principle of pandemic management has been thrown to the winds. In several states such as Punjab, Bihar and Maharashtra, the so-called “wedding season” has resulted in a series of super-spreader events. Hundreds of people crammed in an airconditioned hall in which people partied without masking or distancing during an ongoing pandemic, was always going to be an invitation for disaster. In sharp contrast, the Uttar Pradesh government proactively took several preventive measures at the start of the “wedding season” and escaped relatively unscathed. The state has also been relatively alert and strict on quarantine and isolation measures for patients and contact tracing. In Maharashtra, extended public transport timings and creation of additional transport facilities were needed to decompress the usually heavily congested public transport. However, while capacities were augmented by introduction of additional buses and trains, for some inexplicable reason, the state government decided to restrict timings to just a few hours, leading to massive overcrowding. The same blunder was repeated several times, first by keeping local trains closed and overburdening the bus network, and later by restricting timings of public transport for the general population to just a few hours a day. The reopening of schools also resulted in cluster outbreaks in several states. Proper communication and spread of information to the population, that was excellent throughout the early stages of the pandemic, has also suffered. The drop in the number of cases led to a number of articles that claimed India would not see a second big wave of COVID, and that we were already close to herd immunity. The messaging from the Central government too seemed to suggest that we had beaten back COVID-19. This seems to have had a ripple effect on the population. Biased media coverage was considered a key factor in the failure to contain the 1918 pandemic. The political class is guilty of holding huge political rallies in the middle of a raging pandemic. Some experts, too, jumped in prematurely and claimed that India would not see a second wave as it had attained “herd immunity.” Senior government officials admitted that some complacency crept in, leading to lax attitudes towards implementation of control measures. To top this, while the bed occupancy situation in Maharashtra continued to deteriorate rapidly, the state government failed miserably in communicating the seriousness of the situation to its population. In stark contrast to the factual situation where patients were struggling for hours to get a single bed and most large hospitals had waiting lists of patients, the Municipal Commissioner of Mumbai continued making pompous claims that more than enough beds were available for treatment. Ending the pandemic Mass vaccination is the only safe and reliable method to end the pandemic without significant mortality. We have several precedents to show that this can be done and that it works. The Asian Flu pandemic of 1957 was stopped in its tracks by vaccination. Outbreaks of Ebola have been contained by mass vaccinating the local population. With high-risk population being prioritised, the mortality due to COVID would be expected to fall sharply. As the majority of healthcare workers in India have already been completely vaccinated, mortality rates due to COVID in this high-risk group have plummeted to near zero. The focus of most state governments, therefore, is to mass vaccinate the entire population on a war footing. With high-risk population being prioritised, the mortality due to COVID would be expected to fall sharply. It would be desirable to authorise several other vaccines and procure as many doses as possible, for this purpose. As the vaccine efficacy is around 80%, some people can still develop COVID post-vaccination but mortality is very rare. In Israel, where over 60% of the population has now received at least one dose of the vaccine, life has more or less returned to the pre-pandemic normal. It is heartening that less than 3% of ICU admissions for severe COVID in Israel were patients who had been fully vaccinated as against 75% who had not received even a single dose of the vaccine. There is considerable data to show that vaccination protects against mutant strains, although in variable degrees. The elimination of mortality due to COVID would effectively reduce this virus to the status of a seasonal common cold. That is a good goal to have. Healthcare AmericaBhutanThe PacificEast and Southeast AsiaEast Asia Covid vaccineCOVID-19Epidemic ActHerd ImmunityPandemic ManagementViral MutationWHO The views expressed above belong to the author(s). ORF research and analyses now available on Telegram! Click here to access our curated content — blogs, longforms and interviews. PREV NEXT Author Amit Thadani Amit Thadani is director at Niramaya Hospital Kharghar Navi Mumbai. He is also visiting consultant at Sushrut Hospital and Apollo Spectra Hospitals Mumbai. Read More + Publications The Case for a G20 Development Bank to Resurrect the SDGs Economics and Finance | Sustainable Development Nov 11, 2024 India charts its IMEC path to global trade influence International Affairs | International Trade and Investment Nov 09, 2024 Topics NATIONAL INVESTMENT Artificial Intelligence Privacy &amp; Data Protection Connectivity Development Partnerships BRICS Indian Ocean Trade Regimes SLOCs Geographies Afghanistan Africa America Americas Bangladesh Bhutan Central Asia China Programmes and Centers SUFIP Development Network Centre for New Economic Diplomacy Centre for Security, Strategy & Technology Urban Studies Neighbourhood Studies Inclusive Growth and SDGs Strategic Studies Programme Energy and Climate Change Economy and Growth Content Type Expert Speak Commentaries Issue Briefs Special Reports Occasional Papers GP-ORF Series Books and Monographs Monitors Videos Series Initiatives Maritime StudiesNeighbourhood StudiesDIGITAL INCLUSIONUrban PolicyWaterDEVELOPMENTInternational Trade and FinanceDevelopment and SocietyNeighbourhoodRegional StudiesGreen TransitionsAdaptation and ResilienceEurasian StudiesDefence ModernisationStrategic StudiesSustainable DevelopmentEnergy and Climate ChangeQuad and BeyondClimate Change and Development Who We Are Work With Us Write For Us Media Release Partners Subscribe To ORF Contact Us Terms and Conditions ORF Privacy Policy Declaration of Contributions ORF Social Media Advisory ORF © 2024Website Design and Development by Sterco Digitex ORF हिन्दी ORF मराठी ORF বাংলা SubscribeChicken consumption, trade and avian flu update in the Japanese market Mexico Brazil Arabic Global South Cone Andean Region Spain Indonesia Search Register Login Search TECHNICAL ARTICLES MONOGRAPHICS Species REPORTAGE INTERVIEWS SECTORIAL NEWS Authors BUSINESS DIRECTORY PRODUCT GUIDES REGISTRATION/LOGIN AVINEWS MAGAZINE PRINTED SUBSCRIPTION AGRIFM - PODCAST AGRI - CALENDAR AGRINEWS CAMPUS REGIONS Spain Mexico Brazil Arabic Global South Cone Andean Region Indonesia Magazine Feeding and nutrition of layers Themes Species Interviews Sectorial Authors Companies Product Events RECOMMENDED Alternative production Animal Nutrition AviNews aviNews Biosecurity Equipment Events Genetics 2024 PSA Annual Meeting 41st Saudi Agriculture 2024 Additives aditives alpacas Alphitobius diaperinus Amino acids aMPV Animal welfare Antibiotic-free poultry Artificial Intelligence Ascaridia galli READ SUMMARY SUBSCRIBE RECEIVE IN PAPER OTHER EDITIONS 07 Apr 2021 Chicken consumption, trade and avian flu update in the Japanese market Report Highlights: The production of chicken meat is projected to remain flat from 2020. There are great effects of […] PDF FILE Report Highlights: The production of chicken meat is projected to remain flat from 2020. There are great effects of highly pathogenic avian flu outbreaks that put downward pressure on supply chain. The industry is slightly recovering from covid-19 The importations will slowly increase in 2021. Traders are likely to moderate imports by drawing down existing stocks. Influenza impact: Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) continues to put downward pressure on domestic production volumes. From November of 2020 to February 2021, almost one million broilers have been culled as avian flu consequence. This accounted for 0.7 % of the total population. Continue after advertising. Moreover, the effects on layer production have led to slaughter nine million layers, which represent 5% of the population. “Layers typically account for around 10 % of Japan’s chicken slaughter; this could put additional downward pressure on chicken supply in 2021”. Consumption: Chicken consumption is projected nearly flat from 2020. Strong household demand is expected to continue, but imports could replace domestic chicken on retail shelves due to rising domestic prices. The forecast indicated high boneless leg prices during this year, while breast price is projected to grow during the first semester. Consequently, those increases in prices are making that more importation will need. Trade: “FAS/Tokyo revises projected 2021 chicken imports to 1,010 million MT up a half percent from 2020, but lower than FAS/Tokyo’s previous projection. Weak foodservice demand during the pandemic pushed Japan’s chicken imports sharply downward, falling seven percent. In particular, prepared chicken imports from Thailand and China, the two main suppliers, fell on reduced demand from izakaya pubs and other restaurants operating on shorter business hours”. As pandemic concerns begin to ease, food service demand should begin to tick up again in the second half of 2021. In addition, the higher price of domestic chicken is likely to incentivize processors to use more imported inputs, reversing a trend from several years ago when processors preferred low-priced, underutilized domestic breast meat”. Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture PDF FILE Related to aviNews 14 Dec Consequences of historic high egg prices 03 May Canada will export meat and poultry products to Guatemala 21 Apr UK increases import quotas for poultry meat from Brazil 13 Apr The UK will lift mandatory poultry housing as avian flu declines 10 Apr Avian flu continues striking Japan, and there is not enough land to burn chicken carcasses MAGAZINE AVINEWS INTERNATIONAL Subscribe now to the poultry technical magazine OTHER EDITIONS READ SUMMARY SUBSCRIBE RECEIVE IN PAPER AUTHORS Zoetis Technical Team FOLLOW H&N Technical Team FOLLOW Brian Fairchild FOLLOW Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon FOLLOW Gracieli Araujo Specialist in Animal Welfare - Cobb LatCan FOLLOW Guillermo Tellez FOLLOW Ken Bafundo FOLLOW Güner GÖVENÇ FOLLOW Nestor Ledesma Martínez FOLLOW Dra. Elein Hernández FOLLOW Talha Siddique FOLLOW EDITION AviNews International September 2024 In ovo vaccination with Embrex® technology helps support earlier, more robust immune response in chicks Zoetis Technical Team Egg Size H&N Technical Team Brian Fairchild Interview Brian Fairchild High Oleic Soybeans and their Impact on Egg and Poultry Meat Quality Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon Metapneumovirus Epidemiology and Seasonality Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon Controlling Insects in Poultry Production Gracieli Araujo Specialist in Animal Welfare - Cobb LatCan Effects of Chronic Stress and Intestinal Inflammation on Commercial Poultry Health and Performance: Part I Guillermo Tellez Applications of Saponins in Poultry Production Ken Bafundo The Quality Parameters of Soybean and Alternative Protein Feedstuffs in Poultry Nutrition Güner GÖVENÇ Pathology of the Immune System in the Diagnosis of Immunosuppression in Poultry Nestor Ledesma Martínez Animal Welfare and Artificial Intelligence: A Combination of the Poultry Present or Future? Dra. Elein Hernández Advancing Poultry Health: The Role of Predictive Analytics in Disease Prevention Talha Siddique Biosecurity Compliance: The Balance Between Culture, Personality, Experience, Education and Technology Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon SUMMARY Subscribe now to aviNews magazine SEE MORE OTHER EDITIONS JOIN OUR POULTRY COMMUNITY Access the PDF articles Keep up to date with our newsletters Receive the magazine for free in digital version REGISTER DISCOVER LEGAL Privacy policy Cookies policy Más información sobre las cookies OUR MEDIA aviNews Magazine Other Media JOIN Online Register Printed subscriptions Advertise Publish with us Contact FOLLOW US 2024 Copyright Grupo de Comunicación agriNews, SL. All rights reserved. Reproduction of the content of this page in any format or communication, electronic or printed, without express authorization is prohibited.Request authorization. Agencia de Marketing GanaderoWith second wave of bird flu, hundred birds found dead in Himachal Pradesh - The Hindu India World Elections Technology e-Paper Menu Science Data Opinion SEARCH FREE TRIALGIFT a Subscription Subscribe LOGIN ACCOUNT PREMIUM Open in The Hindu AppFREE TRIALLOGINGIFT a Subscription ACCOUNT PREMIUM Subscribe Science Data Opinion SEARCH India World Elections Technology e-Paper Science Data Opinion SEARCH News Business Entertainment Life & Style Society Technology Videos Sport Cities States Science Show More Chennai Delhi Bengaluru Hyderabad Movies Food Children Data Kochi Books Education Podcast Brandhub To enjoy additional benefitsFREE TRIALGIFT a Subscription Subscribe LOGIN ACCOUNT PREMIUM ShowcaseSubscribe to NewslettersCrossword+CONNECT WITH US Home Sci-Tech Environment With second wave of bird flu, hundred birds found dead in Himachal Pradesh Like the previous outbreak, most of the victims are bar-headed geese Published - April 07, 2021 11:00 am IST - Shimla PTI Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER Remove SEE ALL PRINT Experts collect samples for the detection of bird-flu, at Gharana wetland on the outskirts of Jammu, Tuesday, Jan. 5, 2021. Around 100 migratory birds have been found dead in Pong Dam Lake in the last two weeks after the outbreak of a second wave of bird flu in Himachal Pradesh, wildlife officials said on Tuesday. Bird flu had first been confirmed among migratory water-birds at Pong Dam Lake Wildlife Sanctuary in early January that left around 5,000 birds dead in a month. It was contained in early February but has now resurfaced since late March beginning with the discovery of a dozen bird carcasses in the sanctuary on March 25, they added. Chief Wildlife Warden Archana Sharma said the National Institute of High Security Animal Diseases (NIHSAD) in Bhopal has confirmed the presence of H5N8 avian influenza among the samples of the dead birds. This strain is different from the previous outbreak, when H5N1 had been detected among the migratory birds, she said adding that both these strains are highly pathogenic.Earlier this year, when bird flu outbreaks were reported across India, most of the states including neighbouring Haryana reported the H5N8 subtype of the virus, a strain which has not been known to infect humans. As of Tuesday, 99 birds have been found dead at Pong Dam lake during this resurgence, she added. Like the previous outbreak, most of the victims are bar-headed geese, she said adding that the dead birds also include nine greylag geese. The outbreak has so far been confined to two adjoining forest beats and bird fatalities are higher during days of adverse weather because that is when the geese tend to flock together instead of flying out, leading to more transmission of the virus, she added. An international Ramsar site with an area that extends up to 220 square kilometres during the wet season, the Pong wetland becomes home to flocks of migratory waterfowl each winter when wetlands in Europe, north and central Asia become frozen. A bird census in the sanctuary in February revealed the presence of over one lakh migratory water birds of 51 different species at the lake, including over 40 thousand bar-headed geese. With the onset of summer, the migratory birds are now flying back to their parent wetlands, she added. Many of the birds currently present in the lake are those which have flown from Rajasthan and other parts of the country, stopping here on their northward journey, she added. Some incidents of deaths of other birds have also been reported from other parts of the state, including Theog in Shimla district and Manali in Kullu district, and their samples have been taken for testing by the animal husbandry department. Meanwhile the sanctuary has again been closed for visitors, and the bird flu action plan has been activated, which includes surveillance, testing and scientific disposal of dead birds, she added. Published - April 07, 2021 11:00 am IST Read Comments Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER Remove SEE ALL PRINTTop News Today0 / 0 Read in App The Hindu About Us Code of Editorial Values News Archive Sitemap Print Subscription Digital Subscription Subscribe to Newsletters Rss Feeds Readers Editor-Terms of Reference Authors & Contributors Frame Front page Contact us Contact Us Social Media Advertise With Us Group News Sites Business Line BL on Campus Sportstar Frontline இந்து தமிழ் திசை The Hindu Centre Young World Club The Hindu ePaper Business Line ePaper Crossword + Free Games Other Products RoofandFloor STEP Images Classifieds - Print Bookstore & Special Publications Popular Sections Elections Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2023 Latest News National News International News Videos Life & Style Food Podcast Showcase Opinion Editorial Columns Comment Cartoon Letters Interview Lead Business Agri-Business Industry Economy Markets Budget Sport Cricket Football Hockey Tennis Athletics Motorsport Races Other Sports Sci-Tech Science Technology Health Agriculture Environment Gadgets Internet States Andhra Pradesh Karnataka Kerala Tamil Nadu Telangana Cities Bengaluru Chennai Coimbatore Delhi Hyderabad Kochi Kolkata Kozhikode Madurai Mangaluru Mumbai Puducherry Thiruvananthapuram Tiruchirapalli Vijayawada Visakhapatnam Trending on The Hindu News Top News: Attack on Hindu temple in Canada US election results 2024 LIVE Private property verdict, Supreme court news Chandrachud, CJI news Kerala’s Neeleswaram temple fireworks accident Morning digest Nov 4 MiG-29, Agra news Sensex, Nifty and Stock market news today Kapil Dev meets AP CM Chandrababu Naidu Trending on Group sites Stock Market Live Updates Stocks to buy today Hockey Mogun Bagan Paralympics 2024 Gold Rate Today Silver Rate Today Sexual Harassment in Telugu Film Industry Mango: The Michael Jackson of Fruits Frontline Current Issue Terms of Use Privacy Policy Copyright© 2024, THG PUBLISHING PVT LTD. or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. BACK TO TOPSign in to unlock member-only benefits!Access 10 free stories every monthSave stories to read laterAccess to comment on every storySign-up/manage your newsletter subscriptions with a single clickGet notified by email for early access to discounts & offers on our products✕Looks like you are already logged in from more than 3 devices!To continue logging in, remove at least one device from the below listLog outLog Out from all devicesTerms & conditions | Institutional SubscriberCommentsComments have to be in English, and in full sentences. They cannot be abusive or personal. Please abide by our community guidelines for posting your comments. We have migrated to a new commenting platform. If you are already a registered user of The Hindu and logged in, you may continue to engage with our articles. If you do not have an account please register and login to post comments. Users can access their older comments by logging into their accounts on Vuukle.Sikaiana Reports Increased Number of Influenza-like illnesses - Solomon Times Online Solomon Islands News - Be the First to Know, Participate Honiara, Solomon IslandsMonday, 11 November 2024 16:53 PM Twitter_Logo_White-on-Blue Home News Economy Sports Features Letters Search Sikaiana Reports Increased Number of Influenza-like illnesses The Island’s remoteness and lack of communication facilities and police presence to look after the border is a concern to leaders and people of the island. Source: George Herming, GCU By Georgina Kekea Share Thursday, 08 April 2021 10:29 AM There is an increased number of influenza-like illnesses in Sikaiana. Prime Minister Manasseh Sogavare reported this in his weekly address.Sogavare says that the government has received reports of influenza like illness and increased cases of diarrhoea at Sikaiana.Sikaiana, an atoll in the Malaita Outer Islands (MOI) continues to experience food shortages as the impact of saltwater intrusion and storm surges continue to affect their garden patches.In September last year, the government through the National Disaster Council (NDC) sent relief supplies to the MOI as well as conducted scoping activities to improve the set-up of the SIG COVID-19 response since MOI was included in the declared emergency zone due to close neighbouring ties with PNG.The Island’s remoteness and lack of communication facilities and police presence to look after the border is a concern to leaders and people of the island.Prime Minister Manasseh Sogavare says the government’s public health surveillance team has taken an initial assessment in the current situation.“A health team is being assembled to travel to Sikaiana to undertake further assessment and institute appropriate management of the situation on the ground”, Sogavare says.The population on Sikaiana island now is around 300. RelatedNewsEconomy Share What do you think? Any Comments? Comment here or write your own Letter to the Editor. Disclaimer: Solomon Times Online may edit or delete your comment and cannot guarantee that all submissions will be published or remain online. The comments expressed on these page are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of Solomon Times Online. News Latest Solomon Island News Solomon Economy News Solomon Politics News Solomon Sports News Solomon Culture and Arts Pacific Regional News Features and Letters Features Letters to the Editor Social Solomon Times @ Facebook Solomon Times @ Twitter Miscellaneous Contact us Write to the Editor About us Terms of Use Privacy Statement © 2007 - 2024 Solomon Times Online. All rights reserved. Terms of Use Privacy Statement Powered by Callidus SolutionsStuffFlu: 376,695 birds killed in Kano, Plateau, Niger - Punch Newspapers × Advertise with us Monday, November 11, 2024 Most Widely Read Newspaper Videos Home News Sports Investigations Metro Plus Videos Politics Business HealthWise Editorial Columns PUNCH Lite PunchNG Menu: Video Spice Special Features Education Sex & Relationship Interview Columns Opinion Advertise with us Flu: 376,695 birds killed in Kano, Plateau, Niger 8th April 2021 Web image Okechukwu Nnodim, James Abraham, Adebayo Ayinde, Tukur Muntari and Chima Azubuike Kindly share this story: Getting your Trinity Audio player ready... The Federal Government on Wednesday met with top officials of the Poultry Farmers’ Association of Nigeria as part of efforts to stop the spread of bird flu, which had spread to seven states. The Director-General of PAN, Onallo Akpa, disclosed this in an interview with one of our correspondents as state governments also began moves to stop the spread of the virus. For example, the Kano State Government said it had killed 223,695 birds, while the Niger State Government stated that the disease had killed 53,000 birds. READ ALSO: Land grabbers defy Sanwo-Olu on building in green belt – CDA In Plateau State, the virus has killed 100,00 birds and in Gombe State, no fewer than 14,800 birds have contracted the disease. Recall that the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control had on Tuesday said Kano, Plateau, Bauchi, Gombe, Nasarawa, Kaduna and the Niger states had reported confirmed cases of Avian Influenza H5N1 also called bird flu. Commenting on the development, the Director-General of PAN, Akpa, said bio-security measures had been put in place by poultry farmers to prevent the spread of the disease beyond the seven states. He stated, “We had a meeting today (Wednesday) in the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and all the claims that there are human infections have so far not been verified to the best of our knowledge and to the best of the knowledge of the ministry.” Akpa said claims of human infections had not been verified by recognised laboratories and dismissed such claims. He said, “This is because whatever suspicion that is being reported has to be verified by the main laboratory in Atlanta in the United States and to the best of our knowledge that has not been done.” Kano depopulates 223,695 birds In Kano, no fewer than 223, 695 birds have been depopulated following the outbreak of the deadly avian Influenza in the state. According to www.aphis.usda.gov/publications/animal_health, depopulation is when large numbers of animals are destroyed in response to an animal health emergency The Director of the Kano State Veterinary Services in the ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Dr Bala Bello, said 223, 695 birds had been depopulated following the outbreak of the deadly avian influenza in the state. He disclosed the figure in an interview with The PUNCH in Kano on Wednesday. He said the birds were depopulated so as to prevent other birds from contracting the deadly disease. Bello said a total of 42 poultry farms had so far been affected by the outbreak while no fewer than 40 samples were sent to the National Veterinary Research Institute, Vom in Jos Plateau State for testing. He said as part of efforts, the ministry had commenced the disinfection of all the major live birds markets in the state in addition to disinfecting the affected farms to check the spread of the disease. “We are currently disinfecting all the eight major live birds markets in the eight Kano metropolitan local government areas of the state,” the director said. According to him, the department has also carried out sensitisation among the various stakeholders to educate them on how detect any live bird infected with the disease. He said the department had also convened first and second stakeholders meetings with live birds and feeds sellers. Related News No sign bird flu virus spreading among humans – WHO chief WHO raises concern over spread of human cases of bird flu FG gives “No vaccination policy” nod to bird flu “The meetings were held as parts of renewed effort to sensitise them on the need to take preventive measures to check the spread of the virus. He, however noted that lack of border control was one of the biggest challenge of the ministry as live birds were being imported from different parts of the country especially the neighboring states where they had the outbreak. Meanwhile, the Association of Poultry Farmers in the state said its members had lost over N500m as a result of the outbreak of the disease. The Chairman, Umar Usman, who disclosed this in an interview with The PUNCH, said if urgent steps were not taken to check the spread of the disease, many of their members would lose their investments and be sent out of the business. “Each live bird costs not less than N1,800. So, if you multiply the amount by the total number of birds that have been depopulated, it will give you over N500m. “So, we are not even talking about the birds that died after infecting the disease,” he added. Niger lost over N65m to bird flu The Niger State Government said over 53,000 birds had been lost to the deadly outbreak The Director of poultry in the state Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries, Bello Nma, said only five farms were affected in the state, but over N65m had so far been lost to the disease. Nma advised poultry farmers to be vigilant and report any incident of sudden high mortality of birds to the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries. Bird flu kills 100,000 birds in Plateau At least 100,000 birds have been killed by the flu in Plateau State. The Chief Veterinary Officer in the state Dr Sipak Shaseet, in an interview with The PUNCH in Jos on Wednesday, said the disease had killed 100,000 birds. According to him, 21 farms have been affected in the state, adding that all the affected farms were in the Jos North and the Jos South local government areas of the state. Shaseet said, “When the bird flu outbreak occurred in the state more than a month ago, only six farms were affected, but it later spread to about 21 farms in two local government areas of the state including Jos North and Jos South. So far, we have about 100,000 birds that have died as a result of the Avian Influenza outbreak in the state” The Director of Veterinary Services, Gombe State Ministry of Agriculture, Molta Idris, told The PUNCH the ministry had commenced a campaign towards stopping the spread of the virus. Idris explained that about 14,800 birds had been affected, blaming it on indiscriminate transportation of birds from affected areas. Copyright PUNCH. All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH. Contact: [email protected] Kindly share this story: All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH. Contact: [email protected] Stay informed and ahead of the curve! Follow The Punch Newspaper on WhatsApp for real-time updates, breaking news, and exclusive content. Don't miss a headline – join now! Join The Punch Newspapers Channel URGENT UPDATE: It is now possible for Nigerians to earn US Dollars, flip a $450 domain for $25,000, and learn how to start earning in Dollars. Click here now. Download e-Copy Latest News 3 hours ago Troops launch manhunt as Lukarawa intensifies killings in Sokoto, Kebbi 4 hours ago Petrol landing cost drops to N971/litre – Report 4 hours ago Minister promises to deliver Kano for APC in 2027 4 hours ago NNPP knocks Kwankwaso for visiting Otti 4 hours ago Obaseki, Okpebholo camps clash over inauguration fund Top News Troops launch manhunt as Lukarawa intensifies killings in Sokoto, Kebbi February 19, 2022 NLC gives govs Dec 1 ultimatum for minimum wage payment Ministries making illegal requests for workers’ promotion - Memo Husband arrested for allegedly setting wife ablaze in Ogun Ondo gov poll: IG bans Amotekun, others as 15,500 ad hoc staff deployed Peter Obi can become president in 2027, says Tanko US deported me after I travelled for four years through 10 countries – Late Ooni’s musician ICYMI: Many Nigerians abroad rely on food banks to survive — British-Nigerian lecturer President’s controversial tax bills split N’Assembly 113 foreign hackers enjoyed police escorts before arrest – Abuja residents News Sports Metro Plus Politics Featured Latest News Business Business & Economy Opinion Entertainment Auto Famous Barka Da Sallah Barrier Breakers Breaking News Brexit Columns Corona Anti-corruption Biafra Boko Haram Case Review Court News Court Trivia Campus Champion Celebrity City round Interview Panorama Opinion Special Features Spice Technology Famous Parent Education Cartoon Columns Diaspora Advertise Subscribe Subscribe punchng.com © 1971- 2024 Punch Nigeria Limited About us Advertise with us ContactNCDC confirms bird flu outbreak in 7 states — Daily Nigerian Sign in Home News The Nation World Politics Business Entertainment Features Opinion About Us Advertise with us Contact Us Sign in Welcome!Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Password recovery Recover your password your email Search DailyNigerian DailyNigerian Home About Us Advertise with us Contact Us type here...Search Daily Nigerian Monday, November 11, 2024 Home News The Nation World Politics Business Entertainment Features Opinion About Us Advertise with us Contact Us DailyNigerian Home News The Nation World Politics Business Entertainment Features Opinion About Us Advertise with us Contact Us Sign in Welcome! Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Get help Password recovery Recover your password your email A password will be e-mailed to you. News NCDC confirms bird flu outbreak in 7 states By News Desk April 6, 2021 Share FacebookTwitterPinterestWhatsApp Must read Presidency: Atiku’s criticism of Tinubu’s reforms stems from ignorance November 11, 2024 Wike ignores protests, vows to demolish all shanties posing security threat to FCT November 10, 2024 NiMet forecasts 3-day dust haze, rain across Nigeria November 10, 2024 Lakurawa: Kebbi govt sends delegation to Defence Headquarters November 10, 2024 Agency Reporthttps://dailynigerian.com - Advertisement - The Nigeria Centre for Disease Control, NCDC, have confirmed that Kano, Plateau, Bauchi, Gombe, Nasarawa, Kaduna and Niger States have reported human cases of the Avian Influenza H5N1 also known as the ‘Bird flu’. The NCDC Director General, Chikwe Ihekweazu, who disclosed this in an interview with newsmen on Tuesday in Abuja, provided highlights of the epidemiological situation and response activities in Nigeria. This type of flu is most often contracted by contact with sick birds, and can also be passed from person to person. It spreads by airborne respiratory droplets (coughs or sneezes). Symptoms begin within two to eight days and are like the common flu. Cough, fever, sore throat, muscle aches, headache and shortness of breath may occur. “Health National Rapid Response Team (RRT) from NCDC and the Federal Ministry of Agriculture were deployed to Bauchi, Kano and Plateau States. “A total of 83 human samples were received and 64 (87.7 per cent) samples were tested. Of the tested samples, seven (10.9 per cent) were positive for Flu A, six 85.7 per cent were subtype A/H5 while one 14.3 per cent was unsub-typable,” he explained. READ ALSO: Osun 2022: Forensic expert testifies over BVAS machines, election materialsThe NCDC boss revealed that official notification about the outbreak had been conveyed to the World Health Organisation, WHO, as required by the International Health Regulations, IHR, adding that an official report had also been sent to the authorities at both the Federal and State levels. “Avian influenza outbreak Emergency Operations Centre (EOC) at level 1 has been activated at national and in two states (Plateau and Gombe). “Seven confirmed samples have been shipped to the WHO Collaborating Centre (WHO-CC) in the United States (US) for further characterisation,” he noted. Speaking on the response activities, he said a second session of EOC had been conducted with review of outbreak situation, response Terms of Reference (TORs) and Incident Actions Plan (IAPs). “Seven states: Kano, Plateau, Bauchi, Gombe, Kaduna, Nasarawa and Niger States have confirmed cases of Avian Influenza among poultry. “Two States have reported seven cases among humans – Kano four and Plateau three. “Only Kano, Plateau, Bauchi and Gombe States have had human contacts of birds followed up,” he said. The Director General confirmed that of the 83 contacts reported 27 contacts are from three Local Government Areas (LGAs); Nasarawa, Ungogo and Gwale in Kano State. READ ALSO: Omicron: UK removes Nigeria from red listThe others are; 18 contacts from two LGAs (Jos North and South) in Plateau; 19 contacts from two LGAs (Bauchi and Toro) in Bauchi State, and 19 contacts from three LGAs (Kaltungo, Yamaltu Deba and Gombe) in Gombe State. Mr Ihekweazu stated that all contacts were farmers, farm workers, bird handlers and traders, adding that the contacts were still asymptomatic except one who had catarrh. “A total of 83 human nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal samples have been collected from contacts of confirmed birds in four states: Kano (27), Plateau (18), Bauchi (19) and Gombe (19). “A total of 13 blood samples have also been collected from the very-close contacts (human) of the birds in three states: Plateau (3), Bauchi (5), and Gombe (5). “Of 83 human samples collected, 64 (87.7 per cent) samples were analysed using Real time Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Of 64 samples analysed, only 7 (10.9 per cent) were positive for Flu A. “Of the seven samples positive for Flu A, only six “85.7 per cent “were positive for A/H5 while one (14.3 per cent) was unsubtypable. All seven positive samples have been shipped to WHO Coordinating centre for further lab analysis,” he said. READ ALSO: ASUU has no justification for any strike action — FGThe NCDC boss noted that sensitisation was carried out by the national and state RRT to farm owners, workers, Live Bird Market (LBM) associations and communities in the affected states, adding that biosecurity measures were extensively discussed for the benefit of the farmers and communities. “Distribution of Social and Behavioural Change Communication (SBCC) materials to farm owners, workers, LBM associations and community leaders. “List of items that facilitate safety in farms was shared with farmers, and sensitisation of workers on hygiene and regular wearing of PPE in the farm was carried out,” he said. Nigeria was the first country to report human cases of A/H5N1 in the West African Region one year after the first A(H5N1) outbreak in poultry was reported in the country. The only human case of Avian Influenza in Nigeria was detected in Lagos State in January 2007. It was officially reported on the 17th of February, 2007, and by the end of 2006, 26 farms had been affected by Avian flu in Lagos State. NAN TagsBauchiDistribution of Social and Behavioural Change Communication (SBCC)Emergency Operations CentreEOCGombeH5N1Health National Rapid Response Team (RRT)IHRIncident Actions Plan (IAPs)JosKadunaKanoLagosLBMLive Bird Market (LBM)Local Government Areas (LGAs)NasarawaNCDCNigerPCRPlateauPPERRTTerms of Reference (TORs)United StatesWHOWHO Collaborating Centre (WHO-CC) Share FacebookTwitterPinterestWhatsApp Previous articleAfrica Economic, Cultural Week to hold virtually May 24 to 26 – OrganisersNext articleCOVID-19 cases will rise despite vaccine, British scientists warn - Advertisement - More articles Wike ignores protests, vows to demolish all shanties posing security threat to FCT November 10, 2024 NDLEA intercept 31,750,000 pills of 240mg Voltron in Lagos November 10, 2024 Nigerian Air Force kills scores of terrorists in Zamfara, Kebbi November 10, 2024 - Advertisement - Latest article Presidency: Atiku’s criticism of Tinubu’s reforms stems from ignorance November 11, 2024 Wike ignores protests, vows to demolish all shanties posing security threat to FCT November 10, 2024 NiMet forecasts 3-day dust haze, rain across Nigeria November 10, 2024 Lakurawa: Kebbi govt sends delegation to Defence Headquarters November 10, 2024 NDLEA intercept 31,750,000 pills of 240mg Voltron in Lagos November 10, 2024 - Advertisement - DailyNigerian DailyNigerian.com is among Nigeria’s leaders in online news and information delivery. Conveying fresh, factual and reliable news from our Abuja headquarters. DailyNigerian.com is a verifiable news distribution platform, from live video streaming to audio packages to searchable archives of news features and background information. Contact: editor@dailynigerian.comStuff