Severity of heterosubtypic influenza virus infection in ferrets is reduced by live attenuated influenza vaccine | npj Vaccines Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature npj vaccines articles article Severity of heterosubtypic influenza virus infection in ferrets is reduced by live attenuated influenza vaccine Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 29 March 2021 Severity of heterosubtypic influenza virus infection in ferrets is reduced by live attenuated influenza vaccine Anthony C. Marriott ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8862-98521, Karen E. Gooch1, Phillip J. Brown ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6367-64951, Kathryn A. Ryan ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8608-11441, Nicola J. Jones1, Natasha Merredew1, Nathan Wiblin1, Oliver Dibben ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5645-93882, Helen Bright2, Bassam Hallis1, Catherine J. Whittaker1 & …Miles W. Carroll1 Show authors npj Vaccines volume 6, Article number: 43 (2021) Cite this article 2011 Accesses 3 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects ImmunologyMicrobiology AbstractLive attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) is widely used to protect humans from seasonal influenza infection, particularly in children. In contrast to inactivated vaccines, the LAIV can induce both mucosal and cellular immune responses. Here we show that a single dose of monovalent H1N1pdm09-specific LAIV in the ferret model is fully protective against a subsequent wild-type H1N1pdm09 challenge, and furthermore reduces the severity of disease following challenge with a different influenza A subtype (H3N2). The reduced severity comprised reductions in weight loss and fever, as well as more rapid clearance of virus, compared to non-vaccinated H3N2-challenged ferrets. No H3N2-neutralizing antibodies were detected in vaccinated ferret sera. Rather, heterosubtypic protection correlated with interferon-gamma+ (IFN-γ+) T-cell responses measured in peripheral blood and in lung lymphocytes. The IFN-γ+ cells were cross-reactive to H3N2 virus even when obtained from vaccinated animals that had never been exposed to H3N2 virus. We believe this study provides compelling evidence that the LAIV can provide a significant reduction in infection and symptoms when challenged with heterosubtypic influenza strains not included in the LAIV, highlighting the importance of cross-reactive T-cells in the design of a universal influenza vaccine. Similar content being viewed by others AS03-adjuvanted H7N9 inactivated split virion vaccines induce cross-reactive and protective responses in ferrets Article Open access 19 March 2021 Systemic and respiratory T-cells induced by seasonal H1N1 influenza protect against pandemic H2N2 in ferrets Article Open access 09 October 2020 An epitope-optimized human H3N2 influenza vaccine induces broadly protective immunity in mice and ferrets Article Open access 23 June 2022 IntroductionThe generation of “universal” influenza vaccines is a global research priority due to the challenges posed by the rapid evolution of influenza A and B viruses. Antigenic drift leads to the requirement to update virus strains included in vaccines on an annual basis for both Northern and Southern Hemispheres, with the A/H3N2 component being updated the most frequently1. Antigenic shift in influenza A results in viruses that have surface antigens to which the human population has no prior immune experience, and which are not contained in seasonal vaccines, leading to the possibility of a pandemic. Antigenic shift can arise when influenza A viruses from different species reassort to generate novel subtypes with the capacity to infect humans (as in the 1957 and 1968 pandemics), or when novel subtypes cross a zoonotic species barrier to infect humans (as in the 1918 pandemic).Various strategies are being employed to create a vaccine that will induce broad(er) protection, thus reducing the need for annual updating, and with potential use against a novel pandemic influenza virus. It is generally agreed that both B-cell and T-cell immune responses will be required2,3,4. Of the seasonal vaccines currently widely used, the only replication-competent vaccines are the live attenuated influenza vaccines (LAIVs), which are based upon attenuated, temperature-sensitive master donor strains5,6. The surface proteins (HA and NA) are updated annually in the same way as traditional inactivated and subunit influenza vaccines, in order to match the antigens predicted to be circulating in the following influenza season. Currently the LAIV, which is used extensively to vaccinate children in the UK and other European countries, is a quadrivalent formulation comprising an H1N1, an H3N2, and two influenza B strains. In contrast to inactivated vaccines, LAIV replicates in the upper respiratory tract (URT) and generates a protective T-cell response in addition to the antibody response. In the ferret model, a trivalent LAIV containing the 2009 H1N1 attenuated virus reduced replication of a subsequent heterologous 2006 H1N1 challenge virus7, attributed in part to the presence of interferon-gamma-positive (IFN-γ+) T-cells, which were detected in PBMCs 7 days post-vaccination. Similarly, LAIV containing the 2007 H1N1 attenuated virus partially protected ferrets against disease induced by a 2009 H1N1 virus challenge, despite the lack of detectable neutralizing antibodies directed against the 2009 virus8.Studies in humans have shown induction of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells by the LAIV, with vaccine efficacy in children correlated to IFN-γ+ T-cell responses in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)9,10,11. T-cell responses were shown to exhibit broader reactivity against H3N2 drift variants than the antibody response did12. However, it has not been demonstrated that this T-cell response would protect against subtypes of influenza A virus not present in the vaccine. It has been shown that pre-existing T-cell memory in the population provided a significant level of cross protection during the 2009 influenza pandemic13,14, with the best correlate of protection being IFN-γ + CD8+ T-cells14. In a human volunteer challenge study using H3N2 or H1N1 viruses, the level of pre-existing CD4+ T-cells correlated with reduced disease15.We have previously demonstrated that a mild infection with an H1N1pdm09 virus in the ferret model induces protective immunity against a heterosubtypic H3N2 challenge 4 weeks later16. This partial protection was not mediated by antibodies, but was correlated with a broadly reactive IFN-γ+ T-cell response. In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that vaccination with a monovalent H1N1 LAIV can provide a similar level of cross-protection against an H3N2 virus challenge.ResultsStudy designFerrets were divided into 4 groups of 6, as shown in Fig. 1. Three groups of ferrets were vaccinated with LAIV on day 0 or received PBS mock-vaccination (group PBS/H3). Four weeks later ferrets were either culled (group LAIV/cull) or challenged with 100 plaque-forming units (PFU) of wild-type H1N1pdm09 virus (group LAIV/H1) or H3N2 virus (groups LAIV/H3 and PBS/H3). The remaining animals were culled 14 days post-infection (dpi). Virus shedding was monitored daily following LAIV vaccination and wild-type challenges.Fig. 1: Outline of study design.Blood samples for serum and antigen stimulation, and nasal washes, were collected as described in “Methods”.Full size imageMonovalent LAIV vaccination induces strong H1N1-specific humoral immune response after a single doseAll vaccinated ferrets shed LAIV in their nasal wash for 5-6 days post-vaccination (Fig. 2a). No weight loss or fever was observed following vaccination (Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2), confirming the LAIV was attenuated in the ferret model. An inflammatory cell response was noted in nasal washes of vaccinated ferrets (Supplementary Fig. 3), similar to that reported previously for intra-nasal influenza A infections16,17,18. All ferrets sero-converted by day 24 post-vaccination (mean H1-specific HAI titres of ≥160), but no H3-specific antibody responses could be detected (Fig. 2b), except one ferret in the mock-vaccinated group showed an H3-specific titre of 40. All ferrets had titres of ≤8 prior to vaccination. Similarly, all ferrets showed neutralizing antibodies against H1N1 virus of ≥320 at day 24 post-vaccination, compared to the mock-vaccinated group which had titres ≤10 (Fig. 2c). No neutralizing antibodies to H3N2 virus could be detected. These data demonstrate that the LAIV replicated in the nasal cavity of the vaccinated ferrets without causing disease, and induced strong H1N1-specific antibody response.Fig. 2: Vaccination with LAIV induces virus shedding and sero-conversion.a Virus titres in nasal wash following intra-nasal vaccination with LAIV. Day -3 samples are plotted as day 0. Points show group mean and standard deviation (n = 6). b Serum HAI titres to H1N1 and H3N2 viruses 24 days post-vaccination. c Serum microneutralization titres to H1N1 and H3N2 viruses 24 days post-vaccination. For (b) and (c), Solid bars: tested with H1N1 virus; hatched bars: tested with H3N2 virus. Dashed lines show limits of detection.Full size imageMonovalent LAIV induces an influenza-specific IFN-γ+ response in vaccinated ferretsSerial heparinized blood samples were taken before and after vaccination for stimulation with influenza H1N1 and H3N2 antigens, followed by quantitation of released IFN-γ (Fig. 3). Stimulation with H1 antigen showed peak response to LAIV on day 8 post-vaccination (Fig. 3a), with very little response in the mock group PBS/H3. Stimulation with H3 antigen shows peak response to LAIV on day 11, with very little response in the mock group PBS/H3 (Fig. 3b). These data demonstrate that the monovalent LAIV induced a cross-reactive IFN-γ+ response in the vaccinated ferrets.Fig. 3: Cellular immune responses to vaccination with LAIV.IFN-γ response in antigen-stimulated whole blood was determined by ELISA. Blood was stimulated with wild-type (a) H1N1 or (b) H3N2 viruses. Points show mean and standard error. The black line (All LAIV) shows the mean of all LAIV-vaccinated ferrets. The dotted horizontal line shows the limit of quantitation. *PBS/H3 group was significantly lower than the vaccinated groups on (a) day 8 and (b) day 11 (Mann–Whitney test, P < 0.0001, n = 6).Full size imageMonovalent LAIV vaccination induces protection against heterologous (H3N2) as well as homologous (H1N1) influenza virus infectionVaccination with H1N1 LAIV completely protected against homologous challenge (group LAIV/H1), i.e., there was no detectable virus replication (Fig. 4) and no observed signs of disease. Vaccination with H1N1 LAIV significantly reduced the duration of shedding and amount of virus shedding following heterologous H3N2 infection (group LAIV/H3) (Fig. 4a, b). Virus shedding fell to undetectable levels in the majority of ferrets in group PBS/H3 on 8 dpi whereas group LAIV/H3 fell to undetectable levels on 5 dpi. The mean duration of shedding (i.e. number of days with detectable infectivity in the nasal wash fluid) in the two groups was 7.0 ± 0.6 days for group PBS/H3 and 3.8 ± 0.8 days for LAIV/H3, which is a significant reduction (two-tailed Mann–Whitney test, P = 0.002). The peak of H3N2 virus shedding was at 3 dpi in both PBS/H3 and LAIV/H3 groups, and was of a very similar peak titre.Fig. 4: Nasal wash virus titres following challenge with wild-type viruses.a Mean and SD following challenge. b Area under the curve (AUC) analysis for each group. LAIV/H3 group shed significantly less virus than control group PBS/H3 (one-way ANOVA, P < 0.0001, n = 6).Full size imageInflammatory response17,18,19,20 in vaccinated, H3N2-challenged ferrets (LAIV/H3) was significantly reduced relative to mock-vaccinated, H3N2-challenged ferrets (PBS/H3) (Fig. 5). The response in vaccinated ferrets matched the mock-vaccinated group until 4 dpi, then dropped off more rapidly. The homologous challenge group (LAIV/H1) showed no rise above baseline.Fig. 5: Nasal wash cell counts following challenge with wild-type viruses.Points show group mean and standard deviation. The increase in cell count represents the inflammatory response in the nasal cavity following infection20. Samples taken on day 26 post-vaccination are plotted as 0 dpi. The LAIV/H3 group is significantly different from the PBS/H3 group (P = 0.04), and both groups were significantly different from the LAIV/H1 group (P < 0.0001; AUC, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, n = 6).Full size imageMock-vaccinated ferrets lost weight following H3N2 challenge, but LAIV-vaccinated ferrets lost little or no weight following either H1N1 or H3N2 challenge (Fig. 6a). Comparison of weights by the area under the curve (AUC) showed both homologous (P = 0.004) and heterologous (P = 0.02) groups had significantly reduced weight loss compared to unvaccinated group PBS/H3 (one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s correction, n = 6; Supplementary Fig. 4a).Fig. 6: Protection from clinical disease conferred by LAIV vaccination.a Loss of bodyweight, normalised to day of challenge. b Temperature post-challenge. Group means and SD are plotted (n = 6).Full size imageGroup PBS/H3 showed a characteristic rise in temperature from around 55 h post-infection (Fig. 6b), seen consistently with low-dose H3N2 infection in the ferret model16. Both groups LAIV/H1 and LAIV/H3 showed significantly reduced temperature relative to the PBS/H3 group (AUC from 55 to 83 h, one-way ANOVA, P = 0.0008 and 0.04 respectively, n = 6; Supplementary Fig. 4b).Clinical signs following challenge comprised sneezing and inactivity; no clinical signs were observed in the homologous challenge group LAIV/H1. The heterosubtypic challenge group LAIV/H3 showed very similar signs to the control group PBS/H3 (Mann–Whitney test, P = 0.86, n = 6).Taken together these data demonstrate partial protection in the LAIV/H3 group, despite the absence of H3-specific antibody response (Fig. 2).Immune responses following homologous and heterologous challenges in vaccinated ferretsSerial heparinized blood samples were taken for stimulation with influenza H1N1 and H3N2 antigens, followed by quantitation of released IFN-γ (Fig. 7). In addition, lung lymphocytes were prepared from ferrets for IFN-γ ELISpot at the termination of each group, as outlined in Fig. 1. H3N2 challenge gave a strong response in both vaccinated (group LAIV/H3) and control (group PBS/H3) ferrets, peaking 11 dpi. Homologous challenge group LAIV/H1 shows a more transient response peaking 2 dpi, and day 2 values were higher than the other two groups for both H1 and H3 stimulation. There was a trend to a higher response 2 dpi in group LAIV/H3 vs PBS/H3, but it was not significant (one-way ANOVA, P = 0.35–0.64, n = 6).Fig. 7: Cellular immune responses to virus challenge in vaccinated and unvaccinated animals.IFN-γ response in antigen-stimulated whole blood was determined by ELISA. Blood was stimulated with wild-type a H1N1 or b H3N2 viruses. Points show mean and standard error. Samples taken 2 days before the challenge (equivalent to day 26 post-vaccination) are plotted as day 0. *Group LAIV/H1 day 2 values were significantly higher than the other two groups for both H1 stimulation (a; 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, P = 0.003, n = 6) and H3 stimulation (b; P = 0.006).Full size imageLung lymphocytes were stimulated with H1N1 and H3N2 viruses, and IFN-γ secreting cells were visualised by ELISpot (Fig. 8). Group LAIV/cull represents the lung status 2 days prior to infection in vaccinated ferrets. Comparing group LAIV/cull to group LAIV/H1 shows little difference (P > 0.9), whereas comparing to group LAIV/H3 shows a significant increase in both H1-specific (P = 0.004) and especially H3-specific T-cells (P = 0.0006, n = 6) by 14 dpi. Low signals in group PBS/H3 correlate with the low peripheral blood ELISA values at 14 dpi. For both H1N1 and H3N2 stimulation, the heterologous challenge group LAIV/H3 showed higher spot-forming unit (SFU) counts than any of the other groups.Fig. 8: Cellular immune response in lungs, measured by IFN-γ ELISpot.Purified lung lymphocytes were stimulated with a H1N1 or b H3N2 viruses. Lungs were collected at 14 dpi (groups LAIV/H3, LAIV/H2 and PBS/H3) or at 26 days post-vaccination (group LAIV/cull). Lines show group mean and SD. Groups were compared by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, n = 6. **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.Full size imageThese data show evidence for a rapid memory IFN-γ+ response to homologous challenge in group LAIV/H1, as well as an increase in both H1-stimulated and H3-stimulated responses in the LAIV/H3 group.DiscussionLAIVs have previously been shown to induce greater T-cell responses than inactivated influenza vaccines, both in humans and in the ferret model7,10,11,21. In humans these T-cells have shown cross-reactivity to H1N1 and H3N2 virus strains not contained in the vaccine22. This may lead to a protective immune response with broader specificity than that comprising the antibody response only, as the T-cells may be directed against the more highly conserved internal proteins of the virus (e.g. nucleoprotein NP). Several studies have shown that the LAIV can induce protective antibodies with a broader specificity than the corresponding inactivated vaccine, but these responses are limited to cross-protection between strains within a subtype6,9,23. IFN-γ+ T-cell responses to wild-type influenza infections give at least limited protection to subsequent heterosubtypic infections16,24,25. Pre-existing T-cell responses to influenza gave protection against severe disease during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, which despite not being a novel subtype, was highly divergent from the H1N1 viruses widely circulating in the population at that time13,14. These T-cell responses were characterised as being predominantly NP-specific13 or predominantly directed to NP, M1 and PB1 proteins14.We have demonstrated in this study that a single human dose of monovalent H1N1 LAIV is highly attenuated in ferrets (no fever, weight loss or respiratory disease), and induces a strong neutralizing antibody response specific for the H1N1 subtype. Subsequent challenge with H1N1 resulted in sterilising immunity, i.e., no detectable virus replication and no clinical signs of disease. Although we did not have an unvaccinated, H1N1-infected control group in this study, we have extensive data to show the expected level of virus shedding, fever, weight loss and other clinical signs following low-dose H1N1 challenge16,17,18.Importantly, we have shown that this monovalent H1N1 vaccination protects ferrets from a heterosubtypic H3N2 virus challenge, albeit to a lesser degree than seen with the homologous H1N1 virus challenge. This result confirms that the LAIV can induce a similar protective response to infection with the wild-type virus, despite the LAIV being restricted to the upper respiratory tract, in contrast to the wild-type H1N1 virus which also infects the lungs. Previous studies have shown that trivalent LAIV is able to protect against drift variants not contained in the vaccine26,27, however we made use of a monovalent LAIV to demonstrate heterosubtypic protection for the first time. The protection was characterised by a reduction in fever and weight loss, reduced nasal inflammatory response, and more rapid clearance of virus. The reduction in disease severity suggests that LAIVs may provide a level of protection against infection with heterosubtypic influenza strains in humans. The significant reduction in virus shedding after heterosubtypic infection may be important for onward transmission of the infection, although that was not investigated in this study.No cross-neutralizing antibodies were detected in the vaccinated ferrets, and this is unsurprising as the immunodominant region of the virus is the HA “head” region, which is highly divergent between H1 and H3 HA’s. Instead, we observed influenza-specific IFN-γ+ responses in peripheral blood which were inducible by H3N2 virus stimulation as well as by H1N1 stimulation, peaking 8-11 days post-vaccination but still detectable 26 days post-vaccination (Fig. 3). At this stage in the study (day 26) the ferrets had not been exposed to H3N2 virus, so it seems highly likely that cross-reactive IFN-γ+ T-cells were induced by the vaccination, given that H1N1 and H3N2 viruses share many conserved epitopes, particularly in the major internal proteins such as NP and M128. Upon H3N2 challenge, a strong enhancement of the IFN-γ+ response was observed in the vaccinated ferrets (Fig. 7), indicative of a memory T-cell response. In the homologous challenge group, a significant IFN-γ+ response was observed 2 dpi, which may also indicate a rapid memory recall response, as observed previously in ferrets primed by wild-type H1N1 virus infection16. A similar response was observed using ELISpot to stimulate lung lymphocytes with H1N1 and H3N2 antigens, in that the LAIV/H3 group produced a stronger response than the PBS/H3 control group (Fig. 8), which could represent the difference between recall and primary responses, respectively. Taken together, these data suggest that the heterosubtypic cross-protection we observed is highly correlated with the cross-reactive IFN-γ+ T-cell response.A comparatively weak IFN-γ response was observed in the lungs of the LAIV/H1 group. This is most likely due to the sterilising nature of the immunity to H1N1 virus induced by the LAIV, which prevented detectable virus replication in the nasal cavity, thus minimising the amount of virus available to reach the lungs and trigger a cellular immune response. A similar effect was observed in a previous study, in which the immunity induced by a wild-type infection minimised the lung response to a subsequent infection with the same virus16.The interval between vaccination and virus challenge used in this study was 4 weeks. It would be of great interest to know the duration of the heterosubtypic protection, which could potentially ameliorate disease for much longer periods if it is driven by memory T-cells. There is evidence from the ferret model that heterosubtypic protection may last up to 18 months, although that study used wild-type virus rather than LAIV to induce protection29.Vaccines specifically designed to elicit T-cell responses to influenza virus are in clinical trials as putative “universal” influenza vaccines30,31,32, targeting NP, M1 and M2 proteins. In studies of trivalent LAIV in children, PBMCs were found to respond to NP and M1 peptides11,22. NP-specific T-cells were also reported in a ferret study with trivalent LAIV33. Future studies will be designed to determine the peptide specificity of the cross-reactive T-cells responsible for protection seen in this study, and this data could inform the design of universal vaccines intended to protect in the case of the emergence of new subtype(s) of influenza A virus into the human population. Although T-cell epitopes are not likely to be identical between ferrets and humans, the data available to date suggest that overall T-cell responses to influenza infection in both humans and ferrets are predominantly directed to internal conserved proteins such as NP and M1. Ultimately a vaccine that only induces T-cell responses is unlikely to be fully protective, since the target of T-cells is virus-infected cells, which only become present once infection is already underway. Hence a combined approach using broadly reactive antibodies for protection and T-cells for more rapid clearance of virus seems the most likely to form the basis of a successful universal influenza vaccine.MethodsViruses and cellsInfluenza A/California/04/09 (H1N1) and A/Perth/16/09 (H3N2) were obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, Atlanta, USA), and National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC, Potters Bar, UK), respectively). Monovalent H1N1 LAIV, containing the HA and NA genes from A/California/07/09, was supplied by AstraZeneca, Liverpool, UK. LAIV A/CA09 was propagated in the allantoic cavity of 10–11-day-old embryonated hens’ eggs (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA, USA). The six internal gene segments (PB2, PB1, PA, NP, M, and NS) were provided by cold-adapted, temperature-sensitive A/Ann Arbor/6/196034. The HA and NA genes were derived from wild-type A/California/07/200935.Viruses were titrated in Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells, obtained from European Collection of Cell Cultures (ECACC, Porton Down, UK). Virus titres were determined by plaque assay on MDCK cells under an agar overlay containing 1.8 µg/ml TPCK-trypsin (Merck Life Science, UK), followed by staining with crystal violet (wild-type viruses), or immuno-staining with an NP-specific monoclonal antibody36 for the LAIV. LAIV plaque assays were incubated at 33 °C for 3 days prior to staining with NP-specific antibody, followed by anti-mouse alkaline phosphatase and BCIP-NBT Plus reagent (Mabtech, Nacka, Sweden).AnimalsTwenty-four female ferrets (Mustela putorius furo) were obtained from Highgate Farm, UK, and confirmed as seronegative for influenza H1N1pdm09, H3N2 and influenza B antibodies by haemagglutination-inhibition (HAI) assay before experiments commenced. Mean weight at vaccination was ~960 g. An identifier chip (Bio-Thermo Identichip, Animalcare Ltd, UK) was inserted subcutaneously into the dorsal cervical region of each animal. Animals were monitored for signs of disease (sneezing, nasal discharge, lethargy) twice daily (~8 h apart), and weight was recorded daily. The temperature was monitored twice daily using the chip, increased to seven times daily during the 3 days following challenge virus inoculations, to ensure any peak of fever was recorded. Animals were sedated by intramuscular injection of ketamine/xylazine (17.9 and 3.6 mg/kg bodyweight), prior to intranasal instillation of challenge virus (0.2 ml total, 0.1 ml per nostril) diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Vaccination comprised 0.2 ml LAIV containing 107 PFU virus. Nasal washes were obtained using 2 ml PBS. The experimental animal work described here was scrutinized and approved by the Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body of Public Health England (Porton), as required by the UK Home Office Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act, 1986. The premises in which the work was conducted are approved under Home Office Certificate of Designation PCD70/1707. All methods involving ferrets were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.Serum antibodySerum samples were titrated by HAI assay using 4 HA units per well of the relevant virus, followed by the addition of 0.5 % v/v chicken red blood cells. Selected sera were also titrated by microneutralization assay on MDCK cells14. In brief, virus and sera were incubated together for 2 h at 37 °C, then mixed with MDCK cells in a microtitre plate. 18–20 h later cells were fixed, and stained with a mouse anti-NP antibody, followed by goat anti-mouse horseradish peroxidase conjugate and o-phenylenediamine substrate.Isolation of PBMCs and lung mononuclear cellsBuffy coats containing lymphocytes were prepared from fresh heparin anti-coagulated blood by density separation on Histopaque 108318. Cells were collected by centrifugation and re-suspended in an appropriate volume of cryomedia (90% foetal bovine serum, 10% DMSO) allowing the cells to be stored in liquid nitrogen in 1 ml aliquots at a concentration of 3 × 106 to 1.3 × 107 cells/ml. Dissected lungs were dissociated using a gentleMACS Tissue Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec, UK)18. The tissue suspension was passed through two cell sieves (100 µm then 70 µm) and mononuclear cells were purified and frozen as described for PBMCs above. Red blood cells were removed from PBMC and lung MNC preparations using 5 min incubation in ACK Lysing Buffer (Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific, UK).Viable cell countsViable cells in nasal washes, PBMCs and lung MNCs were counted using a NucleoCounter®NC-200 (ChemoMetec, Allerod, Denmark). Cell suspensions were loaded into Via-1 cassettes which use Acridine Orange and DAPI dyes to perform live/dead staining, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) ELISpot assayLung MNC were assessed for responses to A/California/07/2009 (H1N1) and A/Perth/16/2009 (H3N2)18. Both viruses were used at a multiplicity of infections of 0.08. Following overnight stimulation, IFN-γ expressing cells were detected using the Ferret interferon-gamma ELISpot kit with pre-coated plates (Mabtech, Nacka, Sweden). Results from duplicate tests were averaged. Data were analysed by subtracting the mean number of spots in the control wells (cells and allantoic fluid) from the mean counts of spots in wells with cells and antigen.Ferret IFN-γ enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)Heparinised whole blood was diluted 1:10 with serum-free RPMI 1640 medium and incubated with either A/California/07/2009 (H1N1) or A/Perth/16/2009 (H3N2) allantoic fluids (1.6 × 106 PFU). Phytohemagglutinin PHA-M (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) was used as a positive control and egg allantoic fluid was used as a negative control. Blood was stimulated for 4 days at 37 °C, after which plasma supernatants were collected and cryopreserved at −80 °C. The Ferret IFN-γ ELISA Development Kit (ALP) (Mabtech, Nacka, Sweden) was used to determine the quantity of IFN-ɣ secreted by cells in the blood as described18.Statistical analysisStatistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism 7 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). All measurements were taken from distinct samples. P-values of <0.05 were considered significant.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability All data are included in the paper and its supplementary materials. Materials and access to raw data will be supplied by the authors upon reasonable request: enquiries to Anthony.marriott@phe.gov.uk. ReferencesPetrova, V. N. & Russell, C. A. The evolution of seasonal influenza viruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 16, 60 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Phillipson, J. E., Babecoff, R. & Ben-Yedida, T. Is a universal influenza vaccine feasible? Therapeutic Adv. Vcacines Immunother. 7, 1–6 (2019). Google Scholar Quiñones-Parra, S., Loh, L., Brown, L. E., Kedzierska, K. & Valkenburg, S. A. Universal immunity to influenza must outwit immune evasion. Front. Microbiol. 5, 285 (2014).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Elbahesh, H., Saletti, G., Gerlach, T. & Rimmelzwaan, G. F. Broadly protective influenza vaccines: design and production platforms. Curr. Opin. Virol. 34, 1–9 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Rudenko, L. & Isakova-Sivak, I. Pandemic preparedness with live attenuated influenza vaccines based on A/Leningrad/134/17/57 master donor virus. Expert Rev. Vaccines 14, 395–412 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Jin, H. & Subbarao, K. Live attenuated influenza vaccine. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 386, 181–204 (2015).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Cheng, X. et al. Evaluation of the humoral and cellular immune responses elicited by the live attenuated and inactivated influenza vaccines and their roles in heterologous protection in ferrets. J. Infect. Dis. 208, 594–602 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Pearce, M. B., Belser, J. A., Houser, K. V., Katz, J. M. & Tumpey, T. M. Efficacy of seasonal live attenuated influenza vaccine against virus replication and transmission of a pandemic 2009 H1N1 virus in ferrets. Vaccine 29, 2887–2894 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Carter, N. J. & Curran, M. P. Live attenuated influenza vaccine (FluMist®; Fluenz™): a review of its use in the prevention of seasonal influenza in children and adults. Drugs 71, 1591–1622 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Forrest, B. D. et al. Correlation of cellular immune responses with protection against culture-confirmed influenza virus in young children. Clin. Vaccin. Immunol. 15, 1042–1053 (2008).Article CAS Google Scholar Hoft, D. F. et al. Live and inactivated influenza vaccines induce similar humoral responses, but only live vaccines induce diverse T-cell responses in young children. J. Infect. Dis. 204, 845–853 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Basha, S., Hazenfeld, S., Brady, R. C. & Subbramanian, R. A. Comparison of antibody and T-cell responses elicited by licensed inactivated- and live-attenuated influenza vaccines against H3N2 hemagglutinin. Hum. Immunol. 72, 463–469 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Hayward, A. C. et al. Natural T cell-mediated protection against seasonal and pandemic influenza. Results of the Flu Watch Cohort Study. Am. J. respiratory Crit. care Med. 191, 1422–1431 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Sridhar, S. et al. Cellular immune correlates of protection against symptomatic pandemic influenza. Nat. Med. 19, 1305–1312 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Wilkinson, T. M. et al. Preexisting influenza-specific CD4+ T cells correlate with disease protection against influenza challenge in humans. Nat. Med. 18, 274–280 (2012).Article CAS Google Scholar Gooch, K. E. et al. Heterosubtypic cross-protection correlates with cross-reactive interferon-gamma-secreting lymphocytes in the ferret model of influenza. Sci. Rep. 9, 2617 (2019).Article Google Scholar Marriott, A. C. et al. Low dose influenza virus challenge in the ferret leads to increased virus shedding and greater sensitivity to oseltamivir. PLoS ONE 9, e94090 (2014).Article Google Scholar Ryan, K. A. et al. Cellular immune response to human influenza viruses differs between H1N1 and H3N2 subtypes in the ferret lung. PLoS ONE 13, e0202675 (2018).Article Google Scholar Chen, K.-S., Bharaj, S. S. & King, E. C. Induction and relief of nasal congestion in ferrets infected with influenza virus. Int. J. Exp. Path. 76, 55–64 (1995).CAS Google Scholar Reuman, P. D., Keely, S. & Schiff, G. M. Assessment of signs of influenza illness in the ferret model. J. Virol. Methods 24, 27–34 (1989).Article CAS Google Scholar He, X. S. et al. Cellular immune responses in children and adults receiving inactivated or live attenuated influenza vaccines. J. Virol. 80, 11756–11766 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Mohn, K. G. I., Zhou, F., Brokstad, K. A., Sridhar, S. & Cox, R. J. Boosting of cross-reactive and protection-associated T cells in children after live attenuated influenza vaccination. J. Infect. Dis. 215, 1527–1535 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Gustin, K. M. et al. Comparative immunogenicity and cross-clade protective efficacy of mammalian cell-grown inactivated and live attenuated H5N1 reassortant vaccines in ferrets. J. Infect. Dis. 204, 1491–1499 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Bodewes, R. et al. Vaccination against seasonal influenza A/H3N2 virus reduces the induction of heterosubtypic immunity against influenza A/H5N1 virus infection in ferrets. J. Virol. 85, 2695–2702 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Bodewes, R. et al. Infection of the upper respiratory tract with seasonal influenza A(H3N2) virus induces protective immunity in ferrets against infection with A(H1N1)pdm09 virus after intranasal, but not intratracheal, inoculation. J. Virol. 87, 4293–4301 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Longini, I. M. et al. Estimation of the efficacy of live, attenuated influenza vaccine from a two-year, multi-center vaccine trial: implications for influenza epidemic control. Vaccine 18, 1902–1909 (2000).Article CAS Google Scholar Vesikari, T. et al. Safety, efficacy, and effectiveness of cold-adapted influenza vaccine-trivalent against community-acquired, culture-confirmed influenza in young children attending day care. Pediatrics 118, 2298–2312 (2006).Article Google Scholar Reber, A. J. et al. Extensive T cell cross-reactivity between diverse seasonal influenza strains in the ferret model. Sci. Rep. 8, 6112 (2018).Article Google Scholar Yetter, R. A., Barber, W. H. & Small, P. A. Jr. Heterotypic immunity to influenza in ferrets. Infect. Immun. 29, 650–653 (1980).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lillie, P. J. et al. Preliminary assessment of the efficacy of a T-cell-based influenza vaccine, MVA-NP+M1, in humans. Clin. Infect. Dis. 55, 19–25 (2012).Article CAS Google Scholar Pleguezuelos, O. et al. A synthetic influenza virus vaccine induces a cellular immune response that correlates with reduction in symptomatology and virus shedding in a randomized phase Ib live-virus challenge in humans. Clin. Vaccin. Immunol. 22, 828–835 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Antrobus, R. D. et al. Clinical assessment of a novel recombinant simian adenovirus ChAdOx1 as a vectored vaccine expressing conserved Influenza A antigens. Mol. Ther. 22, 668–674 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Kobinger, G. P. et al. Assessment of the efficacy of commercially available and candidate vaccines against a pandemic H1N1 2009 virus. J. Infect. Dis. 201, 1000–1006 (2010).Article Google Scholar Jin, H. et al. Multiple amino acid residues confer temperature sensitivity to human influenza virus vaccine strains (FluMist) derived from cold-adapted A/Ann Arbor/6/60. Virology 306, 18–24 (2003).Article CAS Google Scholar Chen, Z. et al. Generation of live attenuated novel influenza virus A/California/7/09 (H1N1) vaccines with high yield in embryonated chicken eggs. J. Virol. 84, 44–51 (2010).Article CAS Google Scholar Matrosovich, M., Matrosovich, T., Garten, W. & Klenk, H. D. New low-viscosity overlay medium for viral plaque assays. Virol. J. 3, 63 (2006).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe would like to thank the staff of the Biological Investigations Group at PHE Porton for their technical expertise in conducting animal experiments, animal husbandry and clinical observations. The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of Public Health England. This work was funded by Public Health England.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsNational Infection Service, Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire, UKAnthony C. Marriott, Karen E. Gooch, Phillip J. Brown, Kathryn A. Ryan, Nicola J. Jones, Natasha Merredew, Nathan Wiblin, Bassam Hallis, Catherine J. Whittaker & Miles W. CarrollFlu-MSAT, Biopharmaceutical Development, R&D, AstraZeneca, Liverpool, UKOliver Dibben & Helen BrightAuthorsAnthony C. MarriottView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKaren E. GoochView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPhillip J. BrownView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKathryn A. RyanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNicola J. JonesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNatasha MerredewView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNathan WiblinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarOliver DibbenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHelen BrightView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBassam HallisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCatherine J. WhittakerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMiles W. CarrollView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsConceived and designed the study: A.C.M., K.E.G., B.H., C.J.W., M.W.C. Data collection and analysis: A.C.M., K.E.G., P.J.B., K.A.R., N.J.J., N.M., N.W. Provided the LAIV: O.D., H.B. Wrote the manuscript: A.C.M. Reviewed and revised the manuscript: M.W.C., O.D., H.B., N.J.J., C.J.W.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Anthony C. Marriott.Ethics declarations Competing interests At the time of manuscript preparation, O.D. and H.B. were employees and shareholders of AstraZeneca plc. AstraZeneca plc are the manufacturers of Fluenz® Tetra/FluMist® Quadrivalent intranasal influenza live virus vaccine. The authors declare that there are no other competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationReporting SummaryRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleMarriott, A.C., Gooch, K.E., Brown, P.J. et al. Severity of heterosubtypic influenza virus infection in ferrets is reduced by live attenuated influenza vaccine. npj Vaccines 6, 43 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-021-00306-7Download citationReceived: 07 September 2020Accepted: 02 March 2021Published: 29 March 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-021-00306-7Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Content types Journal Information About the Editors Contact Open Access Calls for Papers Editorial policies Article Processing Charges Journal Metrics About the Partner Publish with us For Authors and Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies npj Vaccines (npj Vaccines) ISSN 2059-0105 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyPeople Gave up on Flu Pandemic Measures a Century Ago When They Tired of Them – and Paid a Price Skip to main content About Michigan Medicine Patient Care Research Education Departments Events Careers Contact Search Search for anything and everything at Michigan Medicine: About Us About Us Building for the Future History Honors & Awards Leadership Our Global REACH Mission Community Community Community Health Services Arts in Health Community Health Planning & Investment Life-Saving Donations Osher Lifelong Learning Institute (OLLI) Sponsorship Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Diversity, Equity & Inclusion House Officer & Faculty Programs Office for Health Equity and Inclusion Patient & Community Support Professional Development Training Students & Pathways Workforce Diversity Giving Giving Areas to Support Ways to Give Get Involved Fundraising Events Resources for Faculty and Staff About the Office of Development News & Stories News & Stories Health Lab Medicine at Michigan Michigan Answers Michigan Medicine Podcast Network Press Room About Us Building for the Future History Honors & Awards Leadership Our Global REACH Mission Community Community Health Services About Community Health Services Ann Arbor Meals on Wheels About Us Our Services Volunteer & Give Friends Gift Shops Get Involved with Friends Apply for Funding Contact Us Housing Bureau for Seniors About Housing Bureau for Seniors Make a Gift Programs and Services Senior Living Week Immunization & Health Screening About Immunization & Health Screening Get Involved Program for Multicultural Health About Us Get Involved PMCH Services Regional Alliance for Healthy Schools Silver Club Memory Programs Washtenaw Support Network for Caregivers TAASC Turner Senior Resource Center Programs Turner Senior Wellness Program Connected Companions Resources for Older Adults Volunteer Services About Volunteer Services Current Volunteers New Volunteers Pre-Approved Volunteers Returning Volunteers Arts in Health About Arts in Health What Is Arts in Health Our Mission & History Our Impact Our Team & Partners Get Involved Exhibit or Perform Make Art Now Volunteer Donate Programs & Services Performances & Events Watch a Concert Now Art Exhibits Permanent Art Collection Art Purchase Community Art Exhibiting Artist Info Gallery Diagrams & Info Patient Services Art Cart Posters Bedside Art Program Bedside Music Program Bedside Story Studio Arts Wellness Resources Art Resources Hospital Arts Projects Coloring Books Comfort Legacy Kits Hamsa Hands Music Resources Nature Resources Life Sciences Orchestra About the Life Sciences Orchestra Give to the Life Sciences Orchestra Join the Life Sciences Orchestra Community Health Planning & Investment About Community Health Planning and Investment Community Health Investments Community Health Needs Assessment (CHNA) Community Outreach and Engagement Programs Life-Saving Donations Donate Blood Share Your Story Become a Volunteer Osher Lifelong Learning Institute (OLLI) About Osher Lifelong Learning Institute Donate Now to OLLI Join OLLI OLLI Programs and Activities OLLI Volunteer Information OLLI Volunteer Roles Sponsorship Frequently Asked Questions About Sponsorship Diversity, Equity & Inclusion House Officer & Faculty Programs Health Equity and Quality Scholars Program Office for Health Equity and Inclusion OHEI Team Patient & Community Support Anti-Racism Oversight Committee Professional Development Training Students & Pathways K-12 Programs Medical School Programs Health Equity Leadership Program Health Equity Visiting Clerkship Leadership and Enrichment for Academic Diversity (LEAD) Undergraduate Programs Workforce Diversity DEI 1.0 DEI Mini Grants DEI Resource Groups Giving Areas to Support Medical School Scholarships Rogel Cancer Center A. Alfred Taubman Medical Research Institute Alumni Class Giving Anesthesiology Ann Arbor Meals on Wheels Biological Chemistry Biomedical Engineering C.S. Mott Children's Hospital Cardiac Surgery Cell & Developmental Biology Chad Carr Pediatric Brain Tumor Center Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics Congenital Heart Center Dermatology Eisenberg Family Depression Center Elizabeth Weiser Caswell Diabetes Institute Emergency Medicine Family Medicine Fast Forward Medical Innovation Forbes Institute for Cancer Discovery Frankel Cardiovascular Center (CVC) Heinz C. Prechter Bipolar Research Program Human Genetics Institute for Healthcare Policy & Innovation Internal Medicine Allergy and Clinical Immunology MEND Nephrology Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Rheumatology Cardiology Gastroenterology/Hepatology General Medicine Genetic Medicine Geriatric and Palliative Medicine Infectious Diseases Hematology/Oncology Hospital Medicine Kellogg Eye Center Kresge Hearing Research Institute Learning Health Sciences Mary H. Weiser Food Allergy Center Medical School Student Programs Michigan Alzheimer's Disease Center Michigan Neuroscience Institute Molecular & Integrative Physiology Neurology Neuroscience Graduate Program Neurosurgery Nursing Obstetrics & Gynecology Office of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Orthopaedic Surgery Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Pathology Pediatrics Pharmacology Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation Psychiatry Radiation Oncology Radiology Ronald Weiser Center for Prostate Cancer Social Work Surgery Transplant Center Urology Von Voigtlander Women's Hospital Ways to Give Annual & Recurring Gifts Corporate and Foundation Gifts Endowments that Empower Estate & Planned Gifts In-Kind Gifts Memorial or Tribute Gifts Get Involved Fundraising Events Big Hearts for Seniors Auction Committee Sponsors Sponsorship Opportunities Storytellers Tickets Event on Main Sponsors Golf on Main 2024 Sponsors Milestones, Memories, and Momentum Sponsors Sponsorship Opportunities Save A Heart Gala Sponsorships & Tickets Sponsors Partners Vita Redita Gala Committee Sponsors Sponsorship Opportunities Mott Golf Classic Committee Members Sponsorship Levels 2024 Sponsors Contact Information Resources for Faculty and Staff About the Office of Development News & Stories Health Lab Medicine at Michigan All Stories Alumni Stories Faculty Stories Featured Stories Student Stories Past Issues Michigan Answers Share Your Michigan Answer Michigan Medicine Podcast Network Breaking Down Mental Health Health Lab Podcast Michigan Answers Michigan Medicine Presents Michigan Medicine Surgery Sessions Minding Memory Press Room Clips for Broadcast Media Contact the Media Team Patient Privacy and HIPAA Research News Home Health Lab People Gave Up on Flu Pandemic Measures a Century Ago When They Tired of Them – and Paid a Price People Gave Up on Flu Pandemic Measures a Century Ago When They Tired of Them – and Paid a Price The deadly third wave of the 1918 flu shows what can happen when society prematurely returns to pre-pandemic life, a medical historian cautions. April 1, 2021 10:13 AM Author | J. Alexander Navarro Armistice Day celebrations on Nov. 11, 1918, worried public health experts as people crowded together in cities across the U.S. Credit: AP Photo Picture the United States struggling to deal with a deadly pandemic. State and local officials enact a slate of social-distancing measures, gathering bans, closure orders and mask mandates in an effort to stem the tide of cases and deaths. The public responds with widespread compliance mixed with more than a hint of grumbling, pushback and even outright defiance. As the days turn into weeks turn into months, the strictures become harder to tolerate. Theater and dance hall owners complain about their financial losses. Clergy bemoan church closures while offices, factories and in some cases even saloons are allowed to remain open. Officials argue whether children are safer in classrooms or at home. Many citizens refuse to don face masks while in public, some complaining that they're uncomfortable and others arguing that the government has no right to infringe on their civil liberties. As familiar as it all may sound in 2021, these are real descriptions of the U.S. during the deadly 1918 influenza pandemic. In my research as a historian of medicine, I've seen again and again the many ways our current pandemic has mirrored the one experienced by our forebears a century ago. As the COVID-19 pandemic enters its second year, many people want to know when life will go back to how it was before the coronavirus. History, of course, isn't an exact template for what the future holds. But the way Americans emerged from the earlier pandemic could suggest what post-pandemic life will be like this time around. Sick and tired, ready for pandemic's end Like COVID-19, the 1918 influenza pandemic hit hard and fast, going from a handful of reported cases in a few cities to a nationwide outbreak within a few weeks. Many communities issued several rounds of various closure orders – corresponding to the ebbs and flows of their epidemics – in an attempt to keep the disease in check. These social-distancing orders worked to reduce cases and deaths. Just as today, however, they often proved difficult to maintain. By the late autumn, just weeks after the social-distancing orders went into effect, the pandemic seemed to be coming to an end as the number of new infections declined. People clamored to return to their normal lives. Businesses pressed officials to be allowed to reopen. Believing the pandemic was over, state and local authorities began rescinding public health edicts. The nation turned its efforts to addressing the devastation influenza had wrought. For the friends, families and co-workers of the hundreds of thousands of Americans who had died, post-pandemic life was filled with sadness and grief. Many of those still recovering from their bouts with the malady required support and care as they recuperated. At a time when there was no federal or state safety net, charitable organizations sprang into action to provide resources for families who had lost their breadwinners, or to take in the countless children left orphaned by the disease. For the vast majority of Americans, though, life after the pandemic seemed to be a headlong rush to normalcy. Starved for weeks of their nights on the town, sporting events, religious services, classroom interactions and family gatherings, many were eager to return to their old lives. Taking their cues from officials who had – somewhat prematurely – declared an end to the pandemic, Americans overwhelmingly hurried to return to their pre-pandemic routines. They packed into movie theaters and dance halls, crowded in stores and shops, and gathered with friends and family. Officials had warned the nation that cases and deaths likely would continue for months to come. The burden of public health, however, now rested not on policy but rather on individual responsibility. Predictably, the pandemic wore on, stretching into a third deadly wave that lasted through the spring of 1919, with a fourth wave hitting in the winter of 1920. Some officials blamed the resurgence on careless Americans. Others downplayed the new cases or turned their attention to more routine public health matters, including other diseases, restaurant inspections and sanitation. Despite the persistence of the pandemic, influenza quickly became old news. Once a regular feature of front pages, reportage rapidly dwindled to small, sporadic clippings buried in the backs of the nation's newspapers. The nation carried on, inured to the toll the pandemic had taken and the deaths yet to come. People were largely unwilling to return to socially and economically disruptive public health measures. No matter the era, aspects of daily life go on even during a pandemic. Chicago History Museum/Archive Photos via Getty Images It's hard to hang in there Our predecessors might be forgiven for not staying the course longer. First, the nation was eager to celebrate the recent end of World War I, an event that perhaps loomed larger in the lives of Americans than even the pandemic. Second, death from disease was a much larger part of life in the early 20th century, and scourges such as diphtheria, measles, tuberculosis, typhoid, whooping cough, scarlet fever and pneumonia each routinely killed tens of thousands of Americans every year. Moreover, neither the cause nor the epidemiology of influenza was well understood, and many experts remained unconvinced that social distancing measures had any measurable impact. Finally, there were no effective flu vaccines to rescue the world from the ravages of the disease. In fact, the influenza virus would not be discovered for another 15 years, and a safe and effective vaccine was not available for the general population until 1945. Given the limited information they had and the tools at their disposal, Americans perhaps endured the public health restrictions for as long as they reasonably could. A century later, and a year into the COVID-19 pandemic, it is understandable that people now are all too eager to return to their old lives. The end of this pandemic inevitably will come, as it has with every previous one humankind has experienced. If we have anything to learn from the history of the 1918 influenza pandemic, as well as our experience thus far with COVID-19, however, it is that a premature return to pre-pandemic life risks more cases and more deaths. And today's Americans have significant advantages over those of a century ago. We have a much better understanding of virology and epidemiology. We know that social distancing and masking work to help save lives. Most critically, we have multiple safe and effective vaccines that are being deployed, with the pace of vaccinations increasingly weekly. Sticking with all these coronavirus-fighting factors or easing off on them could mean the difference between a new disease surge and a quicker end to the pandemic. COVID-19 is much more transmissible than influenza, and several troubling SARS-CoV-2 variants are already spreading around the globe. The deadly third wave of influenza in 1919 shows what can happen when people prematurely relax their guard. This article is republished from The Conversation under a Creative Commons license. Read the original article. More Articles About: Preventative health and wellness Community Health Covid-19 Flu Immunizations Health Care Delivery, Policy and Economics infectious disease Health Lab Explore a variety of health care news & stories by visiting the Health Lab home page for more articles. Media Contact Public Relations Department of Communication at Michigan Medicine [email protected] 734-764-2220 Stay Informed Want top health & research news weekly? Sign up for Health Lab’s newsletters today! Subscribe Subscribe Featured News & Stories Health Lab Does virtual care mean low-value care? Study says no The rise of telehealth has come with concerns that it could encourage use of low-value care that’s not needed. But a study suggests this hasn't happened. Health Lab Is dribbling after peeing normal? A urologist discusses post-void dribble and how to help prevent it, and when to speak with your doctor. Health Lab 5 ways to manage politically induced stress A Michigan Medicine psychiatrist offers strategies for how to be mindful of depression and anxiety symptoms around the topic of politics. Health Lab Beezin’:The dangerous TikTok trend involving Burt’s Bees A viral trend encouraging young people to put lip balm with peppermint or menthol on their eyes is the subject of a study Health Lab Sleep apnea contributes to dementia in older adults, especially women Obstructive sleep apnea, a common and underdiagnosed sleep disorder, contributes to dementia in older adults — particularly women, a study suggests. Health Lab More research is needed to support physicians' mental health, experts say A pair of researchers who have studied physician mental health and stress call for more efforts to supports to prevent burnout and support wellbeing. We transform lives through bold discovery, compassionate care and innovative education. Michigan Medicine About Mission Community Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Giving News & Stories Patient Care Find a Doctor Conditions & Treatments Locations Patient & Visitor Guide Patient Portal Research Clinical Trials Research Labs Research Centers Cores and Resources Education Programs & Admissions Our Community Departments, Centers & Offices About the Medical School Intranet Your gift changes lives. It’s never been easier to make an impact. Make a Gift Accelerate your career. Advance world health. Careers at Michigan Medicine Report Sexual Misconduct, Discrimination and Harassment Global Footer Secondary Navigation © Copyright 1995-2024 Regents of the University of Michigan Accessibility Statement Communication Preferences Disclaimer Internet Privacy Patient Privacy U-M Non-Discrimination Health Information Technology & Services Michigan Medicine Finance Jump back to topUptake of influenza vaccination among persons with inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis: a population-based matched cohort study | CMAJ Open Skip to main content Main menu Home ContentCurrent issue Past issues Collections AboutGeneral information Staff Editorial board Open access Contact CMAJ JOURNALSCMAJ CJS JAMC JPN User menu Search Search for this keyword Advanced search CMAJ JOURNALSCMAJ CJS JAMC JPN Search for this keyword Advanced Search Home ContentCurrent issue Past issues Collections AboutGeneral information Staff Editorial board Open access Contact RSS feeds Follow CMAJ Open on Twitter Research Open Access Uptake of influenza vaccination among persons with inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis: a population-based matched cohort study Ruth Ann Marrie, Randy Walld, James M. Bolton, Jitender Sareen, Scott B. Patten, Alexander Singer, Lisa M. Lix, Carol A. Hitchon, James J. Marriott, Renée El-Gabalawy, Alan Katz, John D. Fisk and Charles N. Bernstein; for the CIHR Team in Defining the Burden and Managing the Effects of Psychiatric Comorbidity in Chronic Immunoinflammatory Disease May 14, 2021 9 (2) E510-E521; DOI: https://doi.org/10.9778/cmajo.20200105 Ruth Ann Marrie Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSMD PhDFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteRandy Walld Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSBScFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteJames M. Bolton Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSMDFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteJitender Sareen Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSMDFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteScott B. Patten Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSMD PhDFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteAlexander Singer Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSMDFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteLisa M. Lix Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSPhDFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteCarol A. Hitchon Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSMD MScFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteJames J. Marriott Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSMD MScFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteRenée El-Gabalawy Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSPhDFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteAlan Katz Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSMBChB MScFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteJohn D. Fisk Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSPhDFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this siteCharles N. Bernstein Department of Internal Medicine (Marrie, Hitchon, Marriott, Bernstein), Department of Community Health Sciences (Marrie, Lix, Katz), Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (Walld, Katz), Department of Psychiatry (Bolton, Sareen), Department of Family Medicine (Singer, Katz), Department of Clinical Health Psychology (El-Gabalawy) and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative and Pain Medicine (El-Gabalawy), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man.; Department of Community Health Sciences (Patten), Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Departments of Psychiatry (Fisk), of Psychology and Neuroscience (Fisk) and of Medicine (Fisk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NSMDFind this author on Google ScholarFind this author on PubMedSearch for this author on this site ArticleFigures & TablesRelated ContentResponsesMetrics PDF AbstractBackground: Individuals with immune-mediated inflammatory diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, are at increased risk for influenza and related complications. We examined and compared the uptake of influenza vaccination among people with and without these diseases, as well as the influence of psychiatric comorbidity on vaccine uptake.Methods: Using administrative data from Apr. 1, 1984, to Mar. 31, 2016, we conducted a retrospective matched cohort study in Manitoba, Canada. We matched persons 18 years of age or older who had a diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis (the immune-mediated inflammatory disease cohorts) with persons who did not have these diagnoses (the control cohorts) on age, sex and region. We then identified cohort members with any mood or anxiety disorder (depression, anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder). We identified influenza vaccinations through billing codes. Using binomial regression, we modelled the difference in the proportion of the immune-mediated inflammatory disease and matched cohorts vaccinated annually, with adjustment for sociodemographic characteristics, comorbidity and immune therapy. We tested additive interaction effects between a person’s cohort and presence of a mood or anxiety disorder.Results: We identified 32 880 individuals with 1 or more immune-mediated inflammatory diseases (10 148 with inflammatory bowel disease, 6158 with multiple sclerosis and 16 975 with rheumatoid arthritis) and a total of 164 152 controls. In fiscal year 2015, 8668 (41.3%, 95% confidence interval [CI] 40.6% to 42.0%) of the 20 982 persons with an immune-mediated inflammatory disease received an influenza vaccination, a rate higher than among controls (35 238 of 104 634; 33.7%, 95% CI 33.4% to 34.0%). After adjustment, participants with an immune-mediated inflammatory disease but no mood or anxiety disorder had 6.44% (95% CI 5.79% to 7.10%) greater uptake of vaccination than participants without such a disease. Among participants without an immune-mediated inflammatory disease, having a mood or anxiety disorder was associated with 4.54% (95% CI 4.20% to 4.89%) greater uptake of vaccination. However, we observed a subadditive interaction between immune-mediated inflammatory disease and psychiatric status (−1.38%, 95% CI −2.26% to −0.50%).Interpretation: Uptake of influenza vaccination was consistently low in populations with immune-mediated inflammatory disease, and although psychiatric morbidity is associated with greater vaccine uptake by Manitobans, it negatively interacts with these diseases to reduce uptake. Changes in care delivery are needed to mitigate this gap in care.Individuals affected by immune-mediated inflammatory diseases (referred to hereafter as immune-mediated diseases), such as inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, share an increased risk for influenza and related complications;1 therefore, prevention of influenza is important. Effective implementation of influenza vaccination strategies requires knowledge of vaccine uptake or use among target populations. However, our understanding of influenza vaccine uptake in populations with immune-mediated diseases has been limited by studies with small sample sizes, selection bias, cross-sectional designs, variable study durations and variable study periods. Prior findings regarding vaccine uptake among persons with immune-mediated diseases have been highly variable.2–5 A population-based assessment of influenza vaccine uptake by persons with immune-mediated diseases was needed to clarify this potential gap in preventive care.Some psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia, are associated with lower uptake of preventive health care such as vaccinations.6,7 It is unknown whether mood and anxiety disorders have a similar effect on preventive health behaviours; however, it is known that they affect people with immune-mediated diseases more often than people without such diseases. 8 Small studies have suggested that the presence of any comorbidity may increase vaccination uptake,5 but others reported no association.9We compared the uptake of influenza vaccination in population-based cohorts with inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis and in matched cohorts without these diseases; we then evaluated the influence of mood and anxiety disorders on vaccine uptake. We hypothesized that uptake would be higher in the cohorts with immune diseases than among those without immune disease, and that psychiatric disorders would be associated with reduced uptake. We focused on immune-mediated diseases, with care provided by different specialists, that are highly prevalent in Canada,10–12 affect individuals across the age spectrum and affect different organ systems.MethodsDesign and settingWe conducted this retrospective matched cohort study in Manitoba, Canada, where publicly funded health care is provided for medically necessary services. Manitoba Health, the provincial health department, maintains health services databases, and we accessed data for the period Apr. 1, 1984, to Mar. 31, 2016.Data sourcesWe accessed high-quality databases housed in the Manitoba Population Research Data Repository at the Manitoba Centre for Health Policy, including the population registry, the Discharge Abstract Database, the medical services database and the Drug Program Information Network database.13–15 We linked these databases at the individual level using an encrypted unique identifier.For provincial residents who are eligible to receive health services, the population registry captures sex, dates of birth and death, health care coverage and region of residence (by postal code). The Discharge Abstract Database captures hospital admissions, related dates and up to 25 diagnoses. Until Mar. 31, 2004, diagnoses were recorded using the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision (clinical modification) (ICD-9-CM) codes;16 thereafter, diagnoses were recorded by International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th Revision, enhanced Canadian version codes.17 The medical services database captures service date, 1 diagnosis assigned using ICD-9-CM codes and tariff (i.e., billing) codes (including codes for vaccinations). Since 1995, the Drug Program Information Network database has captured outpatient prescription dispensations, including the drug identification number (which links to the World Health Organization’s Anatomic Therapeutic Chemical Classification System18) and the date of dispensation.Study populationsUsing validated case definitions, we identified all Manitobans aged 18 years or older who had inflammatory bowel disease (including Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis), multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis (Appendix 1, Table e1, available at www.cmajopen.ca/content/9/2/E510/suppl/DC1).19–21 For each case, we defined the first health claim (hospital, physician, prescription) as the index date. Next, we identified a general population cohort excluding anyone with diagnosis codes for inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis or use of any disease-modifying therapies specific to multiple sclerosis, as these were part of the case definition for multiple sclerosis.8 See Appendix 1 for more details about selection of the study cohorts. Then, we selected controls using a uniform approach for each disease group, that is, matched on sex, year of birth (within 5 years before or after the birthdate of the corresponding case) and forward sortation area (based on postal code). We sought 5 controls for each case, but were unable to do so for every case. We assigned controls the index date of their matched cases.ComorbiditiesWe applied validated case definitions developed in Manitoba to identify members of each cohort affected by any mood or anxiety disorder (≥ 1 of depression, anxiety disorders, bipolar disorders), as well as by depression and anxiety disorders separately (Appendix 1, Tables e2 and e3).22 We classified the date of the first claim for each condition as the diagnosis date. We identified physical comorbidity using the Aggregated Diagnosis Groups (major physical, not time-limited) of the Johns Hopkins Adjusted Clinical Group Case-Mix System.23–25CovariablesWe included the following matching factors and other covariables in the regression models:26 sex (male as reference group), age (updated annually), socioeconomic status at index date, region of residence at index date, physical comorbidity (updated annually), immune-mediated disease-specific procedures (ever) and use of disease-modifying therapy (updated annually).27–29We categorized age as 18 to 24 years (reference group), 25 to 44 years, 45 to 64 years, and 65 years or older, reflecting the emphasis on immunizing individuals in the oldest age group.To determine socioeconomic status, we linked postal code to census data at the level of dissemination area, and then calculated the Socioeconomic Factor Index version 2, which incorporates information about average household income, percent of single parent households, unemployment rate and high school education rate. For this index, scores less than 0 indicate higher socioeconomic status,30 and missing values were imputed at the mean of 0. We categorized socioeconomic status into quintiles (highest quintile as reference). We classified the region of residence as urban (Winnipeg, population > 600 000; Brandon, population > 47 000) or rural.Physical comorbidity was based on Aggregated Diagnosis Group scores and categorized as 0 (reference group), 1, or 2 or above, with higher scores indicating greater comorbidity.We included immune-mediated disease-specific procedures as a measure of disease severity. For inflammatory bowel disease, these included surgical procedures related to gastrointestinal resection or ostomy placement (Appendix 1, Table e4), and for rheumatoid arthritis, they included joint-related surgical procedures (Appendix 1, Table e5); there were no relevant procedures for multiple sclerosis.For inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis, we categorized immune therapies annually as none (reference group), any biologic (alone or in combination), or any anti-inflammatory or traditional immunosuppressive therapy or corticosteroids. For multiple sclerosis, we categorized therapies as none, first-line or second-line (Appendix 1, Table e6).Influenza vaccinationAnnually, we identified influenza vaccinations using tariff codes 8791, 8792 or 8799, which are used by primary care providers, public health nurses and pharmacy providers.Statistical analysisWe summarized the characteristics of the cohort using descriptive statistics, specifically means (with standard deviations), medians (with interquartile ranges) and frequencies (as percentages). We report the crude percentage of each cohort who had the influenza vaccination annually, along with a 95% confidence interval (CI) based on the binomial distribution. We also report percentages standardized by age and sex to the 2010 Canadian census population.We accessed data for the period Apr. 1, 1984, to Mar. 31, 2016; however, for the regression analyses, we initially limited the study period to fiscal years 2006 to 2015 to reduce secular trends. We modelled the difference in the proportion of each cohort immunized annually so that we could estimate the absolute effects of cohort (immune-mediated disease v. matched controls) and psychiatric comorbidity on this outcome, as absolute effects are more useful than relative effects for policy-makers.We used a binomial regression model with an identity link, as well as generalized estimating equations with an exchangeable correlation structure, accounting for differences in follow-up time by including the natural logarithm of person-years as the model offset. Covariables were those defined above.31We tested for the presence of additive interaction effects between cohort and mood or anxiety disorders (entered as cohort*disorders), which we report as interaction contrasts (i.e., the difference of risk differences). A positive (synergistic or superadditive interaction) would indicate that the joint effects of cohort and mood and anxiety disorders exceeded the sum of their individual effects, whereas a negative (subadditive) interaction would indicate that the joint effects were less than the sum of the individual effects.We report differences in terms of percentages and 95% CIs. We repeated these analyses for each immune-mediated disease cohort separately. In a complementary analysis, we further adjusted for the annual number of physician visits.We conducted all statistical analyses using SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc.).Ethics approvalThe University of Manitoba Health Research Ethics Board approved the study. Manitoba’s Health Information Privacy Committee approved data access.ResultsFor the entire study period (fiscal years 1984–2015), we identified 32 880 individuals with 1 or more immune-mediated inflammatory diseases (10 148 with inflammatory bowel disease, 6158 with multiple sclerosis and 16 975 with rheumatoid arthritis), along with a total of 164 152 matched controls (Table 1). The characteristics of these 3 disease cohorts were similar to those of the entire immune-mediated disease population (referred to hereafter as “cases”) for the period 2006 to 2015. Cases and controls were well matched with respect to age, sex and socioeconomic status at the index date.View this table:View inlineView popupTable 1: Characteristics of prevalent disease cohorts at the time of diagnosis and matched controls at the matched index dateInfluenza vaccinationThe crude percentage of combined cases and controls who received influenza vaccination rose over time (Figure 1 and Appendix 1, Table e7). Moreover, the percentage of cases who received an influenza vaccination was similar across immune-mediated diseases after age and sex-standardization (Figure 2 and Appendix 1, Table e8).Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpointFigure 1: Percentage of persons in the combined immune-mediated inflammatory disease (IMID) cohort and the combined cohort of matched controls who received an influenza vaccination, stratified by psychiatric comorbidity status, fiscal years 1984 to 2015 (i.e., Apr. 1, 1984, to Mar. 31, 2016).Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpointFigure 2: Age- and sex-standardized percentage of persons in the combined immune-mediated inflammatory disease (IMID) cohort, the individual disease cohorts and the combined cohort of matched controls who received an influenza vaccination, fiscal years 1984 to 2015 (i.e., Apr. 1, 1984, to Mar. 31, 2016). Arrows indicate changes in groups eligible for provincial (public) funding of vaccination: in 1999, age ≥ 65 years, chronic conditions, health care workers (A); in 2004, children aged 6–23 months and their families (B); in 2005, patients with chronic respiratory diseases (C); in 2007, pregnant women (D); in 2009, H1N1 epidemic (E); in 2010, coverage for entire provincial population (F); and in 2014, pharmacists able to administer influenza vaccine (G). Note: IBD = inflammatory bowel disease, MS = multiple sclerosis, RA = rheumatoid arthritis.In 2015, the crude percentage of cases who received an influenza vaccination was 41.3% (n = 8668 of 20 982; 95% CI 40.6% to 42.0%), 7.6 percentage points more than matched controls (n = 35 238 of 104 634; 33.7%, 95% CI 33.4% to 34.0%). Among cases, those with any mood or anxiety disorder had greater vaccine uptake than those without such a disorder (43.7%, 95% CI 42.8% to 44.6% v. 38.3%, 95% CI 37.3% to 39.3%). Similarly, among the controls, those with a mood or anxiety disorder had greater vaccine uptake than those without such a disorder (37.5%, 95% CI 37.1% to 37.9% v. 30.5%, 95% CI 30.1% to 30.9). The percentage of people immunized increased with age and was highest among those aged 65 years or older (Appendix 1, Figure e1).Multivariable analysisOn multivariable analysis for the period 2006 to 2015, cases with no mood or anxiety disorder had 6.44% (95% CI 5.79 to 7.10) greater vaccination uptake than controls (Table 2). Among controls, having a mood or anxiety disorder was associated with 4.54% (95% CI 4.20% to 4.89%) more vaccination uptake. However, we observed a subadditive interaction between case and mood or anxiety disorder status (−1.38%, 95% CI −2.26% to −0.50%). Female as compared with male sex, older age, living in an urban not rural region, more physical comorbidities, prior disease-specific surgery and use of immune therapies were all associated with increased vaccine uptake. Our findings were similar after further adjustment for physician visits (Appendix 1, Table e9).View this table:View inlineView popupTable 2: Multivariable adjusted risk differences for the association of immune-mediated disease, any mood or anxiety disorder and uptake of influenza vaccinationWhen we conducted separate analyses for depression and anxiety disorders, the findings were similar to those for mood and anxiety disorders combined (Table 3 and Table 4). When we conducted analyses for individual immune-mediated diseases, findings in the rheumatoid arthritis cohort were similar to those for the combined immune-mediated disease cohort. Findings in the inflammatory bowel disease cohort were similar in magnitude and direction to those in the combined immune-mediated disease cohort but were not statistically significant. In contrast, we did not observe a departure from additivity in the multiple sclerosis cohort for any mood or anxiety disorder, but we did observe a superadditive effect for depression and anxiety disorders (Tables 2, 3 and 4).View this table:View inlineView popupTable 3: Multivariable adjusted risk differences for the association of immune-mediated inflammatory disease, depressive disorder and uptake of influenza vaccinationView this table:View inlineView popupTable 4: Multivariable adjusted risk differences for the association of immune-mediated inflammatory disease, anxiety disorder and uptake of influenza vaccinationInterpretationIn this population-based study, vaccination uptake increased over the 30-year study period in 3 immune-mediated disease cohorts and in matched cohorts without immune-mediated disease, in concert with programmatic changes. In 1999, vaccinations became publicly funded for Manitobans aged 65 years and older, those with some chronic conditions and health care workers. In 2005, vaccination funding was extended to those with chronic respiratory disease. However, despite vaccination coverage for the entire provincial population as of 2010 and access through pharmacists as of 2014, vaccination rates in all populations remain lower than desired. In 2015, only 4 in 10 persons with immune-mediated disease were vaccinated annually, which was only slightly better than the 3 in 10 persons without immune-mediated disease who were vaccinated annually. In the matched population, having a mood or anxiety disorder was associated with increased vaccination uptake. However, the joint effect of an immune-mediated disease and mood or anxiety disorder on increasing uptake was subadditive.In Canada, the target vaccination rate for high-risk populations and adults aged 65 years or older is 80%; vaccination is also recommended in immune-mediated disease guidelines.32–34 We found vaccination rates well below this target. In the 2013/14 Canadian Community Health Survey, only 37.8% of adults aged 18 to 64 years of age with a chronic medical condition were vaccinated.35Findings from prior studies involving persons with inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis have been inconsistent. Reported vaccination rates among those with inflammatory bowel disease have ranged from 6% to 80%.2,3 Investigation of temporal changes in vaccine uptake has been limited. In Israel, 16.1% of persons with Crohn disease were vaccinated in 2006; this increased to 38.3% by 2012.36 Findings were similar among persons with ulcerative colitis.37 Reported uptake of influenza vaccine has also ranged widely among persons with rheumatoid arthritis,5,38–40 from 26.6% in a German outpatient clinic40 to 85% in specialty rheumatology centres in the United Kingdom.5 Comparable findings for multiple sclerosis are more limited. In Israel, 37.6% of 101 participants with multiple sclerosis reported receiving the seasonal influenza vaccine during the winter of 2009/10.4 In Norway, 60.7% of persons with multiple sclerosis received the pandemic (H1N1) vaccine in 2009/10.41We observed a subadditive interaction between immune-mediated disease and psychiatric comorbidity on vaccination uptake in the combined cohort and in the cohorts of persons with inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis. This finding may reflect competing demands during physician visits42 or reduced adherence to treatment recommendations by persons with psychiatric disorders, whether pharmacologic43–45 or health behaviours.46 However, we did not observe a subadditive interaction in the multiple sclerosis cohort, which may reflect differences in provincial programs of care for immune-mediated disease, which are more centralized for multiple sclerosis.Older age, female sex, higher socioeconomic status, urban residence, greater disease severity (as evidenced by prior surgeries), physical comorbidities and use of immune therapies were associated with greater uptake of vaccination. These findings are consistent with those for the Canadian general population35 and earlier studies in immune-mediated disease populations.3,36,37Factors contributing to low vaccination rates include a lack of perceived susceptibility to influenza, lack of perceived severity of infection and lack of belief in the vaccine’s effectiveness. 2,3,47–49 Interventions to improve vaccination rates in populations of persons with immune-mediated disease have been tested. Use of electronic medical record alerts improved vaccination rates in immunosuppressed people seen in rheumatology clinics (outpatient, hospital-based); having a nurse-led process improved vaccination rates further.50 At an inflammatory bowel disease clinic, distributing a vaccine questionnaire before attendance at the clinic and offering recommended vaccinations increased influenza vaccine uptake from 54% to 81%.51 Future studies aimed at improving implementation of such strategies are needed.LimitationsStrengths of this study included the population-based design, application of validated case definitions for immune-mediated diseases and psychiatric comorbidity, and the extended study period. The female predominance and age distribution of our cohorts are consistent with the epidemiology of the diseases studied.52–54Conduct of the study in a single province was a limitation. However, in the 2013/14 Canadian Community Health Survey, the proportion of individuals vaccinated was similar across provinces, apart from Nova Scotia, Quebec and Newfoundland and Labrador.55 As such, our findings are likely generalizable within Canada, although they may not be generalizable elsewhere.We may not have identified all vaccinations administered, given that vaccinations in private workplaces would not be captured in our data; however, underascertainment was likely to be nondifferential among the cohorts and would not fully account for our findings. Reassuringly, the percentage of Manitobans reporting influenza vaccinations in the Canadian Community Health Survey (30%) was consistent with the percentage among our controls.55We lacked clinical characteristics related to the immune-mediated diseases, but we included some measures of disease severity and treatment status.ConclusionUptake of influenza vaccination was lower than desired in populations with immune-mediated disease. Given the increased susceptibility of these populations to influenza and related complications, it is essential that action be taken to ameliorate this gap in preventive care. Although having a mood or anxiety disorder was associated with increased influenza vaccine uptake among Manitobans without immune-mediated disease, comorbid mood or anxiety disorder interacted negatively with immune-mediated disease. This suggests that the association of psychiatric comorbidity with other preventive health behaviours should also be evaluated in people with immune-mediated diseases.AcknowledgementsThe Aggregated Diagnosis Groups (ADGs) codes for risk adjustment in regression models were created using The Johns Hopkins Adjusted Clinical Group (ACG) Case-Mix System version 9. The authors acknowledge the Manitoba Centre for Health Policy for use of the Population Health Research Data Repository under project #2014-030 (HIPC #2014/2015-19A). The results and conclusions presented are those of the authors; no official endorsement by the Manitoba Centre for Health Policy, Manitoba Health or other data providers is intended or should be inferred.FootnotesCompeting interests: For work outside the study reported here, Ruth Ann Marrie has received research funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Research Manitoba, the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada, the Multiple Sclerosis Scientific Research Foundation, Crohn’s and Colitis Canada, the National Multiple Sclerosis Society and the Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis Centers; she has also participated in research funded by Roche and Biogen Idec (all funds to co-investigators). Jitender Sareen has received consulting fees from UpToDate and previously held stock in Johnson & Johnson. For work outside the study reported here, Scott Patten has received research funding from CIHR, the Hotchkiss Brain Institute and the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada (which includes contributions from Roche, Biogen and the Government of Alberta); he also holds the Cuthbertson and Fischer Chair in Pediatric Mental Health at the University of Calgary. Alexander Singer has received financial and in-kind support from an IBM/CIMVHR Advanced Analytics Grant and Calian Inc. For work outside the study reported here, Lisa Lix has received research funds from CIHR and the Arthritis Society. Carol Hitchon has received research funds for unrelated studies from UCB Canada and Pfizer. James Marriott has received grant funding from Roche (as site principal investigator for a clinical trial). Renée El-Gabalawy has received research funds for unrelated studies from University of Manitoba Start-Up Funds, the CIHR Chronic Pain Network, Health Sciences Centre foundation grant, Department of Anesthesia operating grant and the Tri-Agency New Frontiers in Research Fund. For activities unrelated to the current study, John Fisk has received research funds from CIHR, the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada, the Nova Scotia Health Authority Research Fund and the Dalhousie Medical Research Fund, as well as royalty fees from MAPI Research Trust. For activities unrelated to the current study, Charles Bernstein has received consultancy fees from Roche Canada, Mylan Pharmaceuticals and Takeda Canada; contract research funding from Pfizer, Janssen Canada and Roche; unrestricted educational or research grants from Abbvie Canada, Janssen Canada, Pfizer Canada, Takeda Canada, Sandoz and Medtronic Canada; speakers’ fees from Abbvie Canada, Janssen Canada, Pfizer Canada, Takeda Canada and Medtronic Canada; and has served on advisory boards for Abbvie Canada, Janssen Canada, Pfizer Canada, Takeda Canada, Sandoz, Amgen Canada, Bristol Myers Squibb Canada and Roche Canada. No other competing interests were declared.This article has been peer reviewed.Contributors: Ruth Ann Marrie, James Bolton, Jitender Sareen, Scott Patten, Lisa Lix, Carol Hitchon, James Marriott, Alan Katz, John Fisk and Charles Bernstein obtained study funding and designed the study. Randy Walld analyzed the data, and all of the authors interpreted the data. Ruth Ann Marrie drafted the manuscript, and Randy Walld, James Bolton, Jitender Sareen, Scott Patten, Alexander Singer, Lisa Lix, Carol Hitchon, James Marriott, Renée El-Gabalawy, Alan Katz, John Fisk and Charles Bernstein revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. All of the authors approved the final version for publication and agreed to be accountable for the work.Members of the CIHR Team in Defining the Burden and Managing the Effects of Psychiatric Comorbidity in Chronic Immunoinflammatory Disease: Ruth Ann Marrie, James M. Bolton, Jitender Sareen, John R. Walker (deceased), Scott B. Patten, Alexander Singer, Lisa M. Lix, Carol A. Hitchon, Renée El-Gabalawy, Alan Katz, John D. Fisk, Charles N. Bernstein, Lesley Graff, Lindsay Berrigan, Ryan Zarychanski, Christine Peschken, James J. Marriott.Funding: This study was funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR; THC-135234), Crohn’s and Colitis Canada and the Waugh Family Chair in Multiple Sclerosis (to Ruth Ann Marrie). James Bolton has received research funding from the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation and the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada. Charles Bernstein is supported in part by the Bingham Chair in Gastroenterology. Jitender Sareen is supported by CIHR grant no. 333252. Lisa Lix is supported by a Canada Research Chair. Renée El-Gabalawy is supported by University of Manitoba Start-Up Funding. Alan Katz held a contract from the Government of Manitoba for maintenance of the data repository. The sponsors had no role in the design and conduct of the study; the collection, management, analysis or interpretation of the data; or the preparation, review or approval of the manuscript.Data sharing: The authors of this study are not the data custodians and are therefore not authorized to make the study data available to others. With appropriate approvals, the data can be accessed through the Manitoba Centre for Health Policy.Supplemental information: For reviewer comments and the original submission of this manuscript, please see www.cmajopen.ca/content/9/2/E510/suppl/DC1.This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) licence, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided that the original publication is properly cited, the use is noncommercial (i.e., research or educational use), and no modifications or adaptations are made. See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/References↵Blumentals WA, Arreglado A, Napalkov P, et al. (2012) Rheumatoid arthritis and the incidence of influenza and influenza-related complications: a retrospective cohort study. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 13:158.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Waszczuk K, Waszczuk E, Szenborn L (2018) Can we better protect patients with inflammatory bowel disease against infections — patient attitude and personal immunization knowledge. Acta Gastroenterol Belg 81:257–61.OpenUrl↵Wasan SK, Calderwood AH, Long MD, et al. (2014) Immunization rates and vaccine beliefs among patients with inflammatory bowel disease: an opportunity for improvement. Inflamm Bowel Dis 20:246–50.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Auriel E, Gadoth A, Regev K, et al. (2012) Seasonal and H1N1v influenza vaccines in MS: safety and compliance. J Neurol Sci 314:102–3.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Subesinghe S, Rutherford AI, Ibrahim F, et al. (2016) A large two-centre study in to rates of influenza and pneumococcal vaccination and infection burden in rheumatoid arthritis in the UK. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 17:322.OpenUrl↵Martens PJ, Chochinov HM, Prior HJ, et al., Need To Know Team (2009) Are cervical cancer screening rates different for women with schizophrenia? A Manitoba population-based study. Schizophr Res 113:101–6.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Lord O, Malone D, Mitchell AJ (2010) Receipt of preventive medical care and medical screening for patients with mental illness: a comparative analysis. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 32:519–43.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Marrie RA, Walld R, Bolton JM, et al., CIHR Team in Defining the Burden and Managing the Effects of Psychiatric Comorbidity in Chronic Immunoinflammatory Disease (2017) Increased incidence of psychiatric disorders in immune-mediated inflammatory disease. J Psychosom Res 101:17–23.OpenUrlPubMed↵Pham HV, Hasan I, Udaltsova N, et al. (2018) Rates and predictors of vaccinations among inflammatory bowel disease patients receiving anti-tumor necrosis factor agents. Dig Dis Sci 63:209–17.OpenUrl↵Bernstein CN, Wajda A, Svenson LW, et al. (2006) The epidemiology of inflammatory bowel disease in Canada: a population-based study. Am J Gastroenterol 101:1559–68.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed(2003) Arthritis in Canada: an ongoing challenge (Health Canada, Ottawa) Cat no H39-4/14-2003E.↵Evans C, Beland SG, Kulaga S, et al. (2013) Incidence and prevalence of multiple sclerosis in the Americas: a systematic review. Neuroepidemiology 40:195–210.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Roos LL, Mustard CA, Nicol JP (1993) Registries and administrative data: organization and accuracy. Med Care 31:201–12.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMedRoos LL, Sharp SM, Cohen MM (1991) Comparing clinical information with claims data: some similarities and differences. J Clin Epidemiol 44:881–8.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Roos LL, Walld R, Wajda A, et al. (1996) Record linkage strategies, outpatient procedures, and administrative data. Med Care 34:570–82.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵(1996) ICD-9-CM: international classification of diseases, 9th revision, clinical modification (5th ed), (Medicode).↵(2015) ICD-10-CA: international statistical classification of diseases and related health problems, tenth revision, Canada (Canadian Institute for Health Information, Ottawa).↵Anatomic therapeutic chemical classification system — structure and principles (WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics Methodology), updated 2018 Feb 15Available: www.whocc.no/atc/structure_and_principles/. accessed 2012 Aug 9.↵Bernstein CN, Blanchard JF, Rawsthorne P, et al. (1999) Epidemiology of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis in a central Canadian province: a population-based study. Am J Epidemiol 149:916–24.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMedAl-Sakran LH, Marrie RA, Blackburn DF, et al. (2018) Establishing the incidence and prevalence of multiple sclerosis in Saskatchewan. Can J Neurol Sci 45:295–303.OpenUrl↵Hitchon CA, Khan S, Elias B, et al. (2020) Prevalence and incidence of rheumatoid arthritis in Canadian First Nations and non-First Nations people: a population-based study. J Clin Rheumatol 26:169–75.OpenUrl↵Marrie RA, Fisk JD, Yu BN, et al., CIHR Team in the Epidemiology and Impact of Comorbidity on Multiple Sclerosis (2013) Mental comorbidity and multiple sclerosis: validating administrative data to support population-based surveillance. BMC Neurol 13:16.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Starfield B, Weiner J, Mumford L, et al. (1991) Ambulatory care groups: a categorization of diagnoses for research and management. Health Serv Res 26:53–74.OpenUrlPubMedWeiner JP, Starfield BH, Steinwachs DM, et al. (1991) Development and application of a population-oriented measure of ambulatory care case-mix. Med Care 29:452–72.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Reid RJ, Roos NP, MacWilliam L, et al. (2002) Assessing population health care need using a claims-based ACG morbidity measure: a validation analysis in the province of Manitoba. Health Serv Res 37:1345–64.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Sjölander A, Greenland S (2013) Ignoring the matching variables in cohort studies — When is it valid and why? Stat Med 32:4696–708.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Aday LA, Andersen R (1974) A framework for the study of access to medical care. Health Serv Res 9:208–20.OpenUrlPubMedAndersen RM (2008) National health surveys and the behavioral model of health services use. Med Care 46:647–53.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Andersen R, Aday LA, Chen MS (1986) Health status and health care utilization. Health Aff (Millwood) 5:154–72.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Chateau D, Metge C, Prior H, et al. (2012) Learning from the census: the Socioeconomic Factor Index (SEFI) and health outcomes in Manitoba. Can J Public Health 103:S23–7.OpenUrlPubMed↵Rothman KJ, Greenland S (1998) in Modern epidemiology, Matching, eds Rothman KJ, Greenland S (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia), 2nd ed, pp 147–61.↵Farraye FA, Melmed GY, Lichtenstein GR, et al. (2017) ACG clinical guideline: preventive care in inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol 112:241–58.OpenUrlPubMedFarez MF, Correale J, Armstrong MJ, et al. (2019) Practice guideline update summary: vaccine-preventable infections and immunization in multiple sclerosis: report of the guideline development, dissemination, and implementation subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 93:584–94.OpenUrl↵Furer V, Rondaan C, Heijstek MW, et al. (2020) 2019 update of EULAR recommendations for vaccination in adult patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases. Ann Rheum Dis 79:39–52.OpenUrlAbstract/FREE Full Text↵Roy M, Sherrard L, Dubé È, et al. (2018) Determinants of non-vaccination against seasonal influenza. Health Rep 29:12–22.OpenUrlPubMed↵Boltin D, Gingold-Belfer R, Kimchi NA, et al. (2014) Utilization of influenza immunization in adults with Crohn’s disease-a longitudinal, population-based study. Inflamm Bowel Dis 20:240–5.OpenUrl↵Boltin D, Gingold-Belfer R, Kimchi NA, et al. (2014) Uptake of influenza vaccine in ulcerative colitis. Vaccine 32:5484–9.OpenUrl↵Qendro T, de la Torre ML, Panopalis P, et al. (2020) Suboptimal immunization coverage among Canadian rheumatology patients in routine clinical care. J Rheumatol 47:770–8.OpenUrlAbstract/FREE Full TextCostello R, Winthrop KL, Pye SR, et al. (2016) Influenza and pneumococcal vaccination uptake in patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with immunosuppressive therapy in the UK: a retrospective cohort study using data from the clinical practice research datalink. PLoS One 11:e0153848.OpenUrl↵Krasselt M, Ivanov JP, Baerwald C, et al. (2017) Low vaccination rates among patients with rheumatoid arthritis in a German outpatient clinic. Rheumatol Int 37:229–37.OpenUrl↵Ghaderi S, Berg-Hansen P, Bakken IJ, et al. (2020) Hospitalization following influenza infection and pandemic vaccination in multiple sclerosis patients: a nationwide population-based registry study from Norway. Eur J Epidemiol 35:355–62.OpenUrl↵Szilagyi PG, Shone LP, Barth R, et al. (2005) Physician practices and attitudes regarding adult immunizations. Prev Med 40:152–61.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Nigro G, Angelini G, Grosso SB, et al. (2001) Psychiatric predictors of noncompliance in inflammatory bowel disease: psychiatry and compliance. J Clin Gastroenterol 32:66–8.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMedMohr DC, Goodkin DE, Likosky W, et al. (1997) Treatment of depression improves adherence to interferon beta-1b therapy for multiple sclerosis. Arch Neurol 54:531–3.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Tarrants M, Oleen-Burkey M, Castelli-Haley J, et al. (2011) The impact of comorbid depression on adherence to therapy for multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler Int 2011:271321.OpenUrlPubMed↵DiMatteo MR, Lepper HS, Croghan TW (2000) Depression is a risk factor for noncompliance with medical treatment: meta-analysis of the effects of anxiety and depression on patient adherence. Arch Intern Med 160:2101–7.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Farmanara N, Sherrard L, Dubé È, et al. (2018) Determinants of non-vaccination against seasonal influenza in Canadian adults: findings from the 2015–2016 Influenza Immunization Coverage Survey. Can J Public Health 109:369–78.OpenUrlMalhi G, Rumman A, Thanabalan R, et al. (2015) Vaccination in inflammatory bowel disease patients: attitudes, knowledge, and uptake. J Crohns Colitis 9:439–44.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Hammami MB, Pandit P, Salamo RT, et al. (2019) Health maintenance and vaccination of patients with inflammatory bowel disease: practice and perception of responsibility of gastroenterologists vs primary care providers. Ochsner J 19:210–9.OpenUrlAbstract/FREE Full Text↵Ledwich LJ, Harrington TM, Ayoub WT, et al. (2009) Improved influenza and pneumococcal vaccination in rheumatology patients taking immunosuppressants using an electronic health record best practice alert. Arthritis Rheum 61:1505–10.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Parker S, Chambers White L, Spangler C, et al. (2013) A quality improvement project significantly increased the vaccination rate for immunosuppressed patients with IBD. Inflamm Bowel Dis 19:1809–14.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Shah SC, Khalili H, Gower-Rousseau C, et al. (2018) Sex-based differences in incidence of inflammatory bowel diseases — pooled analysis of population-based studies from western countries. Gastroenterology 155:1079–89.e3.OpenUrlDobson R, Giovannoni G (2019) Multiple sclerosis — a review. Eur J Neurol 26:27–40.OpenUrlCrossRefPubMed↵Minichiello E, Semerano L, Boissier MC (2016) Time trends in the incidence, prevalence, and severity of rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic literature review. Joint Bone Spine 83:625–30.OpenUrlPubMed↵Gionet L (2015) Flu vaccination rates in Canada (Statistics Canada, Ottawa) Cat no 82-624-X.© 2021 CMA Joule Inc. or its licensors PreviousNext Back to top In this issue Vol. 9, Issue 2 1 Apr 2021 Table of ContentsIndex by author Article tools Respond to this article Print Download PDF Article Alerts User Name * Password * To sign up for email alerts or to access your current email alerts, enter your email address below: Email * Email Article Thank you for your interest in spreading the word on CMAJ Open.NOTE: We only request your email address so that the person you are recommending the page to knows that you wanted them to see it, and that it is not junk mail. We do not capture any email address. Your Email * Your Name * Send To * Enter multiple addresses on separate lines or separate them with commas. You are going to email the following Uptake of influenza vaccination among persons with inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis: a population-based matched cohort study Message Subject (Your Name) has sent you a message from CMAJ Open Message Body (Your Name) thought you would like to see the CMAJ Open web site. Your Personal Message CAPTCHAThis question is for testing whether or not you are a human visitor and to prevent automated spam submissions. Citation Tools Uptake of influenza vaccination among persons with inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis: a population-based matched cohort study Ruth Ann Marrie, Randy Walld, James M. Bolton, Jitender Sareen, Scott B. Patten, Alexander Singer, Lisa M. Lix, Carol A. Hitchon, James J. Marriott, Renée El-Gabalawy, Alan Katz, John D. Fisk, Charles N. Bernstein Apr 2021, 9 (2) E510-E521; DOI: 10.9778/cmajo.20200105 Citation Manager Formats BibTeXBookendsEasyBibEndNote (tagged)EndNote 8 (xml)MedlarsMendeleyPapersRefWorks TaggedRef ManagerRISZotero Share Uptake of influenza vaccination among persons with inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis: a population-based matched cohort study Ruth Ann Marrie, Randy Walld, James M. Bolton, Jitender Sareen, Scott B. Patten, Alexander Singer, Lisa M. Lix, Carol A. Hitchon, James J. Marriott, Renée El-Gabalawy, Alan Katz, John D. Fisk, Charles N. Bernstein Apr 2021, 9 (2) E510-E521; DOI: 10.9778/cmajo.20200105 Share This Article: Copy Tweet WidgetFacebook Like Related ArticlesPubMedGoogle Scholar Cited By...Effects of vaccination against COVID-19 on the emotional health of Peruvian older adultsGoogle Scholar Similar Articles Collections Clinical Psychiatry Anxiety disorders (including OCD and PTSD) Mood disorders (including depression) Infectious Diseases Influenza Public Health Vaccination Content Current issue Past issues Collections About General Information Staff Editorial Board Advisory Panel Contact Us Reprints Copyright and Permissions Copyright 2024, CMA Impact Inc. or its licensors. All rights reserved. ISSN 2291-0026 All editorial matter in CMAJ OPEN represents the opinions of the authors and not necessarily those of the Canadian Medical Association or its subsidiaries. To receive any of these resources in an accessible format, please contact us at CMAJ Group, 500-1410 Blair Towers Place, Ottawa ON, K1J 9B9; p: 1-888-855-2555; e: [email protected]. CMA Civility, Accessibility, PrivacyBD Announces FDA Emergency Use Authorization for Combination COVID-19, Flu Rapid Antigen Test - Mar 30, 2021 Products Solutions Administrator Ambulatory Surgery Center Solutions Diagnostic Accuracy and Efficiency Hazardous Drug Safety Integrated Diagnostic Solutions Medication Management Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Sepsis Management Surgical Solutions Targeted Temperature Management Vascular Access Management (VAM) Clinician Ambulatory Surgery Center Solutions Antimicrobial Resistance BD Original Equipment Manufacturing (OEM) Cervical Cancer Screening Portfolio Diagnostic Accuracy and Efficiency Hazardous Drug Safety Integrated Diagnostic Solutions Medication Management Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Sepsis Management Stone Management Surgical Solutions Targeted Temperature Management Vascular Access Management (VAM) Distributor BD Original Equipment Manufacturing (OEM) Drug Development Company Drug Delivery Systems Medical Device Manufacturer BD Original Equipment Manufacturing (OEM) Laboratory Antimicrobial Resistance BD Original Equipment Manufacturing (OEM) Cervical Cancer Screening Portfolio Diagnostic Accuracy and Efficiency Integrated Diagnostic Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Sepsis Management Traditional Microbiology Pharmacy Hazardous Drug Safety Integrated Diagnostic Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Medication Management Solutions Sepsis Management Vascular Access Management (VAM) Surgery Ambulatory Surgery Center Solutions Hernia Repair Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Surgical Solutions Venous technology Knowledge Center Events Literature Training Support About BD Our Company About Us Segments Leadership Ethics and Compliance Cybersecurity at BD About Us Trust Center Bulletins and Patches Disclosure Process Helpful Resources Distributors Distributor List Unique device identifier (UDI) ESG (Environmental, Social, and Governance) Global Health Sustainability Inclusion, Diversity & Equity Social Investing Global External Funding Opportunities Investors Innovation at BD Overview BD Idea Submission Process News, Media and Blogs Policies, Guidelines and Statements Center Quality Recent Mergers and Acquisitions Response to COVID-19 Rapid COVID-19 Testing Tools and Trainings Support Offerings Suppliers Corporate Policies and Expectations Doing Business with BD Global Procurement Supplier Programs Careers United States North America Canada (FR) Canada (EN) Mexico United States South America Argentina Brasil Chile Colombia Europe Belgium (FR) Belgium (NL) Česká republika Denmark Europe Suomi France Deutschland Hebrew Hungary (EN) Hungary (HU) United Kingdom Ireland Italia Nederland Norge Polska Россия España Sverige Schweiz Türkiye United Kingdom Middle East / Africa Middle East, North Africa Africa Asia / Pacific Australia / New Zealand 中国 Greater Asia India Indonesia 日本 Korea Malaysia Philippines Singapore Thailand Vietnam Login United States North America Canada (FR) Canada (EN) Mexico United States South America Argentina Brasil Chile Colombia Europe Belgium (FR) Belgium (NL) Česká republika Denmark Europe Suomi France Deutschland Hungary (EN) Hungary (HU) United Kingdom Ireland Italia Nederland Norge Polska Россия España Sverige Schweiz Türkiye United Kingdom Middle East / Africa Middle East, North Africa Africa Asia / Pacific Australia / New Zealand 中国 India Indonesia 日本 Korea Malaysia Philippines Singapore Thailand Vietnam Login MediaRoom News and media BD blog Press releases Corporate sustainability news Executive leadership In the news Awards Media contacts BD Announces FDA Emergency Use Authorization for Combination COVID-19, Flu Rapid Antigen Test New Test on the BD Veritor™ Plus System Can Detect SARS-CoV-2, Influenza A, Influenza B from Single Patient Sample View File Download File 256088-BD-Veritor-SARS-CoV-2-and-Flu-A-B FRANKLIN LAKES, N.J., March 30, 2021 /PRNewswire/ -- BD (Becton, Dickinson and Company) (NYSE: BDX), a leading global medical technology company, today announced the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted emergency use authorization (EUA) for a new, rapid antigen test that can detect SARS-CoV-2, influenza A and influenza B in a single test. The BD Veritor™ System for Rapid Detection of SARS-CoV-2 & Flu A+B assay takes about 15 minutes to run on the BD Veritor™ Plus System and distinguishes between SARS-CoV-2, influenza A and influenza B, by providing definitive positive or negative individual digital display readouts for all three. "Given that symptoms for COVID-19 and the flu are very similar, having the ability to run a rapid combination test to distinguish between these viral infections may help save time and resources," said Dave Hickey, president of Life Sciences for BD. "BD will continue to offer both individual tests for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A+B, as well as the new combination tests, to give health care providers the option to run the test that is most appropriate for their patients." BD plans to launch the new test this summer for the 2021-2022 flu season. The test is intended for individuals who are suspected by a health care provider of having COVID-19, influenza A or influenza B within six days of symptom onset. The test follows the same, simple workflow as other rapid tests on the BD Veritor™ Plus System with a result in about 15 minutes. There are over 70,000 active BD Veritor™ Systems in use at hospitals, clinician offices, urgent care centers, nursing homes, retail pharmacies, schools, businesses and other testing locations in all 50 U.S. states. The BD Veritor™ System, which is slightly larger than a cell phone, has one-button functionality, workflow flexibility and ease-of-use make it an ideal solution for settings without laboratory personnel. It also offers customers real-time reporting capabilities through the optional BD Synapsys™ Informatics Solution, providing them with the ability to easily report data for disease monitoring and surveillance purposes. About the BD Veritor™ System for Rapid Detection of SARS-CoV-2 and Flu A+B AssayThis product has not been FDA cleared or approved but has been authorized by FDA under an EUA for use by authorized laboratories. This product has been authorized only for the detection of proteins from SARS-CoV-2, influenza A and influenza B, not for any other viruses or pathogens; and the emergency use of this product is only authorized for the duration of the declaration that circumstances exist justifying the authorization of emergency use of in vitro diagnostics for detection and/or diagnosis of COVID-19 under Section 564(b)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(b)(1), unless the declaration is terminated or authorization is revoked sooner. For more information, please see bdveritor.com. About BDBD is one of the largest global medical technology companies in the world and is advancing the world of health by improving medical discovery, diagnostics and the delivery of care. The company supports the heroes on the frontlines of health care by developing innovative technology, services and solutions that help advance both clinical therapy for patients and clinical process for health care providers. BD and its 70,000 employees have a passion and commitment to help enhance the safety and efficiency of clinicians' care delivery process, enable laboratory scientists to accurately detect disease and advance researchers' capabilities to develop the next generation of diagnostics and therapeutics. BD has a presence in virtually every country and partners with organizations around the world to address some of the most challenging global health issues. By working in close collaboration with customers, BD can help enhance outcomes, lower costs, increase efficiencies, improve safety and expand access to health care. For more information on BD, please visit bd.com or connect with us on LinkedIn at www.linkedin.com/company/bd1/ and Twitter @BDandCo. Forward Looking StatementsThis press release contains forward-looking statements regarding the availability and use of BD's point-of-care test. Forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in such statements, many of which are beyond the company's control, including risks relating to market acceptance of the test, events that could impact our manufacturing capabilities, and other challenges inherent in manufacturing and commercially launching new products. Further information on these risks and uncertainties is included in the company's most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and other SEC filings. BD expressly disclaims any undertaking to update any such statements set forth herein to reflect events or circumstances after the date hereof, except as required by applicable laws or regulations. Contacts: Media Investors Troy Kirkpatrick Kristen M. Stewart, CFA VP, Public Relations SVP, Strategy & Investor Relations 858.617.2361 201.847.5378 troy.kirkpatrick@bd.com kristen.stewart@bd.com SOURCE BD (Becton, Dickinson and Company) Follow us Quick Links Recalls and Field Actions Careers Cybersecurity Electronic Instructions for Use Events Investors Inclusion, Diversity & Equity Literature Live Chat Support News, Media and Blogs Our Company Ethics and Compliance Support Training © 2024 BD. All rights reserved. BD and the BD Logo are trademarks of Becton, Dickinson and Company. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Contact us Cookie Preferences Privacy Statement Terms of Use Website Accessibility Your Privacy Rights Limit the use of Sensitive Personal InformationWhy are flu-vaccinated people more resistant to COVID-19? – DW – 03/30/2021 You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. Skip to contentSkip to main menuSkip to more DW sitesLatest videosLatest audioRegionsAfricaAsiaEuropeLatin AmericaMiddle EastNorth AmericaGermanyTopicsClimateEqualityHealthHuman RightsMigrationTechnologyCategoriesBusinessScienceEnvironmentCultureSportsLive TVLatest audioLatest videosIn focusIsrael and the crisis in the Middle EastGerman coalition collapseUS election AdvertisementScienceWhy are flu-vaccinated people more resistant to COVID-19?Fabian Schmidt03/30/2021March 30, 2021People who have been vaccinated against influenza contract COVID-19 less often and tend to have less severe cases. Is this because vaccinated people are more cautious, or are there medical reasons? https://p.dw.com/p/3rKPiA study found that flu-vaccinated people were slightly less likely to contract COVIDImage: picture-alliance/dpa/B. WüstneckAdvertisementDoes a flu vaccination protect against COVID-19? And if so, why? These are the questions medical professionals are asking after a team of doctors led by Anna Conlon from the University of Michigan came to some startling conclusions in a recent study published in the American Journal of Infection Control. The physicians had looked at patient data from 27,201 Michigan residents who had taken a COVID-19 test before July 15, 2020. Of those, 12,997 had previously been vaccinated against the flu. The study found that the proportion of flu-vaccinated people who contracted the coronavirus was slightly lower than among those who had not been vaccinated: 4% instead of 4.9%. That may not look like much at first glance, but it means that people who'd had a flu shot had a 24% lower chance of contracting COVID-19. In addition, the flu-vaccinated patients were also less likely to require hospitalization or ventilation for coronavirus infection, and their hospital stays were shorter on average. However, there were no significant differences in mortality between the two comparison groups. Does our innate immune defense have an influence? The crucial question for the experts: Is there a medical and a microbiological explanation for these results? This could be, for example, the innate immune defense, which is possibly activated by the flu vaccination. The immune defense functions independently of specific learned antibody immunity, which primarily targets the characteristic spike protein when fighting COVID-19, thus rendering the virus harmless. In contrast, the innate immune defense, which may be stimulated by vaccination, consists of a number of different elements that react to infections in general, not specific viruses. This standing army of our immune defenses includes, for example, phagocytes and dendritic cells (cells that ingest harmful foreign particles), but also various cytokines (proteins that play a role in immune reactions and inflammatory processes). Some vaccinations are generally good for the immune defense, as can be seen in people vaccinated against measles, for example. Epidemiological studies showed years ago that vaccinated children still had a higher immunity to a variety of pathogens than non-vaccinated children, even a very long time after the vaccination took place. Or is it just correlation? It is also conceivable, however, that fewer people who had been vaccinated against the flu contracted COVID-19 simply because they were more cautious than non-vaccinated people. More people from high-risk groups, like seniors and people with preexisting conditions, typically get vaccinated against influenza than young and healthy people. In the United States, for example, many seniors and retirees had already voluntarily isolated themselves early last year while others were still out in public. However, there are two indications against such a correlation: Seniors typically show more severe courses of COVID-19, which was not the case with those who got flu shots in the Michigan study. A non peer-reviewed preprint study from last year points more to an immunologic explanation: Among Dutch hospital workers who had received the influenza vaccination ahead of the the 2019/2020 flu season, COVID-19 occurred significantly less often than among those who had not been vaccinated. And there were no seniors over 70 years of age in either of these groups. All of those studied were of working age and had a correspondingly high number of contact encounters. Does that mean you should get a flu shot now? The studies show that more research into the role of the innate immune system is necessary. And there is still some uncertainty about the studies' results. Protecting yourself against COVID-19 should not be the driving force behind getting a flu shot, but it's always recommended because influenza can also be life-threatening. The best time to get the shot is usually in autumn, just before the new flu season. More importantly, if you really want to strengthen your immune system, you should check your entire vaccination status with your doctor and devise a comprehensive vaccination plan. Make sure you have all the recommended immunizations and boosters against the most dangerous diseases, including, but not limited to mumps, measles, rubella, tetanus, polio, diphtheria, pertussis, tuberculosis, smallpox, hepatitis A and B, shingles and, where applicable, tick-borne encephalitis and human papillomavirus. Fabian Schmidt Science editor focusing on technologies and inventionsSend us your feedbackYour feedbackAdvertisementSkip next section Explore moreExplore moreHow dangerous is the flu virus?How dangerous is the flu virus?A century ago, the Spanish flu killed at least 50 million people between 1918 and 1920. How likely is a comparable tragedy today?Science03/21/2018March 21, 201803:22 minCan a tuberculosis vaccine help combat COVID-19?Can a tuberculosis vaccine help combat COVID-19?VPM1002 is the name of a new tuberculosis vaccine that could possibly help control the novel coronavirus. Several studies have been initiated and seem promising.Science05/11/2020May 11, 2020Do I have the flu or the common cold?Do I have the flu or the common cold?It's not always easy for people to tell the difference between a cold and a flu right away. What distinguishes influenza from a common cold?Health12/17/2018December 17, 2018Show more storiesSkip next section Related topicsRelated topicsCOVID-19CoronavirusAbout DWWho we arePressDW Global Media ForumDW offersLearn GermanDW AkademieServiceNewslettersReceptionFAQContactTopics from A to ZHeadlinesB2BSales & DistributionTravelAdvertisingGerman News ServiceFollow us on© 2024 Deutsche WellePrivacy PolicyLegal noticeDigital accessibilityData privacy settingsWhat strains should be in this year’s seasonal influenza vaccines? RecommendedNew webinar with Fujifilm: Monocyte activation test (MAT): Insight into examining regulations and markets prospectsNew webinar: The path to optimisation in pharmaceutical microbiologyJoin our webinar: An alternative medium to support sterility testing using the Growth Direct® Rapid Sterility SystemDiscover more in our new application note: validating recombinant cascade reagents in 3 simple steps About us | Advertise with us | Contact us MenuHomeAI HubNewsArticlesVideosPodcastsPublicationsWhitepapers/App Notes/PostersWebinarsContent HubsEventsThe Future of Bio Pharmaceutical Analysis 2024 (Online Summit)PHARMA MICROBIOLOGY – Navigating Compliance and Best Practices (Online Summit)Pharma 4.0: Breakfast BriefingThe Future of Pharmaceutical Analysis 2023 (Online Summit)Industry EventsAnalytical techniquesBiopharmaDrug deliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegs & Legs newsWhat strains should be in this year’s seasonal influenza vaccines?5SHARES Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardPosted: 31 March 2021 | Hannah Balfour (European Pharmaceutical Review) | No comments yetThe European Medicines Agency has published its recommendations for 2021-2022 seasonal influenza vaccine composition. The European Medicines Agency (EMA) has issued its recommendations for the influenza strains that manufacturers should include in their vaccines for the prevention of seasonal flu strains this year.Manufacturers of egg-based or live attenuated trivalent vaccines for the 2021/2022 season should include these three virus strains:an A/Victoria/2570/2019 (H1N1)pdm09-like virus;an A/Cambodia/e0826360/2020 (H3N2)-like virus;a B/Washington/02/2019 (B/Victoria lineage)-like virusManufacturers of cell-based trivalent vaccines for the 2021/2022 season should include these three virus strains:an A/Wisconsin/588/2019 (H1N1)pdm09-like virus;an A/Cambodia/e0826360/2020 (H3N2)-like virus;a B/Washington/02/2019 (B/Victoria lineage)-like virusFor quadrivalent vaccines with two influenza B viruses, a B/Phuket/3073/2013-like virus should be added to the strains mentioned above.These recommendations apply to the manufacture of both inactivated and live attenuated influenza vaccines.To make the recommendations, the EMA Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP)’s Ad hoc Influenza Working Group of the Biologics Working Party (BWP) considered information on international surveillance by World Health Organization (WHO) and Research on Influenza at the UK’s Francis Crick Institute. The recommendations agree with those of the WHO.The EMA recommends that marketing authorisation holders submit applications to change the composition of centrally authorised seasonal flu vaccines by 14 June 2021.Intranasal influenza vaccine produces strong immune response, Phase I study shows…Related topicsBiologics, Drug Manufacturing, Formulation, Immunisation, VaccinesRelated organisationsFrancis Crick Institute, The European Medicines Agency (EMA), World Health Organization (WHO)Related drugsinfluenza vaccineRelated diseases & conditionsInfluenza By Hannah Balfour (European Pharmaceutical Review)31 March 2021No comments yetShares5 Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardRelated topicsBiologics, Drug Manufacturing, Formulation, Immunisation, VaccinesRelated organisationsFrancis Crick Institute, The European Medicines Agency (EMA), World Health Organization (WHO)Related drugsinfluenza vaccineRelated diseases & conditionsInfluenza Most popular...Sustainability continues to steer pharmaceutical packaging marketFirst-of-a-kind EU approval granted for eosinophilic esophagitis medicineFinal Chapter text published for early adoptionEncouraging data revealed for schizophrenia long-acting injectablesSingle-use bioreactor market to witness favourable expansion to 2030 Read the latest issueAll subscriptions include online membership, giving you access to the journal and exclusive content. Download free copyRelated content webinarTurning quality management into quality leadershipBy newsEuropean Commission grants first-of-a-kind biosimilar approvalBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsOphthalmology acquisition to advance tri-specific antibodyBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsCHMP meeting highlights – July 2024By Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) articleAre we set for the revised EU GMP Annex 1?By Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment *Name * Email * Website ContentNewsArticlesMagazineWhitepapers & App NotesEventsWebinarsVideosCompany ProfilesTopicsAnalytical TechniquesBiopharmaDrug DeliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegulation & LegislationAdvertising & EditorialAdvertising OpportunitiesAdvertising Tech SpecsAdvisory BoardInformation for AuthorsMedia PlannerPermission to reuse our contentWrite for us | Advertise with us Contact Subscribe TodayT: +44 (0)1959 563311 F: +44 (0)1959 563123 Company InformationEuropean Pharmaceutical Review is published by: Russell Publishing Ltd.Court LodgeHogtrough HillBrasted, Kent, TN16 1NUUnited KingdomAboutCareers @ Russell PublishingTerms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyManage your cookies© Russell Publishing Limited, 2010-2024. All rights reserved.Website development by e-Motive Media Limited. This website uses cookies to enable, optimise and analyse site operations, as well as to provide personalised content and allow you to connect to social media. By clicking "I agree" you consent to the use of cookies for non-essential functions and the related processing of personal data. You can adjust your cookie and associated data processing preferences at any time via our "Cookie Settings". Please view our Cookie Policy to learn more about the use of cookies on our website.Manage your cookies I agreeCookie Settings Close Cookie SettingsThis website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as ”Necessary” are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. For our other types of cookies “Advertising & Targeting”, “Analytics” and “Performance”, these help us analyse and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these different types of cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. You can adjust the available sliders to ‘Enabled’ or ‘Disabled’, then click ‘Save and Accept’. View our Cookie Policy page. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncookielawinfo-checkbox-advertising-targetingThe cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Advertising & Targeting".cookielawinfo-checkbox-analyticsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Analytics".cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessaryThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".cookielawinfo-checkbox-performanceThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Performance".PHPSESSIDThis cookie is native to PHP applications. The cookie is used to store and identify a users' unique session ID for the purpose of managing user session on the website. The cookie is a session cookies and is deleted when all the browser windows are closed.viewed_cookie_policyThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data.zmember_loggedThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls whether you are able to see content which is only available to logged in users. Performance performancePerformance cookies are includes cookies that deliver enhanced functionalities of the website, such as caching. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncf_ob_infoThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and, in conjunction with the cookie 'cf_use_ob', is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.cf_use_obThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.free_subscription_onlyThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls which types of content you are able to access.ls_smartpushThis cookie is set by Litespeed Server and allows the server to store settings to help improve performance of the site.one_signal_sdk_dbThis cookie is set by OneSignal push notifications and is used for storing user preferences in connection with their notification permission status.YSCThis cookie is set by Youtube and is used to track the views of embedded videos. Analytics analyticsAnalytics cookies collect information about your use of the content, and in combination with previously collected information, are used to measure, understand, and report on your usage of this website.CookieDescriptionbcookieThis cookie is set by LinkedIn. The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.GPSThis cookie is set by YouTube and registers a unique ID for tracking users based on their geographical locationlangThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.lidcThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.lisscThis cookie is set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.vuidWe embed videos from our official Vimeo channel. When you press play, Vimeo will drop third party cookies to enable the video to play and to see how long a viewer has watched the video. This cookie does not track individuals.wow.anonymousIdThis cookie is set by Spotler and tracks an anonymous visitor ID.wow.scheduleThis cookie is set by Spotler and enables it to track the Load Balance Session Queue.wow.sessionThis cookie is set by Spotler to track the Internet Information Services (IIS) session state.wow.utmvaluesThis cookie is set by Spotler and stores the UTM values for the session. UTM values are specific text strings that are appended to URLs that allow Communigator to track the URLs and the UTM values when they get clicked on._gaThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. It stores information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors._gatThis cookies is set by Google Universal Analytics to throttle the request rate to limit the collection of data on high traffic sites._gidThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visited in an anonymous form. Advertising & Targeting advertising-targetingAdvertising and targeting cookies help us provide our visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns.CookieDescriptionadvanced_ads_browser_widthThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the browser width.advanced_ads_page_impressionsThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the number of previous page impressions.advanced_ads_pro_server_infoThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets geo-location, user role and user capabilities. It is used by cache busting in Advanced Ads Pro when the appropriate visitor conditions are used.advanced_ads_pro_visitor_referrerThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets the referrer URL.bscookieThis cookie is a browser ID cookie set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.IDEThis cookie is set by Google DoubleClick and stores information about how the user uses the website and any other advertisement before visiting the website. This is used to present users with ads that are relevant to them according to the user profile.li_sugrThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used for tracking.UserMatchHistoryThis cookie is set by Linkedin and is used to track visitors on multiple websites, in order to present relevant advertisement based on the visitor's preferences.VISITOR_INFO1_LIVEThis cookie is set by YouTube. Used to track the information of the embedded YouTube videos on a website. Save & AcceptCourt clears way for lawsuit against USDA policy of rewarding factory farms that spread bird flu | The Humane Society of the United States Skip to main content The Humane Society of the United States Main navigation Our Fights Our Impact How You Can Help Blog Donate Button Donate Main Menu × Search Humanesociety.org Blog menu Blog menu A Humane World Blog About Kitty Subscribe March 30, 2021 Court clears way for lawsuit against USDA policy of rewarding factory farms that spread bird flu BY Kitty Block and Sara Amundson SHARE The USDA’s current plans, which we and our allies challenged in court last year, incentivize large factory farms that treat animals miserably, by packing them in tight cages or barren warehouse-like facilities. Photo by Jo-Anne McArthur/Animal Equality A federal district court has cleared the way for our lawsuit against the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s irresponsible and dangerous plans for responding to outbreaks of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza, commonly known as the “bird flu.” The agency’s current plans, which we and our allies challenged in court last year, incentivize large factory farms that treat animals miserably, by packing them in tight cages or barren warehouse-like facilities. When there is a deadly bird flu outbreak in such operations, the USDA requires them to kill every animal and allows this to be accomplished with a cruel method called ventilation shutdown—a practice where the conscious birds are slow cooked to death by shutting down the entire ventilation system and allowing carbon dioxide and heat to build up. Once the “cleanup” is complete, the USDA reimburses the producers with taxpayer dollars so they can go right back to restocking their cages and barren barns with more animals. This does nothing to solve the root cause of the disease outbreak: factory farming. Factory farms present the perfect environment for viruses to spread rapidly and mutate. That’s why, five years ago, we suggested a commonsense plan to the USDA asking that it incentivize producers who give animals room to move naturally, thus reducing the risk of disease spread, instead of rewarding those who cram animals into cages. Unfortunately, the USDA refused to even consider this plan. When we challenged this decision in our lawsuit last year, the USDA attempted to have it dismissed by claiming that the possibility of another bird flu outbreak is too speculative and that it was not responsible for the harms associated with its own plan as well as powerless to mitigate any problems arising from it. Fortunately, the court refused to dismiss our lawsuit and that means the agency will have to try to defend these weak arguments. We are grateful for this win, and we hope it will pave the way for ending some of the worst practices in animal agriculture. Between 2014 and 2016 more than 50 million birds, including egg laying hens, chickens raised for meat, turkeys and others, were killed across more than a dozen states in an effort to contain a bird flu outbreak. But it was not just the animals who suffered; the outbreak caused up to three billion dollars’ worth of damage to the U.S. economy, and the USDA spent over $900 million cleaning up the mess it described as the most serious animal health disease incident in history. In this and other instances, the USDA has demonstrated that it has failed to learn from these past mistakes. But we will not stop working toward the day when our government is no longer offering a helping hand to those who commit the most terrible abuses against animals. The lawsuit was prepared and defended by pro bono counsel at the law firm Shearman & Sterling, LLP and the HSUS’s Animal Protection Law team along with co-plaintiffs, Mercy For Animals and Farm Sanctuary. Sara Amundson is president of the Humane Society Legislative Fund. Improving the Lives of Farm Animals About the author Kitty Block is President and CEO of the Humane Society of the United States and CEO of Humane Society International, the international affiliate of the HSUS Read more about Kitty Block Subscribe to the blog Get all of Kitty's latest updates delivered to your inbox. Subscribe Also of interest iStock.com Breaking: Lawsuit forces U.S. to rethink bird flu response Improving the Lives of Farm Animals June 4, 2022 Photo by Bill Gozansky/Alamy Breaking: U.S. courts issue four wins over 48 hours against trophy hunting, state-funded wildlife killing, fur and cage confinement of factory-farmed birds Improving the Lives of Farm Animals March 31, 2021 The HSUS USDA Secretary’s support for factory farming cruelty is an insult to animals and voters Improving the Lives of Farm Animals June 14, 2024 Get HSUS news and action alerts Mobile number Thank you for signing up for text alerts!You will receive text messages with ways to help animals right from your phone. By providing your mobile number, you agree to receive autodialed, recurring text messages from the HSUS with updates and ways you can help animals. Message and data rates may apply. Text STOP to 77879 to opt out, HELP for info. Privacy policy. Terms and conditions. Footer All Our Fights Animals Events News Press Room Blog Shop Stream Podcast Donate One-time and Recurring Membership Matching Gifts Major Gifts and Grants Legacy Giving Vehicle Donation Host a Fundraiser Volunteer About us Our Mission Leadership Governance Financial Information Affiliates Careers Internships Diversity, Equity and Inclusion FAQ Contact Us All Animals magazine Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn YouTube © 2024 The Humane Society of the United States Privacy policy and terms. The Humane Society of the United States is registered as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization. Contributions to the HSUS are tax-deductible to the extent permitted by law. The HSUS's tax identification number is 53-0225390. Transparency in coverage. Footer Right Better Business Bureau Accredited CharityPreventing the next pandemic: the search for a universal flu vaccine - The Pharmaceutical Journal Skip to contentAdvertisement Advertisement The Royal Pharmaceutical Society's official journal Search Search Log in Menu Close Monthly edition Latest issues October 2024 September 2024 August 2024 July 2024 June 2024 May 2024 April 2024 March 2024 February 2024 January 2024 December 2023 November 2023 News Type Latest news Features & analysis Opinion Letters Podcasts RPS news Job listings Tributes & obituaries Events Theme RPS elections 2024 Antimicrobial stewardship Digital pharmacy COVID-19 Health inequalities Genomic medicine Green pharmacy Medicines safety Medicines shortages Palliative and end-of-life care Polypharmacy OPERA 2024 Women to Watch 2023 Sector Community General practice Hospital Industry Location England Scotland Wales Condition Addiction Cancer Cardiovascular diseases Dermatology Diabetes Elderly care Gastrointestinal system diseases Infectious diseases Mental health Minor ailments Musculoskeletal conditions Neurological conditions Paediatrics and neonatal Pain: acute Pain: chronic Renal diseases Respiratory tract diseases Sexual health Women's health CPD & Learning Career stage Pharmacy students Foundation trainees Early years pharmacists Advanced practice Theme Professional skills Prescribing Antimicrobial resistance and stewardship Revalidation Palliative and end-of-life care Condition Allergy Cancer Cardiovascular diseases Dermatology Diabetes Eye Gastrointestinal system diseases Infectious diseases Mental health Minor ailments Musculoskeletal conditions Neurological conditions Oral health Paediatrics and neonatal Pain: acute Pain: chronic Pain: joint Palliative care Respiratory tract diseases Sexual health Urgent and emergency care Women's health Career development Changing sectors Finding a preregistration placement Getting a new job Progressing your career Returning to practice Surviving your first year Research Publications Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology International Journal of Pharmacy Practice Journal of Pharmaceutical Health Services Research RPS Pharmacy and Pharmacology Reports Researcher awards OPERA 2024 OPERA 2023 PJ Jobs Jobseekers Recruiters Log in SubscribeThe official journal of The Royal Pharmaceutical Society Search Search Monthly edition All Monthly edition Latest issues October 2024 September 2024 August 2024 July 2024 June 2024 May 2024 April 2024 March 2024 February 2024 January 2024 December 2023 November 2023 News All News Type Latest news Features & analysis Opinion Letters Podcasts RPS news Job listings Tributes & obituaries Events Theme RPS elections 2024 Antimicrobial stewardship Digital pharmacy COVID-19 Health inequalities Genomic medicine Green pharmacy Medicines safety Medicines shortages Palliative and end-of-life care Polypharmacy OPERA 2024 Women to Watch 2023 Sector Community General practice Hospital Industry Location England Scotland Wales Condition Addiction Cancer Cardiovascular diseases Dermatology Diabetes Elderly care Gastrointestinal system diseases Infectious diseases Mental health Minor ailments Musculoskeletal conditions Neurological conditions Paediatrics and neonatal Pain: acute Pain: chronic Renal diseases Respiratory tract diseases Sexual health Women's health CPD & Learning All CPD & Learning Career stage Pharmacy students Foundation trainees Early years pharmacists Advanced practice Theme Professional skills Prescribing Antimicrobial resistance and stewardship Revalidation Palliative and end-of-life care Condition Allergy Cancer Cardiovascular diseases Dermatology Diabetes Eye Gastrointestinal system diseases Infectious diseases Mental health Minor ailments Musculoskeletal conditions Neurological conditions Oral health Paediatrics and neonatal Pain: acute Pain: chronic Pain: joint Palliative care Respiratory tract diseases Sexual health Urgent and emergency care Women's health Career development Changing sectors Finding a preregistration placement Getting a new job Progressing your career Returning to practice Surviving your first year Research All Research Publications Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology International Journal of Pharmacy Practice Journal of Pharmaceutical Health Services Research RPS Pharmacy and Pharmacology Reports Researcher awards OPERA 2024 OPERA 2023 PJ Jobs All PJ Jobs Jobseekers Recruiters Subscribe Access provided by Home Feature Preventing the next pandemic: the search for a universal flu vaccine With each new strain of the influenza virus — like the bird flu identified in Russia in 2021 — comes the potential risk of a pandemic. Now, amid the global COVID-19 crisis, a vaccine that can protect against multiple flu strains has never been more important. Vaccination 01 April 2021 By Rachel BrazilAdvertisement Advertisement Copy link to page Download PDF Mclean/Shutterstock.comSocial distancing and lockdown measures put in place across the UK to limit the spread of COVID-19 have also led to a huge drop in the levels of influenza.However, while we continue to battle the COVID-19 pandemic, it is important not to become complacent about the risks posed by the yearly emergence of new strains of flu. The virus’s ability to mutate rapidly means that when a new strain appears, immunity is low, protection from seasonal vaccines is limited and the risk of a pandemic is high.The 1918 Spanish flu infected 500 million people — about a third of the world’s population at that time — and killed an estimated 50 million, and the most recent flu pandemic in 2009 is estimated to have infected around 24% of the global population and killed over 284,000 in its first year​[1,2]​.Looking at these data, it is clear that developing a universal flu vaccine to protect against multiple flu strains is more important than ever.An arms raceThe challenge with the flu virus lies in its ability to alter its surface proteins — the parts of the virus the human immune system usually targets first, which enables it to continue reinfecting the same host population over time.“It is engaged in a kind of evolutionary process … that one could describe as an arms race,” says Sunetra Gupta, a theoretical epidemiologist and vaccine developer from the University of Oxford.The flu virus exists in many types and subtypes: both influenza A and B can cause epidemic seasonal infections. Influenza B is typically only found in humans, but influenza A subtypes are found in many other species, particularly in birds, and if these subtypes transfer to humans the risk of a pandemic increases.You have to race to make the vaccineSunetra GuptaWe are also battling against what immunologists call ‘antigenic drift’ within current flu subtypes, owing to rapid changes in the surface glycoprotein haemagglutinin (HA).Influenza viruses are named after the 18 possible HA subtypes (which can be split into two broadly similar groups) and the 11 different subtypes of another surface protein, neuraminadase (NA). Subtypes found in humans are usually H1N1 or H3N2 but there have also been a handful of deadly outbreaks of H5N1 and H7N9 influenzas.It is changes to the HA protein, which occur even in familiar circulating subtypes, which necessitate updating flu vaccines every year.“You have to race to make the vaccine,” explains Gupta: “And very often there is a mismatch.”This means that current seasonal flu vaccines have, on average, an efficacy of only 40%. There have been some industry advances, such as the new quadrivalent vaccine, which is designed to protect against four different flu viruses; and newer cell-based vaccines. However, for a long time, improving the flu vaccine was not a priority.“Industry does not make huge amounts of money out of flu vaccines … there’s no blockbusting in this,” explains John McCauley, director of the Worldwide Influenza Centre at the Francis Crick Institute in London.However, according to Florian Krammer, a microbiologist at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, things started to change in 2009 after it was discovered that some of the antibodies humans make in response to influenza can neutralise multiple flu subtypes.“That really catalysed it because that gave us a hope that we can do this with the human immune system,” he says.By 2018, the United States National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases had taken up the challenge and released a strategic plan for a universal flu vaccine and funded a US$51m collaborative network to drive its development​[3,4]​.Some researchers refer to “more broadly protective” vaccines, indicating a vaccine that may protect against the antigenic drift of existing strains and provide broader coverage to flu subtypes already in circulation.A truly universal vaccine would also protect against any new subtypes that may emerge from the animal kingdom — sometimes called an ‘antigenic shift’ — which is much more difficult.You will never demonstrate universality because you don’t know what’s coming next yearOlga PleguezuelosAlso, according to Olga Pleguezuelos, chief scientific officer at the UK biotechnology company ConserV Bioscience: “You will never demonstrate universality because you don’t know what’s coming next year.”In 2020, US vaccine development company Novavax started a phase III trial for its quadrivalent NanoFlu vaccine, which — although not universal — showed “significant improvements against four drifted H3N2 strains”. However, the creation of broader vaccines is hugely challenging and several attempts have failed.In January 2020, Oxford-based biotechnology company Vaccitech announced that phase IIb data for its universal flu vaccine — VTP-100 — had shown it had not achieved reductions in infections compared with the seasonal vaccine and that it would discontinue the trial. Then, after 15 years of research, Israeli biotech BiondVax Pharmaceuticals announced in October 2020 its phase III study of universal flu vaccine — M-001 — showed no significant protection above placebo.Universal strategiesOne of the most promising approaches to developing a universal vaccine currently involves stimulating immunity against the parts of the mushroom-shaped HA protein that remain unchanged across strains — specifically the ‘stalk’ of the mushroom rather than the ‘head’ (see Figure).To do this, Krammer and his team made new versions of HA by combining parts from different subtypes (chimeras). Specifically, they engineered proteins made from the heads of ‘exotic subtypes’ like H5 or H8, which are unfamiliar to the human immune system, but kept an H1 stalk, which is more familiar.This means that, once vaccinated, the host immune system is primed to create more broadly protective antibodies that target regions on the HA stalks of the virus.“The stalk approach is still the one that is the most promising, just because these [stalk] antibodies do exist [naturally in humans],” says Krammer.In December 2020, Krammer’s first clinical study showed that the vaccine effectively stimulates antibodies against one group of HA in humans and the team is now planning further trials​[5]​.The stalk approach is still the one that is the most promisingFlorian KrammerAnother similar strategy uses just the stalk of the HA protein — an approach being taken by scientists at the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease Vaccine Research Centre in Bethesda, Maryland.Their vaccine — H1ssF_3928, based on the H1 protein — displays multiple stalks on the surface of a nanoparticle made from the protein ferritin. Ferritin is useful as a vaccine platform because it forms particles that can display multiple influenza HA spikes on its surface, mimicking the virus itself.However, there may be problems with these strategies because recent results show that the HA stalk can mutate in some strains.“We have looked at the potential for mutations in one of the sites in the HA stalk that we are interested in for design of a universal vaccine,” says Ian Wilson, a structural biologist from Scripps Research in California.“It was clear that, compared to the more antigenic HA head, there’s less mutational ability, but there is some that can lead to escape mutations,” he adds. This occurred with one of most common flu sub-types, H3N2​[6]​.Creating immunity against multiple flu viruses is complicated by the concept of “original antigenic sin”, or imprinting, Wilson adds.“Each of us is primed to respond to influenza virus based on what we saw with our first infection as a child … [meaning] that each of us responds differently, depending on our first exposure.“So, to try to get a completely new response, over a recall response, is more problematic with a virus that circulates in a new form every year.”Gupta and Craig Thompson, a virologist at the University of Oxford, have developed an approach using a combination of bioinformatics and structural biology to find conserved epitopes in the HA protein head — these are regions of the flu protein recognised by the immune system that have remained constant throughout historic flu strains.“[Our] model is suggesting [that], rather than there being this continuous arms race, where flu is slowly and incrementally altering the epitopes that it presents to the immune system, it is actually mutating very quickly, but it only has a small number of possibilities within each epitope region,” explains Gupta.So far, the pair have identified four epitopes that provide immunity to all historical flu strains in mice, while BLU Water vaccines based in Cincinnati, Ohio, is developing a vaccine which would contain a cocktail of those epitopes from a number of flu subtypes​[7]​.Currently delayed owing to the COVID-19 pandemic (see Box), Gupta is hopeful that phase I trials can start in the near future.Box: The impact of COVID-19The COVID-19 pandemic may end up being a game-changer in the push for a universal influenza vaccine, despite the fact that it may have halted flu vaccine progress in the short term, owing to flu laboratories being asked to stop their own work and focus on COVID-19.According to Wilson, work in flu laboratories has now started to resume and the hope is that the pandemic will provide the push needed to develop better vaccines.“Vaccines went through two decades of neglect and under-development and we’re feeling the effects of that as pandemics emerge. It has been a dark corner of biotechnology, and it has all of a sudden got a lot of light,” argues Duncan. Now everyone wants to be part of the next Moderna, he jokes.As the COVID-19 pandemic has progressed, the challenge that viral mutation presents to vaccine development has really come to the fore. “We initially thought that this coronavirus wouldn’t mutate that much, but we’re now seeing that it is starting to mutate quite extensively, akin to what influenza does on an annual basis,” says Wilson.Researchers are currently starting to develop prototypes of a universal — or ‘pancoronavirus’ — vaccine, which will work against all coronaviruses, not just SARS-CoV-2. Cambridge, Massachusetts-based VBI Vaccines has announced some promising, if early, results from experiments on animals. T-cell vaccines and other approachesPredicting how viral surface proteins will mutate still comes with considerable uncertainties, so researchers are also exploring other avenues.“There is more to immunity than just stopping infection [with antibodies] … in fact, it may well be that [other mechanisms of] immunity may attenuate the disease process, for example, through cytotoxic T cells,” says McCauley.Inducing a T-cell response by vaccination has been the aim of recent vaccine research for diseases like HIV and malaria. Bioscience is taking this approach with its vaccine, FLU-v.T cells are white blood cells that are programmed to attack specific antigens; they also produce signalling molecules, called cytokines, that stimulate a further immune response. This means that vaccines that stimulate a T-cell response can be more effective than those that just stimulate antibody production.ConserV was able to identify epitopes from proteins inside the virus that activate a T-cell immune response. Its synthetic peptide vaccine is designed to provide broad protection, including against avian and swine flu strains that pose the greatest pandemic risk.We are antipandemic, by the nature of our designKimbell Duncan“We focus on segments of proteins that do not evolve over succeeding generations of viral strains or as they jump from animals to humans, so we are antipandemic, by the nature of our design,’” explains Kimbell Duncan, chief executive of ConserV.As well as testing against a broad range of circulating strains, ConserV has successfully completed a phase IIb intranasal challenge study in 153 healthy adults​[8]​.Trial participants are directly exposed to the 2009 H1N1 flu strain to see the different responses in vaccinated and unvaccinated groups.“We vaccinated people and then we put them all sort of in a flu hotel,” explains Pleguezuelos.“This is the first time that a vaccine of this type has shown efficacy [in a human study].”The trial showed that a single dose of the vaccine led to a larger proportion showing no disease at all compared to those unvaccinated (67.5% versus 45.2%)​[8]​.Other strategies being investigated include using the surface protein, NA, in addition to HA.Given the recent success of mRNA vaccines for COVID-19, there is a growing interest in this approach too — a team at the University of Pennsylvania in the United States has developed an mRNA vaccine that encodes for the full HA protein, which was able to induce high levels of stalk antibodies​[9]​.Future prospectsFor ConserV, the current challenge is not identifying the vaccine targets, but defining a regulatory pathway since there is currently no process for approving a flu vaccine with a specific broad spectrum or indeed universal designation.“Commercially, it’s not viable if we come out of phase III, with the same label that an annual flu vaccine has, we can’t compete,” says Duncan.Krammer agrees that regulatory issues need attention, but there are inherent difficulties.“In animals [we] can easily prove that a vaccine is universal, by challenging them with all kinds of subtypes, but how do we prove that in humans?”A broad-spectrum designation will likely require trials over multiple flu seasons, and “[it takes] a lot of money to do that,” says Krammer.In animals [we] can easily prove that a vaccine is universal…but how do we prove that in humans?Florian KrammerAlthough a truly universal vaccine is currently a long way off, McCauley sees the potential for a better seasonal one within a “reasonable time frame”.ConserV is currently in discussions with the US Food and Drug Administration to submit plans for a two-year, phase III trial of Flu-v.And, Krammer hopes that if the current stalk-focused strategies continue to be successful, a broad-spectrum vaccine should be available within five years.Even though we can now produce vaccines quicker than ever before, COVID-19 has shown us that millions of people can still die in the time that it takes — and a universal vaccine could prevent this. Bearing recent events in mind, Pleguezuelos argues that now is certainly not the time for complacency.“This is what we’re trying to do with influenza — we don’t want to wait until there is a pandemic.”11918 Pandemic (H1N1 virus). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2019.https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/1918-pandemic-h1n1.html (accessed 22 Mar 2021).2Pandemic influenza. World Health Organization. https://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/communicable-diseases/influenza/pandemic-influenza (accessed 22 Mar 2021).3The Human Vaccines Project Launches New Initiative To Accelerate Development Of Universally Effective Influenza Vaccines. Human Vaccines Project. 2017.https://www.humanvaccinesproject.orgews-itemhe-human-vaccines-project-launches-new-initiative-to-accelerate-development-of-universally-effective-influenza-vaccines/ (accessed 22 Mar 2021).4Universal Influenza Vaccine Research. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. 2019.https://www.niaid.nih.gov/diseases-conditions/universal-influenza-vaccine-research (accessed 22 Mar 2021).5Nachbagauer R, Feser J, Naficy A, et al. A chimeric hemagglutinin-based universal influenza virus vaccine approach induces broad and long-lasting immunity in a randomized, placebo-controlled phase I trial. Nat Med 2020;27:106–14. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1118-76Wu NC, Thompson AJ, Lee JM, et al. Different genetic barriers for resistance to HA stem antibodies in influenza H3 and H1 viruses. Science 2020;368:1335–40. doi:10.1126/science.aaz51437Thompson CP, Lourenço J, Walters AA, et al. A naturally protective epitope of limited variability as an influenza vaccine target. Nat Commun 2018;9. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06228-88Pleguezuelos O, James E, Fernandez A, et al. Efficacy of FLU-v, a broad-spectrum influenza vaccine, in a randomized phase IIb human influenza challenge study. npj Vaccines 2020;5. doi:10.1038/s41541-020-0174-99Pardi N, Parkhouse K, Kirkpatrick E, et al. Nucleoside-modified mRNA immunization elicits influenza virus hemagglutinin stalk-specific antibodies. Nat Commun 2018;9:3361. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05482-0 Last updated 15 August 2022 11:23CitationThe Pharmaceutical Journal, PJ, March 2021, Vol 306, No 7947;306(7947)::DOI:10.1211/PJ.2021.1.71420 Please leave a comment Cancel replyYou must be logged in to post a comment.You may also be interested in UK’s first potential norovirus vaccine to be trialled by UK government partnership with Moderna MMR vaccination coverage in England has declined for fifth consecutive year UK government announces mpox vaccination programme Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement About us A to Z subjectsServices Services Advertising and branded content Subscribe Supported contentSupport Support Article access rules Community guidelines For authors and referees Website FAQs Using the new PJ Logging in as a RPS member Preferences and newsletters How to use the PJ app PJ app FAQs Technical supportPublications Publications The Pharmaceutical Journal International Journal of Pharmacy Practice Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology Journal of Pharmaceutical Health Services Research RPS Pharmacy & Pharmacology ReportsPartners Partners Pharmaceutical Press MedicinesComplete Pharmacy Knowledge ONtrack Pharmacy Knowledge Student PJ JobsContact Contact Contact us Permissions and reprintsFollow us Follow us Social media and communities hub Download our app Cookie policy Terms and conditions Subscription T&Cs Copyright Privacy Policy Acceptable use policy © 2024 Royal Pharmaceutical SocietyFlu shot may help protect against COVID-19 Medical News TodayHealth ConditionsHealth ConditionsAlzheimer's & DementiaAnxietyAsthma & AllergiesAtopic DermatitisBreast CancerCancerCardiovascular HealthCOVID-19DiabetesEnvironment & SustainabilityExercise & FitnessEye HealthHeadache & MigraineHealth EquityHIV & AIDSHuman BiologyLeukemiaLGBTQIA+Men's HealthMental HealthMultiple Sclerosis (MS)NutritionParkinson's DiseasePsoriasisPsoriatic ArthritisSexual HealthUlcerative ColitisWomen's HealthHealth ProductsHealth ProductsAllNutrition & FitnessVitamins & SupplementsCBDSleepMental HealthAt-Home TestingMen’s HealthWomen’s HealthDiscoverNewsLatest NewsOriginal SeriesMedical MythsHonest NutritionThrough My EyesNew Normal HealthPodcastsAll3 ways to slow down type 2 diabetes-related brain agingToxic metals in tampons: Should you be worried?Can tattoos cause blood or skin cancer?Can we really ‘outrun the Grim Reaper’?What makes a diet truly heart-healthy?Is intermittent fasting actually bad for your heart?ToolsGeneral HealthDrugs A-ZHealth HubsHealth ToolsFind a DoctorBMI Calculators and ChartsBlood Pressure Chart: Ranges and GuideBreast Cancer: Self-Examination GuideSleep CalculatorQuizzesRA Myths vs FactsType 2 Diabetes: Managing Blood SugarAnkylosing Spondylitis Pain: Fact or FictionConnectAbout Medical News TodayWho We AreOur Editorial ProcessContent IntegrityConscious LanguageNewslettersSign UpFollow UsSubscribeCan getting a flu shot help protect against COVID-19?Written by Erika Watts on March 31, 2021 — Fact checked by Harriet Pike, Ph.D.Share on PinterestThe flu shot might help protect against COVID-19. Francine Orr/Getty ImagesResearchers recently identified lower COVID-19 rates among people who received flu shots. The odds of testing positive for SARS-CoV-2 were 24% lower for those who received a flu shot compared with those who did not.People who had been vaccinated against the flu who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 had a lower hospitalization rate than people who had not been vaccinated against the flu. Coronavirus dataAll data and statistics are based on publicly available data at the time of publication. Some information may be out of date. Visit our coronavirus hub for the most recent information on COVID-19.Since the World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a global pandemic, scientists have focused on finding ways to slow down the spread and minimize the severity of medical issues associated with the disease. Scientists have now developed multiple vaccines and found treatments to improve outcomes. One group of researchers has been looking back to the earlier months of the pandemic. They noticed that people who had been vaccinated against the flu developed COVID-19 at lower rates and experienced less severe symptoms than people who had not been vaccinated. Coronavirus resourcesFor more advice on COVID-19 prevention and treatment, visit our coronavirus hub.Flu vs. COVID-19Something that medical professionals have continually emphasized since the onset of the current pandemic is that COVID-19 and the flu are not the same illness. Although the illnesses may share a few similar symptoms — such as cough, fever, and fatigue — different viruses cause them. The flu is caused by an influenza virus, of which there are numerous strains. Typically, there are one or two dominant strains per flu season, which scientists attempt to target with a vaccine. COVID-19, on the other hand, is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2. Not only do these viruses function differently from each other, but SARS-Cov-2 is also far deadlier than the typical flu virus. Flu vaccine studyOver the past year, scientists have focused on developing a vaccine that helps prevent contracting and spreading SARS-CoV-2. At the same time, researchers have started to explore whether other vaccines, targeting different pathogens, might influence the virus. Research by scientists at Michigan Medicine at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor suggests that people who receive a flu vaccine may be less likely to get COVID-19. Dr. Marion Hofmann Bowman, an associate professor of internal medicine and a cardiologist at Michigan Medicine, is a senior author of the new paper, which appears in the American Journal of Infection Control. Dr. Hofmann believes that there is a connection between people who get their flu vaccination and a reduction in COVID-19 cases. “It’s particularly relevant for vaccine hesitance, and maybe taking the flu shot this year can ease some angst about the new COVID-19 vaccine.”– Dr. Marion Hofmann BowmanThe group reviewed medical records from more than 27,000 people who took COVID-19 tests at Michigan Medicine. The study included people who underwent testing between February 27 and July 15, 2020. Of the individuals who underwent testing for COVID-19, almost 13,000 received flu vaccines and just over 14,000 did not. The number of people who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 was higher among people who did not get the flu shot. Almost 5% of these participants tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. Of those who did get a flu shot, 4% tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.According to the paper, “The odds of testing positive for [SARS-CoV-2] was reduced in [people] who received an influenza vaccine compared [with] those who did not by 24%.”Additionally, people who had been vaccinated against the flu had better outcomes than people who had not been vaccinated.Those who had not been vaccinated required hospitalization at higher rates than those who had. People who had not been vaccinated were also more likely to need mechanical ventilation and extended hospital stays. The death rate was about the same between the two groups. “Recent data [have] also suggested an association between influenza vaccination and reduced mortality from COVID-19 as well as a decreased need for intensive care treatment and invasive respiratory support,” write the authors.Flu shot safetyThe study authors are not yet sure why people who had been vaccinated against the flu fared better than people who had not been vaccinated against it. “It is possible that [people] who receive their flu vaccine are also people who are practicing more [physical] distancing and following [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] guidelines,” suggests Dr. Hofmann. Dr. Hofmann also says that the reduction in positive SARS-CoV-2 tests could be attributable to “a direct biological effect of the flu vaccine on the immune system relevant for the fight against SARS-CoV-2 virus.” Even though the researchers may not know exactly why the relationship between flu shots and COVID-19 exists, one thing is clear. They write, “The results of our study indicate that influenza vaccination presents no harmful effect on COVID-19 susceptibility or increased disease severity.”This is important to ensure that the public does not have any fear of getting vaccinated against the flu. It is important to keep flu numbers down and avoid depleting resources needed to fight COVID-19. “Instead of a concerning connection between COVID-19 and the flu shot, our publication provides more confidence that getting [the] flu shot is associated with staying out of the hospital for COVID-19,” concludes Dr. Hofmann.For live updates on the latest developments regarding the novel coronavirus and COVID-19, click here.Immune System / VaccinesInfectious Diseases / Bacteria / VirusesCOVID-19FluCat 1coronavirusShare this articleWritten by Erika Watts on March 31, 2021 — Fact checked by Harriet Pike, Ph.D.Latest newsClassic and green Mediterranean diets may help slow brain agingRheumatoid arthritis linked to changes in the gut microbiome in new studyDaytime sleepiness may be a sign of higher dementia riskCould taking fish oil supplements help lower cancer risk?Can a combo of “active” therapies help lower dementia risk?Related CoverageGlobal impact of the COVID-19 pandemic: 1 year onIn this feature, we look at how the world is faring after 1 year of the COVID-19 pandemic. We consider the impact on work, family life, and mental…READ MORENew SARS-CoV-2 variants: How can vaccines be adapted?With new, potentially more infectious coronavirus variants on the horizon, how will vaccine development keep pace? Medical News Today investigate.READ MOREThrough my eyes: How lockdown anxiety with a newborn broke meIn this Through My Eyes perspective feature, Marie Ellis talks about her experience of having a baby and parenting two small children in a pandemic.READ MOREMy experience having twins during the COVID-19 pandemicMy name is Rosie Smith. This is my experience of being pregnant and having twins in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic.READ MOREAbout UsContact UsTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsHealth HubsMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzyPersistently high antibody responses after AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine: Dissecting the HA specific antibody response | npj Vaccines Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature npj vaccines articles article Persistently high antibody responses after AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine: Dissecting the HA specific antibody response Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 01 April 2021 Persistently high antibody responses after AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine: Dissecting the HA specific antibody response Anders Madsen1, Åsne Jul-Larsen1, Mai-Chi Trieu1, Florian Krammer ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4121-776X2 & …Rebecca J. Cox ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8341-40781,3 Show authors npj Vaccines volume 6, Article number: 45 (2021) Cite this article 1531 Accesses 4 Citations Metrics details Subjects ImmunologyInactivated vaccinesVaccines AbstractCurrent influenza vaccines have a suboptimal effectiveness. The introduction of a novel A/H1N1 influenza virus in 2009 (H1N1pdm09) provided a unique opportunity to study the humoral response to the AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine and repeated annual vaccination with the homologous virus in subsequent influenza seasons. Thirty-two HCWs immunized with the AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine in 2009 were divided into four groups based on the longevity of their antibody responses (persistently high or transient), and whether they were repeatedly annually vaccinated in the subsequent four influenza seasons or not. Serological assays were utilized to measure the quantity, quality and functionality of antibodies targeting the major surface glycoprotein hemagglutinin (HA). Persistent high responders (hemagglutination inhibition (HI) titre ≥ 80 at 12 months after H1N1pdm09 vaccination) had protective levels of HI antibodies throughout the study period. In addition, the quality and functionality of these antibodies were greater than the individuals who had a transient antibody response to the pandemic vaccine (HI titre < 40 at 12 months after H1N1pdm09 vaccination). All groups had similar levels of antibodies towards the conserved HA stalk domain. The level of HA head-specific antibodies gradually increased over time with annual vaccination in the transient responders. The AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine elicited a robust humoral response that persisted up to 5 years in some individuals. Seasonal annual vaccination boosted the HA-antibodies over time in individuals with a transient response to the pandemic H1N1pdm09 vaccine. Similar content being viewed by others Pandemic influenza virus vaccines boost hemagglutinin stalk-specific antibody responses in primed adult and pediatric cohorts Article Open access 06 December 2019 Seasonal influenza vaccination expands hemagglutinin-specific antibody breadth to older and future A/H3N2 viruses Article Open access 24 June 2022 Pre-existing immunity and vaccine history determine hemagglutinin-specific CD4 T cell and IgG response following seasonal influenza vaccination Article Open access 18 November 2021 IntroductionInfluenza is a contagious respiratory pathogen that causes annual epidemics with an estimated 290,000–650,000 deaths each year1. Occasionally, influenza pandemics occur, causing a substantial burden for health care systems globally. Vaccination against influenza is the most effective measure to prevent infection and induces B cell responses leading to the production of neutralizing antibodies. While the licensed seasonal inactivated influenza vaccines (IIV) are effective, they lack two essential attributes; firstly the antibody response provide limited potential for cross-protection; and secondly, immunity appears to be of a short of duration2.Vaccine-induced antibodies are predominantly directed to the major surface glycoprotein hemagglutinin (HA)3,4,5. The HA protein consists of a stalk domain and a head domain, the latter being the immunodominant part of the HA protein. Antibodies directed to the HA head domain prevent attachment of the virus to the sialic acids on host cells. HA head-specific antibodies can be detected with hemagglutination inhibition assay (HI), a serological assay commonly used for measuring vaccine immunogenicity. However, the HA head domain is particularly prone to mutations due to the continuous evolution of the virus in a process called antigenic drift. Thus, HA-head-specific antibodies generated in response to prior infection or immunizations are no longer neutralizing due to the antigenic plasticity of the influenza virus6. Antibodies targeting the conserved HA stalk domain are broadly cross-reactive and therefore the stalk is a candidate for novel broadly protective influenza vaccines7. Stalk-specific antibodies have other functions, including blocking viral fusion with the host cell and inducing natural killer (NK) cells and eliminating infected host cells through antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC)8.In 2009, a novel influenza A/H1N1 virus (H1N1pdm09) emerged, causing the first pandemic of the 21st century providing a unique opportunity to study the humoral response to a novel influenza virus. During the pandemic, healthcare workers (HCW) were prioritized for vaccination in order to maintain the integrity of the healthcare system and protect their patients. In Norway, a novel monovalent pandemic vaccine containing the H1N1pdm09 virus with an oil-in-water emulsion AS03-adjuvant was available in October 2009, just before the peak of the pandemic activity. The AS03 adjuvant improved the vaccine´s immunogenicity, allowing for dose sparing and increasing the number of available doses9. A 5-year cohort study of HCWs vaccinated with the AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine was conducted to investigate the antibody response to the AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine and subsequent annual vaccination containing the H1N1pdm09 virus10. Our initial results from the HCW cohort have shown that the AS03-adjuvanted vaccine provided robust durable antibody responses. However, the H1N1pdm09-specific antibody titres varied considerably between HCW one year after pandemic vaccination, ranging from protective levels in some individuals to undetectable in others. In order to better understand the longevity of the antibody responses, we dissected the HA-specific antibody response after the AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine with or without annual seasonal vaccination in the subsequent four influenza seasons.ResultsStudy populationA total of 32 HCWs were selected for the current study based on their HI response to pandemic H1N1pdm09 vaccine at 12 months post-vaccination and their vaccination habits during the subsequent influenza seasons. The HCWs were divided into four groups based on the longevity of their antibody responses (persistently high or transient), and whether they were repeatedly vaccinated in the subsequent four influenza seasons (repeated) or not (single) (Fig. 1). We analysed the durability and kinetics of the antibody responses after vaccination with AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 pandemic vaccine and subsequent seasonal vaccination. A majority of the HCWs in this study were female (81%), except for the group of single vaccinated persistent high responders, which had an even gender distribution (Table 1). This is similar to the gender distribution in the Norwegian health care sector. In total, at least 18 HCWs (56%) had previously been vaccinated with seasonal influenza vaccines before the 2009 H1N1 pandemic and most of them (14/18) belonged to the repeated vaccination groups. Of note, there were a higher proportion of individuals with pre-existing antibodies (HI ≥ 10) before pandemic vaccination among the persistent high responders (69%) compared to the transient responders (31%). This could be due to prior vaccination with IIVs before 2009 or working in a clinical department caring for infected patients10,11.Fig. 1: Study design.Healthcare workers (HCWs) were vaccinated in 2009 with the AS03-adjuvanted low-dose (3.75 μg HA) pandemic H1N1pdm09 vaccine (N = 250)10. Blood samples were collected prior to pandemic vaccination in 2009 and annually before the subsequent influenza seasons. HCWs were grouped based on their HI titres at 12 months after the adjuvanted pandemic H1N1pmd09 vaccine: those with HI ≥ 80 as “persistent high responders” and those with HI < 40 as “transient responders”. Subjects were further divided into subgroups based on their seasonal vaccination habits after pandemic vaccination: HCWs who were annually vaccinated in the subsequent four influenza seasons as “repeated vaccination group” and those who chose not to receive seasonal vaccination as “single vaccination group”. In this study, we included all eight individuals from the “Persistent high, repeated vaccination” group, and selected eight individuals that donated the most frequent blood samples in subsequent seasons from each of the three groups “Persistent high, single vaccination”, “Transient, repeated vaccination” and “Transient, single vaccination”.Full size imageTable 1 Characteristics of study participants.Full size tableLong-term maintenance of seroprotection in persistent high responders regardless of subsequent seasonal vaccinationThe HI and neutralizing antibodies were assessed in all four groups of HCWs (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 1). The persistent high responders remained above the suggested thresholds of protection (HI ≥ 40 and MN ≥ 80) throughout the study period of 60 months, regardless of subsequent seasonal vaccination status12,13. However, we observed a significant decrease in HI titres between 24 and 60 months post-pandemic vaccination in the persistent high single vaccination group (p < 0.001) (Fig. 2a), although there were no significant differences between the repeatedly vaccinated and single vaccinated persistent high responders. Antibody-titres in the transient responders were significantly lower than the persistent high responders at 12 months post vaccination, and remained below the protective threshold (HI < 40, MN < 80) throughout 60 months, regardless of subsequent seasonal vaccination status. Using linear regression, we found that the transient responders who were repeatedly vaccinated had a gradual increase of HI and MN antibodies during the 60 months follow-up (HI: p < 0.05, R2 = 0.12. MN: p < 0.05, R2 = 0.10). In comparison, we observed a tendency of decreasing antibody titres in the transient responders who were not seasonally vaccinated.Fig. 2: High antibody titres 12 months post H1N1pdm09 vaccination persisted up to four subsequent years, regardless of repeated seasonal influenza vaccination.The HI titres (a) and MN titres (b) against H1N1pdm09 virus were measured annually before each influenza season in persistent high responders (circle) and transient responders (square) after repeated vaccination (blue and turquoise) or single vaccination (red and orange). The geometric mean titres and 95% confidence intervals are presented. The dotted line at HI = 40 and MN = 80 represent a surrogate correlate of protection. Statistical differences between different time points were tested using two-way ANOVA with Tukey test for multiple comparisons. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ****P < 0.0001.Full size imageComparable HA stalk-specific responses in persistent high and transient respondersThe H1N1pdm09-specific antibody responses were further characterized in an ELISA to assess the composition of HA-reactive IgG (Fig. 3a–c and Supplementary Table 2). We found a tendency of higher levels of IgG towards the mutation-prone HA-head domain in the persistent high responders, compared to the transient responders (Fig. 3b). The HA-head reactive IgG increased with annual vaccination in the transient responders (linear regression: p < 0.05 and R2 = 0.09) and the persistent high repeated vaccination group (not significant). When assessing the HA stalk specific antibodies we used a chimeric cH9/1 HA, which has the H1 stalk domain and the H9 head domain. Since the subjects in this study are expected to be naïve to the avian H9, we assumed no or little cross-reactivity to the H9 head domain. We found that the level of IgG binding to the conserved HA-stalk domain remained similar between the groups (Fig. 3c). A further assessment of the functionality of the HA-stalk specific antibodies was conducted using the VN assay (Fig. 3d). Here, no significant differences between the groups were found, although we observed a trend of higher VN titres in the repeatedly vaccinated persistent high group throughout 60 months and the repeatedly vaccinated transient group at 0 and 24 months compared to the 2 single vaccinated groups. The HA-stalk-specific antibodies can also function through ADCC. We therefore performed an NK cell activation assay on four subjects from each HCW group who had similar levels HA stalk antibodies in ELISA (Supplementary Fig. 2). Here, we observed no significant increase in the ability to provide Fc-mediated protection after vaccination and no significant differences between the groups.Fig. 3: No differences in HA-stalk-specific antibodies between the persistent high and transient responders.The serum IgG binding to the HA protein of the H1N1pdm09 virus before each influenza season were measured by the ELISA assay. Persistent high responders are presented as circles and transient responders as squares. Repeated vaccination is shown in blue and turquoise, and single vaccination is shown in red and orange. The endpoint titres are shown for antibodies binding to different domains of the HA protein: whole HA (a), HA head (b) and HA stalk (c). Functional neutralizing HA-stalk specific antibodies were measured in the virus neutralization (VN) assay using a chimeric cH9/1N3 virus (d). Geometric mean titres and 95% confidence intervals are presented. Statistical differences between different time points were tested using two-way ANOVA with Tukey test for multiple comparisons. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.Full size imageTrend of higher avidity in persistent high respondersTo assess the quality of the HA-specific IgG in HCWs, we measured the avidity to the whole HA and the head and stalk domains separately (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Table 3). Pre-pandemic vaccination (day 0), the avidity to the whole HA and the HA-head was low in all groups except the persistent high repeated group, which had significantly higher avidities than the other groups (p < 0.05) (Fig. 4a, b). Overall, we found higher avidity towards the HA-stalk compared to the HA-head domain. There was a tendency of higher avidity in persistent high responders compared to the transient responders throughout the study period. However, this trend was less noticeable when measuring the avidity to the HA stalk and whole HA. In transient responders, the avidity index against HA-head significantly increased over time (repeated group; p < 0.05, R2 = 0.1 and single group; p < 0.01, R2 = 0.2).Fig. 4: Trend of higher avidity in persistent high responders.The IgG avidity to the HA protein of the H1N1pdm09 virus before each influenza season were measured by the avidity ELISA assay against three different domains of the HA protein: whole HA (a), HA head (b) and HA stalk (c). Persistent high responders are shown as circles and transient responders as squares. Repeated vaccination is shown in blue and turquoise, and single vaccination is shown in red and orange. The means and standard errors of the means are shown.Full size imageDiscussionOur study sought to better understand induction of persistently high antibody responses after pandemic vaccination with the AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine and the impact upon subsequent annual seasonal vaccination. There are several advantages in the use of AS03 adjuvant in a pandemic vaccine to prime the immune response. Firstly, the AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pmd09 vaccine lead to enhanced humoral responses compared to vaccination with a non-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine14,15. Increasing vaccine immunogenicity is especially valuable in a pandemic scenario, where most of the population is immunologically naïve to the emerging virus. Specifically, the AS03 adjuvant functions by increasing antigen uptake and presentation in the local draining lymph nodes9,16. Furthermore, the adjuvant stimulates increased activation of naïve B-cell responses and increased adaptability of recalled memory B cells. This allowed dose sparing to 1/4 of the amount of antigen used in seasonal IIVs, which proved to be essential during the 2009 influenza pandemic to rapidly provide more vaccine doses from the available vaccine production.Although the enhanced immunogenicity of the AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 led to robust antibody responses, there is a need for better understanding of the durability of antibody responses and the potential of annual vaccination to boost antibody responses. One of the main challenges for today’s IIVs is inducing long-lasting antibody responses that can provide protection against emerging influenza viruses. Traditionally, HI titres ≥ 40 are considered a correlate of protection in adults with >50% reduction in the risk of influenza infection12. In our study, we chose a 12-month interval as a measurement time point to get a better understanding of the baseline antibody levels before any subsequent seasonal vaccination and prior to circulation of the virus during the influenza season. Remarkably, we found that individuals with an HI titre ≥80 one year after the H1N1pdm09 pandemic vaccine maintained a persistently high antibody level throughout the 60 months study period, regardless of seasonal vaccination. These findings raise questions about whether there were other characteristics than their vaccination status or demographical characteristics that could explain their persistent antibody responses. Their demographic information such as age, working department or previous seasonal vaccination, could not explain the differences between the persistent high responders and transient responders. It is possible that the persistent high responders had a stronger germinal centre reaction to the H1N1pdm09 vaccine than the transient responders17. Since the persistent high responders had higher levels of H1N1pmd09 strain-specific antibodies, one could assume that the H1N1pdm09 vaccine was able to engage more naïve B cells in these individuals. The H1N1pdm09 vaccine may have stimulated more pre-existing memory B cells in the transient responders, targeting older H1N1 viruses resulting in an original antigenic sin effect. We therefore measured the HI response to previous circulating H1N1 viruses from 1977 to 2008 (Supplementary Fig. 1) pre- and post-H1N1pdm09 vaccination. However, we found that the transient responders had lower levels of back boosting to other H1N1 viruses compared to the persistent high responders. We could however see a higher proportion of individuals with pre-existing H1N1pdm09 antibodies prior to vaccination in the persistent high responders (69%) compared to the transient responders (31%). Similarly the percentage of individuals previously vaccinated with IIVs before 2009 was higher in the persistent high (69%) than the transient responders (44%). This suggests that a previous exposure to the H1N1pdm09 virus or previous seasonal vaccination was beneficial for achieving durable antibody responses to the H1N1pdm09 vaccine.In addition to the HI and MN antibody responses, we have assessed the quality of antibodies and the level of antibodies targeting the conserved HA-stalk domain in our study. We found that despite lower HI and MN antibodies, the transient responders had similar levels of HA stalk-reactive antibodies compared to the persistent high responders. These HA stalk-reactive antibodies may have a critical role in protecting these individuals in the absence of head-specific HI antibodies. The HA stalk-specific antibodies are broadly cross-reactive and capable of preventing conformational changes in the HA, inhibiting viral egress and hindering cleavage activation of HA7. The antibody avidity is another important factor indicating the quality of antibodies. High avidity antibodies were associated with increased virus neutralization and milder disease upon infection with H1N1pdm0918. We found that the persistent high responders displayed the highest levels of antibody avidity throughout the study period.Annual vaccination is recommended for all healthcare personnel in Norway to provide immunity against the frequently changing influenza viruses. In this cohort, the H1N1 antigen in the seasonal IIVs was the same as the antigen in the H1N1pdm09 vaccine throughout the study. Although the impact of annual homologous boosting is unclear, studies have found improved quality of B-cell and T-cell responses after repeated vaccination19,20. In our study, we observed a potential positive effect of repeated vaccination in the transient responders on the quantity (ELISA), quality (avidity) and functionality (MN) of the antibodies directed to the immunodominant HA head domain.This study has limitations inherent in the long-term follow-up study design. Firstly, the size of the study population (n = 32) is relatively small. The strict inclusion criteria of having persistently high HI titres ≥80 at 12 months post-pandemic vaccination and annual seasonal vaccination in four subsequent seasons limited the study participants in the persistent high repeated vaccination group, thus affecting the number of participants in the other groups. Additionally, many individuals did not provide blood samples every year during the study, which restricted our selection of participants. A larger study is therefore needed to confirm our results. Secondly, the lack of virological and symptomatic surveillance of the HCWs means that we could not properly assess the influence of virus exposure and infection on the long-term antibody response. Furthermore, including additional sampling time points would give us a more comprehensive understanding of the serological responses after each vaccination. For future studies, assessing the immunoglobulin B-cell receptor repertoire and generating monoclonal antibodies from single-sorted B cells would provide valuable insight into the phenotypic, clonal and functional characteristics of the B-cell responses in the persistent high and transient responders.In summary, the long-term antibody response of the persistently high responders differed from the transient responders in three different aspects with higher quantity, quality and functionality of influenza-specific antibodies in the persistent high responders compared to the transient responders. However, repeated annual vaccination with the same H1N1pdm09 antigen in the transient responders increased their H1N1pdm09-specific antibody repertoire over time. Our findings have implications for future development of influenza vaccines and the use of adjuvant.MethodsClinical study designTwo-hundred-and-fifty HCWs were vaccinated with the AS03-adjuvanted monovalent H1N1pdm09 pandemic influenza vaccine (Pandemrix, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Belgium) in 2009 and followed up for 5 years10 (www.Clinicaltrials.gov, NCT01003288). The study was approved by the local ethics committee (REKVest-2012/1772) and the Norwegian Medicines Agency. All participants provided written informed consent before inclusion. Blood samples were collected annually at 12 months intervals, prior to each seasonal influenza vaccination. We retrospectively grouped the HCWs based on their HI titres at 12 months post pandemic vaccination: HCW with HI titres ≥80 as “Persistent high responders” and those with HI titres <40 as “Transient responders”. We further divided the subjects into subgroups based on their vaccination habits after H1N1pdm09 pandemic vaccination: HCW who were annually vaccinated with seasonal vaccine during the subsequent four influenza seasons as “repeated vaccination group” and those who chose not to receive seasonal vaccination as “single vaccination group”. The seasonal influenza vaccines were non-adjuvanted split virus trivalent vaccines containing H1N1pdm09, A/H3N2 and B viruses. From the four groups “Persistent high, repeated vaccination” (n = 8), “Persistent high, single vaccination” (n = 33), “Transient, repeated vaccination” (n = 13) and “Transient, single vaccination” (n = 18), we included all eight individuals from the repeated vaccination group and chose eight individuals from each of other three groups that donated blood in most seasons to include in this study (Fig. 1). We excluded single vaccinated individuals who had a ≥4-fold increase in HI titre between any time points after 12 months post-pandemic H1N1pdm09 vaccination, as a sign of infection between the two time points.HA proteins and influenza virusesWhole H1 HA (trimeric A/California/04/09) and chimeric cH9/1 (trimeric HA protein composed of a H1 stalk domain from A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1) and an H9 head domain from A/guinea fowl/Hong Kong/WF10/99) were generated using the baculovirus expression system21. Recombinant baculoviruses were passaged three times through Sf9 cells, before infection of High-five cells. Purified proteins were analysed using sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and quantified by infra-red spectrometer (DirectDetect®, Milipore Corporation). In addition, we used an influenza HA1 head (A/California/06/2009(H1N1)) hexahistidine-tagged protein (eEnzyme, Cat: IA-01SW-005P). Recombinant cH9/1N3 (for virus neutralization assay (VN)) and A/California/07/2009(H1N1) (for microneutralization assay (MN)) viruses were propagated in embryonated hen’s eggs 10 days after gestation. The A/California/07/2009(H1N1) virus was beta-propiolactone (BPL) inactivated for the HI assay.Hemagglutination inhibition assayThe HI assay measuring antibodies targeting the receptor-binding site of HA was performed as previously described11. In brief, eight HA units of the A/H1N1pdm09 strain (A/California/7/2009) and 0.7% turkey red blood cells were added to 2-fold serial dilutions of sera pre-treated with receptor destroying enzyme (Seiken, Japan). HI titres were defined as the reciprocal of the highest dilution of sera to prevent 50% agglutination. Undetectable HI titres <10 were assigned a value of 5 for calculation purposes.Microneutralization assayThe MN assay was performed as previously described using A/H1N1pdm09 like-virus (X179a)22. Briefly, sera were heat inactivated at 56 °C for 30 min and added in 2-fold serial dilutions to a 96-well plate (Nunc maxisorp™) with virus diluted to 2000 TCID50/ml (50% tissue culture infectious dose). Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were added after 1 h, and plates were further incubated for 16–18 h at 37 °C. Cells were subsequently fixed with hydrogen peroxide, and infected cells were detected by the presence of influenza A virus nucleoprotein. Mouse anti-influenza A virus nucleoprotein antibodies were added to the fixed cells and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C before adding horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody, and detected with a colorimetric substrate (3,30,5,50-3,30,5,50-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB)). MN titres were calculated as the dilution of serum at which 50% of MDCK cells were infected. Undetectable MN titres < 10 were assigned a value of 5 for calculation purposes.Indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)The amount of H1N1pdm09 HA-reactive serum IgG was determined by indirect ELISA as previously described23. In short, 96-well plates (Nunc maxisorp™) were coated with HA protein at a concentration of 1 μg/ml in PBS. The following H1N1pdm09 HA proteins were used: HA1 head (eEnzyme, Cat: IA-01SW-005P), whole HA and a chimeric stalk HA with an irrelevant H9 head domain (generated with baculovirus expression system). The plates were incubated at 4 °C overnight before adding 5-fold serial dilutions of sera. After 1 h incubation at 37 °C, HRP-conjugated monoclonal mouse anti-human IgG (BD Pharmingen™) was added to the HA-bound antibodies and detected by adding TMB substrate (BD Biosciences, USA). The endpoint titre was defined as the highest dilution of serum that gives a detectable measurement (an optical density (OD) ≥ 3 standard deviations above the mean of blank controls).Avidity ELISAThe avidity of the HA-reactive IgG was measured by avidity ELISA23. The procedure is similar to the indirect ELISA, with a few exceptions. Firstly, serum samples were diluted to an optical density (OD) of 0.7 ± 0.3 using an indirect ELISA. After 1 h incubation with sera, the plates were treated with 1.5 M chaotropic agent NaSCN (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA). The avidity index was calculated as proportion of antibody remaining bound after treatment; (ODTreated serum/ODUntreated serum) multiplied by the dilution factor that was used on the serum sample to standardize the amount of IgG.Virus neutralizationVirus neutralization (VN) assay was preformed to detect HA stalk-specific antibodies inhibiting infection in cell culture23. In short, 2000 TCID50/ml of cH9/1N3 virus was incubated with 2-fold serial dilutions of heat-inactivated sera in viral growth medium (Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium with tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone-trypsin, 0.14% bovine serum albumin, 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin and 0.25 μg/ml amphotericin B) for 1 hour at 37 °C. The serum-virus mixture was added to a 96-well plate with confluent MDCK cells for 1 h at 37 °C. After incubation and washing to remove virus and sera, new medium with the same serum dilution was added to the MDCK-cells and incubated for 72 h. Subsequently, 50 μl of the supernatant was transferred to a 96-well V-bottom plate to measure the hemagglutination activity. The VN titre was defined as the highest dilution of serum causing 100% hemagglutination (using 0.7% human O- blood).NK cell-mediated ADCC assayThe ADCC assay for measuring intracellular NK cell IFN-γ and CD107a expression was conducted and analysed with the gating strategy as previously described23. Briefly, 96-well plates were coated overnight at 4 °C with A/California/04/09 HA protein (1 μg/ml) and chimeric cH9/1 HA protein (1 μg/ml). The plates were then washed with PBS and incubated with heat-inactivated sera (prediluted 1:10) for 2 h at 37 °C. Plates were then washed again with PBS and incubated with 105 CD16 176 v NK-92 cells per well (mycoplasma-free, human NK cell line expressing high affinity 176 V variant CD16 receptor) (Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA). As a negative control, NK-92 cells lacking the expression of CD16 were added to an additional well per sample. Cells were incubated with anti-CD107a-AF488 antibody (Biolegend, San Diego, CA, USA), Brefeldin A (5 μg/ml, BD) and monensin (5 μg/ml, BD) for 16 h at 37 °C. After incubation, the cells were stained with LIVE/DEAD Fixable Aqua dead cell staining kit (Invitrogen), anti-CD3-PE CF594 (BD) and anti-CD56-APC (BD) before intracellular staining with anti-IFN-γ-BV-421 (Biolegend). The cells were acquired on BD Fortessa. Data analysis was performed using FlowJo version 10 (treeStar).Statistical analysisThe statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism version 7.0e for Mac, (GraphPad Software, USA). Statistical differences were tested using two-way ANOVA with Tukey test for multiple comparisons. Correlations are presented as Spearman r, alpha = 0.05. A correlation between antibody titres and years post H1N1pdm09 vaccination was identified using linear regression models. A p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant in all analyses.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The data sets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. ReferencesIuliano, A. D. et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet 391, 1285–1300 (2018).Article Google Scholar Paules, C. I. & Fauci, A. S. Influenza vaccines: good, but we can do better. J. Infect. Dis. 219, S1–S4 (2019).Article Google Scholar Chen, Y. Q. et al. Influenza infection in humans induces broadly cross-reactive and protective neuraminidase-reactive antibodies. Cell 173, 417–429.e410 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Ellebedy, A. H. & Ahmed, R. Re-engaging cross-reactive memory B cells: the influenza puzzle. Front. Immunol. 3, 53 (2012).Article Google Scholar Krammer, F. The human antibody response to influenza A virus infection and vaccination. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 19, 383–397 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Estrada, L. D. & Schultz-Cherry, S. Development of a universal influenza vaccine. J. Immunol. 202, 392–398 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Krammer, F. & Palese, P. Influenza virus hemagglutinin stalk-based antibodies and vaccines. Curr. Opin. Virol. 3, 521–530 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar DiLillo, D. J., Palese, P., Wilson, P. C. & Ravetch, J. V. Broadly neutralizing anti-influenza antibodies require Fc receptor engagement for in vivo protection. J. Clin. Investig. 126, 605–610 (2016).Article Google Scholar Morel, S. et al. Adjuvant System AS03 containing α-tocopherol modulates innate immune response and leads to improved adaptive immunity. Vaccine 29, 2461–2473 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Trieu, M.-C. et al. Antibody responses to influenza A/H1N1pdm09 virus after pandemic and seasonal influenza vaccination in healthcare workers: a 5-year follow-up study. Clin. Infect. Dis. 68, 382–392 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Madhun, A. S. et al. An adjuvanted pandemic influenza H1N1 vaccine provides early and long term protection in health care workers. Vaccine 29, 266–273 (2010).Article CAS Google Scholar Hobson, D., Curry, R., Beare, A. & Ward-Gardner, A. The role of serum haemagglutination-inhibiting antibody in protection against challenge infection with influenza A2 and B viruses. Epidemiol. Infect. 70, 767–777 (1972).Article CAS Google Scholar Veguilla, V. et al. Sensitivity and specificity of serologic assays for detection of human infection with 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus in US populations. J. Clin. Microbiol. 49, 2210–2215 (2011).Article Google Scholar Garçon, N., Vaughn, D. W. & Didierlaurent, A. M. Development and evaluation of AS03, an Adjuvant System containing α-tocopherol and squalene in an oil-in-water emulsion. Expert Rev. vaccines 11, 349–366 (2012).Article Google Scholar van der Most, R. G. et al. Long-Term Persistence of Cell-Mediated and Humoral Responses to A (H1N1) pdm09 Influenza Virus Vaccines and the Role of the AS03 Adjuvant System in Adults during Two Randomized Controlled Trials. Clin. Vaccine Immunol. 24, e00553–16 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Galson, J., Trück, J., Kelly, D. & Van der Most, R. Investigating the effect of AS03 adjuvant on the plasma cell repertoire following pH1N1 influenza vaccination. Sci. Rep. 6, 37229 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Turner, J. S. et al. Human germinal centres engage memory and naive B cells after influenza vaccination. Nature 586, 127–132 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Monsalvo, A. C. et al. Severe pandemic 2009 H1N1 influenza disease due to pathogenic immune complexes. Nat. Med. 17, 195–199 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Eidem, S. et al. Persistence and avidity maturation of antibodies to A (H1N1) pdm09 in healthcare workers following repeated annual vaccinations. Vaccine 33, 4146–4154 (2015).Article Google Scholar Trieu, M.-C. et al. Long-term maintenance of the influenza-specific cross-reactive memory CD4+T-cell responses following repeated annual influenza vaccination. J. Infect. Dis. 215, 740–749 (2017).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Margine, I., Palese, P. & Krammer, F. Expression of functional recombinant hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins from the novel H7N9 influenza virus using the baculovirus expression system. J. Vis. Exp. 81, e51112 (2013).Rowe, T. et al. Detection of antibody to avian influenza A (H5N1) virus in human serum by using a combination of serologic assays. J. Clin. Microbiol. 37, 937–943 (1999).Article CAS Google Scholar Tete, S. M. et al. Dissecting the hemagglutinin head and stalk-specific IgG antibody response in healthcare workers following pandemic H1N1 vaccination. npj Vaccines 1, 1–9 (2016).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank all the HCWs at Haukeland University hospital who participated in this study, the staff at the Influenza Centre and the nurses at Bergen Clinical Vaccine Consortium. The study was funded intramurally by the Influenza Centre at the University of Bergen, Norway.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsInfluenza Centre, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, NorwayAnders Madsen, Åsne Jul-Larsen, Mai-Chi Trieu & Rebecca J. CoxDepartment of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USAFlorian KrammerDepartment Microbiology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, NorwayRebecca J. CoxAuthorsAnders MadsenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarÅsne Jul-LarsenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMai-Chi TrieuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFlorian KrammerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRebecca J. CoxView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsR.J.C., M.C.T. and Å.J.-L. designed the study. A.M., Å.J.-L. and M.-C.T. conducted laboratory analysis. F.K. provided baculovirus constructs. A.M. and R.J.C. analysed the data and wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Anders Madsen or Rebecca J. Cox.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationReporting SummaryRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleMadsen, A., Jul-Larsen, Å., Trieu, MC. et al. Persistently high antibody responses after AS03-adjuvanted H1N1pdm09 vaccine: Dissecting the HA specific antibody response. npj Vaccines 6, 45 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-021-00308-5Download citationReceived: 10 October 2020Accepted: 24 February 2021Published: 01 April 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-021-00308-5Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Heterologous SARS-CoV-2 spike protein booster elicits durable and broad antibody responses against the receptor-binding domain Tomohiro TakanoTakashi SatoYoshimasa Takahashi Nature Communications (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Content types Journal Information About the Editors Contact Open Access Calls for Papers Editorial policies Article Processing Charges Journal Metrics About the Partner Publish with us For Authors and Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies npj Vaccines (npj Vaccines) ISSN 2059-0105 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: Microbiology» Illustrating the history of pandemics Careers Open Positions Postdoctoral Training Internships Immigration Services Contact Media Inquiries Intranet Research Databases Cancer Epitope Database and Analysis Resource Database of Immune Cell Epigenomics Immune Epitope Database Immune Space Diseases (A-Z) Licensing Opportunities Publications Research Centers Center for Autoimmunity and Inflammation Center for Cancer Immunotherapy Center for Vaccine Innovation Center for Sex-based Differences in the Immune System Research Services Bioinformatics Clinical Studies Cryo-EM DLAC Flow Cytometry Histopathology Immunometabolism Microscopy & Histology Next Generation Sequencing Legal Affairs & IP Labs Ay Lab Benedict Lab Cheroutre Lab Croft Lab Crotty Lab Einav Lab Grifoni Lab Hogan Lab Kronenberg Lab Myers Lab Peters Lab Rao Lab Reina Lab Saphire Lab Schmiedel Lab Schoenberger Lab Sette Lab Sharma Lab Shresta Lab Vijayanand Lab Weiskopf Lab News Blog Life Without Disease STORIES Magazine News Videos Events Art Competition Life Without Disease Event Series Live from the Lab Scientific Seminars About Us Overview History Institute Facts Our Team Leadership Faculty Emeriti Clinical Associates Board of Directors Scientific Advisory Board Inclusion, Diversity, Equity & Advocacy at LJI Support Overview Ways to Give SPARK Awards Vanguard Giving Society Planned Giving Clinical Studies Advancement Team DONATE Careers Open Positions Postdoctoral Training Postdoctoral Association Internships Contact Media Inquiries Support Illustrating the history of pandemics Madeline McCurry-Schmidt Science Writer March 30, 2021 Share this article: Full size illustration from “How Pandemics End.” By Patricia Pauchnick Life during COVID-19 has had a way of putting past pandemics in context. The Fall 2020 issue of Immune Matters included an original illustration from San Diego artist Patricia Pauchnick. The goal of the piece, which ran alongside the piece “How Pandemics End,” was to show how past pandemics affected real people—and how science today is connected to a long history of infectious disease research. We talked with Pauchnick to learn how she took on this challenge: What kind of background research did you do before sitting down to do the illustrations? Before creating the illustrations for “How Pandemics End,” I looked at a lot of imagery from the Middle Ages, the 16th century, the 1918 influenza pandemic and the SARS epidemic in 2002. Photography existed in 1918 and 2002, so we have a good idea of what personal protective equipment looked like during those time periods. As for the bubonic plague in the 1300–1400s, most of our visual evidence exists in the form of woodcuts and other artwork, so I put together a collection of these images to refer to for the illustrations. I also did a lot of research on plague doctors and found their beaked masks from the 16th–17th century completely fascinating. Most of the visuals we have of plague doctor garb are from artistic renderings, but a 16th century mask does exist in the German Museum for the History of Medicine in Ingolstadt, Germany. Which images through history stood out to you? Detailed shot of plague doctor garb. By Patricia Pauchnick The photographs of the 1918 influenza pandemic were the most striking to me because they seem hauntingly similar to today. In relation to our current moment, the style of masks haven’t changed much, and the fact that we can see photographs from that era makes it seem all the more real and recent. It also wasn’t that long ago in the context of pandemics and human civilization. Looking at these photographs made me feel a certain kinship with these people in history—a strange sense of camaraderie. At the same time I feel grateful to live in a time where scientists understand viruses and vaccines as well as they do. Can you describe the process of actually making the illustration? I started the illustrations with lots of sketching. I made several preliminary drawings and mock-ups of Medieval architecture and dress based on woodcuts from the time period. Also, I made several practice sketches of people wearing 1918-era clothing. It was important to me that the imagery in the illustration be accurate to each time period. Afterwards, I sketched the illustrations on tan paper to represent the look of time-aged paper then painted them with liquid ink and a brush. The parts of the illustration depicting the contemporary era were drawn with colored pencils. What images or scenes from the COVID-19 pandemic do you think will stick with us? A detailed shot of modern scientists. By Patricia Pauchnick The masks, empty grocery store shelves, Zoom grid, PPE-clad healthcare workers, six foot markers, and graphs of “the curve” are images that I think may collectively represent this pandemic as time goes on. However, I think each person living through this moment will also have a set of personal images that will stick with them. We will all remember where we were during mid-March when quarantine began. Those who lost family members will have potent images that they can never shake. Hospitalized patients who recovered from Covid will remember their empty room devoid of visitors. Doctors and healthcare workers will also have their own unique experiences etched into their memories. I hope all of these images—both personal and universal, with all the emotional impact they carry—can help inspire us to move forward into ever-better eras of science and research. Read the article: How Pandemics End Notice: JavaScript is required for this content. Latest News Share this article: Oct 3, 2024 Behind the Science How do herpesviruses evade the immune system? LJI scientists look for new ways to fight a sly family of viruses Read More Sep 24, 2024 Behind the Science An eye on viruses—in San Diego and São Paulo A Q&A with virologist Rúbens Alves, Ph.D. Read More Sep 10, 2024 Behind the Science Postdoctoral Fellow Rachel Helms, Ph.D., awarded 2024 CRI Irvington Postdoctoral Fellowship LJI scientist aims to answer fundamental questions about the development and maintenance of immune cells to prevent cancer Read More Notice: JavaScript is required for this content. Contact Us Careers Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Financial Conflicts of Interest contact@lji.org 9420 Athena Circle La Jolla, CA 92037 Phone: +1 (858) 752-6500 © 2024 La Jolla Institute for Immunology. All rights reserved. LJI is a 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization. Federal Tax ID Number 33-0328688 Location: We use cookies to analyze site traffic and to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. We do not sell data obtained through the use of cookies. By continuing to use this website, you consent to the use of cookies in accordance with our Privacy Policy.OkPrivacy policyGovernment, Sanofi officials unveil $925M in vaccine funding in Toronto | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Government, Sanofi officials unveil $925M in vaccine funding in Toronto | CBC News LoadedTorontoGovernment, Sanofi officials unveil $925M in vaccine funding in TorontoRepresentatives from all three levels of government announced joint funding to expand Canada's vaccine manufacturing capacity in Toronto on Wednesday morning. Sanofi, which has a North York facility, will bolster its vaccine manufacturing work in the cityCBC News · Posted: Mar 31, 2021 8:38 AM EDT | Last Updated: March 31, 2021A new facility in Toronto is expected to be up and running in 2027, and will have the capacity to produce 'enough vaccine doses to support the entire Canadian population,' a federal news release said. (Damian Dovarganes/Associated Press)Social SharingRepresentatives from all three levels of government announced joint funding to expand Canada's vaccine manufacturing capacity in Toronto on Wednesday morning. The federal government will spend $415 million on the partnership with Sanofi Pasteur Ltd. Ontario's government will contribute $55 million to the project. For its part, Sanofi will spend more than $455 million as well as create and maintain 1,225 highly-skilled jobs in Canada. The company will also invest at least $79 million a year to fund Canadian research and development.Canada's ability to manufacture its own vaccines and personal protective equipment has been a hot-button issue throughout the pandemic.Ford, who has been critical of former U.S. president Donald Trump's bid to block shipments of personal protective gear to Canada last year, lauded the announcement on Wednesday."We are now never going to have to rely on any country, any leader, we will be self-sufficient," he said.Ford says 'stay tuned' for announcement Thursday as Ontario's COVID-19 ICU admissions hit new highThe Toronto Star was first to report the multi-million dollar deal with the French pharmaceutical company, which already has a facility in the city where it produces influenza vaccines. "Today is an actual, tangible demonstration that we've all learned lessons from the pandemic and are doing something about it," Toronto Mayor John Tory said.Industry and science minister announces funding for Toronto vaccine facility4 years agoDuration 2:21Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry François-Philippe Champagne announced funding for a vaccine facility in Toronto.The new money will build an "end-to-end influenza vaccine manufacturing facility," said a federal release, and is expected to create some 300 high-quality jobs in Toronto.The new facility is expected to be up and running in 2027, and will have the capacity to produce "enough vaccine doses to support the entire Canadian population within approximately six months of the World Health Organization (WHO) identifying a pandemic influenza strain," the release continued."The investment will enable Sanofi to bulk manufacture Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccine, a flu vaccine approved for people 65 years and older, at its historic Connaught site in Toronto," a provincial release said. All countries should be 'self sufficient': ChampagneChampagne said the pandemic has taught all countries that they need to have domestic vaccine manufacturing capacity."When it comes to the next pandemic flu we should be self sufficient," he said. "If there's one lesson learned from the current COVID pandemic it is that we need to have a strong Canadian biomanufacturing sector."Champagne said that Sanofi chose Canada as the home of its new production and distribution centre after a global search.The CEO of CIFAR, a Canadian-based global research organization, lauded the federal and provincial governments for the announcement.Alan Bernstein, who is also a member of Canada's COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force, said securing further vaccine production capacity, even if it takes years to bring online, is vital."There will be future pandemics and so we we need to be ready next time and we clearly weren't this time," he said."We need to have our own domestic manufacturing capacity so we're not reliant on international supply chains for vaccines."Bernstein said the federal government has made a number of vaccine-related investments in recent months and it needs to think more broadly about how it can link them together to create a comprehensive plan."We now need a coherent, integrated strategy to make sure that these disparate separate investments really synergize with respect to each other," he said.With files from JP Tasker, Shawn Jeffords and The Canadian PressCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories Ford says 'stay tuned' for announcement Thursday as Ontario's COVID-19 ICU admissions hit new highFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowSanofi to build $925-million Toronto flu vaccine facility with joint investment from Ottawa and Ontario - The Globe and Mail Skip to main contentSearchNewslettersWatchlistHomeWatchlistFor YouCanadaWorldBusinessInvestingPersonal FinanceOpinionPoliticsSportsLifeArtsDriveReal EstateLatest in SubscribeDigital accessDigital + home deliverySanofi to build $925-million Toronto flu vaccine facility with joint investment from Ottawa and OntarioSanofi to build $925-million Toronto flu vaccine facility with joint investment from Ottawa and OntarioMarieke WalshSenior political reporterIncludes correctionOttawaPublished March 31, 2021This article was published more than 3 years ago. Some information may no longer be current.ShareBookmarkPlease log in to bookmark this story.Log InCreate Free AccountSanofi will build an “end-to-end” influenza vaccine manufacturing facility in Toronto following an announcement Wednesday that the global pharmaceutical giant, the federal government and the province of Ontario will invest close to a billion dollars in the project.The nearly 50-50 split of public and private investment will ensure that Canada has an operational domestic vaccine manufacturing plant by 2026 that can make enough vaccine for the entire population within about six months of the World Health Organization identifying a pandemic flu strain, the federal government said Wednesday.“When it comes to the next pandemic flu, we should be self-sufficient,” Industry Minister François-Philippe Champagne said.Sanofi will spend $455-million on the facility, while the federal government is pledging $415-million and Ontario will kick in $55-million. The facility will be used to make Sanofi’s Fluzone vaccine, a high-dose quadrivalent influenza shot, which is supplied to Canada, the United States and Europe.Mr. Champagne said negotiations with Sanofi are continuing over a contract to supply the federal government with vaccines during a future pandemic. The federal government did not provide more detail on those talks, but Mr. Champagne told CBC’s Power and Politics that the deal would give Canada priority access in any future pandemic to vaccines developed at the site .“That’s the basis of the investment that we’ve been making, obviously, is the fact that they can serve first the domestic market,” Mr. Champagne said. He also said the company would be able to make 76 million shots for Canada within six months.While the facility is being made with a focus on influenza pandemics, Vincent Hignot, a senior vice-president at Sanofi, said the new site will be able to complete critical manufacturing stages for other types of vaccines that target other diseases.“The formulation, filling, inspection and packaging capacity are also very important and these steps are common for all vaccines. If you are talking about mRNA or whatever vaccines, it will be suitable as well,” Mr. Hignot said. Those are important parts of the manufacturing process that were lacking in Canada and worldwide during the COVID-19 pandemic, he said.“With this project, Canada will have such capacities in the future,” Mr. Hignot said.Sanofi’s Toronto manufacturing site already makes vaccines for diseases such as polio and tetanus. The company is also developing a COVID-19 vaccine, but poor results in their first Phase 1/2 clinical trial prompted them to launch a new trial.Sanofi will also invest $79-million annually for eight years in research and development work in Canada, Mr. Champagne said. The company did not provide more details on that part of the announcement.At a news conference in Toronto, several company and government representatives highlighted the need for Canada to be better prepared for any future pandemic as the country grapples with a third wave of the COVID-19 pandemic.In Ontario, hospitals reported the highest number of COVID-19 patients in critical care since the start of the pandemic. Despite that, the province had still planned to loosen restrictions, but Premier Doug Ford said an announcement from his government was expected on Thursday.The federal and provincial government have frequently been at loggerheads in the past few months, with Mr. Ford criticizing the federal government for a sluggish start to the vaccine rollout. On Tuesday, he said the province still didn’t have predictability in supplies or deliveries, which he argued was further challenging Ontario’s vaccination campaign.Mr. Ford and federal ministers struck a friendly tone at the joint news conference, with the Premier saying he’s not “taking the bait” on a question about his government’s frustrations over federal vaccine procurement and critiques from federal Liberal MPs about the amount of doses the province has held back in storage for future vaccination appointments.“Sure, we’ll have bumps in the road,” Mr. Ford said. “We’ll have a few differences – but what family doesn’t?”Editor’s note: An earlier version incorrectly said Ontario was contributing $50-million to the project. Know what is happening in the halls of power with the day’s top political headlines and commentary as selected by Globe editors (subscribers only). Sign up today.Please enable JavaScript to view this content.Report an editorial errorReport a technical issueEditorial code of conductFollow related authors and topicsMarieke WalshFlu, COVID, RSV and ColdsTorontoAuthors and topics you follow will be added to your personal news feed in Following.Interact with The GlobeTerms & ConditionsCommunity GuidelinesPrivacy PolicyDisclaimerSkip footer navigationSubscribeDigital + Home DeliveryDigital AccessGlobe2GoThe New York TimesGlobe Email NewslettersGift SubscriptionBusiness servicesAdvertise with UsGroup SubscriptionsGlobe CampusDataStoreGlobe Event CentreLeadership InstituteContact usAddress and Phone NumberStandards EditorStaffSecureDropSubmit an articleReader servicesAccount SettingsTechnical Support & FAQsSubscriptionsManage my privacy preferencesManage my advertising preferencesMember BenefitsAbout usCompany InformationWork at The GlobeAccessibilityEditorial Code of ConductSustainabilityLicensing & PermissionsElection Advertising RegistryModern Slavery ReportSubscribeDigital + Home DeliveryDigital AccessGlobe2GoThe New York TimesGlobe Email NewslettersGift SubscriptionBusiness servicesAdvertise with UsGroup SubscriptionsGlobe CampusDataStoreGlobe Event CentreLeadership InstituteContact usAddress and Phone NumberStandards EditorStaffSecureDropSubmit an articleReader servicesAccount SettingsTechnical Support & FAQsSubscriptionsManage my privacy preferencesManage my advertising preferencesMember BenefitsAbout usCompany InformationWork at The GlobeAccessibilityEditorial Code of ConductSustainabilityLicensing & PermissionsElection Advertising RegistryModern Slavery ReportReturn to start of footer navigation© Copyright 2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All rights reserved.351 King Street East, Suite 1600, Toronto, ON Canada, M5A 0N1Andrew Saunders, President and CEOSK Bioscience to halt flu vaccine production temporarily < Bio < Article - KBR 주요서비스 바로가기 본문 바로가기 매체정보 바로가기 로그인 바로가기 기사검색 바로가기 전체서비스 바로가기 상단영역 UPDATE : 2024-11-11 13:34 (Mon) Home Log in Join 전체메뉴 기사검색 검색 본문영역 이전 기사보기 다음 기사보기 SK Bioscience to halt flu vaccine production temporarily 바로가기 복사하기 본문 글씨 줄이기 본문 글씨 키우기 스크롤 이동 상태바 현재위치 Home Bio SK Bioscience to halt flu vaccine production temporarily 기자명 Kim Chan-hyuk Published 2021.03.30 11:35 바로가기 복사하기 본문 글씨 줄이기 본문 글씨 키우기 SNS 기사보내기 Facebook(으)로 기사보내기 Twitter(으)로 기사보내기 Kakaostory(으)로 기사보내기 Copy url(으)로 기사보내기 이메일(으)로 기사보내기 다른 공유 찾기 기사스크랩하기 I share this article Facebook(으)로 기사보내기 Twitter(으)로 기사보내기 Kakaostory(으)로 기사보내기 Copy url(으)로 기사보내기 닫기 SK Bioscience said it would temporarily discontinue production of SKYCellflu, an influenza vaccine, to focus on manufacturing Covid-19 vaccines. Industry sources said Monday that SK Bioscience would not manufacture the flu vaccine SKYCellflu this year. The company said the move was to allocate its full output capacity to manufacturing Covid-19 vaccines at its vaccine plant, L House, in Andong, North Gyeongsang Province. SKYCellflu is a cell-culture influenza vaccine developed by SK Bioscience. The vaccine comes in two types – trivalent and quadrivalent. The quadrivalent SKYCellflu obtained the WHO’s prequalification (PQ) certification. Last year, SK Bioscience produced about 9.5 million doses of SKYCellflu. “Our annual output capacity is limited. We thought Covid-19 vaccines were more urgent than flu vaccines, so we made such a decision,” an official at SK Bioscience said. The halt of the SKYCellflu manufacturing will not affect the company’s profitability, he added. According to IQVIA data, sales of the quadrivalent SKYCellflu recorded 63.8 billion won ($56.3 million), and the trivalent SKYCellflu, about 100 million won, in 2020. The SK Bioscience official declined to disclose the annual output target this year, citing confidentiality in a CMO (contract manufacturing organization) agreement with a client firm. A lower incidence of flu with better personal hygiene amid the pandemic must have affected the company’s decision to suspend flu vaccine production, observers said. According to data released by Rep. Shin Hyun-young of the Democratic Party in December, the incidence of influenza plunged to one-fifth in 2020, compared to a year earlier. During the 48th week of 2020, influenza-like illness (ILI) reported 2.6 cases per 1,000 outpatients, which was one-fifth of 12.7 reported during the same period in 2019, and one-eighth of 19.2 in 2018. Industry watchers said an abrupt halt of manufacturing SKYCellflu might disrupt the national immunization program. However, SK Bioscience said the company had already consulted a decrease of the flu vaccine supply with the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KCDA). SK Bioscience is making AstraZeneca’s Covid-19 vaccine AZD1222 and Novavax’s vaccine NVX-CoV2373. Last year, the company won a CMO deal to manufacture AstraZeneca's undiluted solution, then the investigational Covid-19 vaccine AZD1222. Also, the company clinched a CDMO agreement with Novavax for the antigen of the Covid-19 vaccine candidate NVX-CoV2373 and licensed in the antigen manufacturing technology. The government said its purchase of AstraZeneca vaccines would cover 10 million people and Novavx vaccines for 20 million. (Caption) SK Bioscience will temporarily stop producing SKYCellflu, an influenza vaccine, to focus on manufacturing Covid-19 vaccines. tweet Kim Chan-hyuk kch@docdocdoc.co.kr See Other Articles Copyright © KBR Unauthorized reproduction, redistribution prohibited News That You Haven't Seen Falls and trips, primary reasons for older adults’ injuries, while youngsters must be careful about electric scooters Mediwhale wins 1st place in MICCAI’s medical AI competition 'Stem cell therapy shows potential to improve bladder function in diabetic patients' [Interview] ‘Pediatric care will revive, so don't give up and stay with us’ Potential new cure found for treating glioblastoma resistant to immunotherapy Huons to acquire PanGen Biotech to boost biopharma R&D, CDMO biz Philips Korea to launch digital pathology reference site at Seoul Clinical Laboratories Falls and trips, primary reasons for older adults’ injuries, while youngsters must be careful about electric scooters Comments Log In 작성자 비밀번호 댓글 내용입력 0 / 400 Submit 댓글 정렬 Newest Recommended Top Comments BEST Comments BEST Comments It is automatically exposed by adding up the number of replies and recommendations. 닫기 More Delete comments Deleted comments cannot be recovered. Do you still want to delete it? Password Delete 닫기 Modify the comments You can modify comments only within 1 minute after writing. Text / 400 Password Modify 닫기 My comment collection 닫기 Important News Korean ECMO experts criticize 'punitive cuts' in reimbursement Novartis’ Entresto reduces mortality and hospitalization risks in Korean patients, PARADE-HF study shows Mounjaro praised as ‘super GLP-1,’ sparking interest in Korean launch, insurance coverage 'Healthy obesity' may be linked to lower Alzheimer's risk: Korean study [SITC 2024] LigaChem Biosciences presents STING agonist preclinical data [SITC 2024] GI Innovation’s therapies aim to enhance CAR-T durability and overcome tumor immune suppression Recent News Korean ECMO experts criticize 'punitive cuts' in reimbursement Novartis’ Entresto reduces mortality and hospitalization risks in Korean patients, PARADE-HF study shows Mounjaro praised as ‘super GLP-1,’ sparking interest in Korean launch, insurance coverage 'Healthy obesity' may be linked to lower Alzheimer's risk: Korean study [SITC 2024] LigaChem Biosciences presents STING agonist preclinical data Photo News Korean ECMO experts criticize 'punitive cuts' in reimbursement Novartis’ Entresto reduces mortality and hospitalization risks in Korean patients, PARADE-HF study shows Mounjaro praised as ‘super GLP-1,’ sparking interest in Korean launch, insurance coverage 'Healthy obesity' may be linked to lower Alzheimer's risk: Korean study Most Viewed 1 Falls and trips, primary reasons for older adults’ injuries, while youngsters must be careful about electric scooters 2 Mediwhale wins 1st place in MICCAI’s medical AI competition 3 'Stem cell therapy shows potential to improve bladder function in diabetic patients' 4 [Interview] ‘Pediatric care will revive, so don't give up and stay with us’ 5 Potential new cure found for treating glioblastoma resistant to immunotherapy 6 Huons to acquire PanGen Biotech to boost biopharma R&D, CDMO biz 7 Philips Korea to launch digital pathology reference site at Seoul Clinical Laboratories 8 Hanmi Pharm boosts R&D spending amid Q3 profit decline and global headwinds 하단영역 Latest Korean ECMO experts criticize 'punitive cuts' in reimbursement Novartis’ Entresto reduces mortality and hospitalization risks in Korean patients, PARADE-HF study shows Mounjaro praised as ‘super GLP-1,’ sparking interest in Korean launch, insurance coverage 'Healthy obesity' may be linked to lower Alzheimer's risk: Korean study [SITC 2024] LigaChem Biosciences presents STING agonist preclinical data [SITC 2024] GI Innovation’s therapies aim to enhance CAR-T durability and overcome tumor immune suppression [Interview] Merck's partnership with KAIST powers Korea's vision for global leadership in life sciences Alteogen inks $300 mil. deal with Daiichi Sankyo to develop SC version of Enhertu Pfizer's AML drug denied insurance coverage; Roche, Lilly face conditional reimbursement for MS and ulcerative colitis treatments Genolution launches state-supported R&D project to develop automated exosome platform for cancer diagnostics Important Neurophet teams up with AriBio to develop next-generation Alzheimer's diagnostic platform facebook twitter rss 하단메뉴 About KBR Tip off Advertising Site Feedback Privacy Policy Adolescent Protection Policy E-mail address privacy 매체정보 The Korean Doctors’ Weekly Co., Ltd 76-1, Dongmak-ro, Mapo-gu, Seoul, Korea Tel : 82-2-2646-0852 Fax : 82-2-703-3916 Title : KBR Online newspaper registration number : Seoul 아 04285 Date of registration : December 19, 2016 Publishing date : February 22, 2017 CEO & Publisher : Yang Kyung-cheol Managing Editor : Kim Yoon-mi Juvenile Protection Manager: Lim Woong Copyright © KBR. All rights reserved. 위로 전체메뉴 All Hospital Pharma Bio All Korea‘s Bio Industry Device/ICT Policy People Life science Special All Innovation for Survival Korea’s medical culture series Korea’s New Candidate Drug Watch List Special Series in Celebration of KBR's 1st Anniversary Interview with foreign envoys Special Series in Celebration of KBR’s 2nd Anniversary Interview with global pharma Special Series in Celebration of KBR’s 3rd Anniversary ASCO 2020 Highlights Special Series in Celebration of KBR’s 4th Anniversary KBR Covering RSNA 2021 Special Series in Celebration of KBR’s 5th Anniversary Special Report on EULAR 2022 [Top K-Pharma Analysis] BIO 2023 Opinion All Reporter’s Notebook Journalist’s Column Congratulatory Remarks Sponsored 전체메뉴닫기Funeral director 'can't even fathom' how many services held during the Spanish flu | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Funeral director 'can't even fathom' how many services held during the Spanish flu | CBC News LoadedManitobaFuneral director 'can't even fathom' how many services held during the Spanish fluThis year has been a time of reflection for Kevin Sweryd, director of Bardal Funeral Home, the oldest privately-owned funeral home in Winnipeg. The business has been through several difficult seasons of influenza, but to date, the worst remains the 1918 Spanish flu. Historical ledgers show Bardal Funeral Home went from an average of 5 funerals a week to 45Stephanie Cram · CBC News · Posted: Apr 03, 2021 7:00 AM EDT | Last Updated: April 3, 2021Bardal Funeral Home is Winnipeg's oldest privately owned funeral home. It has been through several pandemics, including the Spanish flu. (Supplied by Bardal Funeral Home)Social SharingThe last year has been difficult for the funeral industry — not because they've seen a spike in business, but because public health orders have restricted how people can celebrate the lives of those who have died."It's not necessarily the ceremony or a minister or a priest standing in front of a microphone pronouncing words that make a … funeral important, it's what happens after," said Kevin Sweryd, director of Bardal Funeral Home. "It's during the coffee service, when everybody's laughing."Last month, the province made changes to pandemic restrictions, which included the maximum capacity for funerals to increase from 10 people to 25. Even with that change, Sweryd says he can't accommodate coffee service. This year has been a time of reflection for Sweryd, whose funeral home has been around since 1894, and is the oldest privately-owned funeral home in Winnipeg. The business has been through several difficult seasons of influenza, but to date, the worst remains the 1918 Spanish flu. Sweryd has the records to prove it — a collection of very old ledger books that lay out a timeline of all the funerals held at the business on Sherbrook street. Kevin Sweryd, Funeral Director, Bardal Funeral Home, shows ledger of funerals held during the 1918 Spanish flu. (Jeff Stapleton/CBC)"We still have all our records going back to 1894. Now, the records are not great, but they do … paint a picture and they do tell a story." said Sweryd. The story it told of the Bardal funeral home, Sweryd said, is "it looked a lot busier than it normally was." Sweryd dug up ledgers from the early 1900s, and says that typically one book would cover two years of funerals. The ledger which captured the year the Spanish flu arrived in Winnipeg only covered eight months — from August 1918 to March 1919. Latest changes to Manitoba COVID-19 restrictions met by both relief and disappointmentA tale of two pandemic curves: COVID-19 and the 1918 flu in WinnipegDuring the Spanish flu, Bardal Funeral Home went from holding five funerals a week, on average, to 45 funerals a week. "I know what it's like to do seven funerals in a week … [but] to try and accommodate 45 in a week, and then have to do that for half a year, must have been intense and exhausting. I can't even fathom it," said Sweryd. "I think it just would have been a lot of long days, a lot of hard work and a lot of heartbroken families." In the early 1900s, Bardal Funeral Home created a makeshift motorized hearse by mounting a carriage to a Model T truck. Even with the new hearse, current director Kevin Sweryd doesn't know how the funeral home could handle the spike in funerals from the Spanish flu. (Supplied by Bardal Funeral Home)Looking through the ledger for the year of the Spanish flu, Sweryd says that at first, many deaths were noted as caused by illnesses that impact the lungs, like tuberculosis, bronchitis and pneumonia."Then all of a sudden you start seeing page after page … [of] exclusively influenza deaths, and then by 1919, they stopped calling it influenza and started calling it Spanish influenza," said Sweryd. Spanish flu was 'off the charts' When asked what comparisons he can draw from the number of funerals held during the Spanish flu and today's pandemic, Sweryd said his funeral home hasn't seen a change in how many funerals they hold. "I'm not trying to discount the real danger … the current pandemic presents, because there's a lot of data that shows that for people that are vulnerable, this is very dangerous," said Sweryd. "But we're still doing the average number of funerals that we typically have done, and if I compare this year to the last five years, I don't see a huge difference … so what was happening in the Spanish flu was off the charts compared to what's happening now." Sweryd attributes this difference to improved global communication of the virus and advances in medicine, noting that the Spanish flu occurred before the invention of ventilators and antiviral drugs. Page after page of deaths caused by influenza can be found in Bardal Funeral Home's records from the time of the 1918 Spanish flu. The name has been blurred from this record. (Jeff Stapleton/CBC)While official numbers on excess mortality caused by COVID-19 in 2020 haven't been finalized, estimates released by Statistics Canada do appear to line up with Sweryd's observations. There were weeks throughout the year where the number of deaths in Manitoba exceeded estimates, but it wasn't until November that there was a noticeable trend of excess mortality, according to Statistics Canada. Higher estimated rates of excess mortality were noted in Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia.Still, the pandemic has affected the type of work Sweryd is able to do."I haven't had a coffee service in a year … I haven't heard the laughter, and that is one of the things that really struck me in the last year," he said."One of my highest badges of honour as a funeral director is when a family leaves and says, 'I really thought this was going to be so hard, but you've made it easy, I didn't expect to laugh so much making arrangements for my mother or my father.'" CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowHighly pathogenic strain of bird flu detected at Staffordshire farm | Guernsey Press Local news you can trustNewsSportWeatherServicesPodcastsBusinessPoliticsNews from the IslandsTravelEducationVoicesCoronavirusCampaignsFeaturesMore CloseNewsSportWeatherServicesPodcastsJobsPropertyMotoringBiSiFamily NoticesPicture StorePride Of GuernseyDigital EditionsNewslettersHighly pathogenic strain of bird flu detected at Staffordshire farmHuman cases of H5N8 infection were reported to the World Health Organisation for the first time in February this year, PHE said.Published Mar 29, 2021Last updated Mar 29, 2021A highly pathogenic strain of bird flu has been detected at a chicken farm in east Staffordshire.The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) said avian influenza H5N8 had been confirmed in broiler chickens at the premises, located north of Uttoxeter.It was determined to be a highly pathogenic strain – meaning it leads to more severe disease in birds – on Monday.Restrictions to limit the spread of the disease are now in place within a 10km radius around the site.A 3km protection zone – which appears to centre around the village of Ellastone – along with a wider 10km surveillance zone is in place to restrict the movement of poultry.Human cases of H5N8 infection were reported to the World Health Organisation for the first time in February this year, Public Health England (PHE) said.Those seven cases all related to poultry workers in Russia.However, the risk of infection to the UK public is “low” and anyone exposed to a confirmed H5N8 case will receive advice from a local health protection team, PHE added.Defra said all birds on the infected farm will be humanely culled.The local authority’s trading standards manager Stephanie Young added: “Anyone with poultry in Staffordshire should be vigilant and look out for signs of avian influenza and maintain biosecurity measures.“If anyone has any concerns or needs further information, they should contact us straight away.”Meanwhile, a low pathogenic strain of bird flu has been found at a turkey breeding farm in Cheshire.A 1km “restricted zone” is in place around the village of Tarporley to limit the disease’s spread and all birds on the infected premises will be culled, Defra said.Sorry, we are not accepting comments on this article.Similar storiesWhat the papers say – November 11UK News|1 hour agoGovernment says it will not allow events to be ‘hijacked’ by antisemitismUK News|2 hours agoStarmer and Macron to discuss Ukraine ahead of Armistice commemorationsUK News|5 hours agoSFA chief tells of emergency eyecare surgery before key Euros matchUK News|5 hours agoDrivers handed £4.1m Dartford Crossing fines by mistakeUK News|5 hours agoMost popular1Rotten eggs put in appeal collection binNews|17 hours agoFollow us onGet involvedSend Us Your NewsSubscribe to the Guernsey PressUseful linksAdvertise with usMaking a complaintGuernsey AirportGuernsey HarboursAbout the websiteAbout usContact usTerms of website usePrivacy PolicyAcceptable Use PolicyHomepageFollow us onTwitterFacebook Back to top© 2024 Guernsey Press. All rights reserved.Foods To Eat When You Have Fever: 10 Immunity-Boosters To Try XProduct GuideSign inPregnancy Due date calculatorI'm pregnantTrying To ConceiveLabourAfter birthBaby lossParenting Parent's GuideRelationship & SexChild NewbornBabyToddlerPre-SchoolerKidPre-Teen & TeenFeeding & Nutrition Diseases-InjuriesBreastfeeding & FormulaMeal PlannerHealthAllergies & ConditionsVaccinationsEducation Pre-SchoolPrimary SchoolSecondary SchoolPrimary School DirectoryLifestyle MoneyTravel & LeisureFashionHomeFitnessContests & promotionsEventsHoliday HubAptamil ImmunityIntelligenceTAP RecommendsShoppingPress ReleasesProject SidekicksCommunityAdvertise With UsContact UsVIPHealth10 Immunity-boosting Foods To Help Your Child Fight Influenza And Fever5 min readMums, be careful of another menace lurking around-Influenza A.While the wrath of coronavirus continues to unleash its fury, you must be careful of another menace lurking around-Influenza A. It is a viral infection that attacks the respiratory system and may be accompanied with fever-like symptoms. The good news is that you can prevent this disease from affecting your child’s health by including immunity-boosting foods to eat when you have fever. Typically, these immunity-boosters are rich in nutrients and high in antioxidants; and help improve resistance and boost the immune system to help fight the onslaught of viruses. The best part is that most of these items are readily available in your kitchen. 10 Immunity-boosting Foods To Fight Fever Photo Courtesy: Unsplash Yoghurt Not only is yoghurt packed with vitamins and protein, but it’s also a source of lactobacillus, a probiotic, that helps to fight infection and boost your immunity. Probiotics in yoghurt inhibit a range of pathogenic bacteria and yeasts in the gut. They also show potential in preventing allergies such as eczema, particularly in children. Almond Photo Courtesy: Unsplash Almonds are key to a healthy immune system and it has vitamin E, which acts as an antioxidant to support pulmonary immune function. Vitamin E is also known to offer protection against infections caused by viruses and bacteria. They are a source of 15 nutrients such as magnesium, protein, riboflavin, zinc, and others. Plus, they are a convenient snack that can be eaten anywhere, any time of the day. Broccoli Photo Courtesy: Unsplash Packed with vitamins A, C, and E, and fibre and many other antioxidants, broccoli is one of the healthiest vegetables. It is supercharged with minerals as well and can be included in a variety of dishes for kids. You can eat it steamed, or cooked in spices or add it to rice. Spinach Photo Courtesy: Unsplash This green leafy vegetable is packed with vitamin C and other antioxidants, which increases the infection-fighting ability of our immune systems. Remember that spinach needs to be cooked a little so that all the nutrients remain intact. If your kid isn’t particularly fond of spinach, you can even make cutlets or mis it with rice and/or in dim-sums. Garlic Photo Courtesy: Unsplash Garlicâs immune-boosting properties seem to come from a heavy concentration of sulfur-containing compounds, such as allicin. Studies have shown that garlic reduces the risk of catching infections and also reduces the severity of symptoms. Apples Photo Courtesy: Unsplash They don’t say “An apple a day keeps the doctor away” for no reason! Fruits like apples are known to create a stronger immune system, which in turn can decrease the risk of diseases like the flu. Apple skins contain quercetin, a type of plant pigment flavonoid that helps boost your immune system. Plus, you can use it in sweet as well as in savoury dishes. Mushroom Photo Courtesy: Unsplash Experts affirm that the fungus helps to speed up the reproduction and activity of white blood cells, increasing the body’s immunity. Some mushrooms have more potassium than a banana. They are also an excellent source of iron, fibre and one of the best plant sources of vitamin D you can eat. So think not, and add mushrooms to your daily diet! Beef Photo Courtesy: Unsplash It is powerful preventive food for influenza A, because it contains zinc that promotes the production of white blood cells in the blood. It also prevents toxins and harmful bacteria from entering the body. A child, therefore, should eat beef to keep the body warm and effectively prevent the flu. Chicken soup Photo courtesy: Unsplash When you are sick and down with a sore throat or mild fever, sometimes all you may want is just a bowl of plain chicken soup. It is extremely beneficial which it comes to boosting immunity and may help lower inflammation, which could improve cold-like symptoms. Poultry, such as chicken and turkey are also high in vitamin B-6, making them crucial to be included in your child’s diet, at least once or twice a week. Shell Fish Photo Credits: Unsplash Shellfish is packed with zinc and our bodies require an adequate amount of it so that our immune cells can function as intended. Some varieties of shellfish that are high in zinc include crab, lobsters and oysters. However, avoid shellfish if your child develops allergies after consuming them. Disclaimer: All of these foods should be consumed in moderation. When dealing with a serious illness or diagnosis, always consult your doctor to determine the best treatment plan for you. Aptamil Gold+ Growing Up Milk Aptamil Gold+ Growing Up Milk supports your childâs immunity+ and brain developmentâ¦. The perfect Growing Up Milk for your child to play their way to a stronger, smarter future. Aptamil Gold+ Growing Up Milk with Immuno-nutrients+ for children aged between 1 and 3 years old is formulated with the highestâ DHA as compared to other growing up milk in Singapore and imported from New Zealand. This helps to support your child brain development to learn many wonderful and interesting things. Supporting your childâs immunity and brain development is a great way to help your child to be prepared for the ever-changing and competitive environment in Singapore, and yes, the preparation starts as early as possible. As for you, you can be reassured that with Aptamil Gold+ Growing Up Milk, you are providing the very best for your child! Click here to find out more and sign up for a free^ 900g Aptamil Gold+ Growing Up Milk Stage 3 sample. To learn more about the Aptamil advantage, visit their website at https://www.aptaadvantage.com.sg/products.html Here at theAsianparent Singapore, it’s important for us to give information that is correct, significant, and timely. But this doesn’t serve as an alternative for medical advice or medical treatment. theAsianparent Singapore is not responsible for those that would choose to drink medicines based on information from our website. If you have any doubts, we recommend consulting your doctor for clearer information. Got a parenting concern? Read articles or ask away and get instant answers on our app. Download theAsianparent Community on iOS or Android now!Read Full ArticleWritten bySarmistha NeogyHome/Health/10 Immunity-boosting Foods To Help Your Child Fight Influenza And FeverfoodApplespinachVitamin Eviral infectionimmunityimmunity boosting foodshell fishzincInfluenza AB-6Foods to Eat When You Have FeverShare: Recommended StoriesLiving with Type 1 Diabetes: Tips for Parents and AdultsThis Mom's Mastectomy Journey Inspires Advocacy & Awareness in Breast Cancer CommunityDiabetes Medication Guide: Types, Benefits, and Side EffectsLoad more articlesRecommended StoriesLiving with Type 1 Diabetes: Tips for Parents and AdultsThis Mom's Mastectomy Journey Inspires Advocacy & Awareness in Breast Cancer CommunityDiabetes Medication Guide: Types, Benefits, and Side EffectsGet advice on your pregnancy and growing baby. Sign up for our newsletterGOPregnancyFamily OccasionsLifestyleNormal DeliveryAges & StagesTrying To ConceiveNewsTAP CommunityAdvertise With UsContact UsBecome a ContributorMums around the world Singapore Thailand Indonesia Philippines Malaysia Sri Lanka India Vietnam Australia Japan Nigeria KenyaÂ© Copyright theAsianparent 2024. All rights reservedAbout Us|Privacy Policy|Terms of Use |Sitemap HTMLToolsArticlesFeedPollWe use cookies to ensure you get the best experience. Learn MoreOk, Got itWe use cookies to ensure you get the best experience. Learn MoreOk, Got it