Effective inactivated influenza vaccine for the elderly using a single-stranded RNA-based adjuvant | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Effective inactivated influenza vaccine for the elderly using a single-stranded RNA-based adjuvant Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 07 June 2021 Effective inactivated influenza vaccine for the elderly using a single-stranded RNA-based adjuvant Yoo-Jin Bang1,2 na1, So-Hee Hong1,2 na1, Hyo-Jung Park1,2 na1, Hye Won Kwak1,2, Yu-Sun Lee1,2, Jae-Yong Kim1,2, Hyeong-Jun Park1,2, Seo-Hyeon Bae1,2, Hye-Jung Kim1, Yun-Hee Kim3, Hae Li Ko4, Sang-In Park4, Hun Kim3, Gyeongjoo Park5, Man-Seong Park6, Jun Chang5 & …Jae-Hwan Nam1,2 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 11, Article number: 11981 (2021) Cite this article 2358 Accesses 7 Citations 2 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects ImmunologyInfectious diseasesVaccines AbstractThere is an unmet need for new influenza vaccine strategies that compensate for impaired vaccine responses in elderly individuals. Here, we evaluated the effectiveness of a single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) as an adjuvant to enhance the efficacy of inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) in mouse models. Immunization with the ssRNA along with IIV reduced viral titers as well as pathological and inflammatory scores in the lungs after influenza challenge in aged mice. ssRNA induced balanced Th1/Th2 responses with an increase in IgA titers. Moreover, the ssRNA adjuvant markedly increased the frequency of influenza HA-specific T cells and IFN-γ production along with the expression of genes related to innate and adaptive immune systems that could overcome immunosenescence in aged mice. Our findings indicate that ssRNA is an efficient vaccine adjuvant that boosts cellular and humoral immunity in aged mice, demonstrating its potential as a novel adjuvant for currently available influenza virus vaccines for elderly individuals. Similar content being viewed by others Enhancing the protection of influenza virus vaccines with BECC TLR4 adjuvant in aged mice Article Open access 13 January 2023 Immunogenicity of standard, high-dose, MF59-adjuvanted, and recombinant-HA seasonal influenza vaccination in older adults Article Open access 16 February 2021 Multicomponent intranasal adjuvant for mucosal and durable systemic SARS-CoV-2 immunity in young and aged mice Article Open access 29 June 2023 IntroductionInfluenza caused by influenza viruses A and B is a common infectious respiratory disease occurring in the human population. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), influenza virus infects 2–10% of the world’s population and causes 250,000–500,000 deaths annually1,2. Similar to the cases observed in other respiratory diseases, immunocompromised individuals, such as the elderly, children, and those with other chronic illnesses, are particularly vulnerable to influenza-associated mortality. It was reported that approximately 70–85% of the deaths due to flu and 50–70% of the flu-associated hospitalization cases occurred in patients older than 65 years3. Therefore, influenza is not a negligible disease in the elderly.Although vaccination is the most efficacious method to prevent the development of infectious diseases, the responsiveness of influenza vaccine is markedly reduced in elderly individuals owing to the occurrence of immunological aging4,5. One of the major characteristics of immunological aging is the occurrence of immunosenescence, a complex process that affects both innate and adaptive immune responses. In addition to decreased numbers of circulating monocytes and dendritic cells, reduced phagocytic activity and impaired antigen presentation are associated with aging. T and B cells are also markedly affected by aging6,7. The most significant change within the aging T cell population is the contraction of naïve T cells due to thymic atrophy. Additionally, impaired T cell activation, effector T cell failure, and long-lived memory T cell generation have been associated with aging8,9. These defects in T cells have been associated with decreases in co-stimulatory molecule expression and cytokine production. A similar phenomenon is also observed in B cells. Decreased generation of naïve B cells from the bone marrow results in the contraction of B cell repertoires10. Consequently, this reduction restricts the number of B cell clones that can respond to new antigens11. Moreover, aged memory B cells exhibit reduced ability to differentiate into antibody-secreting cells as well as decreased antigen-specific antibody production and germinal center formation12.Another important immunological feature that accompanies aging is persistent, sterile, and low-grade inflammation, also called inflammaging13. Higher levels of several pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and C-reactive protein were detected both within the tissue microenvironments and in blood of aged individuals13. This phenomenon is regarded as an obstacle for the induction of proper immune responses to pathogens or vaccines because it impedes the organism’s ability to recognize stimuli. Thus, aged individuals may need higher threshold levels to activate immune cells than that of young individuals14,15.An adjuvant is a substance that improves the immunogenicity of vaccines. Although a few adjuvants, such as aluminum salt, MF59, and AS03, are currently used in influenza vaccines to enhance immune responses, they do not induce sufficient Th1/2 responses16,17. Moreover, their efficacy is suboptimal, especially in the elderly. Only 30–40% of individuals over 65 years of age experience influenza vaccine-induced immunogenicity, despite the vaccine and circulating virus being antigenically matched5,18. In contrast, the efficacy of vaccine ranges between 70 and 90% in individuals under 65 years. Therefore, it is of utmost interest to explore a new influenza vaccine strategy that induces protective responses and overcomes immunological aging.We previously developed a novel single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) platform that originated from cricket paralysis virus (CrPV) internal ribosome entry sites (IRES). We showed that the ssRNA could act as an effective adjuvant when formulated with an inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) or MERS-CoV spike protein vaccine in young mice19,20. Moreover, the ssRNA adjuvant bestowed cross-protection against heterologous influenza virus20. In the present study, we extended our previous research and tested whether an ssRNA adjuvant could potentially enhance the efficacy of IIV in elderly through conduction of experiments using aged mice.ResultsIIV formulated with ssRNA induces a balanced IgG1/IgG2a immune response and elicits the production of higher neutralizing antibody titers in young and aged miceTo assess the adjuvant effect of ssRNA on humoral responses, young (6-week-old) and aged (21-month-old) mice were subjected to intramuscular vaccination with IIV formulated with or without ssRNA (20 μg), and in a prime/boost schedule, their blood samples were collected as described in Fig. 1a. Interestingly, ssRNA adjuvant considerably increased the humoral response in both young and aged mice. IIV alone induced substantial levels of IgG1 (average O.D. value: 1.6 ± 0.4) and IgG2a (O.D. value: 0.75 ± 0.2) in young mice (G2), but it rarely induced the production of IgG1 (O.D. value: 0.3 ± 0.2) and IgG2a (OD value: 0.15 ± 0.12) antibodies in aged mice (G5), even 2 weeks after the boost schedule (Fig. 1b). However, IIV formulated with ssRNA-immunized aged mice (G6) showed increases in IgG1 (O.D. value: 0.38 ± 0.21) and IgG2a (OD value: 0.78 ± 0.28) antibodies 2 weeks after the prime schedule (Fig. 1b), and significant increases in IgG1 (O.D. value: 1.1 ± 0.31) and IgG2a (O.D. value: 2.1 ± 0.42) antibodies 2 weeks after the boost schedule. A similar pattern was observed 1 week after the boost schedule (Supplementary Fig. S1). Notably, ssRNA adjuvant remarkably induced IgG2a antibody production. In young mice, IIV alone (G2) could not induce IgG2a antibodies after the prime schedule; however, they were detected in IIV formulated ssRNA-immunized mice (G3) after the prime schedule. In aged mice, considerable levels of serum IgG2a were detected only in the IIV formulated with ssRNA-immunized groups (G6) at all observation time points (Fig. 1b).Figure 1Inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) formulated with ssRNA augments the IIV-induced humoral responses. BALB/c mice were intramuscularly immunized with 0.6 μg IIV with or without ssRNA adjuvant at an interval of 2 weeks. 2 weeks after the boost schedule, mice were challenged with A/California/04/2009 virus. To perform IgG, IgG2a, hemagglutination inhibition, and microneutralization assays, sera were collected at 2 weeks after the prime and boost schedule. Data are represented as mean ± SD. The data were statistically analyzed by one-way ANOVA. The significance of differences between groups are indicated by bars and symbols as follows: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. (a) Immunization groups and schedule for immunization and challenge. n = 5 mice for G1 to G6. (b) IIV-specific IgG1 and IgG2a levels measured by ELISA 2 weeks after the prime and boost schedule. n = 5 mice for G1–G6. (c) Hemagglutination inhibition titer against vaccine strains measured by hemagglutination inhibition assay 2 weeks after the boost schedule. Data represent geomean of duplicated results. n = 3 mice for G1–G6. (d) Microneutralization titer against A/California/04/2009 measured by microneutralization assay 2 weeks after the boost schedule. n = 5 mice for G1–G6.Full size imageFurthermore, A considerable increase in hemagglutination inhibition (HI) titers against vaccine strains A/Michigan/45/2015 (NYMC X-275) for A/H1N1, A/Singapore/INFIMH-16-0019/2016 (IVR-186) for A/H3N2, B/Phuket/3073/2013 for B/Yamagata, B/Maryland/15/2016 for B/Victoria, and A/California/04/2009 (H1N1), the surrogate model for A/Michigan/45/2015 (NYMC X-275), for H1N1 was detected in the IIV formulated with ssRNA-immunized groups. Furthermore, microneutralization antibody titers against A/California/04/2009 (H1N1) were detected in the IIV formulated with ssRNA-immunized groups in both young and aged groups (G3 and G6) (Fig. 1c,d, Supplementary Fig. S2).IIV formulated with ssRNA restricts viral replication and reduces influenza-induced pathogenesis in young and aged miceSubsequently, we ascertained whether the ssRNA adjuvant application could enhance the protective effects of IIV and reduce virus-induced pathogenesis after viral challenge. As shown in Fig. 2a,b, IIV-immunized groups (G2 and G5) showed slightly delayed or alleviated weight loss and development of clinical illness in both young and aged mice compared to the respective control groups (G1 and G4). In contrast, IIV formulated with ssRNA-immunized groups (G3 and G6) did not show any significant weight loss or development of clinical illness after the challenge performed in young and aged mice (Fig. 2a,b). In line with these results, viral titers in the lungs and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) collected 1 week after conduction of the challenge were considerably reduced in groups immunized with IIV formulated with ssRNA (G3 and G6). Average virus titer (copy number) in the lungs of IIV-immunized young or aged mice were 2 × 109 and 9 × 109 copies/mL, respectively; furthermore, these numbers were reduced to 2 × 108 (young) and 8 × 108 (aged) copies/mL in the groups immunized with IIV formulated with ssRNA (G3 and G6) (Fig. 2c).Figure 2Inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) formulated with ssRNA reduces viral replication and pathogenesis and induces protection against influenza virus. BALB/c mice were challenged with A/California/04/2009 virus 2 weeks after the boost schedule and sacrificed after 1 week as described in Fig. 1a. The lungs were harvested 1 week after the virus challenge, fixed, processed, and H&E-stained for lung histopathological evaluation. BALF was harvested 1 week after the challenge. The experimental groups are described in Fig. 1a. Data are represented as mean ± SD and statistically analyzed by one-way ANOVA and Student’s t-test. The significance of differences between groups are indicated by bars and symbols as follows: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. n = 5 mice for G1 to G6. Percentages of young and aged mice body weight (a) and clinical illness score (b) studied for 1 week after challenge with A/California/04/2009. Clinical illness score detailed in “Materials and methods”. (c) Viral titer in the lungs and BALF of young and aged mice measured by real-time PCR 1 week after challenge with A/California/04/2009. (d) Lungs were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). B, bronchus or bronchi; V, blood vessel; P, pulmonary emphysema; arrow, inflammatory cells (neutrophils and lymphocytes); arrowhead, hemorrhage; asterisk, exudate. (e) Percentages of pathological lesion area and total inflammatory score. (f) IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ, and TNF-α levels in BALF measured using the Magnetic Luminex Screening Assay Kit.Full size imageIn addition, the recruitment of inflammatory cells into the lungs (bronchi or blood vessel), parenchymal and vascular inflammation, and bronchiolitis were markedly reduced in groups immunized with IIV formulated with ssRNA (G3 and G6) (Fig. 2d,e). Finally, remarkable reductions in levels of cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-4, IL-6, IL-10, interferon (IFN)-γ, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α were observed in the BALF of virus-challenged G3 and G6 groups (Fig. 2f).IIV formulated with ssRNA increases the generation of influenza-specific T cells and humoral response after viral challenge in young and aged miceAs the protection against influenza is also associated with the generation of cytotoxic T cell responses as well as antibody responses, we determined whether the alleviation of influenza symptoms caused by the application of the ssRNA adjuvant was associated with an increase in antigen-specific CD8+ T cells. As indicated in Fig. 3a,b, the percentages of HA533-specific CD8+ T cells in the spleen were markedly increased by the application of the ssRNA adjuvant, in both in young and aged mice 1 week after the challenge. The ssRNA adjuvant did not markedly increase the percentages of HA533-specific CD8+ T cells in the lungs of young mice, but such an increase was observed in old mice (Fig. 3c,d). Furthermore, the application of the ssRNA adjuvants increased the number of IFN-γ-producing T cells triggered by hemagglutinin (HA) protein and HA peptide in the spleen of young and aged mice (Fig. 3e). Thus, these results indicate that the enhanced protective effects of the ssRNA adjuvant are associated with the generation of T cell-specific immune responses.Figure 3Inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) formulated with ssRNA increases the generation of influenza HA-specific T cells and humoral response against influenza virus. Splenocytes and lung lymphocytes were harvested 1 week after challenge. For conducting the ELISPOT assay, cells were stimulated for 2 days with or without IIV or influenza HA-specific T cell epitope peptide. Detailed peptide sequences are listed in the “Materials and methods”. For estimation of levels of IgG1, IgG2a, and IgA, sera and BALF were collected 1 week after challenge. The experimental groups are described in Fig. 1a. Data are represented as mean ± SD and were statistically analyzed using the one-way ANOVA. The significance of differences between groups are indicated by bars and symbols as follows: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Percentages of HA-specific tetramer in the spleen (a,b) (n = 5 mice for G1 to G6) and lungs (c,d) (n = 4 mice for G3 and n = 5 mice for G1, G2, G4, G5, and G6) measured by FACS. (e) Spots of influenza HA-specific IFN-γ-producing cells in splenocytes measured using ELISPOT. n = 5 mice for G1–G6. (f) IIV-specific IgG1, IgG2a, and BALF IgA levels measured using ELISA 1 week after the challenge. n = 5 mice for G1–G6.Full size imagessRNA also increased the serum levels of IgG2a and BALF IgA in young mice after challenge (G3), and more significant increases in the serum levels of IgG1, IgG2a, and BALF IgA were observed in aged mice immunized with IIV formulated with ssRNA (G6) (Fig. 3f).ssRNA increases the generation of dendritic cells in the spleen and promotes T cell activation in young and aged miceTo decipher the underlying mechanism of the boosting effects of the ssRNA adjuvants, splenocytes and lung lymphocytes were isolated 1 week after the boost schedule from young and aged mice vaccinated with IIV formulated with or without ssRNA in a prime/boost schedule as described in Fig. 4a. As indicated in Fig. 4b, percentages and absolute numbers of splenic dendritic cells were increased, either in a significant or a non-significant manner, by ssRNA application in both young and aged mice (Fig. 4b). Although it was not statistically significant, the expression levels of CD25 and CD154, which are typical activation markers of T cells, seem to be increased in lung CD8+ T cells of young and aged mice immunized with IIV formulated with ssRNA (G3 and G6) compared with those of IIV alone immunized mice at 1 week after the boost (Fig. 4c). Moreover, the application of the ssRNA adjuvant increased the percentage of IFN-γ- and TNF-α-producing CD4+ T cells in the spleen of young and aged mice (G3 and G6) (Fig. 4d–g). Moreover, the numbers of IFN-γ-producing cells in the spleen and lungs were increased in both young and aged mice after HA protein stimulation (G3 and G6). Additionally, ssRNA application slightly increased the number of IL-4-producing cells in the spleen of young and aged mice (Fig. 4h). In line with these results, the culture supernatant of HA protein-stimulated splenocytes obtained from groups immunized with IIV formulated with ssRNA comprising young and aged mice (G3 and G6) showed a remarkable increase in IFN-γ and IL-2 production and a slight increase in IL-6 production (Fig. 4i).Figure 4Inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) formulated with ssRNA increases antigen-presenting cells, activation markers, and cytokine production in T cells. BALB/c mice were intramuscularly immunized with 0.6 μg of IIV with or without ssRNA adjuvant at an interval of 2 weeks. Splenocytes and lung lymphocytes were harvested 1 week after the boost schedule. To detect cytokines, cells were stimulated for 16 h for FACS analysis, for 2 days for ELISPOT assays, and for 3 days for conducting ELISA with or without IIV. Data are represented as mean ± SD and were statistically analyzed by one-way ANOVA. The significance of differences between groups are indicated by bars and symbols as follows: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ***﻿*p < 0.0001. n = 5 mice for G1, G2, G3, G5 and G6. n = 4 or 5 mice for G4. (a) Immunization groups and schedule. (b) Percentages and absolute number of macrophage and dendritic cells in young and aged mice splenocytes. (c) Percentages of CD25 and CD154 in young and aged mice lung lymphocytes. Percentages of (d,e) IFN-γ and (f,g) TNF-α in young and aged mice splenocytes. (h) Spots of influenza HA-specific IFN-γ- and IL-4-producing cells among splenocytes and lung lymphocytes measured by ELISPOT. (i) Concentration of influenza HA-specific IFN-γ, IL-2, and IL-6 in splenocyte culture supernatant measured by ELISA.Full size imageAlterations in mRNA expression due to ssRNA application in immunized young and aged miceTo investigate the effects of the application of the ssRNA adjuvant on gene expression in aged mice, we compared the transcriptome profiles of splenocytes isolated from immunized mice 1 week after the boost schedule by conducting NanoString analysis. Gene expression was quantified and compared with that of the saline-immunized groups (G1 in young mice and G4 in aged mice). Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with p < 0.05 and fold-change ≥ 2 were identified; the data are represented using a Venn diagram (Fig. 5a). We confirmed that the number of DEGs in the aged groups (G5 and G6) was lower than that in the young groups (G2 and G3); we identified 377 and 13 upregulated or downregulated genes in groups immunized with IIV formulated with ssRNA comprising young (G3) and aged (G6) mice, respectively. Among these, the expression of eight genes was upregulated [complement factor D precursor (Cfd), integrin alpha 6 (Itga6), MAF, and non-receptor tyrosine protein kinase (Tyk2)] or downregulated [cluster of differentiation 79b (Cd79b), cluster of differentiation 80 (Cd80), low-affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor IV (Fcgr4), and interferon activable protein 204 (Ifi204)] in the groups immunized with IIV formulated with ssRNA (G6) compared with those in the IIV-immunized group (G5) in aged mice (Fig. 5a). To investigate the functional association, we analyzed gene expression patterns in the spleen of mice from each group. As shown in Fig. 5b, the ssRNA adjuvant induced several immune responses-associated gene clusters. Aged mice showed similar gene expression patterns as those in young mice. Both innate and adaptive immune system-related genes such as Klrd1, ifnα, IL-6, CD74, and MAPK11 were upregulated by the ssRNA. Furthermore, it is expected that the ssRNA could affect the migration of immune cells and function of antigen-presenting cells as it increased several chemokine receptors and chemokines such as CCR7, CCR5, CXCR2, and Ccl19, as well as phagocytosis and type 1 and 2 IFN signaling. The ssRNA adjuvant also increased B-cell receptor signaling- (Syk, Fyn, Nfatc2, and ikbkg) and Th1 and Th2 differentiation-associated genes (Gata3, IL2rg, Rele, Stat5b, and Jak) (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. S3).Figure 5Immune-related gene expression pattern in splenocytes of immunized young and aged mice. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) are illustrated by Venn diagrams and heatmaps. n = 3 mice for G1 to G6. (a) Genes whose expression levels were upregulated or downregulated more than twofold with P < 0.05 compared to G1 in young mice and G4 in aged mice are shown using Venn diagrams. (b) Gene expression patterns associated with immunology are shown using heatmaps.Full size imageDiscussionVaccination is the most effective preventive measure to tackle infectious diseases. Although vaccines are necessary for older individuals, such individuals are markedly less responsive to vaccines than younger individuals because of the occurrence of immunosenescence and inflammaging15. Thus, the development of novel adjuvants that can improve the efficacy of vaccines in the elderly is of considerable importance. In this study, we evaluated the adjuvant effect of ssRNA on seasonal IIV in aged and young mice. Although the application of the ssRNA adjuvant markedly increased IgG1 and IgG2a levels in aged and young mice, it exerted more prominent effects on IgG2a levels. Since the IgG2a antibody response represents a Th1 bias, it seems that ssRNA may effectively enhance the Th1 response. In fact, ssRNA application remarkably increased IFN-γ production not only in young mice but also in aged mice. Furthermore, ssRNA application considerably increased the titers of neutralizing antibodies that were not detected in the aged mice immunized with IIV alone. Thus, we suggest that ssRNA may affect the generation of follicular Th cell responses or germinal center formation because it is associated with the generation of functional neutralizing antibodies21. Interestingly, ssRNA application increased the BALF IgA levels even in aged mice. We believe that the increase in IgA levels confers protection against influenza virus infection in the respiratory tracts of aged mice. Thus, the use of ssRNA may widen the quantity and quality of antibody responses generated and that generally decline with aging, and it may induce not only balanced Th1/Th2 responses but also mucosal immune responses in young and aged mice.In addition to the increase in humoral responses, ssRNA application enhanced cellular immune responses. It has been reported that effector T cells generated by aged mice express lower levels of activation and differentiation markers, such as CD154, CD25, and CD62L, and produce reduced amounts of cytokines22. Furthermore, a marked decrease in the helper activity of CD4+ T cells obtained from aged individuals was reported. Aged CD4+ T cells provide little cognate help to induce humoral responses, consequently leading to decreased B cell expansion, GC differentiation, and IgG production23. Notably, the application of our ssRNA adjuvant increased CD25 and CD154 expression in CD8+ cells in the lungs, as well as IFN-γ- and TNF-α-producing CD4+ cells in the spleen. Moreover, IFN-γ, IL-2, and IL-6 production in response to influenza protein was markedly increased in aged mice, similar to that observed in young mice. Thus, the data indicate that the ssRNA adjuvant stimulates T cell activation, and that these activated T cells might ameliorate virus-induced pathology in aged mice.In this study, we did not determine whether ssRNA adjuvant increased the survival rate of aged mice after the challenge. However, the application of the ssRNA adjuvant alleviated the decreases in body weight, clinical illness, and BALF cytokine production as well as decreased viral titers in the lungs and BALF in both young and aged mice after the challenge. These data indicate that ssRNA application contributes to rapid virus clearance and reduction of lung inflammation24,25. Furthermore, the application of the ssRNA adjuvant reduced the infiltration of inflammatory cells in the lungs after the challenge, and the lungs of mice immunized with the ssRNA adjuvant and vaccine showed almost normal alveolar architecture in both young and aged mice. Therefore, we believe that ssRNA may enhance the survival rate because it effectively ameliorates influenza virus-induced pathogenesis.In our previous study, we demonstrated that the application of the ssRNA adjuvant induced the expression of genes related to innate immune response generation and T cell activation26. Therefore, we examined its effect on the mRNA expression pattern of aged mice immunized with the influenza vaccine. It is known that IFN production and signaling are reduced in aged mice because of immunosenescence6,27. However, in the present study, the application of the ssRNA adjuvant increased Tyk2 and MAF expression in aged mice. As Tyk2 is involved in IFN signaling28 and MAF activates IL-4 production29, we anticipate that an increase in the expression of these genes may mitigate immunological defects in aged mice. Furthermore, we confirmed that the expression pattern of genes related to the innate and adaptive immune systems, cytokine signaling, lymphocyte activation, Th1 and Th2 differentiation, TNF family signaling, and type 1 and 2 IFN signaling in aged mice immunized with IIV formulated with ssRNA was similar to that observed in young mice. This indicates that ssRNA adjuvant may increase the expression of innate and adaptive immune system-related genes even in aged mice.In conclusion, the use of the ssRNA adjuvant compensates for impaired cellular and humoral responses caused by aging, and promotes not only balanced Th1/Th2 responses but also mucosal immunity and production of neutralizing antibodies that lead to the development of protective immunity. Furthermore, its application seems to be excellent in terms of simplicity, as the formulation can be simply added to commercially available inactivated vaccines. We believe that our findings may accelerate the development of more effective influenza vaccines, particularly targeting the elderly, and may be applicable to other vaccines as well.MethodsMiceFemale BALB/c mice, 6-week-old and 12-month-old, were purchased from Dae Han Bio-Link (Chungbuk, Korea). To obtain aged mice, the 12-month-old mice were housed until 21 months of age. All mice were housed in the animal facility at the Catholic University of Korea under specific pathogen-free conditions at 21–22 °C and a 12/12-h light/dark illumination cycle. All animal experimental procedures conducted in this study followed the guidelines of and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Catholic University of Korea (approval no. CUK-IACUC-2019-004). The study was carried out in compliance with the ARRIVE guidelines.Vaccines and virusesThe SKYCellflu (SK Bioscience, Seoul, Korea) vaccine used against the 2018–2019 Northern hemisphere strain, is a cell culture-based quadrivalent influenza vaccine consisting of A/Michigan/45/2015(NYMC X-275), A/Singapore/INFIMH-16-0019/2016 (IVR-186), B/Phuket/3073/2013, and B/Maryland/15/2016 for A/H1N1, A/H3N2, B/Yamagata, and B/Victoria, respectively. It was used as the seasonal IIV in the present study. The A/H1N1 virus, A/California/04/2009, used in the viral infection challenges, was generously provided by Dr. Seong BL, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.In vitro transcription and RNA purificationThe DNA platform was designed using the IGR IRES and SV40 late-polyadenylation signal sequences as previously described20,26.DNA templates were linearized using NotI. The EZ T7 High Yield In Vitro Transcription Kit (Enzynomics, Daejeon, Korea) was used for in vitro transcription. Briefly, linearized DNA template was initially incubated with T7 transcription buffer, MgCl2, 10 mM DTT, Enhancer solution, 5 mM rNTP, 200 U T7 polymerase mix, and nuclease-free water in a final volume of 60 μL for 3 h at 37 °C, followed by incubation with RNase-free DNase I (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 15 min at 37 °C. For RNA purification, the Hi-Yield RNA Ultra-purification Kit (RBC, Banqiao, Taipei, Taiwan) was used. RNA purity and concentration were evaluated using a NanoDrop-2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), and RNA integrity was analyzed by performing denaturing gel electrophoresis.ImmunizationYoung (6-week-old) and aged (21-month-old) BALB/c mice were immunized intramuscularly in the upper thigh, twice (prime and boost) at an interval of 2 weeks, with IIV only (0.6 μg) or IIV with 20 μg of ssRNA adjuvant.Virus challengeThe mice were challenged with 1 × 102 plaque-forming units (PFU) of A/California/04/2009 (H1N1) virus (50 µL) intranasally using a pipette. After the challenge, mice body weight, survival, and clinical illness were checked. The clinical illness was scored using the following scale: 0 = no visible signs of disease; − 1 = slight ruffling of fur; − 2 = ruffled fur, reduced mobility; − 3 = ruffled fur, reduced mobility, and rapid breathing; and − 4 = ruffled fur, minimal mobility, huddled appearance, and rapid and/or labored breathing30. The mice were sacrificed when body weight decreased by more than 25% of the original body weight30.Serum collectionThe mice were euthanized using isoflurane. Blood was collected to obtain serum samples from immunized mice at 1 or 2 weeks after the prime, boost, and virus challenge as described in the schedule (Figs. 1a, 4a). Blood samples were collected from the facial vein using an 18-G needle or from the abdominal vena cava using a 1-mL syringe; samples were subsequently microcentrifuged for 15 min at 7000 rpm and 13,000 rpm, respectively. The sera were stored at − 80 °C until use.Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid collectionBAL of the sacrificed mice was performed using a 22-gauge catheter and 1 mL of saline by flushing the airway compartment three times. The BALF was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C.Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)ELISAs were conducted to measure Antigen-specific IgG1 and IgG2a levels in mouse serum and antigen-specific IgA levels in mouse BALF as described in pervious report19. The 96-well plates (Corning, Corning, NY, USA) were coated with IIV (100 ng/well) for 2 h at 18–25 °C. After 2 h incubation, the wells were washed three times with 200 µL of PBS-T (phosphate-buffered saline [PBS] containing 0.05% Tween 20) and blocked with 100 µL of blocking buffer (PBS containing 1% bovine serum albumin) for 1 h at 18–25 °C. Serum samples were diluted 1/200–1/400 in blocking buffer, added to the wells, and incubated overnight at 4 °C. After incubation, the wells were washed three times with 200 µL of PBS-T. Anti-mouse IgG1- (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), IgG2a- (Novus Biologicals, Centennial, CO, USA), and IgA-HRP- (Bethyl Laboratories, Inc., Montgomery, TX, USA) conjugated antibodies were diluted 1/1000–1/5000 using blocking buffer and incubated for 1 h at 18–25 °C. After five washes with PBS-T, tetramethylbenzidine substrate (Invitrogen) was added, and the samples were incubated for 5–10 min; then 2 N H2SO4 was added to terminate the reaction. The optical density (OD) values were measured at 450 nm using a GloMax Explorer microplate reader (Promega).To measure the levels of cytokines in the splenocyte culture supernatants, splenocytes were isolated from immunized mice, seeded at 5 × 105 cells/well in a 96-well plate, and stimulated with 500 ng/well of IIV for 72 h at 37 °C. The concentrations of IFN-γ, IL-2, and IL-6 were determined using ELISA kits (Invitrogen; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentrations of these cytokines were calculated using the respective standard curves, and the results obtained are shown as the amount (pg) of each cytokine per milliliter of supernatant.Hemagglutination inhibition assayThe hemagglutination inhibition assay was performed according to the “Manual for the laboratory diagnosis and virological surveillance of influenza” (https://www.who.int/influenza/gisrs_laboratory/manual_diagnosis_surveillance_influenza/en/). Briefly, mouse sera were treated with receptor-destroying enzyme (Denka Seiken, Tokyo, Japan) overnight at 37 °C and then inactivated for 30 min at 56 °C, followed by adsorption with chicken red blood cells to prevent elicitation of nonspecific responses. All sera were then twofold serially diluted in 25 μL of PBS in V-bottom 96-well microtiter plates and incubated with standardized viral suspensions (4 HA U/25 μL) at 18–25 °C for 1 h. Fifty-microliters volumes of 0.5% chicken RBCs were added, and the plates were incubated for 45 min at 18 ~ 25 °C. The antibody titers (geometric mean titers, GMT) were expressed as the reciprocal of the highest serum dilution that showed complete inhibition of agglutination in duplicate experiments. As the initial dilution was 1/10, the lower limit of the detectable antibody titer was 1:10. Titers < 1:10 were assigned a value of 1:5 for calculation purposes.Microneutralization (MN) assaySerum samples were inactivated for 30 min at 56 °C. All serum samples were then twofold serially diluted starting from 1:10 in serum-free medium in 96-well cell culture plates (Corning) and incubated with the same volume of viral suspension containing 25 TCID50 of influenza A/California/04/2009 (H1N1) at 37 °C for 1 h in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. After incubation, 100 μL of the mixture at each dilution was added to a cell plate containing a Madin–Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) monolayer. The plates were incubated for 48 h at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2, after which the supernatant was carefully discarded and 100 μL of a 5% formaldehyde solution (DaeJung Chemicals & Metals, Siheung-si, Gyeonggi-do, Korea) was added. After 30 min incubation at room temperature, the 5% formaldehyde solution was discarded and 100 μL of 0.1% crystal violet solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St, Louis, MO, USA) was added. After 1 h of incubation, the crystal violet solution was discarded, and the cell monolayer was washed using tap water. The results were evaluated using a microscope. The highest protective serum dilution was considered as the neutralization titer31.Real-time PCR for virus titrationVirus titers were quantified by real-time PCR methods as previously reported19,20. Total RNA was isolated from the lungs and BALF using the TRIzol reagent (Favorgen, Ping-Tung, Taiwan). The PCR reaction contained 10 μL of template RNA, standard, or negative control; 12.5 μL of 2 × SuperScript III Platinum Master Mix (Invitrogen); 0.5 μL of SuperScript III Taq polymerase (Invitrogen); and 2 μL each of forward primer (10 μM), reverse primer (10 μM), and dual-labeled probe (5 pmol) in a total volume of 25 μL. Real-time PCR was performed using a Bio-Rad thermocycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA, USA). The PCR conditions were as follows: 30 min at 50 °C and 5 min at 95 °C, followed by 45 cycles of 20 s at 95 °C and 1 min at 55 °C. For virus detection, we used two pairs of influenza virus-specific primers and TaqMan probes designed based on the conserved matrix gene region of influenza A virus. The sequences included: forward primer 5′-GACCRATCCTGTCACCTCTGAC-3′, reverse primer 5′-AGGGACTTYTGGACAAAKCGTCTA-3′, and probe 5′-FAM-TGCAGTCCTCGCTCACTGGGCACG-BHQ1-3′.Histological analysisThe lung tissue samples obtained from experimental mice were submerged in 10% formalin for 48 h, paraffin-embedded, and sectioned to 3–5 μm thickness before mounting and staining for routine hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-based analysis. Representative histopathological images were obtained and evaluated using Aperio ImageScope Version 12.3 (Leica Biosystems, Buffalo Grove, IL, USA). The histopathologist was blinded to the group distribution.Cytokine analysis in BALF samplesThe concentrations of IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ, and TNF-α in BALF samples were determined using the Magnetic Luminex Screening Assay Kit (R&D Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.Flow cytometryTo determine the HA tetramer, the isolated splenocytes and lung lymphocytes were blocked using CD16/CD32 (eBioscience; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and 5 μg streptavidin (Invitrogen) for 20 min at 4 °C, and then stained using CD8a (clone 53-6.7, eBioscience), H-2Kd HA tetramer with the HA518-526 epitope IYSTVASSL, CD4 (clone GK1.5, eBioscience), CD45 (clone 30-F11, eBioscience), and Fixable Viability Dye eFluor520 (eBioscience) for 30 min at 4 °C in the dark. The HA tetramer was produced and generously provided by Dr. Chang Jun, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea. The stained cells were fixed using 4% paraformaldehyde. To determine macrophage, dendritic cell, and T cell activation, isolated splenocytes and lung lymphocytes were blocked using CD16/CD32 (eBioscience) for 20 min at 4 °C and stained using F4/80 (clone BM8, eBioscience), CD11c (clone N418, eBioscience), CD8a (clone 53-6.7, eBioscience), CD25 (clone PC61.5, eBioscience), CD154 (clone MR1, eBioscience), CD45 (clone 30-F11, eBioscience), and Fixable Viability Dye eFluor520 (eBioscience) for 30 min at 4 °C in the dark. Stained cells were fixed using 4% paraformaldehyde. To evaluate the generation of cytotoxic T cell responses, isolated splenocytes were stimulated with 500 ng/well IIV for 16 h at 37 °C and then Bredfeldin A (GolgiPlug, BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) was added after 6 h. After another 10 h of incubation, splenocytes were blocked with CD16/CD32 (eBioscience) for 20 min at 4 °C and first stained with CD4 (clone GK1.5, eBioscience) and Fixable Viability Dye eFluor520 (eBioscience) for 30 min at 4 °C in the dark. The stained cells were permeabilized using a Fixation/Permeabilization Solution kit (BD Biosciences) for 1 h at 4 °C in the dark, and then stained with IFN-γ (clone XMG1.2; eBioscience) and TNF-α (clone MP6-XT22; eBioscience) for 30 min at 4 °C in the dark. Cells were analyzed using the FACS Aurora (Cytek Biosciences, Fremont, CA, USA), and the data were analyzed using Spectroflo (Cytek Biosciences) or FlowJo (Tree Star, Inc., Ashland, OR, USA).Enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assaySplenocytes and lung lymphocytes were stimulated with 500 ng/well IIV or 5 μg/well HA-specific T cell epitope peptide mixture (LYEKVRNQL, GIPSRISI, GMVDGWYG, VRPVTSGCF, RGFFGAIAGF, and IYSTVASSL) for 48 h at 37 °C. HA peptides were synthesized by Peptron (Daejeon, Korea). The ELISPOT assays for the detection of IFN-γ or IL-4-secreting T cells were conducted using mouse IFN-γ and IL-4 ELISpotBASIC (Mabtech, Stockholm, Sweden). Each step was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.NanoString-based analysisSpleen samples from immunized mice were obtained 7 days after the boost schedule. Total RNA was isolated from spleen samples using the TRIzol reagent and confirmed using an Agilent RNA 6000 Pico kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and a bioanalyzer. Total RNA was analyzed using the NanoString nCounter Analysis System (NanoString Technologies, Inc., WA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. A 5 μL (100–300 ng) aliquot of each RNA sample was mixed with 8 μL of the Master Mix (reporter codeSet and hybridization buffer), 2 μL of the capture probeSet was added, and the sample was placed in a 65 °C thermocycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.) for 16 h. The samples were then transferred to the preparation station (NanoString Technologies) with a prepared nCounter Master Kit and a cartridge. After binding the sample to the cartridge, 12 lanes per run of the nCounter prep station were performed for approximately 2.5–3 h. The cartridges were transferred to a Digital Analyzer (NanoString Technologies) for analysis and scanned at 555 fields of view. To calculate gene expression values, the first background correction used default options with control probes in Codeset. Next, data normalization also used control probes in Codeset. The scaling of data was controlled by using the expression level of genes overlapping between each code set. Finally, DEGs between the two selected biological conditions were analyzed by performing the Student’s t-test. All processes, such as background correction and normalization as well as statistical calculations were performed using nSolver Analysis software ver 4.0. (NanoString).Statistical analysisAnalyses were performed using a one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple-group comparisons and unpaired t-tests to compare between two groups. Differences were considered significant at p < 0.05. Data are expressed as mean ± SD. Statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) and SPSS for Windows (release 14.0 K, SPSS Inc., IL, Chicago, USA). Data availability All substantial data are available in the text and the Supplementary Figures. Certificates of analysis and origins, material data sheets, and detailed procedures are available upon request to the corresponding author. ReferencesKeshavarz, M. et al. Induction of protective immune response to intranasal administration of influenza virus-like particles in a mouse model. J. Cell. Physiol. 234, 16643–16652 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Keshavarz, M. et al. Association of polymorphisms in inflammatory cytokines encoding genes with severe cases of influenza A/H1N1 and B in an Iranian population. Virol. J. 16, 79 (2019).Article Google Scholar Simonsen, L. et al. Impact of influenza vaccination on seasonal mortality in the US elderly population. Arch. Intern. Med. 165, 265–272 (2005).Article Google Scholar Ciabattini, A. et al. Vaccination in the elderly: The challenge of immune changes with aging. Semin. Immunol. 40, 83–94 (2018).Article Google Scholar Smetana, J., Chlibek, R., Shaw, J., Splino, M. & Prymula, R. Influenza vaccination in the elderly. Hum. Vaccin. Immunother. 14, 540–549 (2018).Article Google Scholar Oh, S.-J., Lee, J. K. & Shin, O. S. Aging and the immune system: The impact of immunosenescence on viral infection, immunity and vaccine immunogenicity. Immune Netw. 19, e37 (2019).Fulop, T. et al. Immunosenescence and inflamm-aging as two sides of the same coin: Friends or foes?. Front. Immunol. 8, 1960 (2017).Article Google Scholar Salam, N. et al. T cell ageing: Effects of age on development, survival & function. Indian J. Med. Res. 138, 595–608 (2013).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Weiskopf, D., Weinberger, B. & Grubeck-Loebenstein, B. The aging of the immune system. Transpl. Int. 22, 1041–1050 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Crooke, S. N., Ovsyannikova, I. G., Poland, G. A. & Kennedy, R. B. Immunosenescence and human vaccine immune responses. Immun. Ageing I A 16, 25 (2019).Article Google Scholar Cancro, M. P. et al. B cells and aging: molecules and mechanisms. Trends Immunol. 30, 313–318 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Frasca, D. & Blomberg, B. B. Effects of aging on B cell function. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 21, 425–430 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Chung, H. Y. et al. Redefining chronic inflammation in aging and age-related diseases: Proposal of the senoinflammation concept. Aging Dis. 10, 367–382 (2019).Article Google Scholar Goronzy, J. J. & Weyand, C. M. Understanding immunosenescence to improve responses to vaccines. Nat. Immunol. 14, 428–436 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Del Giudice, G. et al. Fighting against a protean enemy: Immunosenescence, vaccines, and healthy aging. NPJ Aging Mech. Dis. 4, 1–8 (2017).Article Google Scholar Tregoning, J. S., Russell, R. F. & Kinnear, E. Adjuvanted influenza vaccines. Hum. Vaccin. Immunother. 14, 550–564 (2018).Article Google Scholar McKee, A. S. & Marrack, P. Old and new adjuvants. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 47, 44–51 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Lu, P.-J. et al. Seasonal influenza vaccination coverage trends among adult populations, U.S., 2010–2016. Am. J. Prev. Med. 57, 458–469 (2019).Article Google Scholar Kim, H. J. et al. MERS-CoV spike protein vaccine and inactivated influenza vaccine formulated with single strand RNA adjuvant induce T-cell activation through intranasal immunization in mice. Pharmaceutics 12, 441 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Kim, Y. H. et al. Inactivated influenza vaccine formulated with single-stranded RNA-based adjuvant confers mucosal immunity and cross-protection against influenza virus infection. Vaccine 38, 6141–6152 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar De Boer, R. J. & Perelson, A. S. How germinal centers evolve broadly neutralizing antibodies: the breadth of the follicular helper T cell response. J. Virol. 91, e00983-17 (2017).Haynes, L. & Swain, S. L. Why aging T cells fail: Implications for vaccination. Immunity 24, 663–666 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Haynes, L. & Eaton, S. M. The effect of age on the cognate function of CD4+ T cells. Immunol. Rev. 205, 220–228 (2005).Article CAS Google Scholar Lee, Y.-T. et al. Intranasal vaccination with M2e5x virus-like particles induces humoral and cellular immune responses conferring cross-protection against heterosubtypic influenza viruses. PLoS One 13, e0190868–e0190868 (2018).Article Google Scholar Koday, M. T. et al. Multigenic DNA vaccine induces protective cross-reactive T cell responses against heterologous influenza virus in nonhuman primates. PLoS One 12, e0189780 (2017).Article Google Scholar Kwak, H. W. et al. Cricket paralysis virus internal ribosome entry site-derived RNA promotes conventional vaccine efficacy by enhancing a balanced Th1/Th2 response. Vaccine 37, 5191–5202 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Agarwal, S. & Busse, P. J. Innate and adaptive immunosenescence. Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 104, 183–190 (2010).Article CAS Google Scholar Platanias, L. C. Mechanisms of type-I- and type-II-interferon-mediated signalling. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5, 375–386 (2005).Article CAS Google Scholar Kim, J. I., Ho, I. C., Grusby, M. J. & Glimcher, L. H. The transcription factor c-Maf controls the production of interleukin-4 but not other Th2 cytokines. Immunity 10, 745–751 (1999).Article CAS Google Scholar Tate, M. D., Brooks, A. G. & Reading, P. C. The role of neutrophils in the upper and lower respiratory tract during influenza virus infection of mice. Respir. Res. 9, 57 (2008).Article Google Scholar Manenti, A. et al. Evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies using a CPE-based colorimetric live virus micro-neutralization assay in human serum samples. J. Med. Virol. 92, 2096–2104 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by a Grant (2020-ER5303-00) from Research of Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, by a Grant (20172MFDS290) from Ministry of Food and Drug Safety in 2020, by the Catholic University of Korea, Research Fund, 2021.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Yoo-Jin Bang, So-Hee Hong and Hyo-Jung Park.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment of Medical and Biological Sciences, The Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of KoreaYoo-Jin Bang, So-Hee Hong, Hyo-Jung Park, Hye Won Kwak, Yu-Sun Lee, Jae-Yong Kim, Hyeong-Jun Park, Seo-Hyeon Bae, Hye-Jung Kim & Jae-Hwan NamBK Plus Department of Biotechnology, The Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of KoreaYoo-Jin Bang, So-Hee Hong, Hyo-Jung Park, Hye Won Kwak, Yu-Sun Lee, Jae-Yong Kim, Hyeong-Jun Park, Seo-Hyeon Bae & Jae-Hwan NamDepartment of R&D, SK Bioscience, Pangyoro, Bundang-gu, Republic of KoreaYun-Hee Kim & Hun KimScripps Korea Antibody Institute, Chuncheon, Kangwon-do, Republic of KoreaHae Li Ko & Sang-In ParkGraduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Republic of KoreaGyeongjoo Park & Jun ChangDepartment of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of KoreaMan-Seong ParkAuthorsYoo-Jin BangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSo-Hee HongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHyo-Jung ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHye Won KwakView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYu-Sun LeeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJae-Yong KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHyeong-Jun ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSeo-Hyeon BaeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHye-Jung KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYun-Hee KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHae Li KoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSang-In ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHun KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGyeongjoo ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMan-Seong ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJun ChangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJae-Hwan NamView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsJ.-H.N. conceived and supervised the research and designed the experiments. Y.-J.B, S.-H.H., H.-J.P., H.W.K, Y.-S.L, J.-Y.K., H.-J.P., S.-H.B., H.-J.K., Y-H.K., H.L.K., S.-I.P., H.K., G.J.P., M.-S.P., and J.C. contributed to data acquisition. S.-H.H., Y.-J.B., and H.-J.P. contributed to writing the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Jae-Hwan Nam.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Figures.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleBang, YJ., Hong, SH., Park, HJ. et al. Effective inactivated influenza vaccine for the elderly using a single-stranded RNA-based adjuvant. Sci Rep 11, 11981 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-91445-3Download citationReceived: 09 March 2021Accepted: 26 May 2021Published: 07 June 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-91445-3Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Analyzing immune responses to varied mRNA and protein vaccine sequences Hyeong-Jun ParkYoo-Jin BangJae-Hwan Nam npj Vaccines (2023) Heterologous vaccination utilizing viral vector and protein platforms confers complete protection against SFTSV Jae-Yong KimKyeongseok JeonJae-Hwan Nam Scientific Reports (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyThe coming flu season may be severe. Here’s why | CNN CNN values your feedback 1. How relevant is this ad to you? 2. Did you encounter any technical issues? Video player was slow to load content Video content never loaded Ad froze or did not finish loading Video content did not start after ad Audio on ad was too loud Other issues Ad never loaded Ad prevented/slowed the page from loading Content moved around while ad loaded Ad was repetitive to ads I've seen previously Other issues Cancel Submit Thank You! Your effort and contribution in providing this feedback is much appreciated. Close Ad Feedback Close icon Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships More Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Watch Listen Live TV Subscribe Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch Edition US International Arabic Español Edition US International Arabic Español Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Follow CNN World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Ad Feedback The coming flu season may be severe. Here’s why By Maggie Fox, CNN 6 minute read Updated 12:44 PM EDT, Wed June 9, 2021 Link Copied! Video Ad Feedback Researchers work to improve effectiveness of flu shots 02:33 - Source: CNN Your Health 16 videos Video Ad Feedback Researchers work to improve effectiveness of flu shots 02:33 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Here's where to find the first approved over-the-counter oral contraceptive 02:11 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Watch a nutritionist explain the food labels behind three everyday foods 02:00 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Drugs like Ozempic may transform industries we're not even thinking about 03:29 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback How to check if you've been vaccinated for measles as cases appear in US 01:47 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback 'I know that isn't what people want to hear': Dr. Gupta weighs in on 'dry January' 03:18 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback A new potential Alzheimer's test can find symptoms before they begin to show 02:44 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Research finds minority children face disparities in health care 03:25 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Michael Strahan and his daughter disclose her brain cancer battle 02:07 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback 18-day-old baby undergoes first partial heart transplant 02:37 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Mom wakes up after kidney stone procedure with her legs amputated 02:11 Now playing - Source: Lex 18 Video Ad Feedback Major drug companies massively cut insulin prices. Hear why 02:00 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback 'Crush depression with Minecraft' is the promise of this digital mental health company 03:22 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Poison control centers see 1,500% spike in these type of calls 02:59 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Over half of Black patients expect to be insulted by medical professionals, study shows 02:27 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback 'What are the odds?': She's pregnant with twins, but they don't share a womb 02:05 Now playing - Source: CNN See More Videos CNN — The coming flu season may be a doozy. Even as coronavirus was devastating populations around the world, killing 3.7 million people globally, doctors and public health officials noticed something else was missing: There was almost no flu. One child died from flu this year in the US. In 2019-2020, there were 199 flu-related deaths in children and 144 the season before that. Flu cases, usually counted in the tens of millions, only accounted for a few thousand this year in the US. “Flu hasn’t been anywhere, with the exception of some reasonable activity in western Africa,” said Richard Webby, an influenza specialist at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis. LOS ANGELES, CA - OCTOBER 21, 2020 - People look over a sign advertising a free flu shot clinic provided by Cedars-Sinai Hospital and Good Samaritan Hospital in the parking lot of Immanuel Presbyterian Church in Los Angeles on October 21, 2020. People, pictured here, were waiting in line at a free food giveaway at Immanuel Presbyterian Church. (Genaro Molina / Los Angeles Times via Getty Images) Genaro Molina/Los Angeles Times/Getty Images Related article There's hardly any flu this year. Coronavirus restrictions may be responsible “No one has seen it. That includes countries that have done lockdown. It includes countries that haven’t done any lockdown. It includes countries that have done a good job controlling the pandemic. It includes countries that haven’t done a good job,” Webby told CNN. It’s not entirely clear why. Many experts believe that measures taken to help control coronavirus also prevented the spread of influenza. It’s also possible that coronavirus somehow outcompeted or interfered with flu. Either way, Webby and other experts think the lull in flu activity is only temporary. They worry that when influenza returns, likely this fall, it will be with a vengeance. “The worst flu season we ever had may be coming,” Webby said. “When it comes back, it is going to be a doozy of a season,” agreed Aubree Gordon, an epidemiologist who studies flu at the University of Michigan School of Public Health. One reason the coming influenza season is likely to be a bad one can be explained by human behavior. People tired of lockdowns, of wearing masks, of staying away from other people, will want to celebrate the freedom offered by vaccines that protect them from coronavirus and the waning of the pandemic. Syringes with the Moderna Covid-19 vaccine lay on a table at a pop up vaccine clinic at the Jewish Community Center on April 16, 2021 in the Staten Island borough of New York City. (Photo by Angela Weiss / AFP) (Photo by ANGELA WEISS/AFP via Getty Images) Angela Weiss/AFP/Getty Images Related article Now proven against coronavirus, mRNA can do so much more They may overdo it. Travel is already on the increase, restaurants are filling back up, and schools are planning to re-open with in-person classes. But while people flocking to resorts, bars and family gatherings may be much safer from coronavirus, they’re not any safer from flu or other respiratory viruses that are spread in the same ways that coronavirus is: in the air, in droplets and on surfaces. “I do think with a greater number of individuals not wearing masks and not as much social distancing, there is definitely going to be an uptick in the common respiratory infections that we see seasonally,” Allison Aiello, who studies the spread of infectious diseases at the University of North Carolina’s school of public health, told CNN. Aiello says North Carolina is already seeing an increase in respiratory diseases. “We should expect there to be some increases, especially in the fall as children go back to school,” she said. Spreading viruses in school “It’s not just flu. It’s all the other respiratory viruses,” Webby said. These include not only influenza, but respiratory syncytial virus or RSV, adenoviruses, the coronavirus strains that cause the common cold, rhinoviruses and others. “I certainly think as the mitigation measures as we have in place for Covid come down and kids go back to school in person and we all start traveling again, particularly internationally, we know all sorts of respiratory viruses are going to have much more opportunities to spread,” Lynette Brammer, who leads the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Domestic Influenza Surveillance Team, told CNN. “And we certainly expect that flu and all the other respiratory viruses that have been low over the last year will come back,” she added. “In certain ways, we have returned back to normal. You start putting kids together and you will get viruses.” Children arrive for class on the first day of school reopening on December 7, 2020 in the Brooklyn borough of New York City. - The novel coronavirus has killed at least 1,535,987 people since the outbreak emerged in China last December, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP at 1100 GMT on Monday. The US is the worst-affected country with 282,324 deaths. (Photo by Angela Weiss / AFP) (Photo by ANGELA WEISS/AFP via Getty Images) Angela Weiss/AFP/Getty Images Related article New York City plans mandatory in-person school this fall. That's left these parents with both hope and worry However, Brammer is cautious about making predictions. “Flu is always unpredictable, and I feel like right now it’s more true than ever,” Brammer said. There’s a second reason to think the 2021-2022 influenza season might be a bad one. There’s a theory, not well documented, that the human body’s immune response is naturally boosted by repeated, annual exposures to viruses such as flu. These exposures might not be enough to make people sick, but they’re enough to remind the immune system to keep up its defenses. “The longer you go without exposure, the more likely you are to be symptomatic and more likely to be sicker,” Gordon said. “We do know the longer you go without being exposed to influenza, the more symptomatic you are. Sicker individuals lead to more severe cases. We absolutely know that.” The same goes for RSV, non-Covid-19 coronaviruses and other infections. “I would kind of generally be worried about all of them. All of them can cause severe disease. All of them can cause pneumonia,” Gordon added. MIAMI, FL - APRIL 30: A sign giving direction to The University of Miami Hospital's Emergency Department hangs on a wall on April 30, 2012 in Miami, Florida. As people wait to hear from the United States Supreme Court on its decision of the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act, some experts say that if the act is overturned, a decision expected later this year, people that now have insurance will no longer be eligible and will be kicked back into a system where the emergency department is their first visit when sick. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) Joe Raedle/Getty Images Related article US hospitals raise alarm about higher-than-normal RSV cases in young children RSV, especially, takes a toll on babies and very young children. It kills an estimated 100 to 500 children every year, and 14,000 adults, mostly over the age of 65. Many of the 4 million or so infants born during the pandemic will be getting their first exposures to RSV and other viruses as they go into daycare for the first time ever. “We don’t know what effects will be of all these young children delaying their first exposure of RSV,” Gordon said. “There probably are going to be very large RSV epidemics.” Aiello is less certain about the possible effect of avoiding germs for a year or so. “This is a short period of time,” she said. Several years of avoiding exposure may be expected to have an effect, but the 15 months or so most people have been social distancing, working from home or staying out of classrooms may not have been long enough to affect immune systems. Two years’ worth of viruses packed into one But the fall respiratory flu season may feel worse, even if it actually isn’t, Aiello said. If nothing else, many children will be packing two years’ worth of exposure to a range of viruses into a single season. “When an individual hasn’t been sick for a while, it may seem like you are experiencing more robust symptoms,” she said. Flu will be the one virus that get measured. Doctors do not test people for most of the other respiratory viruses – mostly because there’s no specific treatment for them – but the CDC tracks influenza. Flu kills between 12,000 and 61,000 people a year, depending on the season, the CDC says. It says the 2019-2020 season was a moderate one in which 38 million people in the US got sick with flu, 18 million saw a health care provider for treatment, 400,000 were sick enough to be hospitalized and an estimated 22,000 died. About 8% of the US population gets sick from flu each season, with a range of between 3% and 11%, depending on the season, the CDC says. Much will depend on how many Americans get vaccinated. Each year, just under half the population gets a flu vaccine, even though the CDC recommends an annual flu shot for almost everyone over the age of 6 months. Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team. One thing the CDC knows for sure: Flu activity is impossible to predict. “I don’t know what to expect. I don’t know,” Brammer said. “We are just going to have to wait and see.” Brammer has seen every flu season for decades, and each one is unique. “Every time you think you know what will happen, it will do something totally different,” she said. Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Health Watch Listen Live TV Follow CNN Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Terms of Use Privacy Policy Ad Choices Accessibility & CC About Newsletters Transcripts © 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved. CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.Lessons from the last pandemic point the way toward universal flu vaccines - UChicago MedicineSkip to main contentPatients & VisitorsResearch & Clinical TrialsFor CliniciansHealth & Science NewsCareersGiveMyChartComer Children's HospitalFind a DoctorFind a LocationConditions & ServicesPatients & VisitorsResearch & Clinical TrialsFor CliniciansHealth & Science NewsCareersGiveMyChartComer Children's HospitalSearchHomeForefrontResearch and DiscoveriesLessons from the last pandemic point the way toward universal flu vaccinesJune 8, 2021TopicsInfluenza Vaccine Injections (Flu Shot)Influenza, fluInfectious DiseasesPrevention and ScreeningBiological SciencesResearch and DiscoveriesResearch and DiscoveriesNewsCall Us At 1-888-824-0200Hemagglutinin (HA) is a protein on the surface of the influenza virus that attaches to receptors on host cells. A new study shows how antibodies that target conserved, stable portions of HA, shown in the colored portions here, were highly effective at fighting the virus. (Credit: Guthmiller, et al) A new study from the University of Chicago and Scripps Research Institute shows that during the last great pandemic — 2009’s H1N1 influenza pandemic — people developed strong, effective immune responses to stable, conserved parts of the virus. This suggests a strategy for developing universal flu vaccines that are designed to generate those same responses, instead of targeting parts of the virus that tend to evolve rapidly and require a new vaccine every year. Influenza is an elusive and frustrating target for vaccines. There are two main types of flu virus that can infect humans, which evolve rapidly from season to season. When developing seasonal flu vaccines, health officials try to anticipate the predominant variation of the virus that will circulate that year. These predictions are often slightly off. Sometimes new, unexpected variants emerge, which means the vaccine may not be very effective. To avoid this, the ultimate goal of many flu researchers is to develop a universal vaccine that can account for any virus strain or variation in a given year, or even longer. The new study, published June 2 in Science Translational Medicine, was led by UChicago immunologists Jenna Guthmiller, PhD, and Patrick Wilson, PhD, along with structural biologists Julianna Han, PhD, and Andrew Ward, PhD, from Scripps Research Institute. They studied the immune responses of people who were first exposed to the 2009 H1N1 pandemic flu virus, either from infection or a vaccine. The researchers saw that the immune systems of these people recalled memory B cells from their childhood that produced broadly neutralizing antibodies against highly conserved parts on the head of a protein called hemagglutinin (HA) — a virus surface protein that attaches to receptors on host cells. These antibody responses were very effective at combatting the virus, and because they targeted conserved parts of the HA protein — meaning they don’t change very often — they could provide an enticing target for a vaccine to generate those same robust immune responses. That's the exciting thing about this study. Not only have we found these broadly neutralizing antibodies, but now we know of a way to actually induce them. In a separate 2020 study, Guthmiller and colleagues found so-called polyreactive antibodies that can bind to several conserved sites on the flu virus. Now, the new study reveals more details about the conditions that can recall the same strong immune responses as this first exposure. “That’s the exciting thing about this study,” Guthmilller said. “Not only have we found these broadly neutralizing antibodies, but now we know of a way to actually induce them.” The only problem is that on subsequent encounters with the virus or a vaccine, the body doesn’t generate those same super-effective antibodies. Instead, for reasons that are unclear, the immune system tends to target newer variations on the virus. That may be effective at the time, but isn’t very helpful down the road when another, slightly different version of influenza comes along. “When people encounter that virus a second or third time, their antibody response is pretty much completely dominated by antibodies against those more variable parts of the virus,” Guthmiller said. “So that's the uphill battle that we continue to face with this.” The trick to getting around this is to design a vaccine that recreates that initial encounter with H1N1, using a version of the HA protein that keeps the conserved, powerful antibody-inducing components, and replaces the variable parts with other molecules that won’t distract the immune system. “Structural studies were essential to delineate the conserved areas on the HA protein,” said Han, who was co-first author of the new study and received her doctorate from the Committee on Microbiology at UChicago. “Now these data can be used to fine-tune vaccine targets.” In roughly the past century, two of the four flu pandemics have been caused by H1N1 influenza, including the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic that killed as many as 100 million people. Yet the findings of this study are reassuring in the fight against possible future pandemics caused by other H1 viruses. Just knowing that we actually have the immune toolkit ready to protect ourselves is encouraging. Now it's just a matter of getting the right vaccine to do that. “The odds of there being another pandemic within our lifetime caused by an H1 virus is quite high,” Guthmiller said. “Just knowing that we actually have the immune toolkit ready to protect ourselves is encouraging. Now it's just a matter of getting the right vaccine to do that.” The study, “First exposure to the pandemic H1N1 virus induced broadly neutralizing antibodies targeting hemagglutinin head epitopes,” was supported by the National Institutes of Health, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and GlaxoSmithKline. Additional authors include Lei Li, Olivia Stovicek, Micah E. Tepora, Henry A. Utset, Dalia J. Bitar, Natalie J. Hamel, Siriruk Changrob, Nai-Ying Zheng, Min Huang, Christopher T. Stamper, and Haley L. Dugan from the University of Chicago; and Alec W. Freyn, Sean T.H. Liu, Florian Krammer, Raffael Nachbagauer, and Peter Palese from Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. I'd Like To...Pay a BillRequest Medical RecordsExplore CareersContact UsEmployee LoginQuick LinksAbout UsMediaCommunityBiological Sciences DivisionPritzker School of MedicineJoint Commission Public NoticeAppointments: 1-888-824-0200Sign up for our NewsletterSubscribeThe University of Chicago Medicine 5841 S. Maryland Avenue Chicago, IL 60637 773-702-1000Website PoliciesPrivacy PracticesLegal DisclaimerWebsite Privacy PolicyWebsite Terms of UsePrice TransparencySite Map© 2024 The University of Chicago Medical Center. All rights reserved.Study: COVID-19 produced more symptoms and complications than seasonal influenza in youths Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Study: COVID-19 produced more symptoms and complications than seasonal influenza in youths Download PDF Copy Reviewed Reviewed by Emily Henderson, B.Sc.Jun 8 2021 A new global study of 30-day outcomes in children and adolescents with COVID-19 found that while death was uncommon, the illness produced more symptoms and complications than seasonal influenza. The study, "30-day outcomes of Children and Adolescents with COVID-19: An International Experience," published online in the journal Pediatrics, also found significant variation in treatment of children and adolescents hospitalized with COVID-19. Early in the pandemic, opinions around the impact of COVID-19 on children and adolescents ranged from it being no more than the common flu to fear of its potential impact on lesser-developed immune systems. This OHDSI global network study compared the real-world observational data of more than 242,000 children and adolescents diagnosed with COVID-19, including nearly 10,000 hospitalized youths, to more than 2,000,000 diagnosed with influenza across five countries (France, Germany, South Korea, Spain, and the United States) to provide a clearer picture of its impact. Asthma and obesity -- a common finding among a general pediatric population -- were the most common baseline comorbidities. There was also a higher prevalence of rare conditions, including congenital malformations, neurodevelopmental disorders, and heart disease, among those hospitalized with COVID-19. Pediatric patients with COVID-19 also showed higher rates of symptoms such as labored breathing, loss of smell and gastrointestinal symptoms than those with influenza, which could help improve early diagnosis of COVID-19 among this population. Adjunctive therapies were the most common treatment options in children and adolescents, though there was global heterogeneity on which particular therapies were used (systemic corticosteroids and famotidine were most common). The most common 30-day complications for hospitalized youths with COVID-19 were hypoxemia and pneumonia, both of which occurred at a higher rate than hospitalized influenza pediatric patients. There was limited knowledge of the COVID-19 impact on children and adolescents around the world during the first half of 2020, when the OHDSI community collaborated on the CHARYBDIS Project. Findings at the time ranged from a 5.7 % hospitalization rate to another that reported a 63% hospitalization rate. There was a need for reliable evidence on the demographics, comorbidities, symptoms, in-hospital treatments, and health outcomes among children and adolescents to inform clinical decision-making. Related StoriesStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders"This study addressed critical questions that were weighing down on both the healthcare community and the general population -- how was COVID-19 impacting our youngest population," said study lead Talita Duarte-Salles, PhD, an epidemiologist at IDIAP Jordi Gol in Barcelona, Spain, and first author of the study. "While some last year claimed that COVID-19 was no different than the flu, the real-world evidence we generated through open science showed something quite different. It was a relief to see that fatality was rare, but clearly both complications and symptoms showed the COVID-19 was no flu in children and adolescents." The study was developed and executed by the OHDSI (Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics) community, a multi-stakeholder, interdisciplinary network that collaborates globally to bring out the value of health data through open science and large-scale analytics. This study resulted from the CHARYBDIS Project, which has resulted in several published studies, including ones on general COVID-19 phenotyping, patients with autoimmune disease, and use of repurposed and adjunctive drug therapies. Several others are undergoing peer review and have been posted to a preprint server; OHDSI's work on COVID-19 can be found here. Columbia University serves as the Central Coordinating Center for the OHDSI community. Generating reliable evidence that can inform clinical decision-making for children and adolescents was so important, and it doesn't happen without collaboration and the foundation of open-source tools and practices developed for years in this network. It was truly inspiring the way our OHDSI community rallied together globally in the face of this unprecedented pandemic and collaborated together." Talita Duarte-Salles, PhD, Study Lead Author and Epidemiologist, IDIAP Jordi Gol Source:Columbia University Irving Medical CenterJournal reference:Talita, D-S., et al. (2021) 30-Day Outcomes of Children and Adolescents With COVID-19: An International Experience. Pediatrics. doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-042929. Posted in: Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News | Healthcare News Tags: Adolescents, Asthma, Autoimmune Disease, Breathing, Cardiology, Children, covid-19, Flu, Healthcare, Heart, Heart Disease, Hospital, Hypoxemia, Influenza, Obesity, Pandemic, Pediatrics, Pneumonia, Research, Veterans Affairs Comments (0) Download PDF Copy Suggested Reading Research links COVID-19 vaccines to temporary facial palsy in over 5,000 patientsMasks and smart seating cut COVID-19 risks on flights, review findsNew CDC report highlights disparities in flu hospitalization and vaccinationStudy reveals high effectiveness of flu vaccines in children but highlights challenges with certain subtypesNew study reveals long-term brainstem damage in COVID-19 survivors using advanced MRI scansCOVID-19 raises the risk of type 2 diabetes in children, study revealsStudy reveals how COVID-19 affected the spread and evolution of seasonal influenzaExclusive: Emails reveal how health departments struggle to track human cases of bird flu Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Children's Health (Subscribe or Preview) Asthma (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × H5N1 bird flu is mutating fast and jumping to mammals - could the next pandemic be here?Epic ResearchRSV Cases Dropped by 97% During the PandemicYou need to enable JavaScript to view this page.Epic Research is not viewable using Internet Explorer. Please try accessing it with an alternate browser.Lesotho: ninth African state to report avian flu in poultry | WATTPoultry.comMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSign InPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureRegionsMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesTop Feed CompaniesAgriculture ProductsDirectory of SuppliersEvent CalendarExpert InsightsWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesMoreSign InSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconSign InFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseBroilers & TurkeysDiseases & HealthAvian InfluenzaLesotho is ninth African state to report avian flu in poultrySo far this year, Lesotho has become the ninth African state to report highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in poultry. For the country surrounded by South Africa, it also represents the first occurrence of HPAI.Jackie LindenJune 7, 2021(BOLDG | Bigstock)So far this year, Lesotho has become the ninth African state to report highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in poultry. For the country surrounded by South Africa, it also represents the first occurrence of HPAI. The first outbreak to be officially registered with the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) was at a farm in the western district of Maseru. The presence of an H5 HPAI virus was confirmed after more than 800 of the 3,000 birds on the farm died in late May. The rest of the flock has been destroyed. The source of infection was attributed to the introduction of new birds at the premises. In the past few days, an earlier outbreak has been recorded in the north of Lesotho. From May 22, around 2,500 laying hens died at a farm in the Leribe district, around 100 kilometers from the other outbreak. So far, 2,800 of the birds there have been culled. Introduction of 2,880 pullets at point-of-lay are thought to be the source of the virus. Mali registers further HPAI outbreak A second outbreak linked to the H5N1 HPAI virus variant has been officially registered in this West African state. According to the latest OIE report, a second laying flock in Marakoforo in the Koulikoro region tested positive for this virus after around 30,000 of the 38,600 birds died at the end of April. The report states that officials have begun to survey farms in the area between the affected region — which is in the southwest of Mali and borders Mauritania — and the capital city, Bamako. With the first outbreak starting on April 9, the current HPAI outbreak “series” in Mali followed directly after another. Representing the first occurrence of the H5N1 HPAI virus in the country, the previous wave covered the period March 13-23 this year. It involved a total of 50,150 poultry located at two farms — one in Koulikoro and one in neighboring Sikasso — as well as a backyard flock in the Bamako city region. Latest South African HPAI cases affect three provinces In March of this year, the South African veterinary authority registered with the OIE first 10 outbreaks of HPAI. These were centered on the province of Gauteng. Cause of the outbreak was initially identified as a virus of the H5 group. Subsequently, it has emerged as an H5N1 virus. After a hiatus during April, further cases have now been confirmed. In the period May 6-23 were the 10 latest outbreaks that directly impacted just over 800,000 poultry. Affected were six farms and a backyard flock in Western Cape, two premises in Gauteng (one small farm and a backyard flock), and a first location in KwaZulu-Natal. Otherwise in this series now comprising 20 outbreaks, 10 have occurred in Gauteng, and nine in Western Cape (mainly around Cape Town). Of the around 837,600 birds directly affected, more than 22,400 have died, and almost 76,000 have been destroyed. Situation may be easing in South Africa’s other bird flu waves Between June of 2017 and November of 2020, South Africa was also battling to control an HPAI epidemic linked to the H5N8 virus variant. Starting in a broiler breeder flock in Mpumalanga, the infection spread to other provinces. The most recent confirmed cases were in a commercial ostrich flock in Western Cape at the end of last year. Last but not least, a low-pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) virus of the H5N2 subtype was detected at an ostrich farm in Western Cape in March, according to a recent official report to the OIE. Nine of the 682 birds tested positive for this virus. None died or was culled. The only other cases in this outbreak series were at another ostrich farm in the same district of Western Cape in August of 2020. Avian flu: another challenge for South Africa’s troubled poultry industry Already in struggling from cheap imports and the effects of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, South Africa is now facing a series of avian flu outbreaks. The poultry sector is preparing for a developing wave in the disease that could be as disastrous as the one in 2017, reports Business Live. That cost an estimated two billion rand (ZAR; US$148 million). Adding to the industry’s current challenges are rising feed costs. The avian flu crisis in South Africa is forecast to peak in around three months’ time, according to this source. Avian flu situation elsewhere in Africa H5N1, H5N8, and H5N6 subtypes of the HPAI virus with pandemic potential in countries have been detected in Sub-Saharan Africa since February of 2017, according to the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). As well as Mali and South Africa, the H5N1 variant has been reported in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire (Ivory Coast), Ghana, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, and Togo. Nigeria has detected the H5N6 virus, while the H5N8 variant has occurred in Cameroon, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda, and Zimbabwe. Israel reports HPAI in wild birds 'resolved' Between October of 2020 and April this year, Israel’s animal health agency registered with the OIE a total of 48 cases of the H5N8 HPAI virus in wild birds. The virus was detected in 17 different species — including in 36 swans — at eight locations across the country. Source of the infection is strongly suspected to be migrating birds, as the cases coincided with the peak movements of wild species. The most recent case was a stork that was found sick in Hadarom in early April, and subsequently died. At the time, the migration was in progress over the country of birds from Africa to Europe. South Korea continues elevated egg imports According to a recent report from the ministry of agriculture in South Korea, egg imports are set to continue for at least one more month. At a meeting last week, the ministry resolved to raise the import quota to 50 million eggs. The move followed import authorization of 40 million eggs in each of the preceding two months. Earlier outbreaks of HPAI in South Korea that hit hard the country’s laying flocks have been blamed for a shortage in domestic production and food price inflation in South Korea. Based on data supplied to the OIE, the latest HPAI wave in South Korea has involved a total of almost 10.26 million poultry, comprising 22,000 mortalities and 10.24 million more culls. Since the latest wave of HPAI hit the country in November of last year, 109 outbreaks of the disease have been confirmed in the country. However, two months have elapsed since the last cases in poultry or wild species, and migratory birds have returned to their summer territories. As a result, the HPAI alert level has been reduced to the lowest category. Last week, China reported what is thought to be the world’s first human infection with H10N3 influenza virus of avian origin. It is reported that the patient — a man in his 40s — has recovered. According to Chinese experts, this virus poses a “very low” risk of causing a large outbreak. View our continuing coverage of the global avian influenza situation.RecommendedLatest NewsUSPOULTRY holds seminarIndustry OrganizationsVirginia Egg Council’s Cecelia Glembocki to retireRelated StoriesAvian InfluenzaFirst known human case of H10N3 influenza in ChinaAvian InfluenzaSurge in South African avian flu outbreaksAvian InfluenzaHow to reduce avian flu spread at Asian poultry marketsAvian InfluenzaFrance develops roadmap to prevent return of avian fluMore in Avian InfluenzaAvian InfluenzaLatest Canadian HPAI infections involved variety of speciesOne more flock infection has been reported in Abbotsford, British Columbia.Brand InsightsVaccination success depends on crew trainingZoetisContinuous evaluation and training are critical to improving pullet vaccination accuracy.Avian InfluenzaHPAI hits 5 flocks in British Columbia, 1 in CaliforniaAPHIS provides additional information concerning two broiler flocks previously reported as confirmed cases.Avian InfluenzaAustralia commits more funds to H5N1 preparednessAustralian authorities add additional funds to surveillance, biosecurity, vaccines and communications in the face of possible H5N1 incursion.Avian InfluenzaAPHIS updates report on California HPAI casesFlock size numbers for two of four affected operations have been disclosed.Avian InfluenzaMore HPAI reported in California, British Columbia poultryBoth the state and the province have confirmed cases in two commercial flocks.Avian InfluenzaFirst avian flu outbreaks of the season in East AsiaHPAI cases have been reported in poultry and wild birds across Asia from Israel to Japan and South Korea.Avian InfluenzaAvian influenza strikes two California broiler flocksThe number of chickens involved has not yet been disclosed.North AmericaAvian flu infections continue to hit British ColumbiaThe province has had six commercial poultry flocks affected by the virus since October 21.Avian InfluenzaFrance confirms avian flu in vaccinated flocksDucks were found to be positive for the HPAI virus following routine testing, despite them showing no symptoms of the disease.Avian InfluenzaAvian flu hits second broiler flock in California countyThe latest flock infection in Tulare County involved 6,000 broilers.Avian InfluenzaSaskatchewan has first HPAI infection in poultry of 2024Canada’s two newest instances of avian influenza are confirmed in commercial flocks in Saskatchewan and British Columbia.Avian InfluenzaAvian influenza invades Oregon poultry flockThe state’s first avian flu infection of 2024 involved a commercial laying hen flock.Page 1 of 182Next PageNews and analysis for the global poultry industryFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconDelete My DataTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMoreWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsMedia RequestPrivacy PolicySite Map© 2024 All rights reserved.RACGP - Updated COVID vaccine advice: What GPs need to know Home About Clinical Authors Most read this year GP Opinion Videos & Podcasts Professional Comments policy RACGP poll Menu Search for: Advertising newsGP > Clinical Anastasia Tsirtsakis 10 Jun 2021 News Updated COVID vaccine advice: What GPs need to know Anastasia Tsirtsakis 10/06/2021 5:34:38 PM The new advice comes after news of a death with a ‘likely’ link to the AstraZeneca vaccine. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation is continuing to update its advice around the COVID vaccinations. One death and four new cases of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (TTS) have a ‘likely’ link to the AstraZeneca vaccine in the past week, according to the Therapeutic Goods Administration’s (TGA) latest safety report. The 52-year-old woman from New South Wales reportedly died after developing cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. The news comes as the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI) updated its latest advice for timing influenza and COVID-19 vaccines, halving its recommended window between vaccinations from a minimum of 14 days to seven. The advice, which applies to both AstraZeneca and Pfizer, has been welcomed by Melbourne GP Dr Magdalena Simonis, whose state has been facing a COVID outbreak since just before the beginning of winter. ‘We’ve been in a double-bind situation of knowing that we need to vaccinate [against COVID] rapidly and also needing to cover our communities against the flu because symptoms can appear very similar in the first instance,’ she told newsGP. ‘But this is a new territory, and we have had to tread very slowly and carefully when introducing new things to our vaccination programs, and so we had to step back and wait to see what the effects and aftereffects of the [COVID] vaccines would be.’ Dr Simonis says the shorter timeframe between vaccinations also gives GPs the opportunity to check in with patients, to note any health issues or potential side effects they may have experienced. ‘For example, “I’ve got a sore arm” or “I still have aching joints” or “I had a really bad headache for three days”,’ she said. ‘It gives you the opportunity to give them the assurance that you’re there for any follow-up discussion. So all of that becomes demystified.’ In certain situations, however, the advisory group has said an interval shorter than seven days, including co-administration of the vaccines, ‘is acceptable’. This includes instances where: there is increased risk of COVID-19 or another vaccine-preventable disease (eg COVID-19 outbreak, influenza outbreak, tetanus-prone wound) logistical issues (eg difficulty scheduling visits to maintain the seven-day interval). It was also announced last month that aged care residents no longer have to adhere to the recommended two-week interval. While either vaccine can be administered first, ATAGI has suggested that GPs prioritise COVID-19 vaccines for patients who are currently eligible. ATAGI’s current advice for AstraZeneca as the recommended vaccine for those aged over 50 remains. (Image: AAP) ATAGI has also updated its advice for pregnant women, recommending that they be routinely offered the Pfizer vaccine at any stage of pregnancy. ‘This is because the risk of severe outcomes from COVID-19 is significantly higher for pregnant women and their unborn baby,’ an ATAGI statement reads. ‘Global surveillance data from large numbers of pregnant women have not identified any significant safety concerns with mRNA COVID-19 vaccines given at any stage of pregnancy. ‘Furthermore, there is also evidence of antibody in cord blood and breastmilk, which may offer protection to infants through passive immunity.’ The advisory group has also assured that women who are trying to become pregnant do not need to delay vaccination, or avoid becoming pregnant after vaccination. Dr Simonis said the recommendation is sure to be a relief for many women, including those working in healthcare. ‘We expected this because we knew that … the World Health Organization recommendation has been that Pfizer is safe in pregnancy,’ she said. ‘In the US, UK and Italy, findings there haven’t been any increased ill effects like clotting or negative outcomes with babies born.’ ATAGI’s current advice for AstraZeneca as the recommended vaccine for those aged over 50 remains. But some hesitancy continues in the community. The RACGP has been advised of older patients presenting to a state-run mass vaccination hub to receive Pfizer, with a letter from their GP detailing pre-existing conditions such as deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and atrial fibrillation (AF), but have been turned away. Based on advice from ATAGI, the only contraindications to receiving AstraZeneca are: a history of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis a history of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia a history of idiopathic splanchnic (mesenteric, portal and splenic) venous thrombosis anti-phospholipid syndrome with thrombosis. It is also recommended that people should not receive a second dose of AstraZeneca if they have experienced: anaphylaxis to a previous dose of the vaccine, or to an ingredient of the vaccine thrombosis with thrombocytopenia occurring after the first dose other serious adverse events attributed to the first dose. For people aged under 50 who received their first dose of AstraZeneca without any serious adverse events, it remains advised that they can receive the second dose. Dr Magdalena Simonis says the relaxed TGA advertising regulations for COVID vaccines came as a relief for GPs. During the Department of Health’s (DoH) recent webinar, First Assistant Secretary for the COVID-19 Primary Care Response, Dr Lucas de Toca, said it is not yet known whether eligibility for Pfizer will be opened to all age groups. ‘We don’t know what the situation will be later in the year. We do know that we will have more access to other vaccines, or so we hope. But ultimately, the policy at the moment is this,’ he said. ‘So the choice is not really right now AstraZeneca or Pfizer if you’re 50 years and over. Their choice is a good COVID-19 vaccine like the AstraZeneca one or no vaccine for the foreseeable future. ‘But it is a difficult and tricky conversation.’ Canberra GP Dr Clara Tuck Meng Soo said mixed messaging from the Federal Government, with Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt seemingly advising older patients that they could hold out for Pfizer later in the year, has added to the challenge for GPs. ‘At the moment, I would say [to patients] that we have no information about how that might change, and I tend to actually try to discuss with them what the reasons are for their current hesitancy,’ she said. ‘[But] I think going through the information we have really helps them, and I found that another thing that has been really persuasive for my patients is actually telling them that I’ve actually had the AstraZeneca vaccine myself. That does help a lot.’ To assist GPs in addressing vaccine hesitancy, the TGA has announced new arrangements that allow health professionals to develop their own materials about COVID vaccination, provided the content is consistent with Government messaging and does not contain: references to specific brands of vaccines, or compare different COVID-19 vaccines statements that COVID-19 vaccines cannot cause harm or have no side effects any statement that is false or misleading promotion of any vaccine that has not been approved by the TGA. According to the regulator, the new arrangements, which will be in place until the end of 2022, will give health professionals ‘more flexibility to contribute to the national conversation about vaccination’ to enhance vaccine uptake ‘by publicly supporting vaccination and counter misinformation’. Dr Simonis said the news came as a relief for GPs, giving them the confidence to use the knowledge they have acquired. ‘GPs found themselves in a really tricky situation … because the media were taking certain messages around the side effects and potential risks, but not putting them in the perspective that we have,’ she said. ‘So that media impact overrode our professional authority and our professional voice … making it harder for us to achieve the outcomes because the community out there was losing faith and confidence. ‘So this now is an opportunity for us. ‘It’s flu season coupled with the opportunity now to issue the vaccines in close succession and have this continuing conversation with our patients to reinforce their confidence in this process. Then they can also encourage others to come and have their vaccines.’ Log in below to join the conversation. advertising AstraZeneca coronavirus COVID pregnancy TGA vaccines newsGP weekly poll Which of the RACGP GP24 conference’s key themes are you most interested in? Technology and AI 50%Environmental health 0%GP wellbeing 0%Future of the GP workforce 50% Related Identifying and treating vaccine-linked blood clots in general practice New vaccine advice for aged care residents Who can get the COVID vaccine in your part of the country? Anaphylaxis in less than 1% of ‘highly allergic’ after Pfizer: Study Do pregnant women have different reactions to COVID vaccines? How can Australia’s vaccine rollout be repaired? newsGP weekly poll Which of the RACGP GP24 conference’s key themes are you most interested in? Technology and AIEnvironmental healthGP wellbeingFuture of the GP workforce Advertising Advertising Login to comment Dr Ian 11/06/2021 6:41:07 AM At the first symptom or sign of possible Thrombosis with Thrombocytopenia that is Headache more than mild and persisting Chest Pain Abdominal pain any Shortness of breathe -a D dimer ought be performed and repeated weekly from day 4 after the vaccine .This has to be discussed .Headache is the dilemma .It is common after vaccination with Oxford-AstraZeneca but how often by day 3 or 4 and how long does it last and is it ameliorated by paracetamol or NSAIDS . Dr Vishal Kohli 11/06/2021 7:45:00 AM I thought we weren't allowed to "promote" either vaccine. By saying "I've had the [brand] vaccine" aren't you doing just that? When my patients ask me if ive had it, I tell them im not allowed to say. My choice either way will sway them. Either yes I got it, so my patient will get it too. Or no I didn't get it, well ok, "so my dr didn't get it, so I won't either". Following Recommendations 11/06/2021 12:44:35 PM I think this is one of the most important pieces to be strongly noted from this article - Based on advice from ATAGI, the only contraindications to receiving AstraZeneca are: •a history of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis•a history of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia•a history of idiopathic splanchnic (mesenteric, portal and splenic) venous thrombosis•anti-phospholipid syndrome with thrombosis.Referring patients inappropriately to Pfizer clinics potentially delays vaccination and increases hesitancy. Dr Mark Robert Miller 12/06/2021 1:04:19 AM "It is also recommended that people should not receive a second dose of AstraZeneca if they have experienced: anaphylaxis to a previous dose of the vaccine, or to an ingredient of the vaccinethrombosis with thrombocytopenia occurring after the first doseother serious adverse events attributed to the first dose."What is the current definition to this last line "other serious adverse events attributed to the first dose" is thrombosis without thrombocytopenia classed as a serious ADR and is it ATAGI or the GP who decides if the ADR is vaccine attributable? Given we are not provided with individual feedback on any notified ADR to vaccine that I am aware of from the process of notification, this third line requires more detailed clarification. Also then what is the protocol for a recommended second dose in this situation, a single dose is not as effective as two doses? Also mixing vaccine seems to be holding up around the globe as something worthy of further research. newsGP Terms and conditions | Privacy statement | RACGP | recruitGP | AJGP © 2018 The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) ABN 34 000 223 807