The evolution and future of influenza pandemic preparedness | Experimental & Molecular Medicine Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature experimental & molecular medicine review articles article The evolution and future of influenza pandemic preparedness Download PDF Download PDF Review Article Open access Published: 06 May 2021 The evolution and future of influenza pandemic preparedness Walter N. Harrington ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3314-584X1 na1, Christina M. Kackos1,2 na1 & Richard J. Webby1 Experimental & Molecular Medicine volume 53, pages 737–749 (2021)Cite this article 30k Accesses 109 Citations 135 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Infectious diseasesInfluenza virus AbstractThe influenza virus is a global threat to human health causing unpredictable yet recurring pandemics, the last four emerging over the course of a hundred years. As our knowledge of influenza virus evolution, distribution, and transmission has increased, paths to pandemic preparedness have become apparent. In the 1950s, the World Health Organization (WHO) established a global influenza surveillance network that is now composed of institutions in 122 member states. This and other surveillance networks monitor circulating influenza strains in humans and animal reservoirs and are primed to detect influenza strains with pandemic potential. Both the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the WHO have also developed pandemic risk assessment tools that evaluate specific aspects of emerging influenza strains to develop a systematic process of determining research and funding priorities according to the risk of emergence and potential impact. Here, we review the history of influenza pandemic preparedness and the current state of preparedness, and we propose additional measures for improvement. We also comment on the intersection between the influenza pandemic preparedness network and the current SARS-CoV-2 crisis. We must continually evaluate and revise our risk assessment and pandemic preparedness plans and incorporate new information gathered from research and global crises. Similar content being viewed by others Outlook of pandemic preparedness in a post-COVID-19 world Article Open access 20 November 2023 Hindsight is 2020? Lessons in global health governance one year into the pandemic Article 15 March 2021 Optimal intervention strategies to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic effects Article Open access 12 April 2022 IntroductionInfluenza has plagued humanity for centuries. Influenza A and B viruses are endemic in humans and responsible for annual epidemics across the globe. In addition to annual epidemics, influenza A viruses were responsible for four pandemics from 1918 to 2009 (Fig. 1). Aquatic avian species are the natural reservoir of influenza A viruses, which have adapted to infect many other animals, including swine, domestic poultry, dogs, horses, and others1. This adaptation has provided ample hosts from which zoonotic strains may transmit to humans. The influenza virus has eight gene segments, each of which can be substituted through genetic reassortment when two or more viruses infect the same cell to ultimately produce a novel variant2.Fig. 1: History of influenza pandemics.There have been four influenza pandemics since the turn of the 20th century, occurring in 1918 (H1N1), 1957 (H2N2), 1968 (H3N2), and 2009 (H1N1). This timeline shows the temporal and genetic reassortment relationships among each of the pandemic influenza subtypes.Full size imageHost diversity and gene segmentation were responsible for the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, in which a series of reassortment events among avian, human H3N2, and swine H1N1 viruses via swine produced a novel influenza strain that was transmitted among humans (Fig. 1)3. Although the 2009 H1N1 pandemic was comparatively mild in most age groups, the events that led to its emergence demonstrate the unpredictability of influenza pandemics. Furthermore, the 2009 H1N1 pandemic highlighted the need for a comprehensive framework to evaluate influenza strains for their likelihood of emergence and public health risk. Accordingly, both the World Health Organization (WHO) and United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) created scoring systems to evaluate prepandemic influenza viruses in three primary categories: (1) properties of the virus, (2) attributes of the human population, and (3) viral ecology and epidemiology4,5.We review our tangled history with influenza that has influenced our pandemic response and examine our current methods of preparedness, including influenza surveillance and current risk assessment criteria. Furthermore, we evaluate how the CDC and WHO pandemic risk assessment tools affected our response to H7N9 outbreaks after the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, how these tools may be used to manage the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, and the future outlooks of and goals for influenza pandemic preparedness.Influenza pandemic and preparedness historyIt is generally acknowledged that influenza pandemics have long been a part of human history. Reports describe bouts of influenza-like respiratory disease as far back as 412 BC, with fifteen likely influenza pandemics occurring after the 1700s when descriptions became more reliable6. It was not until the 1930s, however, that the causative agent, influenza virus, was isolated with Koch’s postulates being fulfilled7. The improvements in virus growth and handling that followed allowed for mass production and quantification, which were critical steps toward the subsequent development of a vaccine. This vaccine was followed in the 1940s with studies conducted by the United States Military. The overall vaccination strategy used in these seminal studies is soberingly similar to that used for most influenza vaccines today. Virus harvested from the allantoic fluid of embryonated hen eggs inoculated 48 h prior was concentrated, inactivated, and administered subcutaneously. The first studies of this vaccine were successful, and the immunization of military personnel8 represented the first rationally designed pharmaceutical intervention against influenza. While sporadically used in intervening years, further studies of the same vaccine in 1947 were unable to identify any positive benefit, with the authors postulating the failure due to “the lack of sufficient antigenic crossing between strains of virus in the vaccine and the prevalent strain responsible for the epidemic”9. In response to this growing realization of the variable nature of influenza, in 1947, the Global Influenza Programme (GIP) was established within the WHO10. This initiative started with the designation of the World Influenza Centre at the Medical Research Council of Great Britain. The impetus for establishing this program was articulated as being driven by memories of the 1918 pandemic, the highly infectious nature of the disease, and the speed of its spread and economic impact on countries. Correspondingly, the stated objectives of the GIP were to plan against possible recurrence of a pandemic, devise control methods, and limit economic impact from which influenza pandemic preparedness was essentially born. A further review of the driving forces behind GIP implementation shows how astute the supporters of these early efforts were and how their statements still hold true. In his announcement of the GIP, Payne from the WHO Division of Communicable Disease Services, although it was unclear at that time how influenza maintained itself between seasonal epidemics, surmised that (1) successful vaccination against influenza depends on knowledge of the virus causing epidemics, (2) continuous vigilance is necessary to detect new and potentially dangerous strains of virus at the earliest possible moment, and (3) epidemiological reports can be correctly interpreted only in terms of laboratory studies of the viruses responsible10. Despite the WHO influenza monitoring system (now called the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response Network (GISRS)) currently having been expanded to 144 laboratories in 122 countries11, every one of these tenants rings true today.Influenza preparednessSurveillanceA key component of pandemic preparedness is the ability to detect novel influenza strains as they emerge in the human population. These strains emerge through spillover events from animal reservoirs to humans and must be detected as quickly as possible before sustained human-to-human transmission12. Within the last 20 years, multiple influenza zoonotic events have been detected (Fig. 2); therefore, the surveillance of the influenza strains circulating in humans and animals, particularly in avian and swine species, is crucial for early detection, an endeavor supported by the GISRS and other international agencies such as the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations.Fig. 2: Prepandemic influenza and preparedness.A combined timeline indicating the temporal relationships between emerging potential pandemic strains (with accompanying animal reservoirs) and steps taken to improve pandemic preparedness. Dashed arrows indicate continuing outbreaks for each strain after they first emerged.Full size imageAs innovations such as hunting, animal domestication, industrialization, and sprawling urbanization have increased human interactions with various animal species and their accompanying zoonoses, the likelihood of spillover events has consequently also increased. For influenza, the presence of large, live-bird markets provides an environment for such interactions with influenza viruses. In 1997, a fatal respiratory disease developed in a child in Hong Kong and was caused by an H5N1 avian influenza virus13. Seventeen additional H5N1 infections were detected later that year, killing one-third of those infected14. Culling poultry, cleaning, and monitoring the live-bird markets in Hong Kong eliminated new human cases of H5N1 until its reemergence in 200314,15.Culling is currently the most effective strategy to reduce or prevent the transmission of influenza viruses in poultry, although large-scale vaccination efforts may also curb their spread16. The surveillance of live-bird markets and other high-risk areas with similar conditions is critical for understanding the geographic distribution of circulating influenza viruses, a key component of influenza pandemic risk assessment. International, national, and academic stakeholders must also continue to synchronously guide global influenza research and public health responses, sharing reagents and other resources to support surveillance and research on influenza virus evolution and transmission.Laboratory examinationBasic research on influenza pathogenesis, evolution, and host interactions lays the foundation for all pandemic preparedness strategies. Key insights into transmission and natural reservoirs directly affect the surveillance and risk assessment of emerging strains4,17,18. Two research fields have expanded our understanding of influenza infections: viral pathogenesis and host immune responses19,20.Laboratory research can reveal crucial insights into the pathogenesis of different influenza strains and guide assessments of risk. The reassortment of genetic material from influenza strain coinfections is a driver of pandemic virus emergence21,22,23. Although hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) glycoproteins on the surface of the virus are generally considered drivers of influenza infectivity and pathogenesis, studies have shown that internal genes (e.g., polymerase genes24,25) can confer disease severity characteristics to novel influenza strains26,27.Pathogenesis studies are facilitated through in vitro and in vivo laboratory models that provide key information on viral traits and host immune response. For example, avian and mammalian culture methods are used as surrogate indicators for human infection and vaccine protection28,29. In addition, the ferret influenza model is leveraged to predict pathogenicity and transmissibility in humans, even discerning between direct and aerosol-contact modes of transmission30,31.Risk assessment toolsWith much focus at the time on avian H5N1 viruses, the 2009 H1N1 pandemic illuminated the need for a standardized system to assess the potential risks of emerging and circulating influenza strains and to allocate the limited time and financial resources available to research, prevention, and treatment. After the 2009 pandemic, two major risk assessment tools were developed to meet this need, combining insights from surveillance and laboratory work to develop a general framework for overall potential pandemic risk. These tools are careful to state that they do not predict which pandemic strain will emerge next but rather outline systematic methods for deciding research and funding priorities for emerging strains. Both require input from subject matter experts who score individual elements for a given virus.In 2010, the CDC created the Influenza Risk Assessment Tool (IRAT) to guide strategic decisions for future influenza pandemic preparedness32. The IRAT evaluates prepandemic influenza viruses not currently circulating in humans based on ten characteristics, weighted according to perceived pandemic risk: (1) genomic variation, (2) receptor binding, (3) transmission in animal models, (4) antiviral susceptibility, (5) immunity in humans, (6) disease severity, (7) antigenic similarity to currently circulating strains in humans, (8) global distribution in animals, (9) animal species infected, and (10) human infections32.In 2016, the WHO developed the Tool for Influenza Pandemic Risk Assessment (TIPRA) to estimate the pandemic risk of emerging influenza strains4. The TIPRA was modeled closely after the IRAT, with 9 risk elements: (1) receptor binding properties, (2) genomic characteristics, (3) transmission in animal models, (4) susceptibility to antiviral treatment, (5) human infection, (6) disease severity, (7) population immunity, (8) geographic distribution in animals, and (9) infections in animals. The TIPRA estimates the risk of sustained human-to-human transmission of emerging viruses.Both the IRAT and the TIPRA are multielement additive models with weighted categories, with each weight determined through expert consultation and discussion. Figure 3 is a graphical representation of the relative relationships between elements from the IRAT and TIPRA. Additional risk assessment tools, such as FLURISK, have also been proposed33. Below, we discuss the strengths and weaknesses of these elements and offer suggestions for improvement.Fig. 3: Weighted risk assessment elements to estimate emergence and impact risks for prepandemic influenza strains.Schematic graph indicating the relative weights that each of the risk elements defined by the IRAT and TIPRA contribute to the overall assessment scores for emergence and impact risk of an emergent influenza strain.Full size imageDefining risk assessment characteristicsThe risk elements defined by the IRAT and TIPRA are grouped into three general categories (Fig. 3): (1) viral properties, (2) human population attributes, and (3) viral ecology/epidemiology in animal hosts. Furthermore, they encompass two dimensions of prepandemic strains: (1) their likelihood of developing into a pandemic strain (emergence) and (2) their level of severity in a pandemic (impact).(1) Viral propertiesGenomic characteristicsWhen assessing the pandemic risk of an influenza virus, genomic characteristics can help predict how viral strains will behave before the behavior is observed in the field. General patterns of virulence and transmission are associated with specific genetic markers in the influenza genome26. For example, if a virus is markedly divergent from endemic strains, especially in the HA or NA genes, it has a higher probability of presenting novel antigens to the population, making pandemic spread more likely. If novel viruses are already circulating in mammals, they may contain genetic signatures associated with human infectivity and/or virulence and would score more highly in this element. Such considerations should be factored into assessing the potential pandemic risk of novel influenza viruses.Receptor bindingReceptor binding is a key barrier that avian, and possible mammalian, influenza viruses must overcome to infect and transmit in humans34. Influenza viruses use cell surface glycans with sialic acid to bind and enter cells. Most of these cell surface glycans on human airway epithelial cells contain α2,6 linkages, whereas those on avian cells typically contain α2,3 linkages35. Therefore, influenza strains well adapted to α2,3 linkages must gain mutations that facilitate binding to α2,6 linkages to cross the species barrier into humans. Swine species provide a prime environment for the selection of receptor binding mutations, as cells in the trachea of swine contain a mixture of α2,3 and α2,6 linkages on their surface36,37. Receptor binding can be assessed by glycan-binding assays, but recent data suggest that primary human cell models are more physiologically relevant indicators of receptor binding properties38. These properties are factored into pandemic risk potential estimates.Transmission in animal modelsThe ferret model is particularly important for the prediction of human transmissibility, measuring both direct- and aerosol-contact–mediated transmission39,40. In the direct-contact model, infected and noninfected ferrets are housed together, sharing space, food, and water. In the aerosol-contact model, infected and noninfected ferrets are housed near each other to permit airborne transmission of respiratory droplets without direct contact. These two models can provide crucial information about whether prepandemic strains are likely to demonstrate sustained human-to-human transmission. For example, a strain that transmits via direct and aerosol contact in an animal model has a higher risk potential of sustained transmission than one that transmits via direct contact alone.Susceptibility to antiviral treatmentOnce a novel influenza virus reaches the pandemic level, the determination of appropriate treatment options is vital41,42. However, novel therapeutics against influenza strains resistant to current treatment options typically take years of research and clinical trials to produce. Thus, susceptibility to antiviral treatment should be a major factor for risk assessments of prepandemic strains. This criterion is important to guide the allocation of research and resources towards prepandemic strains that have the highest chance of presenting major treatment challenges should they cross the host-species barrier.(2) Human population attributesPopulation immunityInfluenza pandemic risk assessments must also consider population immunity to emerging strains. Antibody responses to HA and NA surface glycoproteins are primary markers of protective immunity43. Therefore, emerging influenza viruses that are antigenically similar to seasonal influenza strains endemic in humans are more likely to be hindered by population immunity. Conversely, influenza strains originating from animal reservoirs with novel HA or NA subtypes are more likely to cause pandemics.Human infectionUnfortunately, our best predictor of human infection potential is provided by evidence of past human infection. As such, viruses such as the A/goose/Guangdong/1/96-lineage H5N1 viruses, which have caused hundreds of human infections with a mortality rate of ~60%44, are postulated to be of higher risk than an H14 virus that has never been found in humans. However, despite circulating for over 20 years, human-to-human transmission of H5N1 is rare, and infection is typically acquired through close contact with infected birds, lowering its pandemic risk45,46,47. Thus, quantities of past human infections do not necessarily correlate directly with the ability for pandemic spread.Antigenic relatednessA large determinant of our ability to control the spread of pandemic influenza strains is the availability of vaccines to increase population immunity and limit the number of naïve hosts for infection. However, changes to influenza vaccines typically require at least 6 months from conception to final licensing and distribution48. Although SARS-CoV-2 vaccines are being produced in record time, with candidates moving from preclinical testing to phase III trials in under 1 year49, countless individuals may become infected and succumb to the virus even with expedited vaccine production. Existing seasonal or pandemic influenza vaccine stockpiles may minimize the impact of an emerging strain if they are sufficiently antigenically related to the emerging virus. As the antigenic distance between seasonal and pandemic strains increases, the efficacy of existing vaccines decreases50. This particular element is one of the few present in only one of the risk assessment tools (the IRAT).(3) Virus ecology/epidemiology in animal hostsInfection in animalsMany different animal models are used in influenza research, including mice, chickens, pigs, hamsters, guinea pigs, and ferrets51. The ferret is the gold standard to predict and/or study how influenza strains behave in humans because ferrets recapitulate human influenza infections and have a prominence of α2,6 linkages on their airway epithelial cells31,52,53. The infectability of ferrets provides some indication of how well a virus is adapted to infect humans.As interaction between an infected animal population and humans is a clear requirement for pandemic virus emergence, the host animal reservoir of a virus is an important consideration. For example, a virus circulating widely in backyard poultry is more likely to come into contact with a human host than a virus in a population of wild birds.Geographic distribution in animalsGeographic distribution in animals considers both the location and the speed of spread of prepandemic strains. Assessing viral locality indicates how easily a virus can be contained. Strains that are only locally distributed exhibit slow to moderate spread that occurs for understandable and predictable reasons (e.g., animals are moved from one farm to another) or are contained in single animal populations have a low to moderate risk of causing pandemics. Strains that are distributed widely, show unpredictable spread to other populations, or spread rapidly have a high risk of causing pandemics. A virus with a wider geographic distribution is also more likely to encounter a susceptible human host.H7N9: a test caseH1, H2, and H3 are the only influenza subtypes known to cause pandemics. However, recent outbreaks of the H5, H7 and H9 subtypes have raised alarms regarding their pandemic potential54,55,56. Therefore, we use the recent H7N9 outbreaks to evaluate our current pandemic risk assessment and assess the strengths and weaknesses of our current level of preparedness.H7N9 was first isolated in humans in March 2013 and has since caused 1,567 human cases and 615 deaths, a concerning mortality rate57. H7N9 is a novel reassortment avian lineage virus that most likely acquired internal genes from an H9N2 avian virus, an HA gene from a duck H7N3 virus, and an NA gene from an H7N9 virus circulating in migratory birds26. Human H7N9 outbreaks occurred in six waves in China, the latest occurring in 2017, with most cases linked to direct exposure to birds58.Early identification and risk assessments led to a quick response from the research community. The novel strain responsible for the first case in March 2013 was reviewed according to the pandemic risk assessment model by August of that year26, and candidate prepandemic H7N9 vaccines were identified and recommended by the WHO by the summer of 201359. Subsequently, many researchers began studying H7N9 in vitro and in vivo.The H7N9 genome contains mutations that increase human receptor binding and replication, a lack of multiple basic amino acids at the HA cleavage site (leading to low pathogenicity and undetected spread in birds), and an internal NS-associated gene constellation from H9N2 that led to high pathogenicity when reassorted into the highly pathogenic H5N1 outbreak in 199726. These mutations may contribute to its high pathogenicity and mortality rate in humans.H7N9 emergence was a driving factor for developing the TIPRA, and by early 2018, this tool was used to evaluate the risk of this and similar prepandemic strains4,32. H7N9 scored highest for risk potential among 14 animal-origin viruses, ranking high for both emergence and impact risk32. H7N9 is concerning for its pandemic risk, and many resources in research and surveillance are consequently dedicated to this strain.Since 2013, the H7N9 virus has diverged into two major, antigenically distinct genetic lineages. Fortunately, there is evidence to suggest that stockpiled prepandemic vaccines developed against the early 2013 H7N9 viruses will be effective against each lineage. The vaccination of humans with these stockpiled vaccines elicited antibodies that were able to mediate antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and neuraminidase inhibition of the antigenically drifted A(H7N9) viruses60. H7N9 is not yet capable of sustained human-to-human transmission, a key determinate in causing pandemics. Since its first infection in humans, many resources have been dedicated to this response to this virus, resulting in a vast knowledge base. With prepandemic vaccines stockpiled, cell line and animal models optimized, and the surveillance system on alert, we are relatively confident that a quick response can be mounted should H7N9 gain the ability of sustained human-to-human transmission. However, we should always be evaluating and updating our current pandemic plans as we gain new information.FutureThe future of influenza pandemic preparedness: goals and outlooks for the next decadeAs we move into the future of influenza pandemic preparedness, we must continue to improve metrics for pandemic risk assessments and our ability to respond to and mitigate such events. Areas for continued investment include surveillance and coordination among research laboratories, risk assessment criteria, vaccines and therapeutics, and clear and cohesive public health strategies and messaging. Fig. 4 presents an integrated system workflow that incorporates current and proposed elements of influenza pandemic preparedness and response.Fig. 4: Ideal pandemic response workflow.A schematic workflow of the ideal pandemic response from prepandemic surveillance detection to widespread vaccine distribution.Full size imageSurveillanceEffective influenza pandemic responses rely on rapid detection and identification of emerging strains. Expanded sampling of animal species and human infections increases the likelihood that such strains will be detected early. Continued collaboration among human and animal health influenza surveillance centers will ensure that reagents are appropriately shared, developed, and validated. Furthermore, these centers must be poised to respond when prepandemic influenza strains are identified, including maintaining adequate containment facilities and identification reagents.To ensure the ability of these centers to identify and respond to emerging strains, surveillance efforts should be broadened. Increased funding of pandemic preparedness efforts would allow for expanded sampling of zoonotic viruses, as well as the development of reagents and techniques to more precisely assess the risk posed by these viruses. Furthermore, increased support of such efforts would result in a larger arsenal of countermeasures, such as therapeutics, which may be deployed when high-risk prepandemic influenza strains are identified. Funding for surveillance is, shortsightedly, very difficult to maintain long term in the absence of emerging events.Laboratory researchThe study of differential genetic mutation rates among influenza RNA-dependent RNA polymerases may be particularly relevant to pandemic risk assessments. Although the overall mutation rate of influenza has been explored, new methods can compare mutation rates among different influenza strains61. Higher mutation rates are linked to greater population diversity and thus have higher potential to evade host immune responses and develop resistance to antivirals62,63. Tools that can quickly identify strains with high mutation rates or RNA-dependent RNA polymerases with a high propensity for introducing mutations during replication can inform the evaluation of strains for their pandemic potential. Our ability to predict pandemic risk also requires a far larger arsenal of molecular markers of viral phenotypes. The sequencing of viruses is becoming increasingly cheaper and of higher throughput, and the more information that we can glean from sequencing data alone, the stronger our preparedness will be.Assessment criteriaAs our understanding of influenza viral dynamics and disease pathology grows, we must use this knowledge to expand and refine the assessment criteria for evaluating prepandemic strains. Although the risk assessment categories comprehensively represent our current understanding of the factors contributing to emerging influenza strains, other viral and host factors may play an underappreciated role in influenza pandemic probability.For example, we suggest that the acid stability variability between HAs of different subtypes should be considered as a new factor in the assessment criteria. During the viral life cycle, HA binds to the terminal sialic acids of host cell receptors for virion internalization to initiate infections. HA is translated, glycosylated, and acetylated into the trimeric precursor protein HA0, which is functionally inactive and cannot facilitate endocytosis or macropinocytosis for viral entry into cells64,65. The HA0 precursor is activated via cleavage into the HA1/HA2 complex, a high-energy complex that undergoes conformational changes at low pH to enable membrane fusion66. This pH-dependent conformational change suggests that the stability of HA subtypes varies in differing environments. Accordingly, the pH at which HA0 cleavage occurs differs among subtypes. Influenza subtypes endemic in humans are relatively stable, whereas emerging subtypes in humans have a higher pH of activation. Swine isolates have activation pH values that span those found in human isolates, and avian isolates have wide-ranging activation pH values. Mutations that alter HA stability occur across several subtypes in different species67. Therefore, pH-dependent HA stability may have important implications for influenza virion transmission within mammalian hosts. In support of this, multiple studies in mice and ferrets revealed that the stabilization of H5 contributes to gain-of-function airborne transmission of H5N1 in ferrets and facilitates enhanced upper respiratory tract replication68,69,70.Although the complete mechanism of pH-dependent HA stabilization is unknown, environmental stability most likely plays a role. A lower activation pH of H5N1 is associated with greater environmental persistence and may prevent premature extracellular activation in the mammalian respiratory tract. To fully understand this mechanism and the association of HA stability with host range, further studies are needed. However, early findings on HA stability in viral adaptation to human hosts suggest that HA activation pH should be included in the influenza risk assessment framework.Vaccines and therapeuticsOur ability to combat future influenza pandemics lies largely in the therapeutics and vaccines at our disposal. When the next influenza pandemic strain emerges, controlling its spread will be determined by our ability to treat infected patients and prevent others from becoming infected. Although no one-size-fits-all treatments are available, either therapeutically or prophylactically, the development of such treatments is being actively investigated.Until recently, only three useful antiviral therapeutics have been licensed for use within the United States: oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir. All three are NA inhibitors and are most effective when taken early in infections71. Though these therapeutics have been beneficial, an expanded repertoire of therapeutics and therapeutic classes is needed to effectively combat seasonal and pandemic influenza strains. For this reason, new treatment strategies are being explored and developed. For example, baloxavir targets the endonuclease activity of the influenza acidic polymerase protein, thereby preventing the polymerase from performing its essential cap-snatching function and disrupting influenza gene transcription72. However, mutations that confer resistance to baloxavir have already been detected, specifically, a mutation causing an I38T substitution in the acidic polymerase protein. An isolate with this mutation was reported in a patient treated with baloxavir in Japan73. Although baloxavir is still promising, the emergence of resistant influenza strains must continue to be monitored, and additional therapeutics must be developed.The best defense against seasonal or pandemic influenza is vaccination. Currently, seasonal vaccines are administered annually; these vaccines contain H1N1, H3N2, and influenza B antigens, with a standardized amount of HA as the primary antigenic target74. These vaccines are specific to strains with minimal cross-reactivity and confer 40% to 60% protective efficacy when well matched75. However, limited cross-reactivity decreases the likelihood that seasonal vaccines can protect against pandemic strains. Furthermore, the vaccine production process is not ideal during a pandemic. Isolating a pandemic strain, growing it into a seed stock, propagating it into large quantities, inactivating and purifying it, and then mass distributing it is a lengthy and cumbersome process. Further, if the pandemic strain is highly pathogenic, biosafety regulations mandate their handling in high-containment facilities, limiting manufacturing capacity. It is possible to genetically modify these highly pathogenic viruses to where they can be handled at lower containment, but the associated process and required testing add complications and time to the vaccine production timeline. Two approaches may be used to engineer more effective vaccines: (1) universal influenza vaccines that induce broad cross-reactivity against many influenza subtypes and (2) vaccine platforms that are scalable and can be rapidly produced in response to an emerging novel strain.Universal influenza vaccines are currently being investigated76. Multiple antigenic targets for a more broadly protective vaccine are being explored, all with varying benefits and challenges. One such target is NA. Anti-HA and anti-NA antibodies both correlate with protection from infection and disease, with anti-NA antibodies serving as an independent correlate of protection77,78.Anti-HA antibodies are most strongly associated with preventing infections, whereas anti-NA antibody titers correlate with reduced amount and duration of viral shedding and reduced duration and severity of symptoms during infections79. Anti-HA antibodies typically have limited cross-reactivity because of their specificity to the HA head region, which undergoes regular antigenic drift in its epitopes80. Anti-NA antibodies confer a larger breadth of protection, with polyclonal sera generally having some limited inhibitory activity against NAs of the same subtype to which the sera were generated81. Although NA undergoes antigenic drift at a lower rate than HA, leading to more conserved epitopes across strains and broader protection82,83, whether this rate is maintained with widespread NA-based vaccinations and thereby focused immune pressure on NA is unclear.The HA stalk is another antigenic target under investigation. Although the head of HA undergoes antigenic drift at a considerable rate and is highly variable across subtypes, the HA stalk region is more conserved. Broadly neutralizing anti-HA stalk antibodies have been isolated from humans, but these antibodies comprise only a minor fraction of polyclonal sera84. Anti-HA stalk antibodies may be generated by vaccinating with the HA stalk protein lacking the globular head because the head domain is immunodominant85. However, the removal of the head of the HA protein may result in improper conformation and glycosylation of the stalk and, therefore, the induction of antibodies that do not appropriately recognize wild-type epitopes84,85. Immunization with chimeric HA proteins composed of the stalk region of the H1 and H3 subtypes matched to novel avian head domains that humans are naïve to may circumvent this limitation, thereby selectively directing the antibody response to the HA stalk while priming anti-avian antibodies84,86. This strategy has promise, but age-dependent differences in anti-HA stalk immunity, HA stalk escape mutants, and potential autoreactivity of anti-HA stalk antibodies all warrant further exploration before this method of vaccination is widely implemented87,88,89.Until a universal influenza vaccine is developed, a more practical approach to pandemic preparedness may entail developing scalable platforms to produce a pandemic vaccine quickly. One such platform is the production of mRNA-based vaccines. Conceptually, mRNA-based vaccines are quite simple; upon the administration of an mRNA encoding the vaccine target, the mRNA is internalized, and the host cell machinery then translates it into a protein that is both displayed on the cell surface for immune recognition and passed through the proteolytic pathway for peptide presentation. These vaccines are advantageous, particularly in the context of pandemic responses, because the production process is rapid and scalable, uses in vitro reactions (rather than embryonated chicken eggs), and can begin as soon as the antigen nucleotide sequence is known. Furthermore, the immunogenicity of mRNA-based vaccines may be adjusted by incorporating synthetic nucleotides and encapsulating them in various delivery vehicles to improve cellular uptake90,91.Early studies of mRNA-based vaccines for influenza have shown promising protection profiles in mice, ferrets, and swine against a range of influenza strains92. The use of mRNA-based vaccines in pandemics is particularly highlighted by the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Multiple groups are developing mRNA-based vaccines for SARS-CoV-2. Moderna generated a vaccine with an mRNA encoding the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein mRNA-1273. Only 66 days occurred from the publication of the spike protein sequence to the enrollment of the first phase I clinical trial participant, a record-breaking timeline93. The mRNA-1273 vaccine is currently being tested in a phase III clinical trial, and preliminary results from the phase I trial show robust antibody responses to the vaccine in humans94. Outstanding questions of safety and efficacy remain, but those questions will most likely be answered in the coming months. Because mRNA can be used to produce any antigen, provided the sequence is available, this strategy may be particularly useful for influenza control. This strategy can be leveraged not only for pandemic responses but also for seasonal vaccine production, decreasing the time between strain selection and vaccine administration, thus providing more flexibility for strain selection.The role of industry in pandemic responsesAlthough preparation for the next influenza pandemic falls under the purview of government-led surveillance and research, the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic demonstrated the value of industry responses when pandemic-causing viruses emerge. Pharmaceutical companies contribute considerable resources to develop antivirals, including monoclonal antibody therapies from Regeneron and Eli Lilly currently under investigation in phase III clinical trials95. Additionally, Moderna, Johnson & Johnson, and AstraZeneca are investigating vaccines in phase III clinical trials96. All of these treatments were developed and tested preclinically and clinically in collaboration with university and government research institutions, illustrating the value of these collaborations. Maintaining such partnerships will better position us to respond to future pandemics.Public health messagingA critical component of pandemic management is coherent and cohesive public messaging. The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic highlighted the inadequacy of scientific communication to the public, resulting in mixed messaging and unclear public health guidance. Science is an iterative process; therefore, guidance and conclusions about SARS-CoV-2 pathology and management evolved as information became known. However, scientific conclusions are presented as fact rather than ever-evolving ideas, which leads to public misunderstanding of how the scientific process is conducted and the perception that experts are changing their minds. A critical component of preparing for the next pandemic, influenza or otherwise, will be restoring faith in science. We must be transparent in how we perform science and communicate our findings. Furthermore, we must be united in presenting the conclusions that only sound evidence suggests. As we cope with the effects of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and prepare for the next pandemic, we must restore trust in our institutions or risk unmitigated loss of human life and faith in science.Intersection with SARS-CoV-2Before SARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2019, most of the influenza research community anticipated that the next pandemic would be caused by a novel influenza strain97. The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic raises questions about our overall pandemic preparedness and allows some reflection on the overlap of influenza risk assessments and other viruses with pandemic potential. The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic also serves as a model to evaluate our current pandemic workflow for its strengths and weaknesses.A vital aspect of pandemic preparedness is surveillance. Influenza surveillance infrastructure and networks continuously monitor circulating strains in animal populations and identify prepandemic strains before they cross the species barrier. The GISRS has identified several prepandemic influenza strains, potentially providing a crucial advantage to prepare before the next influenza pandemic emerges and to contain such prepandemic strains.Such networks were much less developed for SARS-CoV-2 because coronaviruses were identified only in the past two decades as potential pandemic-causing viruses97,98. The SARS and MERS outbreaks led to increased research on and surveillance of coronaviruses, but the time and resources to develop these surveillance and response frameworks have not been as extensive as those for influenza. This raises questions about the use of our resources, especially now that we fully understand the pandemic potential of noninfluenza viruses. Can we add to our current influenza risk assessment framework to account for other prepandemic viruses? The expertise and infrastructure developed over the past 70 years for influenza surveillance may serve as a model for coronavirus surveillance, if not directly incorporate it. We should also develop methods to identify other virus families with pandemic potential and consider expanding our surveillance to include these viruses.Another aspect of pandemic preparedness is the ability to respond once a pandemic-causing virus emerges. For influenza, this response has two major categories: vaccines and antivirals. Routine production of seasonal influenza vaccines provides the knowledge and infrastructure needed to quickly develop, test, and produce pandemic vaccines. Prepandemic vaccines are also stockpiled for strains at high risk of causing pandemics32,60. Antiviral research has uncovered resistance mechanisms of different influenza strains and optimized therapies99,100. However, coronavirus-specific antivirals were not developed before the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic101.Although the effort to develop a vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 is unprecedented and will most likely produce multiple vaccines in record time49, no coronavirus vaccine platforms were approved before the pandemic. Fortunately, previous and current work on SARS and MERS vaccines accelerated vaccine production, but novel noninfluenza pandemic-causing viruses will require more time for vaccine development. New vaccine platforms, such as mRNA vaccines90,91, which can be applied to an array of antigens, may decrease the time required for vaccine production in response to pandemics of almost any viral origin48.Because influenza research has generated many laboratory tests to identify the presence of influenza and its subtypes, we are well prepared to quickly develop testing for novel strains that emerge, especially for prepandemic strains detected in influenza surveillance54,102. Human cases of prepandemic strains are quickly identified and closely monitored to contain any potential widespread outbreaks that may lead to a pandemic. However, when SARS-CoV-2 emerged, diagnostic testing kits required months to develop and widely distribute across the United States, which led to delayed case identification and contact tracing. Such delays are disastrous for containing or mitigating viral transmission. Therefore, the surveillance of all viruses with pandemic potential is crucial for pandemic preparedness. Testing should be developed for all potential classes of pandemic-causing viruses and be easily adapted to identify specific species or strains.The three key lessons learned from the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic are (1) to continue and enhance the surveillance of prepandemic viruses, (2) to generate a method/platform for rapidly developing and producing pandemic vaccines, and (3) to implement strategies for prompt diagnostic testing responses. Our experience with SARS-CoV-2 will hone our pandemic preparedness workflows, including those for influenza, to better meet the challenges of pandemics in the future.ConclusionOver the past hundred years, influenza has caused four global pandemics. The risks of influenza viruses are well known, and constant genetic drift and shifts in the influenza genome pose a continual threat to novel emergent strains. The 2009 H1N1 pandemic exposed weaknesses in our pandemic preparedness that have since been improved by increased surveillance, dedicated influenza research, and pandemic risk assessment tools. Determining which strains pose the most risk and laying out systematic workflows for resource allocation and research emphasis are now priorities.Identifying and monitoring prepandemic influenza viruses such as H7N9 suggest that this workflow is functioning well and will give us an advantage should one of these viruses transition from prepandemic to pandemic. Continual routine influenza surveillance in animal populations known to be reservoirs for influenza and understanding the evolution of influenza viruses may reveal important patterns in mutations and recombination events to consider. However, the threat of a completely new strain emerging that is not currently on our radar is always present, highlighted by the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. We must continually evaluate and update our pandemic workflows to stay ahead of the next deadly strain. With diligence, countless lives may be saved when the next pandemic arrives. ReferencesKnipe, D. M. & Howley, P. Fields virology. (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins (LWW), 2013).Kim, H., Webster, R. G. & Webby, R. J. Influenza virus: dealing with a drifting and shifting pathogen. Viral Immunol. 31, 174–183 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Smith, G. J. D. et al. Origins and evolutionary genomics of the 2009 swine-origin H1N1 influenza A epidemic. Nature 459, 1122–1125 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar (WHO), W.H.O. Tool for Influenza Pandemic Risk Assessment (TIPRA). (2016).CDC. Influenza Risk Assessment Tool (IRAT). https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resourcesational-strategyisk-assessment.htm (n.d.).Potter, C. W. Textbook of Influenza. Chronicle of influenza Pandemics. (Blackwell Science LTD, 1998).Smith, W., Andrewes, C. H. & Laidlaw, P. P. A virus obtained from influenza patients. Lancet 222, 66–68 (1933).Article Google Scholar Members of the Commission on Influenza A clinical evaluation of vaccination against influenza: preliminary report. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 124, 982–985 (1944).Article Google Scholar Francis, T., Salk, J. E. & Quilligan, J. J. Experience with vaccination against influenza in the spring of 1947: a preliminary report. Am. J. Public Health Nations Health 37, 1013–1016 (1947).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar PAYNE, A. M. The influenza programme of WHO. Bull World Health Organ. 8, 755–774 (1953).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar WHO. Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS). https://www.who.int/influenza/gisrs_laboratory/en/ (2020).Honce, R. & Schultz-Cherry, S. Recipe for zoonosis: how influenza virus leaps into human circulation. Cell Host Microbe 28, 506–508 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jong, J. C., de, Claas, E. C. J., Osterhaus, A. D. M. E., Webster, R. G. & Lim, W. L. A pandemic warning? Nature 389, 554–554 (1997).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Claas, E. C. J., Jong, J. C., de, Beek, R., van, Rimmelzwaan, G. F. & Osterhaus, A. D. M. E. Human influenza virus A/HongKong/156/97 (H5N1) infection. Vaccine 16, 977–978 (1998).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Webster, R. G. & Govorkova, E. A. H5N1 influenza—continuing evolution and spread. N. Engl. J. Med. 355, 2174–2177 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kapczynski, D. R. & Swayne, D. E. Influenza vaccines for avian species. Curr. Top. Microbiol. 333, 133–152 (2009). Google Scholar Webster, R. G., Bean, W. J., Gorman, O. T., Chambers, T. M. & Kawaoka, Y. Evolution and ecology of influenza A viruses. Microbiol Rev. 56, 152–179 (1992).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lipsitch, M. et al. Viral factors in influenza pandemic risk assessment. Elife 5, e18491 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fukuyama, S. & Kawaoka, Y. The pathogenesis of influenza virus infections: the contributions of virus and host factors. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 23, 481–486 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kash, J. C. & Taubenberger, J. K. The role of viral, host, and secondary bacterial factors in influenza pathogenesis. Am. J. Pathol. 185, 1528–1536 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Webster, R. G. & Laver, W. G. The origin of pandemic influenza. Bull World Health Organ 47, 449–452 (1972).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Scholtissek, C. Pigs as ‘mixing vessels’ for the creation of new pandemic influenza A viruses. Med Prin Pract. 2, 65–71 (2004).Article Google Scholar Nelson, M. I. et al. Multiple reassortment events in the evolutionary history of H1N1 influenza A virus since 1918. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000012 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhu, W. et al. Mutations in polymerase genes enhanced the virulence of 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza virus in mice. PLoS One 7, e33383 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar To, K. K.-W. et al. Unique reassortant of influenza A(H7N9) virus associated with severe disease emerging in Hong Kong. J. Infect. 69, 60–68 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lai, K. Y. et al. Human H7N9 avian influenza virus infection: a review and pandemic risk assessment. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 2, 1–5 (2013).Article Google Scholar Ma, W. et al. The NS segment of an H5N1 Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Virus (HPAIV) is sufficient to alter replication efficiency, cell tropism, and host range of an H7N1 HPAIV ▿ †. J. Virol. 84, 2122–2133 (2009).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ward, B. J. et al. The establishment of surrogates and correlates of protection: Useful tools for the licensure of effective influenza vaccines? Hum. Vacc. Immunother. 14, 00–00 (2018).CAS Google Scholar Itoh, Y. et al. In vitro and in vivo characterization of new swine-origin H1N1 influenza viruses. Nature 460, 1021–1025 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Reuman, P. D., Keely, S. & Schiff, G. M. Assessment of signs of influenza illness in the ferret model. J. Virol. Methods 24, 27–34 (1989).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Belser, J. A., Katz, J. M. & Tumpey, T. M. The ferret as a model organism to study influenza A virus infection. Dis. Model Mech. 4, 575–579 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Burke, S. A. & Trock, S. C. Use of influenza risk assessment tool for prepandemic preparedness. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 24, 471–477 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nardi, M. D. et al. Development of a risk assessment methodological framework for potentially pandemic influenza strains (FLURISK). Efsa Supporting Publ 11, (2014).Imai, M. & Kawaoka, Y. The role of receptor binding specificity in interspecies transmission of influenza viruses. Curr. Opin. Virol. 2, 160–167 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stevens, J. et al. Glycan microarray analysis of the hemagglutinins from modern and pandemic influenza viruses reveals different receptor specificities. J. Mol. Biol. 355, 1143–1155 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ma, W. et al. The role of swine in the generation of novel influenza viruses. Zoonoses Public Health 56, 326–337 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Castrucci, M. R. et al. Genetic reassortment between avian and human influenza A viruses in Italian pigs. Virology 193, 503–506 (1993).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hui, K. P. Y. et al. Tropism and innate host responses of influenza A/H5N6 virus: an analysis of ex vivo and in vitro cultures of the human respiratory tract. Eur. Respir. J. 49, 1601710 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Andrewes, C. H. & Glover, R. E. Spread of infection from the respiratory tract of the Ferret. I. Transmission of influenza A virus. Br. J. Exp. Pathol. 22, 91–97 (1941).PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhu, H. et al. Infectivity, transmission, and pathology of human-isolated H7N9 influenza virus in ferrets and pigs. Science 341, 183–186 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Memoli, M. J., Morens, D. M. & Taubenberger, J. K. Pandemic and seasonal influenza: therapeutic challenges. Drug Discov. Today 13, 590–595 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Webster, R. G. & Govorkova, E. A. Continuing challenges in influenza. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1323, 115–139 (2017).Article Google Scholar Couch, R. B. et al. Antibody correlates and predictors of immunity to naturally occurring influenza in humans and the importance of antibody to the neuraminidase. J. Infect. Dis. 207, 974–981 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar WHO. Influenza: H5N1. https://www.who.intews-room/q-a-detail/h5n1-influenza (2012).Ungchusak, K. et al. Probable person-to-person transmission of avian influenza A (H5N1). N. Engl. J. Med. 352, 333–340 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kandun, I. N. et al. Three Indonesian clusters of H5N1 virus infection in 2005. N. Engl. J. Med. 355, 2186–2194 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhou, L. et al. Risk factors for human illness with avian influenza A (H5N1) virus infection in China. J. Infect. Dis. 199, 1726–1734 (2009).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Plotkin, S., Robinson, J. M., Cunningham, G., Iqbal, R. & Larsen, S. The complexity and cost of vaccine manufacturing—an overview. Vaccine 35, 4064–4071 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Krammer, F. SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in development. Nature 586, 516–527 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yen, C. et al. The development of global vaccine stockpiles. Lancet Infect. Dis. 15, 340–347 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bouvier, N. M. & Lowen, A. C. Animal models for influenza virus pathogenesis and transmission. Viruses 2, 1530–1563 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lakdawala, S. S. et al. The soft palate is an important site of adaptation for transmissible influenza viruses. Nature 526, 122–125 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jia, N. et al. Glycomic characterization of respiratory tract tissues of ferrets implications for its use in influenza virus infection studies. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 28489–28504 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Webby, R. J. & Webster, R. G. Are we ready for pandemic influenza? Science 302, 1519–1522 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Horwood, P. F. et al. Co-circulation of influenza A H5, H7, and H9 viruses and co-infected poultry in live bird markets, Cambodia. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 24, 352–355 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sutton, T. C. The pandemic threat of emerging H5 and H7 avian influenza viruses. Viruses 10, 461 (2018).Article PubMed Central Google Scholar Gao, R. et al. Human infection with a novel avian-origin influenza A (H7N9) virus. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 1888–1897 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar CDC. Asian Lineage Avian Influenza A(H7N9) virus. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/h7n9-virus.htm (2018).WHO. Candidate vaccine viruses for avian influenza A(H7N9). https://www.who.int/influenza/vaccines/virus/candidates_reagents/a_h7n9/en/ (2020).Zhong, W. & Levine, M. Z. Stockpiled Avian Influenza A(H7N9) vaccines induce robust, nonneutralizing functional antibodies against antigenically drifted fifth-wave A(H7N9) viruses. J. Infect. Dis. 220, 1276–1280 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pauly, M. D., Procario, M. C. & Lauring, A. S. A novel twelve class fluctuation test reveals higher than expected mutation rates for influenza A viruses. Elife 6, e26437 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Brooke, C. B. Population diversity and collective interactions during influenza virus infection. J. Virol. 91, e01164–17 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cheung, P. P. H. et al. Generation and characterization of influenza A viruses with altered polymerase fidelity. Nat. Commun. 5, 4794 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, J. et al. Structure of the hemagglutinin precursor cleavage site, a determinant of influenza pathogenicity and the origin of the Labile conformation. Cell 95, 409–417 (1998).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vries, Ede et al. Dissection of the influenza A virus endocytic routes reveals macropinocytosis as an alternative entry pathway. Plos Pathog. 7, e1001329 (2011).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Skehel, J. J. & Wiley, D. C. Receptor binding and membrane fusion in virus entry: the influenza hemagglutinin. Annu Rev. Biochem 69, 531–569 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Russell, C. J., Hu, M. & Okda, F. A. Influenza hemagglutinin protein stability, activation, and pandemic risk. Trends Microbiol 26, 841–853 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Herfst, S. et al. Airborne transmission of influenza A/H5N1 virus between ferrets. Science 336, 1534–1541 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Imai, M. et al. Experimental adaptation of an influenza H5 HA confers respiratory droplet transmission to a reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 virus in ferrets. Nature 486, 420–428 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zaraket, H., Bridges, O. A. & Russell, C. J. The pH of activation of the hemagglutinin protein regulates H5N1 influenza virus replication and pathogenesis in mice. J. Virol. 87, 4826–4834 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jefferson, T. et al. Neuraminidase inhibitors for preventing and treating influenza in adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 4, CD008965 (2014). Google Scholar Hayden, F. G. et al. Baloxavir Marboxil for uncomplicated influenza in adults and adolescents. N. Engl. J. Med. 379, 913–923 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Takashita, E. et al. Detection of influenza A(H3N2) viruses exhibiting reduced susceptibility to the novel cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitor baloxavir in Japan, December 2018. Eurosurveillance 24, 1800698 (2019).Article PubMed Central Google Scholar Gerdil, C. The annual production cycle for influenza vaccine. Vaccine 21, 1776–1779 (2003).Article PubMed Google Scholar CDC. Vaccine effectiveness: how well do the flu vaccines work? https://www.cdc.gov/flu/vaccines-work/vaccineeffect.htm (2020).Erbelding, E. J. et al. A universal influenza vaccine: the strategic plan for the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases. J. Infect. Dis. 218, 347–354 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Monto, A. S. et al. Antibody to influenza virus neuraminidase: an independent correlate of protection. J. Infect. Dis. 212, 1191–1199 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Monto, ArnoldS. & Kendal, AlanP. Effect of neuraminidase antibody on Hong Kong influenza. Lancet 301, 623–625 (1973).Article Google Scholar Memoli, M. J. et al. Evaluation of antihemagglutinin and antineuraminidase antibodies as correlates of protection in an influenza A/H1N1 virus healthy human challenge model. Mbio 7, e00417–16 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Das, S. R. et al. Defining influenza A virus hemagglutinin antigenic drift by sequential monoclonal antibody selection. Cell Host Microbe 13, 314–323 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, Y.-Q. et al. Influenza infection in humans induces broadly cross-reactive and protective neuraminidase-reactive antibodies. Cell 173, 417–429.e10 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sandbulte, M. R. et al. Discordant antigenic drift of neuraminidase and hemagglutinin in H1N1 and H3N2 influenza viruses. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 108, 20748–20753 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kilbourne, E. D., Johansson, B. E. & Grajower, B. Independent and disparate evolution in nature of influenza A virus hemagglutinin and neuraminidase glycoproteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 87, 786–790 (1990).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Krammer, F. & Palese, P. Universal influenza virus vaccines that target the conserved hemagglutinin stalk and conserved sites in the head domain. J. Infect. Dis. 219, S62–S67 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Steel, J. et al. Influenza virus vaccine based on the conserved hemagglutinin stalk domain. Mbio 1, e00018–10 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hai, R. et al. Influenza viruses expressing chimeric hemagglutinins: globular head and stalk domains derived from different subtypes. J. Virol. 86, 5774–5781 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nachbagauer, R. et al. Age dependence and isotype specificity of influenza virus hemagglutinin stalk-reactive antibodies in humans. Mbio 7, e01996–15 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Park, J.-K. et al. Pre-existing immunity to influenza virus hemagglutinin stalk might drive selection for antibody-escape mutant viruses in a human challenge model. Nat. Med. 26, 1240–1246 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bajic, G. et al. Autoreactivity profiles of influenza hemagglutinin broadly neutralizing antibodies. Sci. Rep. 9, 3492 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pardi, N., Hogan, M. J., Porter, F. W. & Weissman, D. mRNA vaccines—a new era in vaccinology. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 17, 261–279 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Scorza, F. B. & Pardi, N. New kids on the block: RNA-based influenza virus vaccines. Nato Adv. Sci. Inst. Se 6, 20 (2018). Google Scholar Petsch, B. et al. Protective efficacy of in vitro synthesized, specific mRNA vaccines against influenza A virus infection. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 1210–1216 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Corbett, K. S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine development enabled by prototype pathogen preparedness. Biorxiv 2020.06.11.145920 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.11.145920.Jackson, L. A. et al. An mRNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2—Preliminary Report. N. Engl. J. Med. (2020) https://doi.org/10.1056ejmoa2022483.(NIH), N.I.H. Clinical trials of monoclonal antibodies to prevent COVID-19 now enrolling. https://www.nih.govews-eventsews-releases/clinical-trials-monoclonal-antibodies-prevent-covid-19-now-enrolling (2020).Times N. Y. Coronavirus vaccine tracker. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html (2020).Dolan, B. It wasn’t supposed to be a coronavirus: the quest for an influenza A(H5N1)‐derived vaccine and the limits of pandemic preparedness. Centaurus 62, 331–343 (2020).Article Google Scholar Drexler, J. F., Corman, V. M. & Drosten, C. Ecology, evolution and classification of bat coronaviruses in the aftermath of SARS. Antivir. Res. 101, 45–56 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Koonin, L. M. & Patel, A. Timely antiviral administration during an influenza pandemic: key components. Am. J. Public Health 108, S215–S220 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lehnert, R., Pletz, M., Reuss, A. & Schaberg, T. Antiviral medications in seasonal and pandemic influenza. Dtsch. Aerzteblatt Online 113, 799–807 (2016). Google Scholar Song, Y. et al. COVID-19 treatment: close to a cure?—A rapid review of pharmacotherapies for the novel coronavirus. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agric. 56, 106080 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Ziegler, T., Mamahit, A. & Cox, N. J. 65 years of influenza surveillance by a World Health Organization‐coordinated global network. Influenza Other Respir. 12, 558–565 (2018).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported, in part, by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health under contract number HHSN272201400006C, and by ALSAC.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Walter N. Harrington, Christina M. KackosAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USAWalter N. Harrington, Christina M. Kackos & Richard J. WebbySt. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Memphis, TN, USAChristina M. KackosAuthorsWalter N. HarringtonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChristina M. KackosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRichard J. WebbyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCorresponding authorCorrespondence to Richard J. Webby.Ethics declarations Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleHarrington, W.N., Kackos, C.M. & Webby, R.J. The evolution and future of influenza pandemic preparedness. Exp Mol Med 53, 737–749 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s12276-021-00603-0Download citationReceived: 19 November 2020Revised: 29 December 2020Accepted: 31 December 2020Published: 06 May 2021Issue Date: May 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s12276-021-00603-0Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Assessment of immunopathological responses of a novel non-chemical biocide in C57BL/6 for safe disinfection usage Keun Bon KuJihwan ChaeHeung Kyu Lee Laboratory Animal Research (2024) A systematic review and meta-analysis of strategies to promote vaccination uptake Sicong LiuMarta R. DurantiniDolores Albarracin Nature Human Behaviour (2024) A human monoclonal antibody targeting the monomeric N6 neuraminidase confers protection against avian H5N6 influenza virus infection Min WangYuan GaoYi Shi Nature Communications (2024) The host RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain is the anchor for replication of the influenza virus genome Tim KrischunsBenoît ArragainNadia Naffakh Nature Communications (2024) Spatial-temporal evolution patterns of influenza incidence in Xinjiang Prefecture from 2014 to 2023 based on GIS Zhe YinYan DongFuerhati Wushouer Scientific Reports (2024) Download PDF Editorial SummaryInfluenza: Learning to plan for pandemicsThe long history of combating and planning for influenza pandemics should inform the fight against novel coronaviruses such as SARS-Cov-2. Richard Webby and co-workers at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis, USA review the history of preparing for influenza pandemics, including the global influenza surveillance network set up by the World Health Organization (WHO) in the 1950s. The 2009 H1N1 pandemic prompted WHO and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to develop more detailed risk assessment tools drawing on laboratory research, genomics, industrial vaccine development, and surveillance of emerging animal strains that might transfer to humans. These tools and experience are proving successful in containing the H7N9 influenza that emerged in 2013, and could serve as models for managing coronaviruses, whose pandemic potential has only become apparent in the past two decades.show all Associated content Collection [Special Feature] Emerging Fatal Viral Diseases Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Special Feature Journal Information About the Editors About the Partner Contact For Advertisers Press Releases Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For Authors & Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Experimental & Molecular Medicine (Exp Mol Med) ISSN 2092-6413 (online) ISSN 1226-3613 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedIntranasal Influenza Vaccine Enhances Immune Response and Offers Broad Protection, Biomedical Sciences Researchers Find - Georgia State University News - Faculty, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Press Releases, Research, University Research - Health & Wellness Alumni Faculty & Staff Students Georgia State Menu Academic LifeAcademic CalendarsLibraryUniversity CatalogClass RegistrationRegistration InformationStudent AdvisementGrad Student ResourcesStudent SuccessLearning & Tutoring CenterMilitary OutreachGPA CalculatorPanther AnswersFinancial ServicesTuition & PaymentsTuition ClassificationScholarship InformationSearch for ScholarshipsFinancial AidLoansFAFSARefundsStudent Health InsuranceStudent EmploymentOmbudspersonStudent EngagementFind HelpStudent OrganizationsProgramsHealth & Well-beingRecreationSpotlight ProgramsCareer ServicesStudent CenterHousingStudent GovernmentStudent HandbookCode of ConductTechnologyEmailPAWSGoSOLARiCollegeDigital Learning@GSUCampus ServicesGet Emergency AlertsParking & TransportationPantherDiningBookstorePantherCard Useful Links Coronavirus News Directory (Login Required) Student A-Z Index Law Library Library Help Center Safety & Security Facilities Ethics Hotline MyHousing (STARREZ) Portal Georgia State Menu Finance & Admin.ToolkitFormsTrainingUniversity PoliciesUniversity SenateStaff CouncilBudget & PlanningDisbursement & Accts. PayablePurchasing & BusinessSpectrum ServicesRisk ManagementOmbudspersonHuman ResourcesOpen EnrollmentPayroll & W2 InformationBenefitsVacation & LeaveWork/Life ProgramsNew HiresEmployee ResourcesOneUSG TrainingManagers & HR PartnersRetired or Planning to RetireFaculty HandbookStaff HandbookCampus ServicesFacilities ManagementURSAMail ServicesPrintingPantherDining & CateringParking & TransportationTravel ReservationsPR & Marketing CommunicationsLegal ServicesInstitutional EffectivenessEmeriti AssociationTechnologyEmailSend A FilePAWSGoSOLARiCollegeOneUSG ConnectPanthermartSpectrum (requires VPN)Asset WorksTraining and LearningCETLOEDigital MeasuresStacks for State Useful Links Coronavirus News Directory (Login Required) Student A-Z Index Help Center Help Center Safety & Security Facilities Ethics Hotline Identity & Communications ToolKit College to Career News Hub Georgia State Menu Georgia State Menu Search: Georgia State Georgia State Home Main navigation News Research News Campus News Campus Safety Athletics International News College and Schools Andrew Young School News College of Arts and Sciences News College of the Arts News College of Education and Human Development News College of Law News College of Nursing and Health Professions News Honors College News Institute for Biomedical Sciences News Perimeter College News Robinson College of Business News School of Public Health News News by Category Arts & Culture Business & Economy Education & Leadership Health & Wellness Politics, Law & Society Science & Technology Magazines University Magazine Research Magazine Press Experts Calendar Georgia State Home Georgia State Home Georgia State Menu Georgia State Menu Search: Search: Georgia State Alumni Faculty & Staff Students Academic LifeAcademic CalendarsLibraryUniversity CatalogClass RegistrationRegistration InformationStudent AdvisementGrad Student ResourcesStudent SuccessLearning & Tutoring CenterMilitary OutreachGPA CalculatorPanther AnswersFinancial ServicesTuition & PaymentsTuition ClassificationScholarship InformationSearch for ScholarshipsFinancial AidLoansFAFSARefundsStudent Health InsuranceStudent EmploymentOmbudspersonStudent EngagementFind HelpStudent OrganizationsProgramsHealth & Well-beingRecreationSpotlight ProgramsCareer ServicesStudent CenterHousingStudent GovernmentStudent HandbookCode of ConductTechnologyEmailPAWSGoSOLARiCollegeDigital Learning@GSUCampus ServicesGet Emergency AlertsParking & TransportationPantherDiningBookstorePantherCard × Useful Links Coronavirus News Directory (Login Required) Staff A-Z Index Calendar Help Center Safety & Security Facilities Ethics Hotline College to Career MyHousing (STARREZ) Portal Finance & Admin.ToolkitFormsTrainingUniversity PoliciesUniversity SenateStaff CouncilBudget & PlanningDisbursement & Accts. PayablePurchasing & BusinessSpectrum ServicesRisk ManagementOmbudspersonHuman ResourcesOpen EnrollmentPayroll & W2 InformationBenefitsVacation & LeaveWork/Life ProgramsNew HiresEmployee ResourcesOneUSG TrainingManagers & HR PartnersRetired or Planning to RetireFaculty HandbookStaff HandbookCampus ServicesFacilities ManagementURSAMail ServicesPrintingPantherDining & CateringParking & TransportationTravel ReservationsPR & Marketing CommunicationsLegal ServicesInstitutional EffectivenessEmeriti AssociationTechnologyEmailSend A FilePAWSGoSOLARiCollegeOneUSG ConnectPanthermartSpectrum (requires VPN)Asset WorksTraining and LearningCETLOEDigital MeasuresStacks for State × Useful Links Coronavirus News Directory (Login Required) Staff A-Z Index News & Updates Library Help Center Safety & Security Facilities Ethics Hotline Identity & Communications ToolKit College to Career Skip to content Skip to primary sidebar Skip to primary navGeorgia State News HubMain navigationNews Research News Campus News Campus Safety Athletics International News College and Schools Andrew Young School News College of Arts and Sciences News College of the Arts News College of Education and Human Development News College of Law News College of Nursing and Health Professions News Honors College News Institute for Biomedical Sciences News Perimeter College News Robinson College of Business News School of Public Health News News by Category Arts & Culture Business & Economy Education & Leadership Health & Wellness Politics, Law & Society Science & Technology Magazines University Magazine Research Magazine Press Experts Calendar Intranasal Influenza Vaccine Enhances Immune Response and Offers Broad Protection, Biomedical Sciences Researchers FindIntranasal Influenza Vaccine Enhances Immune Response and Offers Broad Protection, Biomedical Sciences Researchers FindIntranasal Influenza Vaccine Enhances Immune Response and Offers Broad Protection, Biomedical Sciences Researchers Find May 3, 2021 Facebook X LinkedIn Print Email RedditUse Scan QR Code to copy link and share it Media ContactLaTina EmersonDirector of CommunicationsInstitute for Biomedical SciencesGeorgia State University404-413-1353[email protected] ATLANTA—An influenza vaccine that is made of nanoparticles and administered through the nose enhances the body’s immune response to influenza virus infection and offers broad protection against different viral strains, according to researchers in the Institute for Biomedical Sciences at Georgia State University. Recurring seasonal flu epidemics and potential pandemics are among the most severe threats to public health. Current seasonal influenza vaccines induce strain-specific immunity and are less effective against mismatched strains. Broadly protective influenza vaccines are urgently needed. Intranasal vaccines are a promising strategy for combatting infectious respiratory diseases, such as influenza. They are more effective than vaccines injected into a muscle because they can induce mucosal immune responses in respiratory tracts, preventing infection at the portal of virus entry. They can also stimulate systemic immune responses throughout the body. Scientists can overcome vaccine safety concerns and the long production phase of virus-based influenza vaccines by constructing intranasal vaccines with recombinant proteins or peptides. However, these vaccines are poor at producing immune responses, so it’s necessary to have potent mucosal adjuvants, substances that enhance the body’s immune response to antigens (the molecular structures on pathogens). The absence of appropriate mucosal adjuvants currently hinders the development of such a vaccine. In this study, the researchers developed an intranasal influenza vaccine using recombinant hemagglutinin (HA), a protein found on the surface of influenza viruses, as the antigen component of the vaccine. HA is integral to the ability of influenza virus to cause infection. They also created a two-dimensional nanomaterial (polyethyleneimine-functionalized graphene oxide nanoparticles) and found that it displayed potent adjuvant (immunoenhancing) effects on influenza vaccines delivered intranasally. The findings are published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. “Conventional flu vaccines predominantly induce antibody responses,” said Dr. Baozhong Wang, senior author of the study, principal investigator of the National Institutes of Health grant supporting the study and a professor in the Institute for Biomedical Sciences. “However, recent research demonstrates that lung resident memory T cell responses are indispensable for optimal cross-protection against pulmonary influenza infection. The development of lung resident T cell responses requires vaccination by a respiratory route or influenza virus infection. Our research opens a new path for the development of needle-free and logistically simplified intranasal flu vaccines for cross-protection.” “In our study, we reported for the first time that two-dimensional graphene oxide nanomaterials had a potent adjuvant effect in boosting the immune responses of intranasal hemagglutinin (HA) vaccines,” said Dr. Chunhong Dong, lead author of the study and a postdoctoral research Fellow in Dr. Baozhong Wang’s lab in the Institute for Biomedical Sciences. “This study gives new insights into developing high performance intranasal vaccine systems with two-dimensional sheet-like nanoparticles,” Dong said. “The graphene oxide nanoparticles have extraordinary attributes for drug delivery or vaccine development, such as the ultra-large surface area for high-density antigen loading, and the vaccine showed superior immunoenhancing properties in vitro and in vivo. The nanoplatform could be easily adapted for constructing mucosal vaccines for different respiratory pathogens.” The study, conducted in mice and cell culture, found the nanoparticles significantly enhanced immune responses at mucosal surfaces and throughout the body in mice. The robust immune responses conferred immune protection against influenza virus challenges by homologous (same) virus strains and heterologous (different) virus strains. The results are also promising because needle-free, intranasal influenza vaccines possess superior logistical advantages over traditional injectable vaccines, such as easy administration with high acceptance for recipients and the avoidance of biohazardous waste. Co-authors of the study include Dr. Chunhong Dong, Ye Wang, Gilbert Gonzalez, Yao Ma, Yufeng Song, Dr. Sang-Moo Kang and Dr. Baozhong Wang of the Institute for Biomedical Sciences at Georgia State and Shelly Wang and Dr. Richard W. Compans of Emory University School of Medicine. The study was funded by the National Institutes of Health’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. To read the study, visit https://www.pnas.org/content/118/19/e2024998118. Featured Researcher Baozhong Wang Professor Institute for Biomedical Sciences Baozhong Wang is focused on the interaction of viral pathogens with the host immune system. He studies how viral antigens (particularly influenza and HIV antigens) trigger immune responses, with specific emphasis at the crossroads of vaccines and bioengineering through the use of protein nanotechnology and controlled releases in vaccine development. Chunhong Dong Postdoctoral Research Fellow Institute for Biomedical Sciences Filed Under: Health & Wellness, Science & Technology Tagged With: home-featurePrimary Sidebar Search More results... Generic filters Hidden label Exact matches only Hidden label Hidden label Hidden label Filter by Custom Post Type Hidden label Hidden label Content from mm/dd/yy Content to mm/dd/yy Related Articles Georgia State to Expand Online Master of Public Health Opportunities, Launch New Certificate Program Research Project Cultivates Interest in Medical Career $1.5 Million Grant to Expand Mindfulness-Based Smoking Cessation Tool Developed by Georgia State Researchers Georgia State University Establishes Center on Health and Homelessness GSU Student Completes Prestigious Summer Research Program About Contact Georgia State Employment University Policies Office of the President Campus Maps Administration News & Events Student Success Admissions Degrees & Majors Graduate Programs College to Career University Library Law Library Bookstore Connections Magazine Alumni Giving Arts & Ideas Rialto Center Album 88 (WRAS-FM) Research URSA Athletics Tickets Sports Panther Athletic Club Recruits News Campus Life Student Engagement Counseling Center Health Center Housing Parking Dining Recreation Safety Georgia State University33 Gilmer Street SE Atlanta, GA 30303404-413-2000 Contact Georgia StateView legal statementPrivacy NoticesState AuthorizationEthics HotlineWebsite Feedback©2024 Georgia State University Send this to a friendYour emailRecipient emailSendCancelDistribution of avian influenza viruses according to environmental surveillance during 2014–2018, China | Infectious Diseases of Poverty | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search Infectious Diseases of Poverty Home About Articles Collections Submission Guidelines Submit manuscript Distribution of avian influenza viruses according to environmental surveillance during 2014–2018, China Download PDF Download PDF Research Article Open access Published: 06 May 2021 Distribution of avian influenza viruses according to environmental surveillance during 2014–2018, China Hong Bo1, Ye Zhang1, Li-Bo Dong1, Jie Dong1, Xi-Yan Li1, Xiang Zhao1, Zi Li1, Yue-Long Shu2 & …Da-Yan Wang1 Show authors Infectious Diseases of Poverty volume 10, Article number: 60 (2021) Cite this article 4443 Accesses 11 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundRecurrent infections of animal hosts with avian influenza viruses (AIVs) have posted a persistent threat. It is very important to understand the avian influenza virus distribution and characteristics in environment associated with poultry and wild bird. The aim of this study was to analyze the geographic and seasonal distributions of AIVs in the 31 provinces, municipalities and autonomous region (PMA) of China, compare the AIVs prevalence in different collecting sites and sampling types, analyze the diversity of AIVs subtypes in environment.MethodsA total of 742 005 environmental samples were collected from environmental samples related to poultry and wild birds in different locations in the mainland of China during 2014–2018. Viral RNA was extracted from the environmental samples. Real-time RT-PCR assays for influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 subtypes were performed on all the samples to identify subtypes of influenza virus. The nucleic acid of influenza A-positive samples were inoculated into embryonated chicken eggs for virus isolation. Whole-genome sequencing was then performed on Illumina platform. SPSS software was used to paired t test for the statistical analysis. ArcGIS was used for drawing map. Graphpad Prism was used to make graph.ResultsThe nucleic acid positivity rate of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 subtypes displayed the different characteristics of geographic distribution. The nucleic acid positivity rates of influenza A were particularly high (25.96%–45.51%) in eleven provinces covered the Central, Eastern, Southern, Southwest and Northwest of China. The nucleic acid positivity rates of H5 were significantly high (11.42%–13.79%) in two provinces and one municipality covered the Southwest and Central of China. The nucleic acid positivity rates of H7 were up to 4% in five provinces covered the Eastern and Central of China. The nucleic acid positivity rates of H9 were higher (13.07%–2.07%) in eleven PMA covered the Southern, Eastern, Central, Southwest and Northwest of China. The nucleic acid positivity rate of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 showed the same seasonality. The highest nucleic acid positivity rates of influenza A, H5, H7, H9 subtypes were detected in December and January and lowest from May to September. Significant higher nucleic acid positivity rate of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 were detected in samples collected from live poultry markets (LPM) (30.42%, 5.59%, 4.26%, 17.78%) and poultry slaughterhouses (22.96%, 4.2%, 2.08%, 12.63%). Environmental samples that were collected from sewage and chopping boards had significantly higher nucleic acid positivity rates for influenza A (36.58% and 33.1%), H5 (10.22% and 7.29%), H7(4.24% and 5.69%)and H9(21.62% and 18.75%). Multiple subtypes of AIVs including nine hemagglutinin (HA) and seven neuraminidase (NA) subtypes were isolated form the environmental samples. The H5, H7, and H9 subtypes accounted for the majority of AIVs in environment.ConclusionsIn this study, we found the avian influenza viruses characteristics of geographic distribution, seasonality, location, samples types, proved that multiple subtypes of AIVs continuously coexisted in the environment associated with poultry and wild bird, highlighted the need for environmental surveillance in China.Graphic Abstract BackgroundAIVs were first reported in 1878 [1] in Italy and were subsequently isolated from chickens in 1934 [2]. AIVs are categorized into two pathotypes according to their virulence in chickens: low-pathogenic and highly pathogenic AIVs [3, 4]. Of the 16 HA subtypes that have been identified in birds, 5 HA subtypes of AIVs (H5N1, H5N6, H5N8, H6N1, H7N9, H7N2, H7N3, H7N7, H9N2, H10N7, and H10N8) are known to cause human infections [5, 6], among which the H5 subtype has a nearly global distribution in birds. Moreover, the H7N9 subtype widely circulates and had rapidly evolved in LPMs in China especially from 2013 to 2018 [7, 8]. Furthermore, continuous reassortments among AIV strains have increased the risk of a pandemic.Many studies have investigated the demographic and ecological risk factors associated with the effective transmission of AIVs. LPMs play an important role in human infection with AIVs. Bird transport between LPMs affected the emergence of H7N9 in Eastern China, and the closure of LPMs reduced the incidence of human infection with AIVs [9]. Furthermore, one survey found that 80% of households that purchased poultry from LPMs had an increased risk of poultry-to-human infection [10]. LPMs are particularly common in Southern China, and many subtypes, such as H9, H5, and H6, have been enzootic in poultry in China since the mid-1990s [11]. However, environmental factors of LPM, such as temperature, humidity, and feeding conditions, play important roles in AIV survival and infectivity [12].Environmental surveillance related poultry and wild bird was established in China in 2009. Samples are collected each month by each province. In the present study, we analyzed the environmental samples collected from 2014 to 2018 as part of this programme to examine the geographic and seasonal distributions of AIVs in China and how these vary with regard to sites and sample types to determine environmental risk factors.MethodsEnvironmental sample collection sitesSamples were collected from 2014 to 2018 by Chinese National Influenza Surveillance Network laboratories. Based on the national surveillance guidelines, at least 40 samples per month were collected from each of the 31 PAM in China located in seven regions (Eastern, Southern, Central, Northern, Northwest, Southwest, and Northeast of China), providing a total of 742,005 samples. These samples were obtained from a range of sites, including LPMs, poultry farms, backyards, slaughterhouses and wild bird habitats. These samples were obtained from a variety of poultry-related materials, including poultry faeces, drinking water, sewage, and swabs from poultry cages, feathers, etc. Each sample was maintained in viral transport medium and immediately transported at a low temperature to the nearest Chinese National Influenza Surveillance Network laboratory.Environmental sample collectionFaeces or swab samples were put into 5 ml Hank’s medium containing 0.5% bovine albumin, ampicillin (2 × 106 IU/L), streptomycin (200 mg/L), polymyxin B (2 × 106 IU/L), gentamicin (250 mg/L), mycin (0.5 × 106 IU/L), oxygen hydrochloride floxacin (60 mg/L), and sulfamethoxazole (200 mg/L). For liquid samples (drinking water, sewage), 5-ml liquid was collected. The samples were sent to a local network laboratory within 48 h and stored at 4 ℃. The samples were mixed thoroughly, centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min, and the supernatants were aliquoted into three tubes. Each tube contained about 1.5 ml of the sample; one was designated for nucleic acid identification by a local network laboratory, one was designated for virus isolation, and one was transported to the Chinese National Influenza Center and then stored at −80 ℃ for further test.RNA extractionViral RNA was extracted from each of the collected samples using a QIAsymphony RNA Kit (931636; Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) with a QIAsymphony SP instrument (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions.Real-time RT-PCRReal-time RT-PCR assays for influenza A, H5, H7, and H9 subtypes were performed on all the samples, with primer and probe sets provided in the Chinese National Influenza Surveillance Guidelines (Additional file 1: Table S1). The reactions were carried out using an AgPath-ID™ One-Step RT-PCR Kit (4387422; Ambion®) under the following cycling conditions: 10 min at 45 ℃; 10 min at 95 ℃; 40 cycles of 15 s at 95 ℃; and 45 s at 60 ℃. The positive control contained all the reaction components and RNA of influenza A, and H5, H7, and H9 subtypes. The negative control contained all the reaction components and H2O as the template.Virus isolationVirus isolation was performed on the influenza A-positive samples detected by Real-time RT-PCR. The samples were inoculated into the allantoic cavity of 9 to 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs; the eggs were incubated at 37 ℃ for 48 h and chilled at 4 ℃ overnight. The allantoic fluid was then harvested, and a haemagglutination assay was performed using 1% turkey red blood cells to determine the titer of harvested viruses [13].Next-generation sequencingVirus total RNA was extracted by a MagMAX™ Viral/Pathogen Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (cat# 42352, Applied Biosystems). The RNA was subjected to reverse transcription and amplification using the SuperScript™ III One-Step RT-PCR System with Platinum™ Taq High Fidelity DNA Polymerase (cat#: 12574035, Invitrogen). The DNA was purified by a MagMax Core Nucleic Acid Purification Kit (cat# 1903031, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The DNA library was prepared using Nextera XT DNA Preparation Kits (cat#FC-131-1096, Illumina). Whole-genome sequencing was then performed on MiSeq high-throughput sequencing platform and Nextseq platform (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), and the data were analysed using CLC Genomics Workbench software.Statistical analysisThe statistical software SPSS version 25 (IBM Corp, New York, USA) was used to data statistical analysis. A paired t test was performed to analyze the significant difference. P < 0.05 was considered significant.Map plottingArcGIS version 10.7 (Environmental Systems Research Institute, RedLands, USA) was used to draw the map. Different colors represented the range of positivity rate on the map.Graph makingGraphpad Prism5 (Graphpad software Inc, San Diego, USA) was used to process the data and made graph.ResultsGeographic distributions of avian influenza virusesBased on RT-PCR, the positivity rate for influenza A was 22.57% (Fig. 1a). The positivity rates were particularly high (25.96%–45.51%) in 11 provinces in five of the seven regions tested: Central China (Hunan provinces), Eastern China (Fujian, Jiangxi and Zhejiang provinces), Southern China (Guangxi Autonomous Region), Southwest China (Chongqing Municipality and Guizhou Province), and Northwest China (Gansu Province).Fig. 1Geographical distributions of the nucleic acid positivity rates of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 subtypes. a–d indicates the nucleic acid positivity rates of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 subtypes on average in 31 PMA during 2014–2018, respectively. Different colours represent the corresponding range of positivity rates. Abbreviations: AH, Anhui; BJ, Beijing; CQ, Chongqing; FJ, Fujian; GD, Guangdong; GS, Gansu; GX, Guangxi; GZ, Guizhou; HA, Henan; HB, Hubei; HE, Hebei; HLJ, Heilongjiang; HN, Hunan; HaN, Hainan; JL, Jilin; JS, Jiangsu; JX, Jiangxi; LN, Liaoning; NM, Inner Mongolia; NX, Ningxia; QH, Qinghai; SC, Sichuan; SD, Shandong; SH, Shanghai; SX, Shanxi; SN, Shaanxi; TJ, Tianjin; XJ, Xinjiang; XZ, Tibet; YN, Yunnan; ZJ, Zhejiang. PAM: Provinces, municipalities and autonomous regionsFull size imageAmong the influenza A viruses detected, the H5 subtype was detected in 3.89% of the samples (Fig. 1b). The positivity rates were significantly high (11.42%–13.79%) in two provinces and one municipality in two regions: Southwest China (Chongqing Municipality), Central China (Hunan and Jiangxi provinces).The positivity rate for the H7 subtype was 3.41% (Fig. 1c), with rates of up to 4% being detected in two regions: Eastern China (Jiangsu, Fujian, Zhejiang and Jiangxi provinces) and Central China (Hunan Province).The positivity rate for the H9 subtype is 13.07% (Fig. 1d), with 11 PAM displayed high positivity rates (13.07%–27.07%). These regions included Southern China (Guangdong Province and Guangxi Autonomous Region), Eastern China (Zhejiang, Anhui, Jiangxi and Fujian provinces), Central China (Hunan Province), Southwest China (Yunnan Province and Chongqing Municipality) and Northwest China (Gansu Province and Xinjiang Autonomous Region). The nucleic acid positivity rates of influenza A H5, H7, and H9 subtypes in different regions were shown in Fig. 1 and Additional file 1: Table S2.Seasonality of avian influenza viruses in environmentsThe monthly nucleic acid positivity rates of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 subtypes in the poultry-related environmental samples were shown in Fig. 2 and Additional file 1: Table S3. The positivity rates of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 subtypes showed obvious seasonality and were highest in December and January and lowest from May to September.Fig. 2Monthly nucleic acid positivity rates of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 subtypes. The blue line represents the nucleic acid positivity rate of influenza A; the red line represents the nucleic acid positivity rate of H5 subtype; the light green line represents the nucleic acid positivity rate of H7 subtype; the purple line represents the nucleic acid positivity rate of H9 subtypeFull size imageVariations of positivity rates of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 subtypes among the sampling sitesDuring 2014–2018, samples with the highest positivity rates of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 were collected from LPMs (30.42%, 5.59%, 4.26%, 17.78%), followed by slaughterhouses (22.96%, 4.2%, 2.08%, 12.63%), respectively. In contrast, poultry farms, backyards and wild bird habitats had influenza A positivity rates of 3.26%, 3.44%, and 1.1% respectively, while the H5 and H7 positivity rates were all less than 1%. Poultry farms, backyards, and wild bird habitats had H9 positivity rates of 1.98%, 1.42%, and 0.25%. The statistical analysis indicated that LPMs and slaughterhouses were associated with significantly higher positivity rates of AIVs than all other sites during the study period (P < 0.05; Table 1).Table 1 Influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 nucleic acid positivity rates of different sitesFull size tableVariations of the positivity rates of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 subtypes among different sample typesEnvironmental samples that were collected from sewage and chopping boards had significantly higher positivity rates for influenza A (36.58% and 33.1%), H5 (10.22% and 7.29%), H7 (4.24% and 5.69%) and H9 (21.62% and 18.75%) than those collected from faeces, cages, and feeding troughs (P < 0.05). Furthermore, the positivity rates of H9 in samples originating from sewage and chopping boards were significantly higher than those of H5 and H7 subtypes (P < 0.05; Table 2).Table 2 Influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 nucleic acid positivity rates of different sample typesFull size tableMultiple subtypes of influenza A viruses were detected in poultry-related environmentsIn total, nine HA subtypes and seven NA subtypes of avian influenza viruses were isolated including the HA subtypes H1, H3, H4, H5, H6, H7, H9, H10, and H11, and the NA subtypes N1, N2, N3, N6, N7, N8, and N9. In general, the H5, H7, and H9 subtypes of influenza A virus accounted for the majority of avian influenza viruses isolated from the environmental samples (Additional file 1: Table S4). The proportion of H9N2 avian influenza viruses took a proportion of 46.90% among all the subtypes. The proportion of H5N6 and H5N1 AIVs were 20.66% and 6.31%. The proportion of H7N9 AIVs was 8.9%. The proportion of other subtypes were less than 0.5% except for H3N2 (6.15%), H6N6 (4.43%), and mixture subtypes (1.58%). The H9N2, H5N6 and H7N9 AIVs displayed obviously different proportions from 2014 to 2018. The proportion of subtype H5N6 AIVs increased more than threefold from 11% in 2014 to 34% in 2016, then decreased to 12.14% in 2017. The H5N1 AIVs showed a declining trend from 2014 to 2018. The proportion of H7N9 AIVs reached 23% in 2017, which was approximately four times that in 2014 (6%) and decreased to 0.26% in 2018. The proportion of H9N2 AIVs showed a decreasing from 2014 to 2017, with proportions of 59%, 51%, 35% and 36%, respectively then increased to 53.36% in 2018 (Fig. 3 and Additional file 1: Table S4).Fig. 3Proportions of H5N1, H5N6, H7N9, H9N2 AIVs and other virus subtypes during 2014–2018. The X axis represents different years, and the Y axis represents proportion of different subtypes AIVs (%). The proportion is defined as the number of different AIVs subtypesumber of total viruses (%). Abbreviations AIVs: avian influenza virusesFull size imageDiscussionBased on five-year environmental surveillance data, we analysed the geographical distributions of influenza A, H5, H9 and H7 subtypes in AIVs related environment. The geographical distribution of H7 subtype mainly occurred in the Yangtze and Pearl River deltas and a few adjacent provinces. It was reported that these regions were the sources of newly emerged H7N9 human infections during 2013–2017 [11]. Poultry is the major source of H7N9 infections in humans [14]. Our study indicates that the H7 subtype persists in the environment in these regions and may be associated with human infection and virus evolution. The geographical distribution of H5 was mainly located in Southern China. H5 has been widely circulating among poultry in China since 2004. The highly pathogenic avian influenza H5 subtype has evolved multiple clades and subclades [15]. Though control measures were carried out, LPMs and other places are still providing the opportunity for transmission and evolution of H5 subtype, birds and poultry still carry and transmit the H5 AIVs. Compared with the H5 and H7 subtypes, the H9 subtype geographic distribution was nationwide, and it was especially prevalent in the southern and western regions of China. The first H9N2 subtype was isolated in 1992, and since then, H9N2 has become the predominant subtype in poultry [16]. Live poultry trading and feeding patterns have caused H9N2 to become prevalent in different regions of China [17]. The wide distribution of H9 subtype provides the opportunity for avian virus reassortment.Our results indicated that the prevalence of AIVs varied seasonally, with higher positivity rates of H5, H7 and H9 subtypes in late winter (December) and early spring (January) than in summer and autumn. Several studies have found that minor fluctuations in temperature, pH or salinity in aquatic habitats may enhance or diminish the persistence and infectivity of AIVs [18]. AIV transmission is promoted under cool and dry conditions [19]. Our results were consistent with those of current studies and showed that AIVs can survive well in winter and early spring with higher rate. In our study, LPMs and sewage were proved to be environmental risk factors of AIVs. The samples collected from LPMs displayed the highest positivity rates for the H5, H7 and H9 subtypes, which is consistent with previous studies. In China, a large number of poultry is traded through LPMs [20] which are known to be major sources of AIVs causing significant public health concerns. Poultry market closure is still an effective measure to prevent avian influenza infects humans or poultry [21]. We recommended that LPMs should be managed strictly. Some studies have reported that influenza viruses are waterborne pathogens that have the capacity to infect a wide variety of hosts and undergo genetic reassortment [22] In our study, we investigated five kinds of samples related to poultry feeding, sale, and slaughter. The results indicated that sewage may carry a large number of AIVs and transmit the virus among poultry.Our studies demonstrated virus subtypes diversity in environment-related poultry and wild bird. In our study, virus isolation results indicated that the H5 subtype AIVs continuously existed in environmental samples in China and the proportion of H5N1 subtype AIVs viruses decreased while the proportion of H5N6 subtype AIVs viruses increased dramatically during 2014–2017. In 2018, the proportion of H5N1 subtype AIVs significantly declined to 0.8%. Liu et al. have reported the epidemiology and evolution characteristics of H5 AIVs subtype in poultry since 2007. The H5 subtype was almost exclusively H5N1 subtypes before 2012. Since 2014, H5N6, H5N2 and H5N8 subtypes AIVs emerged and H5N6 subtype became predominantly in China. In 2018, 78.0% and 21.8% of all AIV isolates were identified as H5N6 and H5N2 subtypes respectively [23]. In accordance with these studies, our data also revealed that the N subtype of H5 shifted from N1 to N6 during 2014–2018 in environment related AIVs. Some control strategies were carried out in order to prevent the H5 spread, including mass vaccination in poultry in China. Vaccine strain of H5 subtype was updated every few years to combat the vaccine escape mutants. Nine vaccine strains (N-28, Re-1,4,5,6.7.8,11,12) were used during 2005–2018 [23, 24]. The clade 7.2 of H5 AIVs were almost eliminated in chickens since 2014 largely due to mass vaccination while the clade 2.3.2 and 2.3.4 of H5 AIVs were prevalent in waterfowl and also identified in wild birds. The reason was due to the following points. Firstly, vaccination can lead to silent AIV infections and accelerate virus transmission and diversification. Second, low vaccination coverage and immune response to the vaccine reduced the vaccination effect in waterfowl [24]. Third, wild bird and waterfowl can transmit the virus each other and vaccination cannot block the transmission. Fourth, vaccine strains need to be updated accurately. These reasons may explain why H5N6 subtype AIVs substituted H5N1 subtype AIVs and became the dominant in the environment.The avian influenza A(H7N9) virus infection was first detected in humans in March 2013. Until March 2018, a total of 1567 laboratory-confirmed human cases have been reported to WHO [25]. Some studies reported that poultry-related environments were contaminated, and poultry were infected with H7N9 AIV s in the regions where H7N9 AIV s emerged [26]. Jiang et al. reported the H7N9 AIV s prevalence in poultry and evaluated the H7N9 AIV s vaccine protection efficacy in China during 2013–3018. H7N9 AIVs positivity rate varied from 2013 to 2018 in poultry, 0.25% in 2013,0.76% in 2014,0.88% in 2015, 0.41% in 2016, 0.97% in 2017 and 0.00% in 2018. Large scale administration of H7-Re1vaccine made the H7N9 prevalent decrease sharply in poultry [27]. In our study, we also found that the percentage of H7N9 subtype varied in the environment, especially in 2017 (the percentage was up to 23%) while the percentage of H7N9 decrease to 0.26% in 2018. The results indicated that the spread of the H7N9 AIV s in poultry and the environment has been effectively controlled and prevented human infection.Currently, H9N2 remained highly prevalent in poultry. BJ/94-like and G1-like lineage of H9N2 AIVs have been mainly prevalent in China since the mid-1990s [28]. Since 1998, vaccination was carried out in poultry and vaccine strains were updated. However, H9N2 AIVs persisted in chickens due to antigenic drift and low vaccination coverage rate [29]. Our results indicated that H9N2 AIVs remained the highest percentage in environment samples. H9N2 AIVs prevalence in poultry and environment provided the chance for zoonotic transmission and virus reassortant.Our study demonstrated the avian influenza virus characteristics in the environment related to poultry and wild birds in China. There were limitations in our study. Firstly, considering that there are many LPMs in China, especially in rural areas, the data in our study was collected from the environment of a small number of LPMs in China, there may be bias in the representativeness of the data. Secondly, the data only reflected the general features instead of individual characteristics, although the environment was related to waterfowl (duck and goose), domestic fowl (chicken) and wild bird in our study.ConclusionsOur findings indicate that environments associated with poultry may contribute to the transmission of AIVs. The widespread and persistent circulation of avian influenza viruses in China increases the risk of zoonotic transmission and encourages the timely monitoring of changes in AIVs. Long-term control strategies and early interventions need to be developed for AIV outbreaks. Availability of data and materials The datasets used and analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. AbbreviationsAIVs: Avian influenza viruses LPMs: Live poultry markets PAM: Provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions HA: Hemagglutinin NA: Neuraminidase SD: Standard deviation ReferencesPerroncito E. Epizooziatifoideneigallinacei. Annali Accad Agric. 1878;21:87. Google Scholar Burnet FM, Ferry JD. Thedifferetiation of fowl plague and Newcastle disease: experiments using the technique of chorio-allantoic membrane inoculation of the developing egg. Br J ExperimPathol. 1934;15:56. Google Scholar Peiris JS, de Jong MD, Guan Y. Avian influenza virus (H5N1): a threat to human health. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2007;20(2):243–67.Article Google Scholar Kim JK, Negovetich NJ, Forrest HL, Webster RG. Ducks: the “Trojan horses” of H5N1 influenza. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2009;3(4):121–8.Article Google Scholar Li YT, Linster M, Mendenhall IH, Su YCF, Smith GJD. Avian influenza viruse in humans: lessons from past outbreaks. Br Med Bull. 2019;132(1):81–95.Article CAS Google Scholar WHO Group. Emergencies preparedness, response. WHO. 2021 https://www.who.int/csr/don/26-feb-2021-influenza-a-russian-federation/en/. Accessed 26 Feb 2021.Zhou J, Wu J, Zeng X, Huang G, Zou L, Song Y, et al. Isolation of H5N6, H7N9 and H9N2 avian influenza A viruses from air sampled at live poultry markets in China, 2014 and 2015. Euro Surveill. 2016;21(35):30331–4.Article Google Scholar Shi J, Deng G, Ma S, Zeng X, Yin X, Li M, et al. Rapid evolution of H7N9 highly pathogenic viruses that emerged in China in 2017. Cell Host Microbe. 2018;24(4):558–68.Article CAS Google Scholar Zhou X, Li Y, Wang Y, Edwards J, Guo F, Clements AC, et al. The role of live poultry movement and live bird market biosecurity in the epidemiology of influenza A (H7N9): a cross-sectional observational study in four eastern China provinces. J Infect. 2015;71(4):470.Article Google Scholar Yuan J, Lau EH, Li K, Leung YH, Yang Z, Xie C, et al. Effect of live poultry market closure on avian influenza A(H7N9) virus activity in Guangzhou, China, 2014. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015;21(10):1784–93.Article CAS Google Scholar Liao Q, Lam WT, Leung GM, Jiang C, Fielding R. Live poultry exposure, Guangzhou, China, 2006. Epidemics. 2009;1(4):207–12.Article Google Scholar Zhang H, Li Y, Chen J, Chen Q, Chen Z. Perpetuation of H5N1 and H9N2 avian influenza viruses in natural water bodies. J Gen Virol. 2014;95(Pt 7):1430–5.Article CAS Google Scholar WHO Group . WHO Manual for the laboratory diagnosis and virological surveillance of influenza. 2011 https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/44518. Accessed Jan 2011.Ma MJ, Yang Y, Fang LQ. Highly pathogenic avian H7N9 influenza viruses: recent challenges. Trends Microbiol. 2019;27(2):93–5.Article CAS Google Scholar Bi Y, Chen Q, Wang Q, Chen J, Jin T, Wong G, et al. Genesis, evolution and prevalence of H5N6 avian influenza viruses in China. Cell Host Microbe. 2016;20(6):810–21.Article CAS Google Scholar Chen B, Zhang Z, Chen W. The study of avian influenza: I. The isolation and preliminary serological identification of avian influenza virus in chicken. Chin J Vet Med. 1994;20:3–5. Google Scholar Gu M, Xu L, Wang X, Liu X. Current situation of H9N2 subtype avian influenza in China. Vet Res. 2017;48(1):49.Article Google Scholar Stallknecht DE, Kearney MT, Shane SM, Zwank PJ. Effects of pH, temperature, and salinity on persistence of avian influenza viruses in water. Avian Dis. 1990;34(2):412–8.Article CAS Google Scholar Brown JD, Swayne DE, Cooper RJ, Burns RE, Stallknecht DE. Persistence of H5 and H7 avian influenza viruses in water. Avian Dis. 2007;51(1 Suppl):285–9.Article Google Scholar Su S, Bi Y, Wong G, Gray GC, Gao GF, Li S. Epidemiology, evolution, and recent outbreaks of avian influenza virus in China. J Virol. 2015;89(17):8671–6.Article CAS Google Scholar Yu H, Wu JT, Cowling BJ, Liao Q, Fang VJ, Zhou S, et al. Effect of closure of live poultry markets on poultry-to-person transmission of avian influenza A H7N9 virus: an ecological study. Lancet. 2014;383(9916):541–8.Article Google Scholar Sooryanarain H, Elankumaran S. Environmental role in influenza virus outbreaks. Annu Rev AnimBiosci. 2015;3:347–73. Google Scholar Liu S, Zhang Q, Wang S, Jiang W, Jin J, Peng C, et al. Control of avian influenza in China: strategies and lessons. TransboundEmerg Dis. 2020;67(4):1463–71.Article Google Scholar Chen H. H5N1 avian influenza in China. Sci China C life Sci. 2009;52(5):419–27.Article Google Scholar WHO Group. Influenza summary and assessment. WHO. 2018. https://www.who.int/influenza/human_animal_interface/Influenza_Summary_IRA_HA_interface_02_03_2018.pdf?ua=1. Accessed 3 March 2018.He F, Chen EF, Li FD, Wang XY, Wang XX, Lin JF. Human infection and environmental contamination with Avian Influenza A (H7N9) Virus in Zhejiang Province, China: risk trend across the three waves of infection. BMC Public Health. 2015;15:931.Article Google Scholar Jiang W, Hou G, Li J, Peng C, Wang S, Liu S, et al. Prevalence of H7N9 subtype avian influenza viruses in poultry in China, 2013–2018. TransboundEmerg Dis. 2019;66(4):1758–61. Google Scholar Sun Y, Pu J, Jiang Z, Guan T, Xia Y, Xu Q, et al. Genotypic evolution and antigenic drift of H9N2 influenza viruses in China from 1994 to 2008. Vet Microbiol. 2010;146:215–25.Article CAS Google Scholar Zhang P, Tang Y, Liu X, Peng D, Liu W, Liu H, et al. Characterization of H9N2 influenza viruses isolated from vaccinated flocks in an integrated broiler chicken operation in eastern China during a 5 year period (1998–2002). J Gen Virol. 2008;89:3102–12.Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsNot applicable.FundingThe study was funded by National Science and Technology Major Project (2018ZX10711-001; 2020ZX10001-016; 2018ZX10734404); National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFD0500208) and Emergency Prevention and Control Project of Ministry of Science and Technology (10600100000015001206).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsNational Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention; WHO Collaborating Center for Reference and Research On Influenza; Key Laboratory for Biosafety, National Health Commission, Beijing, ChinaHong Bo, Ye Zhang, Li-Bo Dong, Jie Dong, Xi-Yan Li, Xiang Zhao, Zi Li & Da-Yan WangPublic Health School (Shenzhen), Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, ChinaYue-Long ShuAuthorsHong BoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYe ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLi-Bo DongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJie DongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXi-Yan LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXiang ZhaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZi LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYue-Long ShuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDa-Yan WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsWriting: review and editing: DW. Funding acquisition: DW. Supervision: DW; YS. Conceptualization: DW. Methodology: HB, YZ, LD, JD, XL, XZ, ZL. Writing: original draft preparation: HB. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Da-Yan Wang.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest. Supplementary InformationAdditional file 1: Table S1. Primer and probe sequences used in the detection of influenza virus. Table S2. The average nucleic acid positivity rate of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 in different provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions. Table S2-a, S2-b, S2-c, S2-d indicated the average nucleic acid positivity rate of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 respectively. Table S3. The monthly nucleic acid positivity rate of influenza A, H5, H7 and H9 in environmental samples related poultry during 2014–2018. Table S4. Proportion of virus subtypes isolated from environmental samples during 2014–2018.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleBo, H., Zhang, Y., Dong, LB. et al. Distribution of avian influenza viruses according to environmental surveillance during 2014–2018, China. Infect Dis Poverty 10, 60 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40249-021-00850-3Download citationReceived: 28 January 2021Accepted: 21 April 2021Published: 06 May 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40249-021-00850-3Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsAvian influenza virusLive poultry marketEnvironmentSurveillance Download PDF Advertisement Infectious Diseases of Poverty ISSN: 2049-9957 Contact us Submission enquiries: Access here and click Contact Us General enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.How we might banish the flu forever | BrandeisNOW Skip to content Monday, November 11, 2024 Communications | Brandeis Home Brandeis.edu This Site HomeAll NewsFeatured EventsIn the NewsMultimediaOf NoteContact Us How we might banish the flu foreverNew research by biochemist Tijana Ivanovic uncovers the role of a hitherto overlooked flu virus particle. It may hold the key to ridding the world of influenza. Illustration/Jessica TannyBy Lawrence GoodmanMay 5, 2021Every year, more than six billion doses of flu (influenza) vaccine are administered to people around the world. But by the following year, the virus has mutated, and we need to create another vaccine to deal with the new strain. What would it take to rid the world of the flu forever? New research by assistant professor of biochemistry Tijana Ivanovic and several colleagues suggests the flu virus may owe its persistence at least in part to string-shaped structures called filamentous particles. Ivanovic believes that developing an antiviral treatment to target these particles could help rid the world of flu for good. Mike LovettTijana IvanovicIvanovic and her team's research was published online March 18 in Nature Microbiology. The findings also apply to emerging viruses, such as avian flu and Ebola, but not to COVID-19, which has a different structure. Researchers first discovered filamentous virus particles in 1946. They were shown to exist side-by-side with another type of viral particle that was sphere-shaped. But when scientists cultured the flu virus in their labs, observing it undergo several replication cycles, the filamentous particles disappeared from view. “This is what made it so difficult to dissect their function,” Ivanovic says. “They were elusive, so impossible to study.” In their research, Ivanovic and her collaborators used a unique method to study the flu virus. It involves producing virus particles in the lab, observing them using a technique called total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM), and conducting computer simulations. Ivanovic says her approach results in a more accurate and detailed account of the flu virus's behavior than the methods used by scientists in the past. Her method led to the following picture of spherical and filamentous particles: The flu virus relies on spherical particles to initially infect our cells. But then the immune system kicks in or we receive a vaccine, and that largely deactivates the spherical particles. At this point, you return to full health and are considered cured of the virus. But the filamentous particles could still continue to infect your cells, having evaded the body's defense system. They can do this for a straightforward reason: they are a hundred to a thousand times bigger than the spherical ones. It's a lot harder for the immune system's antibodies to fight them. Both spherical and filamentous particles have glycoproteins on their surface, critical in enabling the virus to enter cells. Ivanovic and her team found that 95% of the glycoproteins in filamentous particles can be deactivated, yet the particles will still function. Spherical particles don't have that kind of staying power. The persistence of the filamentous particles allows them to replicate and mutate. This doesn't mean you'll get sick again. The chances are overwhelming that the virus inside you won't evolve enough to become harmful. It may mutate, but the immune system will still be able to fight it. But since influenza infects tens of millions of people worldwide every year, the odds are good enough for the virus to mutate into a new strain in enough people to once again emerge as a global health threat. Ivanovic says her research shows the need to develop a treatment that can target filamentous particles. "We have to figure out a way to target the virus as a whole," she says, "spherical and filamentous particles included." The other authors on the Nature Microbiology paper are Tian Li, Zhenyu Li, Erin E. Deans and Meisui Liu at Brandeis; and Eva Mittler and Kartik Chandran at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York.Categories: Alumni, Research, Science and TechnologyReturn to the BrandeisNOW homepage Media ContactLawrence Goodman Office of Communications (781) 736-4027 lawrencegoodman@brandeis.eduBrowse by CategoryAlumniArtsAthleticsBusinessGeneralHumanities and Social SciencesInternational AffairsResearchScience and TechnologyStudent Life Suggest a Story Email: news@brandeis.edu © 2024 Brandeis University | 415 South Street, Waltham, MA 02453 | (781) 736-2000 | Contact | Emergency ServicesEpic ResearchSeasonal Influenza Rates Drop to Historic Lows During the COVID-19 PandemicYou need to enable JavaScript to view this page.Epic Research is not viewable using Internet Explorer. Please try accessing it with an alternate browser.Inhibitory effects of aprotinin on influenza A and B viruses in vitro and in vivo | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Inhibitory effects of aprotinin on influenza A and B viruses in vitro and in vivo Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 03 May 2021 Inhibitory effects of aprotinin on influenza A and B viruses in vitro and in vivo Eun-Jung Song1,2 na1, Erica Españo1 na1, Sang-Mu Shim3 na1, Jeong-Hyun Nam1,3, Jiyeon Kim1, Kiho Lee1, Song-Kyu Park1, Chong-Kil Lee4 & …Jeong-Ki Kim1 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 11, Article number: 9427 (2021) Cite this article 2797 Accesses 9 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Drug screeningInfluenza virusPhenotypic screeningViral infection AbstractInfluenza viruses cause significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. Long-term or frequent use of approved anti-influenza agents has resulted in drug-resistant strains, thereby necessitating the discovery of new drugs. In this study, we found aprotinin, a serine protease inhibitor, as an anti-influenza candidate through screening of compound libraries. Aprotinin has been previously reported to show inhibitory effects on a few influenza A virus (IAV) subtypes (e.g., seasonal H1N1 and H3N2). However, because there were no reports of its inhibitory effects on the other types of influenza viruses, we investigated the inhibitory effects of aprotinin in vitro on a wide range of influenza viruses, including avian and oseltamivir-resistant influenza virus strains. Our cell-based assay showed that aprotinin had inhibitory effects on seasonal human IAVs (H1N1 and H3N2 subtypes), avian IAVs (H5N2, H6N5, and H9N2 subtypes), an oseltamivir-resistant IAV, and a currently circulating influenza B virus. We have also confirmed its activity in mice infected with a lethal dose of influenza virus, showing a significant increase in survival rate. Our findings suggest that aprotinin has the capacity to inhibit a wide range of influenza virus subtypes and should be considered for development as a therapeutic agent against influenza. Similar content being viewed by others A small molecule compound targeting hemagglutinin inhibits influenza A virus and exhibits broad-spectrum antiviral activity Article 10 July 2024 Antiviral activities of plant-derived indole and β-carboline alkaloids against human and avian influenza viruses Article Open access 28 January 2023 An anti-influenza A virus microbial metabolite acts by degrading viral endonuclease PA Article Open access 19 April 2022 IntroductionInfluenza viruses remain important pathogens that cause respiratory diseases in humans and animals. Human seasonal influenza A and B viruses annually cause severe morbidity worldwide. The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) estimates around 23,000 flu-related deaths in the United States each year1. In addition, avian influenza viruses, such as the H5 and H7 subtypes, sporadically cause highly lethal infections in both animals and humans2,3,4, and animal or human-animal influenza reassortant strains occasionally cause global epidemics or pandemic influenza5. Vaccination is considered the most effective strategy for controlling influenza in humans6. However, current influenza vaccines have several limitations, including their limited efficacy due to antigenic mismatches between the vaccine and circulating virus strains7. For this reason, antiviral drugs are important for controlling influenza. Representative classes of anti-influenza drugs include adamantane-based matrix protein 2 (M2) ion channel blockers (e.g., amantadine and rimantadine) and neuraminidase (NA) inhibitors (e.g., oseltamivir and zanamivir)8. However, the emergence of antiviral drug resistance is a constant concern, owing to the high mutation rates of influenza viruses through antigenic drift and shift9. Since the first report of amantadine-resistant influenza A viruses (IAVs) during the 1980 epidemic10, the prevalence of these viruses among circulating IAVs (especially, H1N1 and H3N2 subtypes) has increased rapidly to nearly 100% of the cases11. In response, the CDC has stopped recommending the use of adamantane in the United States12. Increasing application of NA inhibitors (especially oseltamivir) brings into focus the risk of developing resistance to this class of anti-influenza drugs. Although the prevalence of NA inhibitor-resistant influenza viruses is generally low (oseltamivir < 3.5%) or rare (zanamivir < 1%)13,14,15,16, the problem of reduced susceptibility and resistance of influenza viruses to NA inhibitors has been recently increasing. Therefore, it is an utmost need to develop better or novel anti-influenza drugs to prepare for emergencies.In this study, we first aimed to identify anti-influenza viral agents by screening compound libraries. Aprotinin, a serine protease inhibitor used to prevent bleeding in cardiopulmonary bypass surgery, presented as a candidate. Previous reports have suggested that aprotinin has anti-influenza virus activity based on its ability to prevent the cleavage of hemagglutinin (HA), a step required for viral-host fusion17,18,19. However, most reports cover only a narrow range of IAV strains (especially seasonal IAV strains) and strains of influenza B virus (IBV) that may no longer be circulating. Furthermore, little is known about the effects of aprotinin against oseltamivir-resistant IAV strains.Therefore, in this study, we investigated the effects of aprotinin on various subtypes of IAV, including (i) human seasonal IAVs, (ii) avian influenza viruses with zoonotic potential (H5N2, H9N2, and H6N2), (iii) oseltamivir-resistant IAV, and (iv) on a currently circulating strain of IBV in vitro. We also used a mouse model to verify the anti-influenza activity of aprotinin. Our findings contribute further evidence to the potential of aprotinin as a broad-spectrum anti-influenza agent.ResultsIn vitro dose-dependent inhibitory effects of aprotinin on influenza A and B virusesTo develop better or novel antiviral drugs against influenza virus infection, we screened compound libraries through a Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cell-based screening system20 using A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) virus, the standard reference strain of human IAV. We tested a total of 1280 compounds and found 13 anti-influenza candidates. Aprotinin, a serine protease inhibitor, was selected as a final candidate because both aprotinin samples from this library and from that of another company showed inhibitory effects on the virus (data not shown). To validate the results of screening, we treated MDCK cells infected with different influenza virus strains with varying concentrations (10‒200 nM) of aprotinin (Fig. 1). Viral inhibition assay in MDCK cells showed that aprotinin inhibits A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1a). Aprotinin could also inhibit A/CA/04/09 (H1N1), A/PH/2/82 (H3N2), A/AB/Kor/CN05/09 (H6N5), A/Ck/Kor/01310/01 (H9N2), A/Bris/10/07 (H3N2), and B/Seoul/32/11 in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1b–g). The calculated EC50 values for aprotinin against the different influenza strains are shown in Table 1. Based on the results of the viral inhibition assay, we applied the lowest effective concentration against all the tested influenza strains (60 nM) for subsequent experiments.Figure 1Dose-dependent effects of aprotinin against influenza viruses in vitro. Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were infected with (a) A/PR/8/34 (H1N1), (b) A/CA/04/09 (H1N1), (c) A/PH/2/82 (H3N2), (d) A/AB/Kor/CN5/09 (H6N5), (e) A/Ck/Kor/01310/01 (H9N2), (f) A/Bris/10/07 (H3N2), or (g) B/Seoul/32/11 (Yamagata-like lineage) and were treated with varying concentrations of aprotinin (10‒200 nM; n = 3 per dose) for 72 h. Viruses were inoculated at a dose of 100 (H6N5 and B/Seoul) or 1000 (all except H6N5 and B/Seoul) TCID50 per well. Cell viability was measured using the EZ-Cytox reagent, and cell viability was calculated relative to the uninfected MDCK cell viability (cell-only control). TCID50: median tissue culture infectious dose.Full size imageTable 1 Half-maximal effective concentrations (EC50) of aprotinin against various influenza virus strains in Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells.Full size tableWe next compared the antiviral activity of aprotinin against A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) virus with that of oseltamivir (100 μM). Aprotinin showed corresponding or superior antiviral activity to oseltamivir against PR/8 virus infection (Fig. 2a). Colorimetric cytotoxicity assay revealed that there was no cytotoxicity in the range of aprotinin concentrations tested in this study (≤ 200 nM) (Fig. 2b).Figure 2Antiviral effects of aprotinin compared with oseltamivir and cytotoxicity assay in Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. (a) MDCK cells were infected with A/PR/8/34 (1000 TCID50/ml) and treated with 60 nM aprotinin or 100 μM oseltamivir. Untreated and uninfected MDCK cells (cell) and untreated infected cells (PR/8) were used as controls. (b) To determine the cytotoxicity of aprotinin, cell viability was measured by treating the MDCK cells with the compound for 72 h, and cell viability was compared with untreated control cells (cell). Cell viability was measured using EZ-Cytox. The experiments were performed in triplicate. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001. TCID50: median tissue culture infectious dose.Full size imageIn vitro inhibitory effects of aprotinin on multiple replication cycles of various influenza A virus subtypesPrevious studies have minimal information on the spectrum of the anti-influenza viral activity of aprotinin. Therefore, we evaluated the effects of aprotinin treatment on the production of infectious particles of various IAV subtypes, including human and avian viruses, through time-based studies by determining the growth kinetics of the following viruses in MDCK cells: A/PR/8/34 (H1N1), A/CA/04/09 (H1N1), A/PH/2/82 (H3N2), A/AB/Kor/CN2/09 (H5N2), A/AB/Kor/CN5/09/H6N5 (H6N5), and A/Ck/Kor/01310/09 (H9N2) viruses. Culture supernatants were collected at different time points, and virus titers were determined by calculating the median TCID50 based on the hemagglutination assay. We also compared the inhibitory effects of aprotinin against those of oseltamivir (100 μM).Aprotinin was able to significantly reduce the production of the tested human IAVs after more than 16 h post-infection (Fig. 3a–c), supporting the results of previous studies18, 19. Furthermore, the inhibitory effects of aprotinin on A/CA/04/09 (H1N1) and A/PH/2/82 (H3N2) viruses were more superior than those of oseltamivir towards the end of the incubation period. Aprotinin was also able to inhibit the production of avian influenza viruses in MDCK cells (Fig. 3d–f). Aprotinin displayed weaker inhibitory effects on avian IAVs than oseltamivir at early time points post-infection but presented effects similar to those of oseltamivir at 64 h post-infection. These results indicate that aprotinin had inhibitory effects on infections of both human and avian IAVs.Figure 3Aprotinin inhibited the replication of various strains of human influenza A virus in Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK cells. The replication kinetics of (a) A/PR/8/34 (H1N1), (b) A/CA/04/09 (H1N1), (c) A/PH/2/82 (H3N2), (d) A/AB/Kor/CN2/09 (H5N2), (e) A/AB/Kor/CN5/09 (H6N5), and (f) A/Ck/Kor/01310/01 (H9N2) virus were investigated in MDCK cells after treatment with aprotinin and oseltamivir. MDCK cells were infected with influenza virus at an MOI of 0.001 (H6N5) or 0.01 (all viruses except H6N5) for 1 h and then treated with aprotinin (60 nM) or oseltamivir (100 μM). Supernatants were collected pre-infection (0) and at 16, 24, 32, 48, and 64 h post-infection, and viral titers in the supernatants were determined by the TCID50 assay. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.0001, statistically significant difference between the virus-only (media) group and the aprotinin treatment group. †P < 0.05, ††P < 0.01, and †††P < 0.0001, statistically significant difference between the aprotinin and oseltamivir treatment group. MOI: multiplicity of infection; TCID50: half-maximal tissue culture infectious dose.Full size imageIn vitro inhibitory effects of aprotinin on multiple cycles of replication of oseltamivir-resistant influenza A and B virusesWe next examined the inhibitory effects of aprotinin against an oseltamivir-resistant IAV (A/Bris/10/07; H3N2). As shown in Fig. 4a, A/Bris/10/07 (H3N2) virus was less susceptible to oseltamivir. Our genetic analysis revealed that the H28T mutation in HA conferred the reduced susceptibility of the H3N2 virus to oseltamivir (data not shown). However, aprotinin could effectively reduce the production of the H3N2 virus (Fig. 4a).Figure 4Aprotinin inhibited the replication of oseltamivir-resistant influenza viruses in Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. The replication kinetics of (a) A/Bris/10/07 (H3N2) and (b) B/Seoul/32/11 were investigated in MDCK cells after treatment with aprotinin and oseltamivir. MDCK cells were infected with influenza virus at an MOI of 0.01 (H3N2) or 0.001 (B/Seoul/32/11) for 1 h and then treated with aprotinin (60 nM) or oseltamivir (100 μM). Supernatants were collected pre-infection (0) and at 16, 24, 32, 48, and 64 h post-infection, and viral titers in the supernatants were determined by the TCID50 assay. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.0001, statistically significant difference between the virus-only (media) group and the aprotinin treatment group. †P < 0.05, ††P < 0.01, and †††P < 0.0001, statistically significant difference between the aprotinin and oseltamivir treatment groups. MOI: multiplicity of infection; TCID50: half-maximal tissue culture infectious dose.Full size imageIBVs are generally less susceptible to oseltamivir than IAVs21, 22. Therefore, we investigated the inhibitory effects of aprotinin on influenza B virus (B/Seoul/32/2011) infection. As shown in Fig. 4b, the IBV was around 50- to 100-fold less susceptible to oseltamivir. However, aprotinin was more effective than oseltamivir at reducing IBV production.Taken together, these results suggest that aprotinin can significantly reduce the production of oseltamivir-resistant IAV and IBV.Inhibitory effects of aprotinin treatment in mice infected with a lethal dose of A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) virusTo test whether aprotinin has antiviral activity in vivo, we tested its effects against lethal A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) virus infection in C57BL/6 mice. We initially treated mice with once-daily intravenous injections of aprotinin at 2 mg/kg mouse body weight per day based on a previous study23. However, while it did not have toxic effects in vivo, it also did not display antiviral effects in influenza-infected mice (data not shown). The initial half-life of aprotinin may be too short for conferring antiviral effects in vivo. As such, we decided to administer aprotinin twice a day.C57BL/6 mice were intranasally inoculated with 3 LD50 of A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) virus. For 5 days after infection, the mice received twice-daily intravenous injections of aprotinin (2 mg/kg mouse body weight, twice daily); oral administrations of oseltamivir (10 mg/kg/day) based on a previously reported effective dose24; or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) as control. Uninfected mice were similarly treated with aprotinin as the drug-only control group. Body weight changes and survival were monitored daily for 14 days after infection (Fig. 5). Administration of aprotinin alone did not result in body weight loss in mice. The PBS-treated mice had 0% survival at 8 days post-infection. Meanwhile, the groups of mice treated with either aprotinin and oseltamivir showed 75% and 100% survival, respectively.Figure 5Antiviral effects of aprotinin against influenza A virus in C57BL/6 mice. Groups of mice (n = 8 per group) were intranasally infected with A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) virus at three times the 50% mouse lethal dose (3 LD50). Oseltamivir was orally administered (oral gavage) at 10 mg/kg/day, and aprotinin was intravenously administered at 2 mg/kg, twice daily, for 5 days. Mouse (a) body weight changes and (b) survival were monitored daily for 2 weeks. ** P < 0.01, significant difference between the negative control group (virus-infected only, PR/8) and the aprotinin treatment group (PR/8 + aprotinin).Full size imageDiscussionGiven the limitations of influenza vaccines and the recent rise in the number of oseltamivir-resistant strains, there remains a need to discover and develop new anti-influenza agents. In our cell culture-based screening of compound libraries, aprotinin was identified as a strong anti-influenza candidate. Aprotinin, also known as bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor, is a naturally occurring non-specific inhibitor of serine proteases, including trypsin, chymotrypsin, plasmin, and kallikrein25. It is primarily indicated for preventing blood loss in cardiac bypass surgeries. It was considered to be well-tolerated in animal models and in clinical trials26. Aprotinin has been previously reported as an anti-influenza agent in vitro27, in embryonated chicken eggs17, 28, and in mice29. It is currently licensed in Russia for clinical use in aerosolized form (Aerus), primarily against seasonal H1N1 and H3N2 influenza, but it has also been tested against H2N2, pandemic H1N1, and avian-like H7N9 influenza viruses18, 19, 28.Influenza viruses require proteolytic cleavage and structural rearrangement of HA for successful fusion with host endosomes. HA is initially translated as a precursor, HA0, with HA1 and HA2 domains linked by a short peptide sequence. Trypsin-like proteases facilitate cleavage of the precursor by targeting arginine in the linker peptide in the HA0 of most influenza virus strains. Extracellular cleavage of the HA0 of mammalian and low-pathogenicity influenza viruses is facilitated by soluble proteases such as tryptase Clara, mini-plasmin, and ectopic anionic trypsin I30. Cell-associated cleavage of HA0 in the human airway can also be facilitated by transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) in secretory vesicles during viral egress and by the membrane-bound human airway-trypsin like protease (HAT) prior to attachment to target cells30, 31. Aprotinin inhibits the activity of trypsin-like proteases by blocking the active site, thereby inhibiting proteolytic cleavage of HA028. Aprotinin also displayed inhibitory effects on paramyxoviruses32 and SARS-CoV-233, likely due to suppressed cleavage of the fusion protein precursor and the spike protein, respectively.Because previous studies have shown that aprotinin inhibited a limited number of subtypes of IAV (mainly H1N1 and H3N2), we decided to examine its antiviral activity against a broader range of influenza viruses in this study. The tested strains include avian strains of IAV, an oseltamivir-resistant strain of IAV, and a currently circulating strain of IBV.Similar to previous reports, we found that aprotinin was able to inhibit the production of seasonal H1N1 and H3N2 IAVs in MDCK cells. The effects of aprotinin were either comparable or superior to the effects of oseltamivir. We also found that aprotinin could inhibit avian IAVs belonging to the H9N2, H5N2, and H6N5 subtypes in vitro at levels similar to the effects of oseltamivir. H9N2 currently circulates in poultry and is generally avirulent or low-pathogenic. However, occasional outbreaks in poultry farms have occurred, and sporadic human infection cases have also been reported34. Meanwhile, both the H5N2 and H6N5 viruses in this study were isolated from wildfowl in South Korea. The H6N5 isolate was found to cause considerable morbidity and mortality in mice without bearing any known pathogenicity marker35, and the H5N2 isolate adapted to and caused lethality in mice after only a single lung-to-lung passage36. These previous studies suggest that some of the currently circulating avian influenza virus strains have the capacity to easily cross the avian-mammalian transmission barrier and may emerge as zoonotic agents in the future. The ability of aprotinin to inhibit these avian influenza viruses suggests that aprotinin may potentially be used in human outbreaks of avian influenza viruses.We have also shown that aprotinin is able to inhibit an oseltamivir-resistant influenza A strain (A/Bris/10/07; H3N2). Additionally, similar to earlier reports of aprotinin’s activity against the B/Lee/40 and B/HK/73 viruses17, aprotinin shows antiviral activity against a currently circulating strain of IBV (Yamagata-like lineage, B/Seoul/32/2011). IBVs are generally less susceptible to oseltamivir, especially in children21, 37. Because aprotinin targets a host factor required for infection, influenza viruses are less likely to develop aprotinin resistance, especially because trypsin-like proteases, the targets of aprotinin, are required for influenza virus proliferation. Therefore, the use of aprotinin may be more beneficial in the long run than the use of drugs targeted against viral components.In our study, at least twice-daily intravenous administrations were needed for aprotinin to be protective against influenza virus infection in a mouse model. Aprotinin has a relatively short plasma half-life (0.7–2 h), and 90% of the administered dose is absorbed by the kidney in a few hours38, which requires high-dose intravenous administrations of aprotinin in surgeries26. This probably explains why once-daily intravenous administrations were not sufficient to exert inhibitory effects against the influenza virus. As such, high plasma concentrations of aprotinin may also be required to inhibit influenza viruses. However, as in the case of the licensed aerosolized aprotinin in Russia, multiple doses of intranasally administered aprotinin may be more beneficial for application against influenza virus infection in humans18, 19, 29, 39. This way, aprotinin does not have to circulate systemically and will be targeted in the upper respiratory tract, where most influenza virus subtypes replicate in humans. However, in this study, we did not test intranasal administration of aprotinin. Future studies will have to be performed to determine the optimal dosage and route of administration for human application. Moreover, we did not measure viral titers from the mouse respiratory tract and lungs. Testing the effects of aprotinin on titers of different influenza virus subtypes in the mouse respiratory tract should be considered for further studies. Additionally, whether aprotinin will be effective against highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses (HPAIVs) will have to be evaluated. HPAIVs have multibasic cleavage sites that are more accessible to a wide range of proteases40. If aprotinin has the ability to inhibit HPAIVs, then it will be a viable pandemic influenza therapeutic candidate that runs a lower risk of causing drug resistance than currently used antivirals like oseltamivir.Several studies have associated the use of aprotinin in cardiac bypass surgery with risks of renal failure and mortality41,42,43. Furthermore, re-exposure to aprotinin within six months has been associated with allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, with a peak at 4–30 days from last exposure44. Consequently, aprotinin was pulled out of the market in 2007. In surgery, aprotinin is typically intravenously administered at an initial dose of 1.0–2.0 × 106 kallikrein inhibitor units (KIU), followed by continuous infusion with 0.25–0.5 × 106 KIU/hour45. Zhirnov et al. reported that 1.0–3.0 × 103 KIU per day of aerosolized aprotinin was sufficient against influenza virus infection19. Given the nearly 1000-fold difference in dose and the different routes of administration between the application of aprotinin in cardiac bypass surgery and in influenza treatment, subsequent adverse effects may also differ. Notably, Zhirnov et al. reported that aerosolized aprotinin did not cause allergic reactions in an early clinical trial19. Furthermore, several groups have challenged the existing evidence on the adverse effects of aprotinin and have shown that aprotinin does not independently increase the risk of renal failure and mortality45,46,47,48. Indeed, after reviewing evidence on the benefits and risks of aprotinin, Canada and Europe have re-licensed aprotinin for application in cardiac bypass surgery45, 48. Thus, with the potentially broad applicability of aprotinin against influenza viruses and the potential differences in dosage requirements, we believe that further evaluation of aprotinin as a treatment for influenza is merited despite the reported adverse effects for the original indication of aprotinin.Taken together, in this study, we were able to demonstrate that aprotinin inhibits the in vitro production of (1) avian IAVs with zoonotic potential, (2) oseltamivir-resistant IAV, and (3) currently circulating IBV, which is inherently less susceptible to oseltamivir. Thus, we propose that aprotinin is an excellent candidate for the treatment of most IAVs and IBVs in humans. However, whether aprotinin is similarly effective against HPAIVs will have to be evaluated. The most appropriate route of administration and the optimal dosage for the clinical use of aprotinin against influenza will also have to be determined.Materials and methodsCells, viruses, and aprotininMadin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were cultured in Growth Medium: 1 × Minimum Essential Medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), 3% L-glutamine (Gibco), 0.75% sodium bicarbonate (Gibco), 1% MEM vitamin solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 50 μg/ml gentamicin (Gibco), and 1% antibiotic–antimycotic solution (Gibco).Seven IAVs and one IBV were used in this study: A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (A/PR/8/34; H1N1); A/California/04/2009 (A/CA/04/09; H1N1); A/Philippines/2/1982 (A/PH/2/82; H3N2); A/Brisbane/10/2007 (A/Bris/10/07; H3N2); A/Aquatic Bird/Korea/CN2/2009 (A/AB/Kor/CN2/09; H5N2); A/Aquatic Bird/Korea/CN5/2009 (A/AB/Kor/CN5/09; H6N5); A/Chicken/Korea/01310/2001 (A/Ck/Kor/01310/01; H9N2); and B/Seoul/32/2011 (B/Seoul/32/11). The IAVs were grown in 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs for 48 h at 35 °C. The allantoic fluid was harvested, and aliquots were stored at ‒70 °C until use. The IBV was propagated in MDCK cells in Infection Medium: 1 × MEM supplemented with 0.3% bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich) (instead of FBS) and 1.0 μg/ml tosylsulfonyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corporation, Lakewood, NJ, USA) incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2. After incubation for 72 h, the supernatant was harvested, and aliquots were stored at ‒ 70 °C until use.Aprotinin (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in distilled water to make stock solutions, and aliquots were stored at ‒ 20 °C until use. Oseltamivir phosphate (Tamiflu; Roche, Basel, Switzerland) was reconstituted in PBS and used on the same day. Working solutions of both aprotinin and oseltamivir were prepared by diluting the stock solutions with Infection Medium on the day of use for in vitro assays and with PBS for the in vivo study.Cell viability and cytotoxicity assaysFor the cell viability assay, MDCK cells were cultured on a 96-well plate (2 × 104 cells/well) in Growth Medium. After incubation for 16 h at 37 °C, the cells were infected with each influenza virus at 100 or 1000 half-maximal tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50)/well and were washed with phosphate-buffered saline at 1 h post-infection. Various concentrations (10 to 200 nM, n = 3 per dose) of aprotinin diluted with Infection Medium (similar to the IBV infection medium, with TPCK-trypsin) were added into each well to a final volume of 100 μl/well. After incubation for 72 h at 37 °C, cell viability was determined using the EZ-Cytox kit (Daeillab Service Co., South Korea) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cell viability was indicated by percentage values compared to the negative control (cells that were infected but not treated with aprotinin). Cytotoxicity of aprotinin was measured similarly as described above, but without infection. Cytotoxicity was presented as % cell viability relative to the negative control (wells containing cells only).Virus growth kineticsMDCK cells were cultured on a 24-well plate (1.25 × 105 cells/well) in Growth Medium. After incubation for 16 h at 37 °C, the cells were infected with each influenza virus at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 or 0.001 and were washed with PBS at 1 h post-infection. The cells were treated with aprotinin (60 nM/well) or oseltamivir (100 μM/well; positive control) in a total volume of 0.5 ml Infection Medium/well and incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Culture supernatant was collected pre-infection and at 16, 24, 32, 48, and 64 h post-infection and stored at ‒ 70 °C until analysis.Virus titration was performed using MDCK cells. The cells were cultured on a 96-well plate (2 × 104 cells/well) in Growth Medium and were infected with 100 μl of serial tenfold dilutions of the culture supernatant in Infection Medium. After incubation for 72 h at 37 °C, the culture supernatant was harvested to determine virus titration by the hemagglutination assay using 0.5% chicken red blood cells. The virus titers were determined by calculating the TCID50 using the Reed-Muench method49. The typical limit of detection for the TCID50 assay of influenza viruses on MDCK cells is 100.3 TCID50/ml.Mouse experimentsAll animal experiments were conducted in biosafety level 2-plus facilities at the Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB; Daejeon, South Korea). The study was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of KRIBB (approval no. KRIBB-AEC-10046). Animal care and experiments were carried out according to the guidelines of KRIBB IACUC. The studies were designed and are reported in line with the Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines.Six- to eight-week-old C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Koatech (Pyeongtaek, South Korea), and eight mice per group were used. Each mouse was anesthetized with 100 μl of 1:1:8 Zoletil:Rompun:PBS (intraperitoneal). Then, the mice were inoculated via intranasal instillation with 3 times the 50% lethal dose (3 LD50) of the PR/8 virus in PBS (30 μl/mouse). The following day, the mice were treated intravenously with aprotinin in PBS (2 mg/kg mouse body weight, twice daily; 0.1 ml/mouse); orally (oral gavage) with oseltamivir in PBS (10 mg/kg mouse body weight per day; 0.2 ml/mouse), or intravenously with PBS (negative control) twice a day for 5 days. Uninfected mice were likewise intravenously administered aprotinin in PBS as the aprotinin-only control group. The mice were monitored daily for 14 days for weight change and mortality.Data analysisBased on the inhibition of virus growth, the half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) of aprotinin was calculated using GraphPad Prism (version 5; San Diego, CA, USA). This procedure is commonly known as a logistic regression using the following formula: Y = 1/1 + 10 ([logEC50 – logX] × Hillslope), where Y represents response (inhibition of virus growth), and X represents the concentration of aprotinin. Hillslope is the parameter to describe the steepness of the curve. Data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism for Windows. Student’s t-test was performed to determine differences between two groups. For the virus growth kinetics data, significant differences among the groups were evaluated by ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test. The Gehan–Breslow–Wilcoxon test was used to analyze differences in mouse survival. P values less than 0.05 (P < 0.05) were considered statistically significant. ReferencesYoung-Xu, Y., van Aalst, R., Russo, E., Lee, J. K. H. & Chit, A. The annual burden of seasonal influenza in the US Veterans Affairs population. PLoS ONE 12, e0169344. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0169344 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Peiris, J. S. M., de Jong, M. D. & Guan, Y. Avian influenza virus (H5N1): A threat to human health. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 20, 243–267. https://doi.org/10.1128/cmr.00037-06 (2007).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, D.-H., Bertran, K., Kwon, J.-H. & Swayne, D. E. Evolution, global spread, and pathogenicity of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5Nx clade 2.3.4.4. J. Vet. Sci. 18, 269–280. https://doi.org/10.4142/jvs.2017.18.S1.269 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yang, L. et al. Genesis and spread of newly emerged highly pathogenic H7N9 avian viruses in Mainland China. J. Virol. 91, e01277-e11217. https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.01277-17 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Saunders-Hastings, P. R. & Krewski, D. Reviewing the history of pandemic influenza: Understanding patterns of emergence and transmission. Pathogens 5, 66. https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens5040066 (2016).Article PubMed Central Google Scholar World Health Organization. Influenza (seasonal). https://www.who.int/enews-room/fact-sheets/detail/influenza-(seasonal) (2018).Soema, P. C., Kompier, R., Amorij, J.-P. & Kersten, G. F. A. Current and next generation influenza vaccines: Formulation and production strategies. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 94, 251–263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.05.023 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar De Clercq, E. Antiviral agents active against influenza A viruses. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 5, 1015–1025. https://doi.org/10.1038rd2175 (2006).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hussain, M., Galvin, H. D., Haw, T. Y., Nutsford, A. N. & Husain, M. Drug resistance in influenza A virus: The epidemiology and management. Infect. Drug Resist. 10, 121–134. https://doi.org/10.2147/IDR.S105473 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Heider, H. et al. Occurrence of amantadine- and rimantadine-resistant influenza A virus strains during the 1980 epidemic. Acta Virol. 25, 395–400 (1981).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hayden, F. Developing new antiviral agents for influenza treatment: What does the future hold?. Clin. Infect. Dis. 48, S3–S13. https://doi.org/10.1086/591851 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC recommends against the use of amantadine and rimantadine for the treatment or prophylaxis of influenza in the United States during the 2005–06 influenza season. https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/25151 (2006).Gubareva, L. V. et al. Global update on the susceptibility of human influenza viruses to neuraminidase inhibitors, 2015–2016. Antiviral Res. 146, 12–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2017.08.004 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lina, B. et al. Five years of monitoring for the emergence of oseltamivir resistance in patients with influenza A infections in the Influenza Resistance Information Study. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 12, 267–278. https://doi.org/10.1111/irv.12534 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Influenza antiviral drug resistance. https://www.cdc.gov/flureatment/antiviralresistance.htm (2020).Public Health England. PHE guidance on the use of antiviral agents for the treatment and prophylaxis of seasonal influenza. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/833572/PHE_guidance_antivirals_influenza_201920.pdf (2019).Zhirnov, O. P., Golyando, P. B. & Ovcharenko, A. V. Replication of influenza B virus in chicken embryos is suppressed by exogenous aprotinin. Arch. Virol. 135, 209–216. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01309780 (1994).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhirnov, O. P., Bokova, N. O., Isaeva, E. I., Varobieva, I. V. & Malyshev, N. A. Pathogenetic treatment of influenza patients with aerosolized form of aprotinin, a protease inhibitor. BIOpreparations Prev. Diagnosis Treat. 2015, 59–64 (2015). Google Scholar Zhirnov, O. P., Klenk, H. D. & Wright, P. F. Aprotinin and similar protease inhibitors as drugs against influenza. Antiviral Res. 92, 27–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.07.014 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sidwell, R. W. & Smee, D. F. In vitro and in vivo assay systems for study of influenza virus inhibitors. Antiviral. Res. 48, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0166-3542(00)00125-x (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kawai, N. et al. A comparison of the effectiveness of oseltamivir for the treatment of influenza A and influenza B: A Japanese multicenter study of the 2003–2004 and 2004–2005 influenza seasons. Clin. Infect. Dis. 43, 439–444. https://doi.org/10.1086/505868 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sato, M. et al. Effectiveness of oseltamivir treatment among children with influenza A or B virus infections during four successive winters in Niigata City, Japan. Tohoku J. Exp. Med. 214, 113–120. https://doi.org/10.1620jem.214.113 (2008).Article PubMed Google Scholar Zhirnov, O. P. & Ovcharenko, A. V. Pharmaceutical aerosol composition and application thereof for treatment and prophylaxis of viral diseases. US5723439A (1998).Smee, D. F., Wong, M. H., Bailey, K. W. & Sidwell, R. W. Activities of oseltamivir and ribavirin used alone and in combination against infections in mice with recent isolates of influenza A (H1N1) and B viruses. Antivir. Chem. Chemother. 17, 185–192. https://doi.org/10.1177/095632020601700403 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Fritz, H. & Jochum, M. Aprotinin and its target enzymes in vitro and in vito. in 9th Annual Meeting of the International Society for Heart Transplantation (eds D.E. Birnbaum & H.E. Hoffmeister) 42–51 (Schattauer, 1990).Davis, R. & Whittington, R. Aprotinin. NDrugs 49, 954–983. https://doi.org/10.2165/00003495-199549060-00008 (1995).Article CAS Google Scholar Zhirnov, O. P., Ikizler, M. R. & Wright, P. F. Cleavage of influenza A virus hemagglutinin in human respiratory epithelium is cell associated and sensitive to exogenous antiproteases. J. Virol. 76, 8682. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.76.17.8682-8689.2002 (2002).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhirnov, O. P., Matrosovich, T. Y., Matrosovich, M. N. & Klenk, H.-D. Aprotinin, a protease inhibitor, suppresses proteolytic activation of pandemic H1N1v influenza virus. Antivir. Chem. Chemother. 21, 169–174. https://doi.org/10.3851/IMP1715 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ovcharenko, A. V. & Zhirnov, O. P. Aprotinin aerosol treatment of influenza and paramyxovirus bronchopneumonia of mice. Antiviral Res. 23, 107–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-3542(94)90038-8 (1994).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bertram, S., Glowacka, I., Steffen, I., Kühl, A. & Pöhlmann, S. Novel insights into proteolytic cleavage of influenza virus hemagglutinin. Rev. Med. Virol. 20, 298–310. https://doi.org/10.1002mv.657 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Böttcher, E. et al. Proteolytic activation of influenza viruses by serine proteases TMPRSS2 and HAT from human airway epithelium. J. Virol. 80, 9896. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01118-06 (2006).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhirnov, O. P., Ovcharenko, A. V. & Bukrinskaya, A. G. Myxovirus replication in chicken embryos can be suppressed by aprotinin due to the blockage of viral glycoprotein cleavage. J. Gen. Virol. 66, 1633–1638. https://doi.org/10.1099/0022-1317-66-7-1633 (1985).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bojkova, D. et al. Aprotinin inhibits SARS-CoV-2 replication. Cells 9, 2377. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells9112377 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Central Google Scholar Peacock, P. T., James, J., Sealy, E. J. & Iqbal, M. A global perspective on H9N2 avian influenza virus. Viruses 11, 620. https://doi.org/10.3390/v11070620 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Central Google Scholar Nam, J.-H. et al. Emergence of mammalian species-infectious and -pathogenic avian influenza H6N5 virus with no evidence of adaptation. J. Virol. 85, 13271. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.05038-11 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nam, J.-H. et al. Rapid virulence shift of an H5N2 avian influenza virus during a single passage in mice. Arch. Virol. 162, 3017–3024. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00705-017-3451-9 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Burnham, A. J., Baranovich, T. & Govorkova, E. A. Neuraminidase inhibitors for influenza B virus infection: Efficacy and resistance. Antiviral Res. 100, 520–534. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.08.023 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Emerson, T. E. Jr. Pharmacology of aprotinin and efficacy during cardiopulmonary bypass. Cardiovasc. Drug Rev. 7, 127–140. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1527-3466.1989.tb00521.x (1989).Article Google Scholar Zhirnov, O. P., Ovcharenko, A. V. & Bukrinskaya, A. G. Suppression of influenza virus replication in infected mice by protease inhibitors. J. Gen. Virol. 65, 191–196. https://doi.org/10.1099/0022-1317-65-1-191 (1984).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Erasmus Medical Centre (NL) & Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie (IT). Mechanisms and risk factors for mutation from low to highly pathogenic avian influenza virus. EFSA Support. Publ. 14, EN-1287. https://doi.org/10.2903/sp.efsa.2017.EN-1287 (2017).Article Google Scholar Mangano, D. T., Tudor, I. C. & Dietzel, C. The risk associated with aprotinin in cardiac surgery. New Engl. J. Med. 354, 353–365. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa051379 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Benedetto, U. et al. Safety of perioperative aprotinin administration during isolated coronary artery bypass graft surgery: Insights from the ART (Arterial Revascularization Trial). J. Am. Heart Assoc. 7, e007570. https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.117.007570 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Olenchock, S. A. Jr. et al. Impact of aprotinin on adverse clinical outcomes and mortality up to 12 years in a registry of 3,337 patients. Ann. Thorac. Surg. 86, 560–567. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.athoracsur.2008.04.048 (2008).Article PubMed Google Scholar Dietrich, W., Ebell, A., Busley, R. & Boulesteix, A.-L. Aprotinin and anaphylaxis: analysis of 12,403 exposures to aprotinin in cardiac surgery. Ann. Thorac. Surg. 84, 1144–1150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.athoracsur.2007.05.015 (2007).Article PubMed Google Scholar Royston, D., De Hert, S., van der Linden, J., Ouattara, A. & Zacharowski, K. A special article following the relicence of aprotinin injection in Europe. Anaesth. Crit. Care Pain Med. 36, 97–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accpm.2017.02.001 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Furnary Anthony, P., Wu, Y., Hiratzka Loren, F., Grunkemeier Gary, L. & Page, U. S. 3rd. Aprotinin does not increase the risk of renal failure in cardiac surgery patients. Circulation 116, I-127-I–133. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.681395 (2007).Article CAS Google Scholar Howell, N., Senanayake, E., Freemantle, N. & Pagano, D. Putting the record straight on aprotinin as safe and effective: Results from a mixed treatment meta-analysis of trials of aprotinin. J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 145, 234–240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.07.018 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar European Society of Anaesthesiology task force reports on place of aprotinin in clinical anaesthesia. Aprotinin: Is it time to reconsider?. Eur. J. Anaesthesiol. 32, 591–595. https://doi.org/10.1097/EJA.0000000000000284 (2015).Article Google Scholar Reed, L. J. & Muench, H. A simple method of estimating fifty per cent endpoints. Am. J. Epidemiol. 27, 493–497. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a118408 (1938).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by Korea University Research Grants (K1605091, K1619611, K1704981, K1721091, K1800101, K1821221, K2005541, and K2023291) and Korea University Sejong Future Research Grant (K1826621).Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Eun-Jung Song, Erica Españo and Sang-Mu Shim.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Korea University, 2511 Sejong-ro, Sejong, 30019, Republic of KoreaEun-Jung Song, Erica Españo, Jeong-Hyun Nam, Jiyeon Kim, Kiho Lee, Song-Kyu Park & Jeong-Ki KimLaboratory Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, 61186, Republic of KoreaEun-Jung SongDivision of Acute Viral Diseases, Center for Emerging Virus Research, National Institute of Health, Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency, Cheongju, Chungbuk, 28159, Republic of KoreaSang-Mu Shim & Jeong-Hyun NamDepartment of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Chungbuk, 28644, Republic of KoreaChong-Kil LeeAuthorsEun-Jung SongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarErica EspañoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSang-Mu ShimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeong-Hyun NamView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJiyeon KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKiho LeeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSong-Kyu ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChong-Kil LeeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeong-Ki KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsJ.-K.K., C.-K.L., K.L, and S.-K.P. designed the experiments and prepared the materials. J.-K.K., E.-J.S., S.-M.S., E.E., J.-H.N., and J.K. performed the experiments and analyzed the data. E.-J.S., E.E., J.-K.K. wrote the manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Chong-Kil Lee or Jeong-Ki Kim.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleSong, EJ., Españo, E., Shim, SM. et al. Inhibitory effects of aprotinin on influenza A and B viruses in vitro and in vivo. Sci Rep 11, 9427 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-88886-1Download citationReceived: 18 February 2021Accepted: 16 April 2021Published: 03 May 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-88886-1Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Translational Research newsletter — top stories in biotechnology, drug discovery and pharma. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get what matters in translational research, free to your inbox weekly. Sign up for Nature Briefing: Translational ResearchCell-based seasonal influenza vaccine safe and effective in children RecommendedNew webinar with Fujifilm: Monocyte activation test (MAT): Insight into examining regulations and markets prospectsNew webinar: The path to optimisation in pharmaceutical microbiologyJoin our webinar: An alternative medium to support sterility testing using the Growth Direct® Rapid Sterility SystemDiscover more in our new application note: validating recombinant cascade reagents in 3 simple steps About us | Advertise with us | Contact us MenuHomeAI HubNewsArticlesVideosPodcastsPublicationsWhitepapers/App Notes/PostersWebinarsContent HubsEventsThe Future of Bio Pharmaceutical Analysis 2024 (Online Summit)PHARMA MICROBIOLOGY – Navigating Compliance and Best Practices (Online Summit)Pharma 4.0: Breakfast BriefingThe Future of Pharmaceutical Analysis 2023 (Online Summit)Industry EventsAnalytical techniquesBiopharmaDrug deliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegs & Legs newsCell-based seasonal influenza vaccine safe and effective in children48SHARES Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardPosted: 4 May 2021 | Hannah Balfour (European Pharmaceutical Review) | No comments yetPhase III data shows Seqirus’ cell-based quadrivalent seasonal influenza vaccine was as effective and safe as an equivalent FDA-approved egg-based vaccine in paediatric patients. New Phase III data shows Seqirus’ cell-based quadrivalent seasonal influenza vaccine (QIVc) was as safe and immunogenic as a standard quadrivalent seasonal influenza vaccine (QIV) in children six months through over four years of age during the US 2019/20 influenza season. The data was presented at the Pediatric Academic Society (PAS) Virtual Annual Meeting on 1 May 2021.“There is a significant disease burden of influenza for young children and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recognises this population as one of high-risk for serious complications from the flu,” stated Dr Brandon Essink, Medical Director at Meridian Clinical Research and principal investigator of the study. “The results of this study provide evidence for the benefit of QIVc for paediatric patients, adding to a strong body of evidence in support of cell-based manufacturing for influenza vaccines.”The CDC recommends that yearly seasonal influenza vaccines are the best way to prevent influenza for everyone six months of age and above without contraindications. Children younger than five years of age, especially those under two years of age, are at high risk of developing serious influenza-related complications. Estimates suggest annual influenza-related hospitalisations among children younger than five years of age have ranged from 7,000 to 26,000 in the US since 2010.The Phase III observer-blind controlled study evaluated whether QIVc would elicit a non-inferior immune response compared to a US-licensed QIV in subjects six months through over four years of age. The study randomised 2414 children 2:1 to receive QIVc or QIV. Participants received one or two vaccine doses (28 days apart) based on vaccination history and were followed for at least 180 days.Non-inferiority of QIVc was concluded. It was based on the fact that the upper bound of the two-sided 95 percent confidence interval (CI) for the post-vaccination geometric mean titer (GMT) ratio did not exceed 1.5 and the seroconversion rate (SCR) difference did not exceed 10 percent for each of the four strains tested (A/H1N1, A/H3N2, B/Yamagata and B/Victoria).Safety profiles were also comparable between QIVc and QIV, with the most common solicited adverse events being tenderness, erythema at the injection site, irritability and sleepiness. The rate of serious adverse events was less than one percent for each vaccine group.This Phase III clinical study was designed to support a supplemental Biologics License Application (sBLA) filing with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use of QIVc (marketed as Flucelvax® Quadrivalent) for immunisation against seasonal influenza in the US for persons six months and above.According to the company, one of the benefits of the cell-based vaccine manufacturing system used to create QIVc is that, unlike with traditional egg-based vaccine production – where antigenic mismatch can occur due to mutated strains being produced, it is designed to produce an exact match of the strains selected by the World Health Organization (WHO) for inclusion in seasonal vaccines. Additionally, the enterprise said that cell-based influenza vaccine technology may be more scalable and faster, in terms of production, than the traditional method.What strains should be in this year’s seasonal influenza vaccines?Related topicsBiologics, Bioproduction, Clinical Trials, Drug Manufacturing, Immunisation, QA/QC, Research & Development (R&D), Vaccines, VirusesRelated organisationsSeqirus, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), World Health Organization (WHO)Related drugsFLUCELVAX® QUADRIVALENTRelated peopleDr Brandon EssinkRelated diseases & conditionsInfluenza By Hannah Balfour (European Pharmaceutical Review)4 May 2021No comments yetShares48 Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardRelated topicsBiologics, Bioproduction, Clinical Trials, Drug Manufacturing, Immunisation, QA/QC, Research & Development (R&D), Vaccines, VirusesRelated organisationsSeqirus, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), World Health Organization (WHO)Related drugsFLUCELVAX® QUADRIVALENTRelated peopleDr Brandon EssinkRelated diseases & conditionsInfluenza Most popular...First-of-a-kind EU approval granted for eosinophilic esophagitis medicineEncouraging data revealed for schizophrenia long-acting injectablesFinal Chapter text published for early adoptionSingle-use bioreactor market to witness favourable expansion to 2030Innovative static culturing method developed Read the latest issueAll subscriptions include online membership, giving you access to the journal and exclusive content. Download free copyRelated content webinarEnhancing oral drug delivery: Exploring multiparticulate systemsBy whitepaperAdvertorial: Next-generation microbial testing of pharmaceuticalsBy Bruker newsDigitalisation propelling automated microbiology market growth to 2033By Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) articleCombining biofermentation and chemical synthesis to manufacture complex molecules in pharmaceutical applicationsBy David Blanco (Suanfarma) newsNovel biologic could offer ulcerative colitis symptomatic remissionBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment *Name * Email * Website ContentNewsArticlesMagazineWhitepapers & App NotesEventsWebinarsVideosCompany ProfilesTopicsAnalytical TechniquesBiopharmaDrug DeliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegulation & LegislationAdvertising & EditorialAdvertising OpportunitiesAdvertising Tech SpecsAdvisory BoardInformation for AuthorsMedia PlannerPermission to reuse our contentWrite for us | Advertise with us Contact Subscribe TodayT: +44 (0)1959 563311 F: +44 (0)1959 563123 Company InformationEuropean Pharmaceutical Review is published by: Russell Publishing Ltd.Court LodgeHogtrough HillBrasted, Kent, TN16 1NUUnited KingdomAboutCareers @ Russell PublishingTerms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyManage your cookies© Russell Publishing Limited, 2010-2024. All rights reserved.Website development by e-Motive Media Limited. This website uses cookies to enable, optimise and analyse site operations, as well as to provide personalised content and allow you to connect to social media. By clicking "I agree" you consent to the use of cookies for non-essential functions and the related processing of personal data. You can adjust your cookie and associated data processing preferences at any time via our "Cookie Settings". Please view our Cookie Policy to learn more about the use of cookies on our website.Manage your cookies I agreeCookie Settings Close Cookie SettingsThis website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as ”Necessary” are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. For our other types of cookies “Advertising & Targeting”, “Analytics” and “Performance”, these help us analyse and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these different types of cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. You can adjust the available sliders to ‘Enabled’ or ‘Disabled’, then click ‘Save and Accept’. View our Cookie Policy page. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncookielawinfo-checkbox-advertising-targetingThe cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Advertising & Targeting".cookielawinfo-checkbox-analyticsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Analytics".cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessaryThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".cookielawinfo-checkbox-performanceThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Performance".PHPSESSIDThis cookie is native to PHP applications. The cookie is used to store and identify a users' unique session ID for the purpose of managing user session on the website. The cookie is a session cookies and is deleted when all the browser windows are closed.viewed_cookie_policyThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data.zmember_loggedThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls whether you are able to see content which is only available to logged in users. Performance performancePerformance cookies are includes cookies that deliver enhanced functionalities of the website, such as caching. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncf_ob_infoThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and, in conjunction with the cookie 'cf_use_ob', is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.cf_use_obThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.free_subscription_onlyThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls which types of content you are able to access.ls_smartpushThis cookie is set by Litespeed Server and allows the server to store settings to help improve performance of the site.one_signal_sdk_dbThis cookie is set by OneSignal push notifications and is used for storing user preferences in connection with their notification permission status.YSCThis cookie is set by Youtube and is used to track the views of embedded videos. Analytics analyticsAnalytics cookies collect information about your use of the content, and in combination with previously collected information, are used to measure, understand, and report on your usage of this website.CookieDescriptionbcookieThis cookie is set by LinkedIn. The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.GPSThis cookie is set by YouTube and registers a unique ID for tracking users based on their geographical locationlangThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.lidcThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.lisscThis cookie is set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.vuidWe embed videos from our official Vimeo channel. When you press play, Vimeo will drop third party cookies to enable the video to play and to see how long a viewer has watched the video. This cookie does not track individuals.wow.anonymousIdThis cookie is set by Spotler and tracks an anonymous visitor ID.wow.scheduleThis cookie is set by Spotler and enables it to track the Load Balance Session Queue.wow.sessionThis cookie is set by Spotler to track the Internet Information Services (IIS) session state.wow.utmvaluesThis cookie is set by Spotler and stores the UTM values for the session. UTM values are specific text strings that are appended to URLs that allow Communigator to track the URLs and the UTM values when they get clicked on._gaThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. It stores information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors._gatThis cookies is set by Google Universal Analytics to throttle the request rate to limit the collection of data on high traffic sites._gidThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visited in an anonymous form. Advertising & Targeting advertising-targetingAdvertising and targeting cookies help us provide our visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns.CookieDescriptionadvanced_ads_browser_widthThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the browser width.advanced_ads_page_impressionsThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the number of previous page impressions.advanced_ads_pro_server_infoThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets geo-location, user role and user capabilities. It is used by cache busting in Advanced Ads Pro when the appropriate visitor conditions are used.advanced_ads_pro_visitor_referrerThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets the referrer URL.bscookieThis cookie is a browser ID cookie set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.IDEThis cookie is set by Google DoubleClick and stores information about how the user uses the website and any other advertisement before visiting the website. This is used to present users with ads that are relevant to them according to the user profile.li_sugrThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used for tracking.UserMatchHistoryThis cookie is set by Linkedin and is used to track visitors on multiple websites, in order to present relevant advertisement based on the visitor's preferences.VISITOR_INFO1_LIVEThis cookie is set by YouTube. Used to track the information of the embedded YouTube videos on a website. Save & AcceptWhat Caused the Roaring Twenties? Not the End of a Pandemic (Probably) | Smithsonian Sections Subscribe Renew Shop Subscribe Give a Gift Renew Smart News History Science Innovation Arts & Culture Travel History Archaeology U.S. History World History Video Newsletter Science Human Behavior Mind & Body Our Planet Space Wildlife Newsletter Innovation Innovation for Good Education Energy Health & Medicine Sustainability Technology Video Newsletter Arts & Culture Museum Day Art Books Design Food Music & Film Video Newsletter Travel Africa & the Middle East Asia Pacific Europe Central and South America U.S. & Canada Journeys Newsletter At The Smithsonian Visit Exhibitions New Research Artifacts Curators' Corner Ask Smithsonian Podcasts Voices Newsletter Podcast Photos Photo Contest Instagram Video Original Series Smithsonian Channel Newsletters Shop History | May 3, 2021 What Caused the Roaring Twenties? Not the End of a Pandemic (Probably) As the U.S. anticipates a vaccinated summer, historians say measuring the impact of the 1918 influenza on the uproarious decade that followed is tricky Some facets of the 1918 influenza pandemic echo today's crisis: mask mandates, campaigns against spitting and pleas for people to cover their mouths, and more than half a million Americans died. The decade that followed the pandemic, however, was marked by social change and economic prosperity—for some. Illustration by Meilan Solly / Photos via Wikimedia Commons and Library of Congress under public domain Lila Thulin Former Associate Editor, Special Projects On the afternoon of November 8, 1918, a celebratory conga line wound through a three-mile-long throng on Manhattan’s Fifth Avenue. From high-rise windows, office workers flung makeshift confetti, first ticker tape and then, when they ran out, torn-up paper. They weren’t rejoicing over the close of the influenza pandemic, although the city’s death rate had begun to fall. That afternoon, New Yorkers let loose for another reason: the end of the Great War. The jubilance proved short-lived. A report from the United Press had prematurely declared an armistice in Europe; in reality, it would be a few days more before the war officially ended. “For the moment,” reported the New York Times, “the whole population of New York was absolutely unrestrained, giving way to its emotions without any consideration of anything but the desire to express what it felt.” Due to a false press report, New Yorkers gathered in Times Square to celebrate the end of World War I—several days too early. National Archives In that same edition of the Times that detailed the celebration and described fake caskets for Kaiser Wilhelm being hoisted through the streets, a smaller headline documented 1061 new cases and 189 deaths from the influenza epidemic, still afflicting Americans coast to coast. “About twenty persons applied to the Health Department yesterday personally or by letter to adopt children whose parents have died during the epidemic,” the paper read. Just a week earlier, over the East River in Queens, purpled bodies had piled up in the overflow shed of Cavalry Cemetery, enough that the mayor brought in 75 men to bury the accumulated corpses. Together, the end of the war and the influenza pandemic closed out a tumultuous decade and introduced a new era with an indelible reputation: the Roaring Twenties. * * * On social media and in conversations from behind the shelter of masks, many Americans bat around the idea that the nation is poised for a post-Covid-19 summer of sin, spending and socializing, our own “Roaring 2020s.” On the surface, the similarities abound: A society emerges from a catastrophic pandemic in a time of extreme social inequality and nativism, and revelry ensues. But, historians say, the reality of the 1920s defies easy categorization. “The experiences of the 1920s are uneven,” says Peter Liebhold, curator emeritus at the Smithsonian’s National Museum of American History. “If you make gross characterizations, you’re dead wrong.” If the influenza pandemic shaped that uproarious decade, its impact cannot be neatly measured. The misnamed “Spanish flu” left some 675,000 Americans dead. The sickness particularly afflicted young people; the average age of victims was 28. That death toll dwarfs the number of U.S. combat deaths (53,402, with some 45,000 additional soldiers dying of influenza or pneumonia) during World War I. Despite that disparity, authoritative histories of the era relegated the influenza pandemic on the fringes in favor of a narrative dominated by the war. F. Scott Fitzgerald once described the 1920s as “the most expensive orgy in history.” Between quotes like that and canonical works like The Great Gatsby, the author has an outsized role in how the Roaring Twenties are viewed today. “I blame Fitzgerald for a lot of [misconceptions]” about the decade, says Lynn Dumenil, a historian who revisited the decade in her book The Modern Temper: American Culture and Society in the 1920s. In her class at Occidental College, Dumenil would show the feverish, champagne-fueled party scene in Baz Luhrman’s movie adaptation of Gatsby, as good an example as any of the “unnuanced” pop-culture vision of the decade as a flapper bacchanal*. “There’s this notion of the ’20s as a wild period where everyone is just grabbing everything they can get,” adds Nancy Bristow, history chair at the University of Puget Sound. This idea is broad-brush hyperbole of a reality that held true for only a certain class of Americans—not everyone. “The 1920s were really a time of social ferment,” says Ranjit Dighe, an economic historian at the State University of New York, Oswego. Shifts in women’s roles, leisure time, spending and popular entertainment did characterize the ’20s, so those exaggerated aspects of the decade, while focused on a primarily white and upper/middle-class experience, do have a firm basis in reality. “Only [in the 1920s] did the Protestant work ethic and the old values of self-denial and frugality begin to give way to the fascination with consumption, leisure and self-realization that is the essence of modern American culture,” Dumenil, David Brody and James Henretta write in a book chapter on the era. Notably, these changes had been brewing for years, leaving historians with no obvious link between the Roaring Twenties’ reputation and the pandemic. The makeup and short hemlines of the "New Woman," as over-exaggerated by this performer's wardrobe, would have scandalized the Victorians. Library of Congress / Getty Images A dress worn by First Lady Grace Coolidge in the collections of the National Museum of American History. Her husband summed up the pro-business enthusiasm of the decade when he said, “The man who builds a factory builds a temple. The man who works there worships there.” NMAH, gift of Lillian Rogers Parks The “New Woman” of the 1920s, typically white and middle- or upper-class, with bobbed hair and newfound social freedom, departed drastically from Victorian norms. With the ratification of the 19th Amendment in 1920, (white) women had won the right to vote, and divorce rates reached one-in-seven by the mid-decade. “Respectable” women now wore makeup, and flappers clad in shockingly short skirts wore sheer pantyhose and smoked. More traditional or religious Americans lamented the prevalence of “petting parties.” But, as Dumenil writes in The Modern Temper, the idea of the “New Woman” took root before the 1920s. As early as 1913, commentators noted that the nation had struck “sex o’clock”; in the next three years, Margaret Sanger opened one of the country’s first birth control clinics and went to jail days later. These social changes applied mostly to more well-off white women, since other groups of women had been working and having premarital sex well before the ’20s. Prohibition is the backbone of 1920s mythology, which paints drinking as a glamorous indiscretion. Organizations like the Women’s Christian Temperance Union and the Anti-Saloon League had long agitated to dry up the nation’s heavy boozing. Such groups argued that an alcohol ban would reduce societal ills like domestic violence. They also capitalized on xenophobia, since saloons were political hubs for working-class people and immigrants. National success came in 1920, when a ban on selling alcohol went into effect. The decade’s raucous reputation gets some things right: Prohibition did transform Americans’ relationship with alcohol, turning drinking into a coed, social activity that moved out of disreputable saloons into homes, Dighe says. New York alone housed more than 30,000 speakeasies, many run by gangsters. But that’s not the whole picture. Alcohol consumption itself decreased in the ’20s. In rural areas, the reinvigorated Ku Klux Klan took it upon itself to enforce the Volstead Act and act upon anti-immigrant hostilities. (Historian Lisa McGirr has argued that Prohibition helped kickstart the penal state and the disproportionate imprisonment of people of color and immigrants.) This dark side of Prohibition highlights an undercurrent of nativism and racism throughout the ’20s: White Oklahomans murdered several hundred Black neighbors in the 1921 Tulsa Race Massacre, and national quotas enacted in 1924 slammed the door closed on immigration. And those speakeasies in Harlem, with their chorus girl extravaganzas, bathtub gin, and Madden’s No. 1 beer? White patrons came there to go “slumming.” The famed Cotton Club got its start as the Club Deluxe, owned by African American boxer Jack Johnson, but later became a segregated establishment operated by gangster Owney Madden. Bettman via Getty Images The ’20s were “a prosperity decade, no question about that,” says Dighe. Gross national product ballooned by 40 percent between 1922 and 1929. The Second Industrial Revolution—most notably electricity and the advent of the assembly line—led to a manufacturing boom. Cars could be put together in 93 minutes instead of half a day, and by the close of the decade, one-fifth of Americans owned an automobile, which they could use for leisure activities like traveling. The popularization of personal credit also enabled middle-class Americans to buy consumer goods in droves. The government, too, under the Republican administrations of Presidents Harding, Coolidge and Hoover, shared this spirit of wholehearted materialism, boosting corporations and otherwise taking a light touch to policy that corresponded with the prevailing anti-government sentiment of the time. Examine this upbeat picture of consumerism more closely, though, and you’ll realize the economic boost of the ’20s was checkered. A sharp recession kicked off the decade, caused partially by the declining demand for American agricultural products after the war’s end brought European farming back into commission. (The limited data on the 1918 influenza’s impact indicates that for the most part, it caused short-term, not prolonged, business losses; scholars haven’t linked it to the prosperity of the following decade.) Then, as now, income inequality reached staggering rates. By the end of the ’20s, despite per capita income nearly doubling, the top 1 percent of U.S. families reaped more than 22 percent of the nation’s income. The wealthy and middle class profited. African Americans, many of whom had moved to Northern cities for work as part of the Great Migration, newcomers to the country, and farmers did not share in that prosperity. The 1920 census marked the first time more than half the country’s population lived in urban areas. For rural Americans, particularly farmers, the ’20s “were roaring as in a roaring fire that was burning people out,” says curator Liebhold. * * * The influenza pandemic’s origins remain contested, but the disease spread quickly through the world beginning in the spring of 1918, striking crowded military camps and then American cities and towns in three to four waves. The “purple death” got its name from the colors victims’ oxygen-starved bodies turned as their lungs drowned in their own fluid, and it killed quick, sometimes within hours of the first symptoms. Americans donned masks, schools and public gathering places temporarily shut down, and one-third of the globe fell ill. Doctors, with a flawed understanding of the virus’ cause, had few treatments to offer. Life insurance claims rose sevenfold, and American life expectancy decreased by 12 years. A typist wears a mask to work during the influenza pandemic. National Archives Yale sociologist and physician Nicholas Christakis hypothesizes that the 1918 pandemic falls into an ages-old pandemic pattern, one that our Covid-19 present may mimic, too. In his 2020 book, Apollo’s Arrow: The Profound and Enduring Impact of Coronavirus on the Way We Live, he argues that increasing religiosity, risk aversion and financial saving characterize times of widespread illness. Christakis expects the Covid-19 crisis to have a long tail, in terms of case numbers and social and economic impacts. But once the brunt of the disease abates in the U.S., which he forecasts for 2024, “all of those trends will reverse,” Christakis says. “Religiosity will decline… People will relentlessly seek out social interactions in nightclubs, in restaurants, in bars, in sporting events and musical concerts and political rallies. We might see some sexual licentiousness.” Like the 1920s, Christakis also predicts lasting social and technological innovations will characterize this decade—think of how remote work and mRNA vaccines might shift status quos permanently. “People are going to want to make sense of what happened,” he says, positing that “we’ll likely see an efflorescence of the arts” post-pandemic. That’s not to say our A.C. (After Covid-19) reality will be all rosy. “We’ll be living in a changed world,” Christakis says, and that includes the lives lost (about 1 in 600 in the U.S.), the economic havoc wreaked, shortfalls in education, and the number of people left disabled due to Covid-19. In Apollo’s Arrow, Christakis points to an Italian tax collector and shoemaker’s remembrance of the period that followed the Black Death in 1348 as an example of the collective relief we might experience at the pandemic’s end. Agnolo di Tura wrote: And then, when the pestilence abated, all who survived gave themselves over to pleasures: monks, priests, nuns, and lay men and women all enjoyed themselves, and none worries about spending and gambling. And everyone thought himself rich because he had escaped and regained the world, and no one knew how to allow himself to do nothing. * * * Mapping the post-pandemic events of the 1920s onto the nation’s post-Covid-19 future resembles trying to trace the path of a nearly invisible thread in an elaborate tapestry. At its height, the influenza pandemic routinely made front-page headlines nationwide, says J. Alexander Navarro, a historian who co-edited the University of Michigan’s digital Influenza Encyclopedia, but by the beginning of 1919, before the pandemic had run its course, those articles grew shorter and less prominent. “When we look around, unlike the Great War, there are no monuments to the flu; there are no museums to the flu; there are no heritage sites to the flu; there’s not a stamp for the flu, all the signs we associate with commemoration,” Guy Beiner, a memory studies scholar, said during a presentation hosted by the Institute of Holocaust, Genocide, and Memory Studies at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. He describes the pandemic as an instance of “social forgetting,” an event not wiped from memory but simply left unspoken. Even historians largely neglected the 1918 pandemic, until Alfred Crosby reignited the field in a 1976 book, where he captured these contradictions: Americans barely noticed and didn’t recall ... but if one turns to intimate accounts, to autobiographies of those who were not in positions of authority, to collections of letters written by friend to friend ... if one asks those who lived through the pandemic for their reminiscences, then it becomes apparent that Americans did notice, Americans were frightened, the courses of their lives were deflected into new channels, and that they remember the pandemic quite clearly and often acknowledge it as one of the most influential experiences of their lives. One of the many theories about why 1918 influenza faded from historical memory holds that the trauma of World War I subsumed it. “I don’t think you can divorce the experience of the 1918 pandemic with that of the war,” says Navarro, noting that in places like Denver, Armistice Day coincided with the day social distancing restrictions eased. Public health messaging intertwined the two crises, calling mask-wearing “patriotic” and promoting slogans like “Help Fight the Grippe: Kaiser Wilhelm’s Ally.” In Harper’s editor Frederick Lewis Allen’s 1931 account of the previous decade, Only Yesterday, he labels the Twenties as the “post-war decade” and mentions the pandemic a grand total of once. “My guess is it did not sit with the story that Americans tell about themselves in public. It’s not the story that they want to put in fifth-grade U.S. history textbooks, which is about us being born perfect and always getting better,” says Bristow, who wrote American Pandemic: The Lost Worlds of the 1918 Influenza Epidemic. Americans believed themselves “on the verge of putting infections disease to rest forever,” she explains, and instead, “We couldn’t do anything more about it than anybody else.” Indeed, President Woodrow Wilson, who held the office throughout the multi-year pandemic, never once mentioned it in his public comments. An emergency hospital in Brookline, Massachusetts, during the 1918 influenza pandemic. National Archives Navarro floats another theory: Deaths from infectious disease epidemics happened more routinely then, so the pandemic may not have been as shocking. (According to data compiled by the New York Times, despite the much higher proportion of deaths from the 1918 influenza, the Covid-19 pandemic has a larger gap between actual and expected deaths.) Without a solid scientific understanding of the flu’s cause—evangelical preacher Billy Sunday told congregants it was a punishment for sinning—people struggled to make sense of it. Multiple historians pinpointed another significant discrepancy between the scarring impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and that of the 1918 influenza: Whereas many Americans today have remained masked and distanced for over a year, the 1918 influenza raged through communities quickly. Restrictions were lifted after two to six weeks, Navarro says, and most people still went in to work. John Singer Sargent's Interior of a Hospital Tent is one of the few, peripheral works of visual art that remember the devastating 1918 pandemic. CDC Museum Digital Exhibits / Imperial War Museum, London “Talking about [influenza] being forgotten is different from whether it had an impact,” Bristow says. But she hasn’t found much evidence that concretely ties the under-discussed pandemic to the societal upheaval of the ’20s. “One of the places you could find it would be in the writing, and we don’t see it there,” she says. Hemingway briefly remembers “the only natural death I have ever seen” from the flu, but in a minor work. In Pale Horse, Pale Rider, Pulitzer Prize-winner Katherine Anne Porter draws on her bout of near-fatal flu, writing “All the theatres and nearly all the shops and restaurants are closed, and the streets have been full of funerals all day and ambulances all night.” But that novella wasn’t published until 1939. “When you look at the canon, of cultural literature, of cultural memory,” Beiner points out, “none of these works appear in it.” The 1919 Influenza Blues Watch on Arts and culture undoubtedly flourished in the ’20s as a shared American pop culture emerged thanks to the advent of radio broadcasting, widely circulated magazines and movies. The first “talkie” debuted in 1927 and joined paid vacations and sports games in an explosion of for-fun entertainment options. The Harlem Renaissance gave the nation artists like Duke Ellington and Lena Horne, who performed at the glitzy speakeasy The Cotton Club. While a Clara Bow movie about WWI, Wings, won Best Picture at the first-ever Academy Awards, Bristow says the pandemic didn’t appear much in cinemas, and musical references are also few and far between. (Essie Jenkins’ “The 1919 Influenza Blues” presents a rare exception to this rule: “People was dying everywhere, death was creeping through the air,” she sings.) Young people, who’d watched peers die from influenza, spearheaded these cultural shifts. “After the Great War cost millions of lives, and the great influenza killed some 50 million [worldwide], many—particularly young people—were eager to throw off the shackles of the old and bring in the new,” says John Hasse, curator emeritus at the National Museum of American History. But keep in mind, Hasse explains, that the jazz music and dancing that characterized the performing arts of the decade had roots that preceded the pandemic, like the Great Migration, jazz recording technology, and evolving attitudes about dancing in public. People listen to the radio and dance to jazz music on Staten Island—all cultural touchstones of the 1920s. Bettman via Getty Images Just because the memory of the flu wasn’t typeset, filmed or laid on a record doesn’t mean it didn’t bruise the American psyche. About, all 1 in 150 Americans died in the pandemic; one New Yorker recalled neighbors “dying like leaves off trees.” Pandemics don’t come with a consistent pattern of mental health side effects because humans have responded with different public health measures as our understanding of infectious diseases has evolved, says Steven Taylor, a University of British Columbia, Vancouver professor and the author of 2019’s The Psychology of Pandemics. But he expects the Covid-19 pandemic to psychologically impact between 10 and 20 percent of North Americans (a number sourced from ongoing surveys and past research on natural disasters). Typically, one in ten bereaved people go through “prolonged grief disorder,” Taylor notes, and for every pandemic death, more family members are left mourning. Studies show that one-third of intensive care Covid-19 survivors exhibit PTSD symptoms, and first responders already report deteriorating mental health. Even people with a degree of insulation from this firsthand suffering might still experience what Taylor calls “Covid stress syndrome,” an adjustment disorder marked by extreme anxiety about contacting Covid-19, xenophobia and wariness of strangers, traumatic stress symptoms like coronavirus nightmares, concern about financial security, and repeated information or reassurance seeking (from the news or from friends). A pandemic slowed to a simmer will, of course, mitigate some stressors. Like Christakis, Taylor says he anticipates an increase in sociability as people try to claw back the “positive reinforcers” they’ve been deprived of in the past year. (Others, like people experiencing Covid stress syndrome, might struggle to recalibrate to yet another “new normal.”) His surveys of North American adults have also indicated a silver lining known as “post-traumatic growth,” with people reporting feeling more appreciative, spiritual and resilient, although it’s unknown whether this change will become permanent. “Most pandemics are messy and vague when they come to an end,” says Taylor. “It won’t be waking up one morning and the sun is shining and there’s no more coronavirus.” We’ll doff our masks and let down our guards piecemeal. Overlay Covid-19 and the 2020s with the influenza pandemic and the 1920s and you’ll see unmistakable parallels, but looking closely, the comparison warps. If there were a causal link between the influenza pandemic and the Roaring Twenties, clear evidence of a collective exhalation of relief hasn’t shown up under historical x-rays. The historical record tells us this: Some 675,000 people in the U.S. died of influenza then, and “in terms of a mass public mourning, people just went on with their lives” Navarro says. An estimated 590,000 Americans will have died of Covid-19 by the third week of May. How Americans will remember—or choose to forget—this pandemic remains an open question. *Editor's Note, May 12, 2021: A previous version of this piece misstated the university where Lynn Dumenil taught. She is a professor emerita at Occidental College, not the University of California, Irvine. Get the latest History stories in your inbox? Click to visit our Privacy Statement. Lila Thulin | | READ MORE Lila Thulin is the former associate web editor, special projects, for Smithsonian magazine and covers a range of subjects from women's history to medicine. Filed Under: Business, COVID-19, COVID-19 Culture, Disease and Illnesses, Economics, Prohibition, Psychology, Recreation, Roaring Twenties, Women's History, Women's Rights, Women’s Suffrage, World War I, Explore Smart News History Science Innovation Arts & Culture Travel At The Smithsonian Podcast Photos Video Subscribe Subscribe Give a gift Renew Manage My Account Newsletters Sign Up Content Licensing Our Partners Smithsonian Institution Smithsonian.com Smithsonian Store Smithsonian Journeys Smithsonian Channel Smithsonian Books Smithsonian Membership Terms of Use About Smithsonian Contact Us Advertising RSS Member Services Sustainability Terms of Use Privacy Statement Cookie Policy Advertising Notice © 2024 Smithsonian Magazine Privacy Statement Cookie Policy Terms of Use Advertising Notice Your Privacy Rights Cookie SettingsPrepTalks: John M. Barry "The Next Pandemic: Lessons from History" | FEMA.gov Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Languages EnglishEspañolFrançaisKreyòlTiếng Việt简体中文한국어 Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( LockA locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. . Apply for Assistance Toggle Menu Disasters & Assistance Current Disasters Alaska Flooding Connecticut Severe Storm Florida Hurricane Debby Florida Hurricane Milton Georgia Tropical Storm Debby Hurricane Helene Illinois Severe Storms Iowa Severe Storms (June) Louisiana Hurricane Francine New Mexico Severe Storms New Mexico Wildfires Pennsylvania Tropical Storm Debby Texas Hurricane Beryl Vermont Severe Storms (July 9-11) Vermont Severe Storms (July 29-31) Wildfire Actions Yakama Nation Wildfires All Disaster Declarations Assistance After a Disaster Businesses Governments and Private Non-Profits Individuals and Families Tools to Recover Common Rumors Disaster Multimedia Toolkit Disaster-Related FAQ FEMA in Your Language Save Your Family Treasures Volunteer & Donate General Disaster Information Search Your Location How a Disaster Gets Declared Declarations for Tribal Nations Disaster Authorities Historic Disasters Grants FEMA Grants Preparedness Grants Hazard Mitigation Assistance Grants Resilience Grants Continuing Training Grants Program Emergency Food and Shelter Program Shelter and Services Program Policy & Guidance Procurement & Contracting "Buy America" Preference Bipartisan Infrastructure Law Low-Carbon Goals 2 CFR Policy Updates Tools Authorized Equipment List Benefit-Cost Analysis Environmental & Historic Preservation Guidance FEMA Grants Outcomes (FEMA GO) Grants Management Technical Assistance Non-Disaster Grants Management System Floods & Maps Flood Insurance Find an Insurance Form Work with National Flood Insurance NFIP’s Pricing Approach Insurance Outreach Publications Rules and Legislation Flood Insurance Advocate Floodplain Management Manage Floodplain Risk Get Financial Help Community Assistance Program for States Community Rating System Floodplains & Wildlife Conservation Intergovernmental Collaboration Training Flood Maps Flood Data Viewers & Geospatial Data Change Your Flood Zone Designation Risk MAP Products and Tools Guidance & Reports Cooperating Technical Partners Know Your Risk Homeowners, Renters or Business Owners Community Officials Engineers, Surveyors or Architects Real Estate, Lending or Insurance Professionals State, Local, Tribal or Territorial Governments Emergency Management National Preparedness Training & Education National Incident Management System (NIMS) National Planning Frameworks National Preparedness Goal Continuity Resource Toolkit Equity Exercises Risk Management Hazard Mitigation Planning Building Science Earthquake Risk Dam Safety Hurricane, Wind & Water Surge Hazards Hazardous Response Capabilities Climate Resilience Tools for Practitioners Integrated Public Alert & Warning System (IPAWS) Planning Guides Community Lifelines Environmental Planning & Historic Preservation Recovery Resources Case Study Library PrepTalks Strategic Foresight 2050 Individuals & Communities Preparedness Activities, Research & Webinars Faith-Based & Volunteer Partnership Resources Youth & Emergency Planning Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) Activities to Reduce Risk for Your Home About About Us How FEMA Works Strategic Plan Offices & Leadership Regions, States & Territories Tribal Affairs How to Pay FEMA History of FEMA Contact Us Your Civil Rights Newsroom Blog Events Fact Sheets FEMA Live Mobile Products Newsletters Press Releases Podcast Social Media Video Updates Reports & Data Annual Reports Data Visualizations Disaster Relief Fund Reports FEMA Guidance Documents Glossary OpenFEMA Resilience Analysis & Planning Tool FEMA in Action We Are FEMA National Resilience Month 9/11: We Remember and Honor Work With Us Careers Benefits Career Paths How to Apply Recruitment Events FEMA Employee Resources Business and Organizations Doing Business with FEMA National Business Emergency Operations Center Partnerships Community Disaster Resilience Zones Emergency Manager Exchange Federal Agency Mission Assignments Social Scientist Partnership Resilient Nation Partnership Network Apply for Assistance Languages EnglishEspañolFrançaisKreyòlTiếng Việt简体中文한국어 About Newsroom Newsroom Blog Events Fact Sheets FEMA Live Mobile Products Newsletters Press Releases Podcast Social Media Video Updates About Us Reports & Data FEMA in Action PrepTalks: John M. Barry "The Next Pandemic: Lessons from History" English Release Date February 27, 2018 Symposium date: January 29, 2018 John M. Barry’s PrepTalk showcases lessons learned from the 1918 and 2009 influenza pandemics. He provides guidance on what emergency managers can do to work with public health and elected officials to implement measures that can save lives and, more importantly, avoid ineffective measures that can lose community trust. John M. Barry is a best-selling author of the 2004 book The Great Influenza: The Story of the Deadliest Pandemic in History, a study of the 1918 pandemic. The National Academies of Science named it the year’s outstanding book on science or medicine. His article for the Smithsonian, "How the Horrific 1918 Flu Spread Across America" provides a summary of that deadly pandemic. Download PrepTalk Materials John M. Barry's biography PrepTalk Discussion Guide PrepTalk Facilitator Slides PrepTalk Resource List View Other PrepTalks Preptalks are given by subject-matter experts and through leaders to spread new ideas, spark conversation and promote innovative leadership for the issues confronting emergency managers over the next 20 years. Explore more videos. Tags: PrepTalk Threats, Hazards & Risks Last updated May 4, 2021 Return to top Disasters & Assistance Grants Floods & Maps Emergency Management About Work With Us Facebook Instagram Twitter YouTube LinkedIn Newsletter Contact FEMA FEMA.gov An official website of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Accessibility Accountability Careers Civil Rights Contact Us FOIA Glossary No FEAR Act Plug-Ins Privacy Report Disaster Fraud Website Information DHS.gov USA.gov Inspector GeneralPolling in a Pandemic | History Today Skip to main content User menu logged out Subscribe Sign in SubscriptionOffers Give a Gift Enter your keywords Subscribe Search Toggle navigation Main menu Home The Magazine Subscribe Buy the Current Issue Institutions Explore the Digital Archive Sign in Mini header menu Search Magazine Latest Subscribe Subscribe History Matters Polling in a Pandemic The general election of 1918 was a ‘cynical muddle’ held as influenza killed thousands across a country emerging from the First World War. Peter Keeling | Published in History Today Volume 71 Issue 5 May 2021 This May, English, Scottish and Welsh voters go to the polls in the first UK elections held during a pandemic since 1918. That year, amid an influenza epidemic which claimed the lives of tens of millions globally, David Lloyd George led his coalition government to a crushing victory in mainland Britain, while Sinn Féin swept the board in what was soon to become the Irish Free State. Like the 2021 elections, the 1918 general election, held a month after the Armistice on 14 December, had been long postponed. By the end of the First World War, MPs had not ‘gone to the country’ for eight years. The arguments for holding an election were straightforward: not only did the government wish to seek a fresh mandate before heading into the peace negotiations, but the new electorate – including, for the first time, millions of women – clearly deserved a say in the direction of peacetime reconstruction. To continue reading this article you need to purchase a subscription, available from only £5. Start my trial subscription now If you have already purchased access, or are a print & archive subscriber, please ensure you are logged in. Please email digital@historytoday.com if you have any problems. BritainPolitical Related Articles The Spanish Flu Pandemic Child Voters Popular articles Paracelsus: Revolutionary or Mystic? How to Win an Election in Ancient Rome Recently published Paracelsus: Revolutionary or Mystic? Brushing for Britain ‘Patria’ by Laurence Blair review Most read Paracelsus: Revolutionary or Mystic? How to Win an Election in Ancient Rome ‘Patria’ by Laurence Blair review How Did Christianity Change the Roman Empire? Brushing for Britain X Get Miscellanies, our free weekly long read, in your inbox every week Footer menu About Masthead Contact Jobs Advertising RSS feeds Submit an Article Back Issues Binders Cookie policy Awards Students Privacy policy Terms of Use Twitter Instagram © Copyright 2024 History Today Ltd. Company no. 1556332.Flu is ever evolving and so are we - PharmaTimes Subscribe Advertise About us FollowFollowFollowFollow GO Magazine PharmaTimes Magazine Archive Web Exclusives News Competitions Appointments Business Insights Webinars Thought Leadership Jobs Flu is ever evolving and so are we6th May 2021 by Beverly Taylor There is no doubt that flu will return, but we are prepared for it, says Beverly Taylor The COVID-19 pandemic has shown us the devastation a single virus can cause to vast populations within just a few months. Unknown to most, it has had an impact on flu for this year with data from the Royal College of GPs Research and Surveillance Centre showing flu cases were about 95% lower than normal in England. This is a moment for celebration, but we can’t let our guard down, as we now have far less data to prepare us for the next flu season. Every year the influenza virus circulates the globe and is always changing and on the attack. The global industry collaborates with the World Health Organization (WHO) to track the virus as it evolves, reviewing study results and surveillance data from all over the world to inform what we will do in the coming season. Each year, this rigorous surveillance enables us to be ready to manufacture and respond to vaccine demand. In 2020 the industry was able to meet that additional demand from governments who wanted to avoid at-risk populations becoming exposed to both coronavirus and the influenza virus, in a much-feared ‘twindemic’. This advanced planning and our ability to respond enabled the UK to vaccinate more than 80% of 65+ year olds in England, thereby exceeding the WHO goal of 75%, setting a new benchmark for public health protection. It’s been reported that there have been very few flu cases recorded this season, but every season is different for those of us working in influenza. Terms such as infection rate, mutation and strain are now more common, many would agree that vaccines play a critical role in preventing ill-health and death from infectious diseases. This widespread increase in health literacy will not only help to save lives from COVID-19, it will also help to protect populations from seasonal influenza which is too often dismissed as no worse than a common cold. The reality is seasonal influenza can be deadly. However, the challenge is never an easy one. As influenza experts commonly say, it doesn’t matter if you’ve been through multiple seasons or none, no two are ever the same. Every year the job changes and it’s our agility in responding to the information we have available at the time that dictates how well it is handled. It goes without saying that the upcoming 2021/22 season will present new challenges. Not least amongst them will be the need to explain to populations that one ‘mild’ season does not mean that flu is eradicated. Last season, the circulation of flu was restricted to certain ‘pockets’ due to COVID-19 measures and higher than normal flu vaccine uptake around the world. This led to an abnormally low level of flu circulation. This has made it more difficult than ever to predict which strains will dominate in the upcoming season. There is speculation that the upcoming flu season may be more severe than the last if COVID-19 restriction measures are eased. We also need to keep in mind that the general population hasn’t seen flu for 12 months, there’s always an amount of influenza in circulation which provides a general level of immunity but with this now gone we could experience a more severe season. Regardless of all the complexities, the WHO has selected a strain from Cambodia that has a high chance of becoming the dominant strain of the upcoming season. Seqirus and others the industry have already begun making vaccines against that strain so we’re ready to help protect the elderly and other at-risk populations from the worst effects of the upcoming seasonal influenza virus. We continue to leverage global surveillance, scientific knowledge, technology and manufacturing to develop and supply influenza vaccines whilst also ensuring the public is well informed and educated. Flu will return, make no doubt about it. The good thing is, just like last time, we’re prepared and we’re already making vaccines ready for the coming flu season. Beverly Taylor is Head of Influenza Scientific Affairs, WHO and IFPMA Lead at Seqirus Tags News alerts This field is required. Submit Latest content New study to assess mpox vaccine in pregnant women and infants Elsevier backs Pistoia Alliance for AI in drug discovery Arcellx to present positive data on multiple myeloma treatments MHRA grants approval for bladder cancer drug erdafitinib NICE recommends remote monitoring technology for heart failure patients Contact details PharmaTimes Media Ltd.Mansard HouseChurch RoadLittle BookhamLeatherheadSurrey KT23 3JG E: editorial@pharmatimes.comE: subscriptions@pharmatimes.comT: +44 (0)20 7240 6999F: +44 (0)20 7240 4479 Get the latest pharma news delivered to your inbox A valid email address is required. Subscribe for free Latest jobs from #PharmaRole Chief Business OfficerTerritory Sales Manager - North London & East AngliaNational Account Manager - Anti-infectives - Midlands/YorkshireBrand Manager - Fertility Supplements - WatfordHealthcare Partnership Manager - Northern EnglandSales Specialist - London and South East Senior Key Account Manager - Respiratory/GI - ScotlandKey Account Manager - CardioRenal - Kent & SussexSevere Asthma Nurse - BrightonTerritory Sales Manager - Wound Care - East Midlands, Bedford, Milton Keynes & Luton What job are you looking for? This field is required. Find jobs Download our apps Go to the App Store or Google Play and search for ‘PharmaTimes’ to download our free app. Content NewsMagazineAdvertiseContactCompetitions Connect FollowFollowFollowFollowFollow Legal Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Editorial policy Cookies RSS – feed subscriptions © Copyright PharmaTimes Media Limited 2023RACGP - Reminder text messages can increase influenza vaccination rates Home About Clinical Authors Most read this year GP Opinion Videos & Podcasts Professional Comments policy RACGP poll Menu Search for: Advertising newsGP > Clinical Rosanne Barrett 05 May 2021 News Reminder text messages can increase influenza vaccination rates Rosanne Barrett 5/05/2021 3:10:00 PM A new US study that found alerts prompt people to keep their flu-shot bookings could be a ‘template’ for COVID vaccinations. The research found the notifications were more effective when framed as reminders and consistent with the tone of healthcare considerations. A major study to ‘nudge’ people into keeping their influenza vaccination appointments found twin text messages can increase inoculation rates more than 10%, in a result doctors believe could also work well in Australia. The University of Pennsylvania study of more than 47,000 people reveals direct text messaging is a cost-effective way of increasing flu vaccination rates, suggesting it could be a ‘template’ for future vaccination drives, including COVID-19. The research found the notifications were more effective when framed as reminders and consistent with the tone of healthcare considerations. RACGP Expert Committee – Practice, Technology and Management (REC–PTM) Chair, Dr Rob Hosking, says many Australian practices have existing reminder and recall systems in place already. ‘The dramatic increase in uptake of SMS reminders would suggest that they work,’ he told newsGP. ‘Anecdotally, it has reduced no-shows for all appointments and it would certainly be the case for vaccinations as well.’ Dr Hosking says with mass vaccination programs, such as the COVID-19 rollout, there would be complications with a widespread messaging scheme, with no formal system to link individuals to specific practices in Australia, consent issues, and costs affecting the clinics. He anticipates most clinics performing COVID-19 vaccinations use reminders. ‘I would expect most practices would be doing something like this to try and maximise the patients attending their appointments,’ he said. ‘They don’t want to be having wasted appointments or vaccines. ‘It comes down to, if you’re going to mandate something like this, who is going to pay for it? The current vaccination program for COVID has been only just marginally funded, anyway. You’ve got to be pretty efficient to make break-even with the current funding.’ Dr Hosking wants a national campaign to inform and educate Australians on how to book a COVID-19 vaccination, suggesting there was confusion in the community about when and where people were eligible and whether they would be specifically told when to have a shot. The US study acknowledged the social and logistical challenges of mass vaccination. It noted separate surveys that found just 60% of Americans were planning to get the COVID-19 vaccination, and other research that revealed the gap between intending to vaccinate and actually doing it. The new research, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, drew parallels between the flu vaccinations and shots for COVID-19. ‘Many Americans fail to get life-saving vaccines each year, and the availability of a vaccine for COVID-19 makes the challenge of encouraging vaccination more urgent than ever,’ the study noted. ‘Although COVID-19 differs from the flu in many ways, both are deadly respiratory diseases with an available vaccine that many Americans choose not to get. ‘This successful script could be used as a template for campaigns to encourage the adoption of life-saving vaccines, including against COVID-19.’ Just under half of eligible Americans had a flu vaccine in 2019–20 and 35,000 died from the condition. In Australia, a 2014 survey found 39% of people had a flu shot that season, including 63% in an at-risk group. The ‘nudge’ study found notifications were effective at raising the vaccination rates across the board, with a 5% increase in presentations regardless of what the message said. It tested 19 different forms of messaging. The top-performing messages resulted in a 4.6% boost in vaccination, an 11% increase on overall rates. The first nudge was sent 72 hours before the appointment. The vaccine reminder read: ‘It’s flu season’ and ‘A flu vaccine is available for you’. The second round, sent 24 hours before the booking, read: ‘This is a reminder that a flu vaccine has been reserved for your appointment’. Researchers said the most effective were those that were consistent with healthcare messaging. They said some of the ‘most artful interventions’ such as a picture of a dog telling a cat a joke about flu, were the least effective. REC–PTM member Dr David Adam, believes the tone and message in the US study may not translate to an Australian context, although he supports the use of reminders. ‘If there are practices or doctors who are struggling to get people to turn up to appointments they’ve booked, this study might be useful,’ he told newsGP. ‘We’ve always got to ask ourselves if what works in the American context is going to work in an Australian context. ‘Particularly their findings around the structure of the message and the tone of the message, I think it’s fair to say Australians have a slightly different relationship with their doctor on the whole than Americans do.’ Dr Adam echoed the call for increased awareness for COVID-19 vaccinations, especially as the scheme ramps up. ‘As we move down the phases, public messaging to address the hesitancy is really important,’ he said. Log in below to join the conversation. immunisation influenza vaccination newsGP weekly poll Which of the RACGP GP24 conference’s key themes are you most interested in? Technology and AI 50%Environmental health 0%GP wellbeing 0%Future of the GP workforce 50% Related Australia surpasses childhood immunisation benchmark Parents urged to continue children’s immunisations Flu-zero: More than a year since Australia’s last flu death newsGP weekly poll Which of the RACGP GP24 conference’s key themes are you most interested in? Technology and AIEnvironmental healthGP wellbeingFuture of the GP workforce Advertising Advertising Login to comment Dr Oliver Ralph Frank 6/05/2021 4:46:43 PM In the Discipline of General Practice at the University of Adelaide we are conducting studies aimed at increasing influenza and pneumococcal vaccination of patients at higher risk of pneumococcal infection or influenza. When any of these patients who is not fully vaccinated makes an appointment for any reason, a new function of the Doctors Control Panel software (www.doctorscontrolpanel.com.au) generates an SMS message recommending that they discuss these vaccinations in their consultation. Currently the study includes 24 general practices (mainly in South Australia) and 107,126 patients aged 18 years or older attending these clinics, of whom 29% have at least one high-risk condition for which these immunisations are recommended. Our early feedback is that vaccination uptake improves with SMS reminders. However, uptake differs between vaccines due to specific factors including changing national recommendations, narrow government funding and cost of private prescriptions. newsGP Terms and conditions | Privacy statement | RACGP | recruitGP | AJGP © 2018 The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) ABN 34 000 223 807Sanofi To Build New $700M Flu Vaccine Facility In Canada | Contract Pharma Login Join FOLLOW: Subscribe Free Magazine eNewsletter Checkout Menu Magazine News Manufacturing Packaging Development Compliance Top 20 Directory Solution Center Events More Magazine News Manufacturing Packaging Development Compliance Top 20 Directory Solution Center Events Current / Back Issue Features Editorial Columns Digital Edition eNewsletter Archive Our Team Editorial Guidelines Subscribe Now Advertise Now Top Features Sustainability in Pharma: CDMOs Move Fast to Cut Carbon Footprint 25th Anniversary Retrospective Top 50 Biopharma Products Drive Growth in Contract Manufacturing Single-Use Systems for Biomanufacturing CEO Spotlight: Thierry Van Nieuwenhove Breaking News Online Exclusives Industry News Collaborations & Alliances Promotions & Moves Trials & Filings Financial Reports Bio News & Views Custom Sourcing News Packaging & Tracking CRO News Live From Shows Top News Novo Nordisk's YTD Revenues up 23% Gilead's 3Q Revenues up 7% Samsung Biologics Achieves ISO 37301:2021 Certification Maravai LifeSciences to Acquire DNA & RNA Business of Officinae Bio FDA Clears SystImmune's IND for BL-M17D1 ADC APIs Aseptic Processing Cleaning Validation Clinical Trial Materials Cytotoxics and High Potency Manufacturing Equipment Excipients Extractables and Leachables Facilities Fill/Finish Lyophilization Parenterals Process Development Process Validation Risk Management Scale-up/ Technology Transfer Solid Dosage/ Creams/ Ointments Effects of Residual Carbon Content Matrix on Determining Pharma Regulated Elemental Impurities Accurate Determination of Resin Substitution in Solid Phase Peptide Synthesis Impurity Level Confirmation by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy Summary Vitrian Invests in AmplifyBio’s Ohio Biomanufacturing Facility Evotec SE Sells Chemical API Manufacturing Site Capsules Cold Chain Management Injectables Logistics Serialization Solid Dosage / Semi-solids Supply Chain Vials Peli BioThermal Unveils Crēdo Vault for Bulk Pharma Shipments SIRIO Opens €16M Packaging Facility on German Site Aptar CSP’s N-Sorb Accepted to FDA’s Emerging Tech Program Nipro Launches D2F Glass Vials Using Stevanato's EZ-fill Technology Securing Sustainability Throughout the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Analytical Services Bioanalytical Services Bioassay Developement Biologics, Proteins, Vaccines Biosimilars Chemistry Clinical Trials Drug Delivery Drug Development Drug Discovery Formulation Development Information Technology Laboratory Testing Methods Development Microbiology Preclinical Outsourcing R&D Toxicology Maravai LifeSciences to Acquire DNA & RNA Business of Officinae Bio Huons Acquires Stake in PanGen to Bolster Biopharma Business Asymchem Leverages AI to Optimize Protein Design with STAR Platform iotaSciences to Launch Next-Gen Single-Cell Cloning Platform Novo Nordisk, Ascendis Ink $285M GLP-1 Pact Filtration & Purification GMPs/GCPs Inspections QA/QC Regulatory Affairs Validation From Ambiguity to Action: The FDA’s New Nitrosamine Guidance Abzena to Expand Microbiology Lab Space to Support Biologic Manufacturing Lonza Completes Drug Product Services Facility Expansion in Basel Rottendorf Pharma Selects ValGenesis VLMS Sustainability in Pharma: CDMOs Move Fast to Cut Carbon Footprint Companies Categories Corporate Capabilities Add New Company Contract Service Directory Companies INCOG BioPharma Services LOTTE BIOLOGICS BioTechnique Abzena SGS North America Companies News Releases Posters Brochures Services Videos Case Study White Papers Jobs Contract Service Directory Companies INCOG BioPharma Services LOTTE BIOLOGICS BioTechnique Abzena SGS North America Webinars Live From Shows Magazine Current / Back Issue Features Editorial Columns Editorial Guidelines Subscribe Now Advertise Now Enewsletter Archive Digital Edition Directory Companies Categories Corporate Capabilities Add Your Company Manufacturing APIs Aseptic Processing Cleaning Validation Clinical Trial Materials Cytotoxics and High Potency Manufacturing Equipment Excipients Extractables and Leachables Facilities Fill/Finish Lyophilization Parenterals Process Development Process Validation Risk Management Scale-up/ Technology Transfer Solid Dosage/ Creams/ Ointments cGMP Manufacture Packaging Capsules Cold Chain Management Injectables Logistics Serialization Solid Dosage / Semi-solids Supply Chain Vials Development Analytical Services Bioanalytical Services Bioassay Developement Biologics, Proteins, Vaccines Biosimilars Chemistry Clinical Trials Drug Delivery Drug Development Drug Discovery Formulation Development Information Technology Laboratory Testing Methods Development Microbiology Preclinical Outsourcing R&D Toxicology Compliance Filtration & Purification GMPs/GCPs Inspections QA/QC Regulatory Affairs Validation Top 20 Pharma & BioPharma Contract Pharma Direct Breaking News Online Exclusives Slideshows Experts Opinions Surveys Outsourcing Survey Salary Survey Glossary Videos White Papers Podcasts Infographics Microsites Companies News Releases Posters Brochures Services Videos Case Study White Papers Contract Pharma Conference Contract Pharma Conference Speakers Exhibitors Conference Sessions eBook Webinars Events Industry Events Live from Show Events Webinars Classifieds / Job Bank Classifieds Job Bank About Us About Us Contact Us Advertise With Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Breaking News Sanofi to Build New $700M Flu Vaccine Facility in Canada Facility will be located in Toronto and will increase supply of influenza vaccines in Canada, the U.S. and Europe. In partnership with the Governments of Canada and Ontario, and the City of Toronto, the new facility will also enhance influenza pandemic preparedness efforts. Tim Wright, Editor, Contract Pharma04.05.21 Sanofi has unveiled an investment of more than €600 million (~$707mn) in a new vaccine manufacturing facility at its existing site in Toronto, Canada. The investment in a new facility will provide additional antigen and filling capacity for Sanofi’s Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent influenza vaccine, helping to increase supply availability in Canada, the United States and Europe. “As a leading vaccines company, we continuously look ahead to address the fast-growing demand for those influenza vaccines that have demonstrated clinical superiority against standard-dose vaccines. Fluzone High-Dose provides a long-term competitive advantage and this new investment will ensure more seniors around the world are better protected against influenza and its complications. In addition, it will be a key resource to assist against future pandemics,” said Paul Hudson, CEO, Sanofi. “We welcome the ongoing partnership with the Canadian authorities, who supported us to make today’s great news a reality; this will make the country, which has a strong legacy in vaccines research and development, one of our key hubs in our effort to protect and improve human health across the globe.” François-Philippe Champagne, Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry said, “Today’s announcement demonstrates Canada’s ability to attract foreign investment and to develop facilities with made-in-Canada solutions. This once-in-a-generation investment shows our government’s commitment to rebuilding Canada’s domestic biomanufacturing sector, focusing on both short-term strategic solutions and a long‑term vision. By investing in this project, our government is helping to keep expertise in Canada, creating and maintaining highly skilled jobs, and securing the health and safety of Canadians. By fostering an environment where companies can invest and grow, leading life sciences firms like Sanofi are increasingly looking to this country to establish their manufacturing facilities,” Sanofi expects this new facility to be operational in 2026, following design, construction, testing and qualification of the facility and equipment. Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent influenza vaccine is currently manufactured exclusively by Sanofi Pasteur, Sanofi’s vaccines global business unit, at its Swiftwater, PA site in the U.S. Sanofi Pasteur has been continuously investing in expanding manufacturing capabilities for influenza vaccines. Two new, additional facilities in Swiftwater, PA, and Val-de-Reuil, France will start to operate in the coming years. Related Searches Biologics, Proteins, Vaccines Suggested For You Stiris Research Inc. Neoceram America ViscoTec America pHOXBIO Unveils Trial Results from COVID Prophylactic Nasal Spray Naobios to Manufacture FluGen’s M2SR Flu Vax Candidate CuriRx Launches CuriLytics Platform for Biotherapeutic Development Vaccine Developer Intravacc Adopts Hybrid Business Model Clean Cells Expands Bioproduction Capabilities Symbiosis Completes Successful MHRA Audit CEO Spotlight: Gaston Salinas, Botanical Solution Inc. Lakes BioScience Signs Agreement with Cytvia UK Govt. Terminates Valneva COVID Vax Agreement COVID Booster Vaccines: What’s Next for FDA Eloxx Pharmaceutical Appoints Ali Hairiri as Chief Medical Officer The Future of Clinical Trials Related Buyers Guide Companies Stiris Research Inc. ... Denise Palmer, Manager, Business Development 11.06.24 Neoceram America ... Alexandre Morel, General Manager 10.27.23 ViscoTec America ... Melanie Hintereder, Marketing 11.05.21 Breaking News | Clinical Trials pHOXBIO Unveils Trial Results from COVID Prophylactic Nasal Spray According to the study, the novel prophylactic nasal spray prevented infection from SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.09.22.21 Biologics, Proteins, Vaccines | Breaking News | cGMP Manufacture | Clinical Trial Materials | Industry News Naobios to Manufacture FluGen’s M2SR Flu Vax Candidate Will initiate the GMP manufacturing of the clinical batches of FluGen’s M2SR influenza vaccine candidate for upcoming clinical trials.09.21.21 Breaking News Novo Nordisk's YTD Revenues up 23% Gilead's 3Q Revenues up 7% Samsung Biologics Achieves ISO 37301:2021 Certification Maravai LifeSciences to Acquire DNA & RNA Business of Officinae Bio FDA Clears SystImmune's IND for BL-M17D1 ADC View Breaking News > CURRENT ISSUE October/November 2024 Sustainability in Pharma: CDMOs Move Fast to Cut Carbon Footprint 25th Anniversary Retrospective Top 50 Biopharma Products Drive Growth in Contract Manufacturing Single-Use Systems for Biomanufacturing CEO Spotlight: Thierry Van Nieuwenhove C-Suite Spotlight: Navin Molecular Securing Sustainability Throughout the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Greening the Supply Chain: A CDMO Perspective Pioneering Production Cell for the Pharmaceutical and Biotech Industry Strategies for More Effective Human Factors Engineering for Injectables View More > Cookies help us to provide you with an excellent service. By using our website, you declare yourself in agreement with our use of cookies. You can obtain detailed information about the use of cookies on our website by clicking on "More information”. Got It About Us Privacy Policy Terms And Conditions Contact Us follow us Subscribe Latest Breaking News From Nutraceuticals World PanTheryx Launches GLP-1 Support Prdouct Optimum Nutrition Launches Six New Flavors Across Portfolio ADM Launches Interactive Insights Tool to Navigate Sugar Reduction Trends Latest Breaking News From Coatings World Weekly Recap: Nippon Paint, AkzoNobel, PPG Top This Week’s Stories Statement from the U.S. Green Building Council on the 2024 Election Results Axalta Celebrates the Opening of its Global Headquarters in the Philadelphia Navy Yard Latest Breaking News From Medical Product Outsourcing StimLabs's Umbilical Cord-Derived Wound Care Product Released in U.S. New Medical-Grade Bio-Based PVC Compounds Introduced Croívalve Reports 1st Tricuspid Coaptation Valve Implant in U.S. Feasibility Study Latest Breaking News From Contract Pharma Novo Nordisk's YTD Revenues up 23% Gilead's 3Q Revenues up 7% Samsung Biologics Achieves ISO 37301:2021 Certification Latest Breaking News From Beauty Packaging Wahl Professional Debuts in the U.S. Amazon Premium Beauty Store Skylar’s Vanilla Sky Fragrance Wins Inaugural Digital Fragrance Award Natura &Co Announces Q3 2024 Financial Results Latest Breaking News From Happi Cosmetify Names Nikkie de Jager the World’s Most Powerful Beauty Influencer Big Lips in the Small Wonder L’Oréal’s Bioprinted Skin & Dove’s Deodorant Launch Latest Breaking News From Ink World Weekly Recap: MNYPIA Slideshow, INX Adds C&A Top This Week’s Stories DuPont Reports Third Quarter 2024 Results Pack Expo International Hosts Record Numbers in 2024 Latest Breaking News From Label & Narrow Web INX details acquisition, SpectraGraphics grows and more BW Converting assists SunDance with flexible packaging pivot NextGen Label Group welcomes new VP of sales Latest Breaking News From Nonwovens Industry Ahlstrom’s Climate Targets Validated by SBTi Mativ Reports Third Quarter Results National Diaper Bank Network Announces Partnership Latest Breaking News From Orthopedic Design & Technology David Thordarson Takes Charge of American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society UPM Biomedicals Launches FibGel Injectable Nanocellulose Hydrogel for Medical Devices ONWARD Medical Attracts €50 Million in Capital Latest Breaking News From Printed Electronics Now Weekly Recap: Royal Mail and Wiliot, Dracula Technolgies Top This Week’s Stories Smart Living at LOPEC 2025: Printed Electronics for Digitalization DuPont Reports 3Q 2024 Results Copyright © 2024 Rodman Media. All rights reserved. Use of this constitutes acceptance of our privacy policy The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Rodman Media. AD BLOCKER DETECTED Our website is made possible by displaying online advertisements to our visitors.Please consider supporting us by disabling your ad blocker. FREE SUBSCRIPTION Already a subscriber? LoginIf it’s not COVID or the flu, what am I sick with? | WANE 15 Skip to content WANE 15 Fort Wayne 48° Sign Up Fort Wayne 48° Sponsored By Toggle Menu Open Navigation Close Navigation Search Please enter a search term. Primary Menu News Local News 15 Finds Out Indiana Crime Entertainment Wild on WANE National/World Veterans Voices Hispanic Heritage Month Platinum Perspective Positively Fort Wayne Your Local Election HQ Politics from The Hill Washington DC Bureau Traffic BestReviews Automotive News BestReviews Daily Deals WANE Newsletters Press Releases Top Stories Fatal crash in Williams County 60 mins ago 24 more monkeys that escaped from S.C. lab recovered 4 hours ago Video Boy, 13, lone survivor after California boat capsizes 4 hours ago Video As rates fall, should you refinance student loans? 13 hours ago Video Watch Newscast Streaming Live Events Streaming Weather WANE 15 Forecast Weather Alerts Interactive Radar Webcams Closings and Delays Closings Sign-Up Form Weather Education Worksheets Sports High School Sports Team of the Week College Sports Komets TinCaps Sports Illustrated Indianapolis Colts Comm. Calendar Living Local 15 Marketplace Epic Discounts Find a Job Post a Job Work For Us Lifestyle Pet of the Week Be Our Guest Two-Minute Money Plan Medical Minute Contests Fun in the Fort Daily Pledge of Allegiance Lottery Horoscopes TV Schedule First Birthdays Obituaries About Us Contact Us Information Report It Meet The Team Advertise With Us Regional News Partners About BestReviews Search Please enter a search term. Coronavirus If it’s not COVID or the flu, what am I sick with? Posted: May 4, 2021 / 05:09 PM EDT Updated: May 4, 2021 / 05:09 PM EDT Posted: May 4, 2021 / 05:09 PM EDT Updated: May 4, 2021 / 05:09 PM EDT SHARE FORT WAYNE, Ind. (WANE) — Despite COVID-19’s positivity rate declining and flu cases being minimal this year, many are still feeling sick. This has left many wondering, what illness do I have? Dr. Scott Stienecker, the Medical Director of Epidemiology and Infection Prevention at Parkview Health, said you could have caught the Human Rhinovirus or Enterovirus, which is a common viral infectious agent in humans and is the predominant cause of the common cold. There’s also been rising amounts of Parainfluenza Virus, Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) and Adenovirus. He said all of the viruses are very similar in terms of their symptoms. “[The viruses are] causing upper respiratory congestion, runny nose stuffy nose, coughing, fever,” said Dr. Stienecker. “Some of them are more likely to cause some associated neurologic problems, numbness and Palsy and other kinds of things, versus others that are more likely to go down into the lungs and cause a lot more shortness of breath.” With these viruses on the rises, testing is, too. Doctors perform tests through a process where a swab is put in a patient’s nose, which is then tested for 22 different organisms to see whether or not one of those germs is present. The 22 germs include the ones that are listed as the most common causes of of pathogens, not including pneumonia and respiratory tract infections. This data is compiled from all hospitals across the United States. This data is compiled from all hospitals across the United States. “The point I want to make here is, if you look back a year and you look back at March, the number of respiratory infections dropped like a rock,” said Dr. Stienecker. “The key ones there, influenza being in the green, virtually disappeared into just a thin ribbon of transmissions and that existed throughout the summer and then as we headed into into typical December through March flu season.” He said this is simply because the COVID safety protocols work. “On March 19, [2020], we implemented masking and social distancing and lockdown and hand washing,” said Dr. Stienecker. “The things that we do to block transmission of COVID have been highly, highly effective at blocking the transmission of influenza.” According to Dr. Stienecker, the reason that the Adenovrius, Rhinovirus and Enterovirus didn’t disappear to the same degree is because they’re “far more surface-related.” “I have a contaminated surface, I touch that surface, I picked it up, touch my nose, my mouth,” said Dr. Stienecker. “So, although it was suppressed to a degree, it just didn’t have the same degree of suppression that the other viruses did.” According to the chart, in influenza A and influenza B’s peak in 2020 the rate was about 17%. In 2021, that number was only 0.7% at it’s peak— nearly a 16% drop. Dr. Stienecker said the two influzena’s aren’t “hugely different.” In general, influenza A is typically the one that we worry about, since it has a higher death rate than influenza B. In its worst cases, if you have virus’s such as the Adenovrius, Rhinovirus and Enterovirus could have trouble breathing or experience blue lips or fingertips. Dr. Stienecker said anyone experiencing these symptoms should see their doctor. “If it’s one of these viral infections and it turns out that you don’t look that sick, then we know that it’s safe to send you home, and we don’t need to put you on antibiotics,” said Dr. Schienecker. “Whereas if it turns out that the test is negative, then we have a far higher concern for either a bacterial infection or congestive heart failure or some underlying lung problems that would require perhaps a completely different treatment.” In terms of how deadly these viruses are, Dr. Schienecker said that COVID-19 has the highest death rate at around 2%. Influzena’s death rate is between 0.5 and 0.7% at its worst. “We’ll typically see some deaths in adults from RSV and parainfluenza, a small number of people typically over the age of 65 commonly over the age of 75 that have underlying heart and lung disease on top of it,” said Dr. Schienecker. So what can we expect for the 2022 flu season? Dr. Schienecker said he expects “history to repeat itself.” “This same pattern has occurred, year after year after year, with the exception of everybody masking and handwashing and whatnot,” Dr. Schienecker. “What I expect to see this year is people to look at this data and say you know that stuff works and this year instead of having my snotty nose co worker come to work, with their kids all sick, maybe they work from home, if they’re able to do so.” He also recommends that people continue to wear a mask during next cold and flu season and use sanitizer wipes and hand gel because of their effectiveness of eliminating the virus. “[It’s] not just because they might kill me but because they’re gonna make me sick and feel miserable, and it’s completely avoidable,” said Dr. Schienecker. The link to the Respiratory Pathogens Trends chart can be found here. Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ✕ Read next > Read next > Next ✕ ✕ Read next > Next story in Cancel Read next > Next story in Cancel The best blankets, quilts and throws for cozy season Bedding / 3 days ago Throw blankets can be found in almost any size, fabric and color, with numerous options for electric or weighted blankets to keep warm this season. Starbucks’ holiday menu is back — here’s what’s on … Coffee & Accessories / 4 days ago It’s the most wonderful time of the year! Starbucks rolls out its annual holiday menu on Nov. 7. Best warm activewear for winter workouts Sports Apparel / 6 days ago There is winter exercise apparel for every part of your body, with plenty of styles and colors available. View All BestReviews Top Stories Satellite images and documents indicate China working … FWPD at scene of officer-involved shooting UN climate talks to focus on money to help poor nations … Police investigating fatal shooting in southeast … Fatal crash in Williams County Top Stories More Stories Trump announces Tom Homan, former director of immigration … Will Trump’s hush money conviction stand? A judge … Research reveals China has built prototype nuclear … Trump breaks GOP losing streak in nation’s largest … Trump on Day 1: Begin deportation push, pardon Jan. … Biden’s White House invitation to Trump continues … Judith Jamison, a dancer both eloquent and elegant, … Police investigating fatal shooting in southeast … More Stories WANE 15 Video Windy with cooler air in place for Veteran’s Day 2 hours ago Best and Worst NFL teams to play for | 2024 5 months ago Angola falls to Roncalli in Volleyball State Championship 10 hours ago Carroll wins Volleyball state finals for 1st time 10 hours ago Indiana Crash Statistics 1 year ago Trump: ‘It’s time to put the divisions of the past … 5 days ago New chapel and wall re-dedication at the Veterans … 1 day ago All NASCAR drivers must weigh exactly this much 6 months ago Monkeys ‘playfully exploring’ after escaping South … 2 days ago Video shows escaped monkeys in South Carolina run … 3 days ago Federal Taxes 101 11 months ago More Videos More from WANE 15 Windy with cooler air in place for Veteran’s Day Joey Logano wins Phoenix finale for 3rd NASCAR Cup … 49ers star fined for wearing MAGA hat on TV Angola falls to Roncalli in class 3A state championship Carroll volleyball claims first program state title IUPD: 4 pedestrians struck by driver on Saturday Gunmen open fire in a bar in central Mexico killing … City utilities to close portion of Lake Ave. until … More from WANE 15 Trending Stories FWPD at scene of officer-involved shooting Police investigating fatal shooting in southeast … Another closure at Electric Works Delphi hearings reveal girls’ throats were slit The Army’s answer to a lack of recruits is working Close Thanks for signing up! Watch for us in your inbox. Subscribe Now Daily News SIGN UP NOW BestReviews.com - Top picks to make everyone happy The best Black Friday deals at PetSmart Holiday / 2 days ago Target’s holiday family pajama sets are 30% off right … Holiday / 2 days ago Walmart has holiday family pajama sets for up to … Holiday / 2 days ago Target’s 3-day Early Black Friday Sale is live now Holiday / 3 days ago Netflix’s holiday movie lineup includes Lindsay Lohan … Holiday / 1 week ago Five Below wins Christmas with these ‘90s and aughts-inspired … Holiday / 2 weeks ago View All BestReviews Picks Don't Miss Wedding ring saved from CA home destroyed by fire Is it cheaper to keep heat on, or turn it on and … How to avoid falling victim to a staged car crash What should I do if I can’t pay my credit card bills? Buck gets trapped in senior home with 103-year-old Northeast Indiana and northwest Ohio's most comprehensive news source Contact Us Information About Us EEO Report FCC Public File Top Stories Video Center Advertise With Us TV Schedule Work For Us Report It Get News App Get the iOS app Get the Android app from Google Play Get Weather App Get the iOS Weather app Get the Android Weather app from Google Play Stay Connected Haystack Privacy Policy 06/27/2024 Terms Of Use FCC Applications Public File Assistance Contact The Hill NewsNation BestReviews Content Licensing Nexstar Digital Journalistic Integrity Sitemap Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information © 1998 - 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. | All Rights Reserved. ✕How history forgot a 20th century pandemic | CBC Radio ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchradioCBC RadioTop StoriesShowsPodcastsSchedulesFrequencyListen LiveMore How history forgot a 20th century pandemic | CBC Radio LoadedIdeasHow history forgot a 20th century pandemicHow could these times ever be forgotten? Historian Esyllt Jones explains why we don’t know more stories from an even more devastating global health catastrophe — the Great Influenza of 1918 — but how its complex toll is captured in a moving short story by Alice Munro.Historian and lecturer Esyllt Jones explains why so many stories from the Great Influenza of 1918 disappearedLisa Godfrey · Posted: May 04, 2021 4:48 PM EDT | Last Updated: May 4, 2021Nurses and teachers acting as volunteer nurses at isolation hospitals in Alberta and Saskatchewan during the influenza epidemic in 1918. (Courtesy of Libraries and Cultural Resources Digital Collections, University of Calgary)Social SharingRight now, it's hard to imagine that any global pandemic could ever fade into a routine fact of history. But Esyllt Jones says that is what occurred with a previous worldwide disaster, the Great Influenza of 1918. That pandemic faded despite a death toll in the tens of millions, and the loss of entire families and communities. The public health historian notes that: "There are decades of almost complete neglect of (the 1918 influenza) as a historical subject, during which many of the survivors died."This poster issued by the Provincial Board of Health about the influenza epidemic in Alberta, provides instructions on how to make a mask. (Government of Alberta) Researchers have been bringing the period back into sharper focus. But unfortunately, many of the complex human stories behind the facts have been lost, says Jones, a history professor at the University of Manitoba who has been studying the pandemic since the early 2000s.Meeting with family members seeking answers, she is struck by "the extent to which flu survivors and their ancestors have struggled to comprehend their family histories in a society that had mostly elided any public memory of the pandemic."The pandemic's absence and presence for people was the subject of her recent Avie Bennett Historica Canada lecture, presented by York University last March. Complicating the pandemic narrativeIn Carried Away: Forgetting and Remembering the Great Influenza Pandemic in Canada, Jones points to the very defined way that flu pandemic history has been approached. It's been characterized in the mainstream as a short-term and discrete event, with a starting point, a tense middle, and closure — a "dramaturgic form." Yet as our own era of COVID has already shown us, Jones says, that "pandemics are messy and chaotic with layered multiple meanings." A person's experience of any pandemic depends on complex factors, including location, race, age, and economic status. The very duration of a pandemic may differ for people as well. This was true for Indigenous communities in Western Canada, who experienced flu outbreaks both before and after 1918. They ultimately suffered the highest mortality rates in the country. Instead of forgetting their pandemic history, Indigenous communities vividly remembered their past in the decades that followed. As Professor Jones says: "Pandemics are not the same drama for everyone." Finding historical insight through fictionThe 2020-21 pandemic has occurred alongside other historic moments, including the Black Lives Matter protests, and the violent last days of the Trump presidency. Similarly, Jones notes that the 1918 pandemic era occurred around a world war and global labour uprisings, including Canada's history-making 1919 general strike.Soon after the 1918 pandemic, labour issues came to the fore globally. Seen here, groups clash in June 1919, during Canada’s largest worker action, the Winnipeg General Strike. (Archives of Manitoba)Exploring disparate but concurrent events through archival material can be a challenging task for a historian. Jones found another type of insight about the 1918 era in a work of literary fiction. Carried Away is a short story by Canadian Nobel Prize-winner writer Alice Munro. It was first published in 1991, and ended up in her collection Open Secrets. Set in a small Ontario town, the story touches down in different decades. It is told through the memories of a woman named Louisa, as well as men she encounters through her work as the town's librarian.Jones admires how the story is told in fragments of time, where past and present collide. She appreciates its emotional insights, and how it "draws intimate connections between historical events" like war and pandemic.Alice Munro's short story ‘Carried Away’ imagines connections between the First World War, the 1918 flu pandemic, and labour issues in a way that moved historian Esyllt Jones. It is from the Nobel Prize winner's fiction collection, Open Secrets. (Chad Hipolito/Canadian Press/Penguin Random House)"I was just incredibly moved when I read it," says Jones.Munro's narrative combines fictional lives with historical fact. Jones notes that it places "influenza victims and survivors in a tumultuous and violent world," and imagines their different realities around gender and class.COVID era storiesWhen it comes to our own pandemic era, historian Esyllt Jones cautions that we cannot be complacent about documenting our realities. "It's really important that the stories of what's happening right now are preserved. And also the research that people are doing into the experiences of COVID-19 are preserved."Social media timelines and online media sources are filled with pandemic stories right now, but archival history has been known to repeat itself, Jones says. "We can't kind of go through this same pattern as we did with influenza, So I really hope that there are concrete (funding) commitments made from governments at all levels. I know there are tons of communities out there right now trying to preserve their COVID-19 stories, but it's not easy to do that without resources." University of Manitoba historian Esyllt Jones has been studying pandemic influenza for two decades, and is the author of Influenza 1918: Disease, Death and Struggle in Winnipeg. (Todd Scarth) About the lecturer: Esyllt Jones is a professor in the Department of History, as well as Dean of Studies, St. John's College, at the University of Manitoba, in Winnipeg. She is the author of several books including Influenza 1918: Death, Disease and Struggle in Winnipeg (University of Toronto Press, 2007). About the lecture: The annual Avie Bennett Historica Canada public lecture is presented by York University's Avie Bennett Historica Chair in Canadian History in the Faculty of Liberal Arts & Professional Studies.Its purpose is to promote the study of Canada's heritage and ensure the academic vitality of the discipline.The Chair was established at York University in 2004 by the Historica Foundation of Canada, endowed by York Chancellor Emeritus Avie Bennett. * This episode was produced by Lisa Godfrey.Related Stories How COVID-19 should be remembered: Lessons from the Spanish fluAudio Letter from 1918 pandemic connects Thunder Bay woman to distant relatives, online community amid COVID-19Apocalypse Then An election in a pandemic? Let's take an old, old-school look at that The 1919 Winnipeg General Strike: 100 years laterAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.Subscribe to our newsletter to find out what's on, and what's coming up on Ideas, CBC Radio's premier program of contemporary thought.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of Ideas newsletter will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowFlu vaccinations down, leaving healthcare workers worried about vaccine confidence - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeLatest updatesAsk a questionShare Flu vaccinations down, leaving healthcare workers worried about vaccine confidenceBy Zara Margolis and staff reportersABC North West QldTopic:HealthTue 4 May 2021Tuesday 4 May 2021Tue 4 May 2021 at 8:29pmDisplay captionLeigh Houldsworth says they're seeing a 30-40 per cent decline in influenza vaccines delivered this year. (ABC North West Queensland: Kelly Butterworth)abc.net.auews/flu-vaccinations-down/100114142Link copiedShareShare articleHealthcare professionals in regional Queensland are worried people who would normally get their influenza vaccination are skipping it this year.Key points:A Mount Isa pharmacist is seeing up to 40 per cent fewer people through the doors to get their flu vaccinationsA Gold Coast doctor says the COVID-19 vaccine may be impacting numbers Anyone who has had the COVID-19 vaccination must wait two weeks before they can get a flu vaccinationMount Isa Pharmacy First owner and pharmacist Leigh Houldsworth said there had been a "wobble" in vaccination confidence."We're seeing about a 30 per cent to 40 per cent decline in influenza vaccines being delivered this year," Ms Houldsworth said. "That's super concerning going into winter." Ms Houldsworth said with COVID-19 still "on the radar" she and her staff were working extra hard to get the community vaccinated. "This year, we have prepared to be able to vaccinate everybody who wants and who has traditionally been vaccinated in our pharmacy," she said. "But we are just not seeing the demand at this stage. At the same stage last year there was definitely a sense of urgency to get it done." A sign on the footpath pushing for more people to get their flu vaccination in regional Queensland. (ABC North West Queensland: Kelly Butterworth)Gold Coast numbers downGold Coast doctors are warning flu cases could increase this year, partly due to increased domestic and trans-Tasman movement. Gold Coast Primary Health Network director Lisa Beecham said flu vaccinations were about 30 per cent down from last year."We're certainly seeing that it's not as quick for the uptake of influenza vaccines this year," Dr Beecham said."It could be a number of things; it could be that people are hanging off for the COVID shot so they're delaying the flu shot."The 2021 flu vaccination is available now. (ABC North West Queensland: Kelly Butterworth)Dr Beecham said anyone who had received the COVID-19 vaccination needed to wait two weeks until they could get their influenza shot.She said increased hygiene measures during the COVID-19 pandemic could be part of the reason for the drop in flu cases, but said she feared people were now more complacent. Find more local newsTell us your location and find more local ABC News and informationDr Beecham said the trans-Tasman bubble might play a role in a bounce-back of the flu virus."Now we've got the NZ bubble open that border is open and we're all travelling more interstate and intrastate," she said."Realistically, we can expect this year that there may well be an increase in influenza back to its normal previous rates."Flu shots jumped last yearPharmacy Guild of Australia Queensland branch acting president Chris Owen said while there was a decline in number of people getting the flu jab this year compared to last year, it was up 70 per cent from 2019.Pharmacy Guild of Australia Queensland Branch acting president Chris Owen. (Supplied: Chris Owen)He explained so far this year, between March 1 to April 26 about 2.4 million vaccines had been distributed Australia wide compared to 5.1 million last year and 1.5 million in the same period in 2019."If we assume that 2020 is a statistical anomaly, and we rule that out an outlier, we are actually a lot further ahead than when we have been in previous flu seasons," he said."The most important people to get a flu jab are the under fives, and the over 65 ... the over 65 because they're the greatest risk of having an adverse effect if they do get influenza and the under fives because they're considered super spreaders."Mr Owen said he did not believe people's changing attitudes to hygiene, like washing their hands more and socially distancing since the global pandemic, was enough."I think the most important thing is to realise that vaccines are all about the community at large."It may not necessarily be about you in particular, but it might be about your grandmother or your friend who has a serious illness where their immune systems are lower," he said."I also think that we understand that if those people in our community are at risk, then we need to be doing it for those people as well."And taking a little bit of the selfish attitude away from it, and saying, it's not going to affect me – well it may not but it may affect that person to you are close to."Posted Tue 4 May 2021 at 8:29pmTuesday 4 May 2021 at 8:29pmTue 4 May 2021 at 8:29pmShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasPhoto shows Three images in a composite including a man in glasses, an man with orange makeup and another man in glassesAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPhoto shows Workplace surveillancePrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesPhoto shows A young solider. Tax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsPhoto shows Richard Boyle speaks to supporters outside court.Related storiesThere's the option of a different flu jab this year — but it'll cost you $40Topic:Vaccines and ImmunityPhoto shows A diagram of the influenza virusWhat you need to know about getting the COVID and flu vaccines this yearTopic:ExplainerPhoto shows A woman with dark hair blows her nose on a tissue as she lies in bed.Kalgoorlie Pharmacist says now is the time for flu vaccinesTopic:Vaccines and ImmunityPhoto shows Ali Kent, Kalgoorlie's member of Parliament getting flu shot.Related topicsCOVID-19HealthInfluenzaMaroochydoreMount IsaRegional CommunitiesSurfers ParadiseTop StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesTax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsJust In'It means the world to us': Teddy Sheean statue unveiled 80 years after his WWII heroicsTopic:Veterans9m ago9 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 5:49amMoving WA's major container port from Fremantle to Kwinana expected to cost at least $7.2 billionTopic:Regional Development and Planning8m ago8 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 5:50amMistakenly left off a memorial avenue, these WWI soldiers have finally been recognised for their sacrificeTopic:World War 134m ago34 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 5:24amGrave robber jailed after magistrate brands cemetery thefts 'despicable'Topic:Courts and Trials37m ago37 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 5:21amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCThe Hidden Plague That Ravaged the World | Inside EditionNewsLatest NewsInvestigativeOffbeatPoliticsHealthEntertainmentHuman InterestInspirationalHeroesRoyalsSportsCrimeVideoLiveWatch on TVLocal ListingsMeet the TeamToday on Inside EditionMoreInside HealthPhotosInside Edition InDepthFlashbackShoppingAnimalsFacebook Inside EditionTwitter Inside EditionInstagram Inside EditionYouTube Inside EditionWatch on TVLocal ListingsMeet the TeamToday on Inside EditionLiveFacebook Inside EditionTwitter Inside EditionInstagram Inside EditionYouTube Inside EditionThe IssueThe Hidden 1918 'Spanish Flu' Pandemic: How a Deadly Disease Altered History and the Lives of Millions How the Hidden 1918 ‘Spanish Flu’ Pandemic Infected One-Third of the World’s Population Lost Phones Recovered After Skydiving, Kayaking, and Other Adventures The 17-Year Reign of Terror of New York's 'Mad Bomber' TikToker Rushed to Hospital After Going to Pickle Festival False Alarms That Required Calling Bomb Squads Indiana Mom Confronts Congress, Social Media After Son Dies What Is the 4B Movement? Teen Arrested for Terrorist Threats at Elementary School: Cops Did This Gown Lead to Country Star Zach Bryan's Breakup With Brianna LaPaglia? College Student Charged in North Carolina Highway Shootings Prosecutor Speaks Out About Letter Allegedly Written by Erik Menendez Black Americans Receive Racist Text Message After Election Jimmy Kimmel Fires Back at 'Propaganda Puppet' Remark 'You've Got Mail' Voice Elwood Edwards Dies at 74 Employee Wrestles Gun From Robber in Convenience Store: Cops Will Melania Trump Move Back Into White House? Woman Accidentally Uses Nail Glue Instead of Eye Drops Will New Los Angeles DA Free the Menendez Brothers? Cops Help Evacuate Elderly Residents as Fire Surrounds Home Photo Raises Concern for Health of Stranded NASA Astronaut Jimmy Kimmel Chokes Back Tears After Trump's Election Win By DEBORAH HASTINGS First Published: 6:28 AM PDT,May 5, 2021Pandemics reverberate for generations, altering society, medicine and history in ways never considered. The 1918 "Spanish Flu" epidemic changed the world and shows the frightening aftermath of a global disease.The first casualty of war is truth.And in 1918, as World War I raged, truth was in short supply, most singularly when it came to the "Spanish Flu" pandemic, which claimed the lives of 675,000 Americans and more than 50 million around the globe before it subsided.There was nothing Spanish about the flu, nor was there widespread media coverage of the mysterious virus that felled the young and middle-aged in devastating numbers — wiping out families, troops and orphaning hundreds of thousands of children, many of whom were shipped to distant relatives or adopted by complete strangers with no oversight.There was a war on, and global leaders wanted nothing to mar morale or efforts to raise money for battle. That included coverage by the press and issuing mass public health warnings.The U.S. entered the fighting in April 1917, and a year later the first American cases are believed to have been identified in soldiers at a Kansas military installation. There is no consensus on where the first international cases were reported, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention."The net result of all this was a tremendous amount of fear, particularly given the fact that there was fake news back then," historical author and Tulane University scholar John Barry told Inside Edition Digital."The lies were frankly coming directly from the government. Because we were at war, and because Woodrow Wilson's administration believed that anything negative would hurt the war effort."Inside Edition DigitalMedicine was crude and the electron microscope had not yet been invented, so treatment consisted of aspirin and bed rest and scientists were hard pressed to find a cure because they weren't able to actually see the influenza's molecular structure. "One doctor, desperate, wrote an article for the Journal of the American Medical Association that he tried injecting hydrogen peroxide into people's veins," said Barry, the author of "The Great Influenza: The Story of the Deadliest Pandemic in History."The doctor rationalized patients were lacking oxygen. "Exactly half of his patients died, and he counted that as a success. That's how desperate things got."That doctor's response was not unlike former President Donald Trump's ill-advised supposition that injecting cleaning solutions into people with coronavirus would help them. (One day later, Trump walked back his suggestion, saying he was being sarcastic.)Influenza patients bled from their eyes, noses, ears and mouths. Some turned blue. It was the worst plague in modern history. Worldwide, an estimated 500 million people became infected, or about 30% of the global population. In the U.S., those numbers were 22 million infected people, or about 28% of the country's population.There are similarities to be drawn from that epidemic to the current one, despite changes in medicine and technology. The lessons learned from one pandemic to another are hard-earned. In the 1918 pandemic, loved ones were too afraid to offer help. Parts of society broke down, with corpses stacked like cord wood and no one to bury the mounting dead — a gruesome reality repeated during the early days of COVID-19, when refrigerated trucks were packed with bodies outside hospitals and funeral homes.Pandemics reverberate for generations, altering society, medicine and history in ways that few can foresee. The "Spanish Flu" influenza changed the world and showed the frightening aftermath of a global disease. Those who survived were loathe to talk about it. The devastation of World War I, with its nightmarish trench warfare and mustard gas, was bad enough.The Voices of Those Who Lived Through the 1918 Pandemic In the late 2000s, the Alabama Department of Archives and History interviewed flu survivors as a way to teach future generations the lasting dangers of a pandemic. Influenza paralyzed the state's rural communities, where fear spread like a prairie fire, isolating the dying and the bedridden and leaving bewildered children to wonder what had happened in their ripped-apart worlds.Edna Register Boone was born in 1907 and was 10 years old when the flu erupted in Houston County. "My family was the only family in the little town that did not contract the flu. Therefore, my parents became automatic nurses. They nursed every family in town," the 100-year-old woman told an interviewer in 2008.Alabama Department of Archives and History"It was my job as a 10-year-old to take food to people, to families, all of them stricken," Boone said. "Mama would put a gauze bandage around my face and she kept sterilized fruit jars on the stove at all times. She would fill the jars with soup or whatever there was, and I would take those jars to the home of an afflicted family, knock on the door and leave the food at the door for someone to come pick it up."It was not a pretty picture."There was no medicine for the ill, and nothing to be done except to bury the dead, she said. "My father and Uncle Eli, who we called his manservant, dug a common grave and buried three people in it: a mother, a father and a young daughter."We had no sanitary conditions in the area at that time, so the people were buried in the clothes they died in and wrapped in the sheets, because there was no one to wash the bed linens for them," she said. She remembered being overwhelmed by the sickness and dying around her, and breaking down in sobs because every family save hers was sick in their tiny community of about 200 households. In hindsight, she realized she was depressed as a child, and she had lived in a constant state of panic that someone in her family would fall ill."I came home one day, I don’t know where I had been ... and mama was stretched out on a pallet in front of the fireplace. Oh, I panicked," she recalled.She called out "mama, mama, are you sick?” Her exhausted mother replied, “no, child. I’m just so tired' ... I knew that if I got into that bed I might not ever get up.”Those memories fill her with dread. "Children need to learn about what could happen," she warned. "Be aware. Be aware."Garfield Johnson was just 5 when the pandemic struck down his father, putting him into a coma for three days."He was more or less not able to move," the 93-year-old Coffee County resident said. "He had a very serious ... case of it. But there were no doctors then," he said in 2007.Alabama Department of Archives and History"My dad had influenza. He lost consciousness three days and nights and then lived," Johnson said. "Then a brother of mine, a younger brother, a baby, got it and lived, but (it) affected his brain."Food was scarce in those times, he said, and larders ran very low. He remembered a cousin finally coming to stay with his family and going out to get some provisions. "It was awful out here, the way it was. Everybody was scared of it and they were scared to go help the folks that did have it. Afraid they’d get it and it was very contagious."Even though he was just a little boy, Johnson was enlisted to help with the dead."I remember I helped build a lot of graves," he said. "I was told of whole, complete families that died with it and nobody to bury them, nobody to hire to bury them. It was an awful thing."Johnson got sick, too, and remembered asking for something to take away the pain in his head. "It hurts awful bad," he told a visiting doctor. He rebounded after a day or two and never got the extremely high fever that sent his father into unconsciousness. "That fever would carry you away," he said."I don’t see how today, how my daddy lived to go three days and nights in a coma, but he did. He come back out of it."There was neither rhyme nor reason to explain what was going on at the time. "Folks just stayed at home. They didn’t want to get it, you see. They stayed put, because if they didn’t have it, they didn’t want it, and you can’t blame them," Johnson recounted. "They were doing the best they could ... doing the best they know."Agnes Gatlin was a young girl in Montgomery when influenza devastated her town and sent relatives to their beds with incapacitating fevers. "In our neighborhood there were a number of deaths," the 100-year-old woman said in 2007. "The families and the neighbors that could, would come in and help them, but they didn't have any outside people much to do that." Alabama Department of Archives and HistoryGatlin's immediate family didn't contract the virus, but many of their relatives did. "They were deathly sick and bedridden and ... seemed to be everybody thinking they’d eventually die from it," she said.Those who lived "took a long time to get over it."She remembered not being able to travel, and never venturing from the family home. For food, people relied on what they had canned, and what grew in their gardens. When staples such as flour and sugar ran out, "they just had to wait," she said. "We didn’t have wheat, we had plenty of corn. We always had homemade meal and kept that on hand," she said. People did the best they could, using whatever homemade remedy they had on hand to treat the sick.Asked what advice she had for those living in modern times, Gatlin replied, "I think people in this day and time need to take more consideration of diseases" and "be informed about them." Especially, she said, in how fast they can spread.What the Pandemic WroughtThe Spanish Flu got its name through a strange confluence of war restrictions. The governments of warring countries did not want enemy nations to know their forces were being weakened by the fast-moving disease, nor did they want morale to deteriorate.Spain was neutral during World War I and its newspapers were not censored. They published stories about the deadly influenza and so the "Spanish Flu" became a moniker that stuck. It was also called the "Purple Death" because sufferers sometimes turned a frightening shade of indigo from lack of oxygen in their bloodstreams. It was also called the "Chinese Flu" and the "Russian Pest."In the U.S., children skipped rope to this rhyme: "I had a little bird, its name was Enza, I opened up the window and in flew Enza."Masks were crude. They consisted of cheesecloth and gauze, said historian Kenneth Davis, which would be roughly akin to holding a piece of a screen window to one's face and hoping it would stop the bacteria.There were no federal guidelines about anything. "There was no CDC. There was no National Institutes of Health. There was no Department of Health and Human Services," Davis said.Society and families were collapsing. From major cities and rural areas came reports of people starving "because no one had the courage to bring them food, even other members of their own family," said author John Barry. Hundreds of thousands of children became orphans when their parents died from the horrid flu. Families were larger then, and siblings found themselves being separated and sent off to relatives or orphanages. Some would not see their brothers and sisters for decades, or ever again. Worse, some were put up for adoption and handed out like door prizes, with no one to oversee their welfare because social government agencies didn't exist at the time."They would put the kids who lost their parents on a train, and just go from depot to depot and anybody who wanted to adopt a kid would just show up," Barry said, "and walk away with them." "So, there was a whole generation of Spanish flu orphans."The flu raged in three waves beginning in 1918, with the last ebbing around the summer of 1919. "The first phase, the least deadly, at least in the United States, went from March into the spring time," said Davis. "But then flu season returned in September, October. More troops on the move once again, and a real explosion. And that second wave was the most deadly" in America. The final wave stretched from the winter of 1919 until the summer months, when cases began declining.The war ended Nov. 11, 1918. The survivors — soldiers, battlefield nurses and doctors — walked or limped back into day-to-day life, and more than anything, they wanted simply to move on.In 1920, "Warren G. Harding campaigns for president on the idea of a return to normality, and that was a winning slogan," said Davis. "He came in as (the) Republican president, and he said, 'We're going to return to normal.'''One late sufferer of the virus was reportedly Woodrow Wilson, who was in Paris in 1920 to help negotiate the Treaty of Versailles. The French city was battling a high number of influenza cases at the time.Wilson became seriously ill. He recovered, "but many people who knew him, including the White House valet who knew him for a long time, said he was never the same," Davis said. His judgment and reasoning may have been affected, not unlike coronavirus sufferers who complain of brain fog and debilitating mental setbacks."He did relent and concede some very, very important points," Davis said of Wilson's negotiations, including "much more punishing aspects of the retribution given to Germany in terms of the reparations that they would have to pay."That, in turn, "certainly contributed to the rise of Hitler and the Nazis," the historian said.In America, moving on from World War I included changes at every level of society.Hemlines went up and social mores went down. Women got the vote in 1920, and many smoked openly in public, bobbed their hair and became "flappers." Businesses boomed, as did speakeasies, despite the new Prohibition against the production and distribution of alcohol."We tend not to think about history in terms of disease," Davis said. "This was an important part of history that we don't always teach or talk about."People just wanted to forget. They wanted to get back to their lives."It was really something that was so terrible that nobody wanted to think or talk or write about it," Davis said.Every quarter, the award-winning journalists at Inside Edition Digital dig into a specific topic, going deeper than daily news cycles allow to bring you The Issue, a series of articles and videos on a specific subject. For more of The Issue 3, where we're diving into generational change, click here. Tags:pandemicfluCoronavirusLatest NewsTrending on Inside EditionNew York Woman Faced Local Backlash, Taken to Court Over Her Natural Garden1New York Woman Faced Local Backlash, Taken to Court Over Her Natural GardenOffbeatPastor Speaks on Putting His Life Back Together After Wife's Killing, Including Forgiving Those Responsible2Pastor Speaks on Putting His Life Back Together After Wife's Killing, Including Forgiving Those ResponsibleCrimeTexas Child Battling Batten Disease, One of the Rarest Fatal Illnesses in the World3Texas Child Battling Batten Disease, One of the Rarest Fatal Illnesses in the WorldINSIDE EDITION InDepthAuthor's Warning After Scammer Stole Facebook Pages With Millions of Followers4Author's Warning After Scammer Stole Facebook Pages With Millions of FollowersCrimeWoman Accused of Stealing Fellow Plane Passenger's Phone Charger 5Woman Accused of Stealing Fellow Plane Passenger's Phone Charger NewsOpens a new windowOpens a new windowOpens a new windowOpens a new windowOpens a new windowAbout UsAbout Inside EditionMeet the TeamAwardsContactConnectFacebookTwitterInstagramYouTubeRSSWatch Inside EditionLocal ListingsWatch Live StreamSites We LoveParamount+CBS NewsEntertainment TonightThe Drew Barrymore ShowRachael Ray ShowDABLLast.fmMixibleTerms of Use | Privacy Policy | Closed Captioning | California Notice | Do Not Sell My Personal Information™ King World Productions Inc. © 2024 Inside Edition Inc. and CBS interactive Inc., Paramount companies. All Rights Reserved.Could the flu shot protect against COVID-19? - Medical Republic Login/RegisterClinical Latest Public Health Diagnosis Webinars Political Latest RACGP TGA AMA Opinion Latest Comment Humour The Back Page Humoural Theory Red Herring Wild Health 2024 About About Us Join the Medical Republic Subscribe to Newspaper Subscribe to newsletter Past Issues Contact us Advertise with us Login/Register 06 May 2021 Could the flu shot protect against COVID-19? 3 minute read Clinical COVID-19 Public Health Vaccination By Bianca Nogrady The lower incidence and severity among those vaccinated for flu isn’t explained by the ‘healthy vaccinee’ effect. The influenza vaccine may offer some protection against COVID-19, prompting researchers to suggest the vaccine could be used as a “bridge” to COVID-19 vaccination. In June 2020, at the end of the first wave of the pandemic in the Netherlands, Professor Mihai Netea and colleagues at the Radboud University Medical Center in Nijmegen were analysing data from more than 10,600 employees of the centre – 184 of whom had tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 during the first wave. When they looked at the influenza vaccination status of the participants, they found that those who had been vaccinated during the 2019-20 season had a 39% lower incidence of COVID-19. It’s not the first data suggesting a lower incidence or severity of COVID-19 among influenza-vaccinated individuals. A Brazilian study of more than 53,000 confirmed COVID-19 cases found those who had recently been vaccinated against influenza had 7% lower odds of needing intensive care, 17% lower odds of needing mechanical ventilation, and 16% lower odds of death. Another study in Italy found that areas with higher influenza vaccine coverage had lower rates of COVID-19 deaths in the elderly. There is also at least one study which found the opposite: that higher rates of influenza vaccine coverage in OECD nations correlated with higher rates of COVID-19 infections. If there is a genuine association between influenza vaccine and lower infection rates, one possible explanation is the so-called healthy vaccinee effect: individuals who get vaccinated against influenza are also more likely to engage in other healthy behaviours, such as complying with public health measures, which reduce their risk of COVID-19 infection. However, Professor Netea says healthy vaccinee bias doesn’t explain the reduction in COVID-19 severity seen among individuals vaccinated against influenza. He argues there is biological support for the theory that the influenza vaccine itself is altering COVID-19 risk through viral or vaccine interference. “If we get a certain virus infection, it is very difficult – if not impossible – to get infected with a second virus during the viral infection, because the entire body produces interference and all other host defence mechanisms,” he says. “In vitro, it has been shown that cells infected with a rhinovirus cannot be infected again with the SARS-CoV-2 virus.” The prospect that the influenza vaccine might offer some degree of protection is an appealing one, particularly when there is an absence or shortage of targeted vaccines. “If you have such effect, you can vaccinate immediately as much as possible with something that is already available,” Professor Netea says. “It will not give protection of 90%, like the Moderna or Pfizer vaccine are doing, but it will be giving a partial protection.” Another advantage of the influenza vaccine against COVID-19 is that it’s less likely to be compromised by variants in SARS-CoV-2. “If there is an effect, there will be a huge advantage because it will be completely independent of the antigenic structure of the of the virus, and then the variants don’t matter anymore,” Professor Netea says. Netea is currently involved in a prospective study of influenza vaccination against COVID-19 in Brazil, which is experiencing high rates of COVID-19 infections but shortage of access to COVID-19 vaccines. Previous Post Next Post Subscribe Login/Register Notify of new follow-up comments new replies to my comments Please login to comment 0 Comments Inline Feedbacks View all comments ClassifiedsView all > Would you like to advertise here?AustraliawideChoose Highgate Hill Doctors!Brisbane RegionVR GP | SOUTHPORT, QLDMixed Billing, Full Patient BaseGold Coast Region Post your classified here Sign up to our Newsletter Follow us on Twitter Follow our Facebook page Connect on LinkedIn Receive daily updates on the latest news affecting Australian GPs Sign up to our Newsletter Follow us on Twitter Follow our Facebook page Connect with us on LinkedIn Recent Posts Diagnosis Immunology Five red flags for IgG4-related disease Clinical Genetics Pharmaceuticals More gene testing means safer medication Adolescent & young adult Climate Change Mental Health Heat raises risk of youth suicide Latest ClassifiedsView all >VR GP | SOUTHPORT, QLDMixed Billing, Full Patient BaseGold Coast RegionLOCUM GP | WINSTON HILLS3 Weeks (16 Nov – 11 Dec 2024)Sydney RegionChoose Highgate Hill Doctors!Brisbane RegionBill $350-$450 p/hr KiamaFull time, Fellowed GP roleSouth Coast End of content No more pages to load © 2024 - Medical Republic Log In Register × Log in Username/email Password Lost your password? Register for a new account Username Password Confirm Password First Name Last Name Email Address Full Name LEAVE THIS BLANK What field do you work in? Choose a field of work GP Rheumatologist Oncologist Dermatologist Allergist Immunologist Respiratory Physician Doctor, other specialty Retired Doctor International Doctor Nurse Other AHPRA registered HCP Practice Manager Medical Industry University Other Non-Healthcare Specialty: Addiction medicine Anaesthesia Anatomical pathology (including cytopathology) Cardiology Cardio-thoracic surgery Chemical pathology Clinical genetics Clinical pharmacology Community child health Dermatology Diagnostic radiology Emergency medicine Endocrinology Forensic pathology Gastroenterology and hepatology General medicine General paediatrics General pathology General practice General surgery Geriatric medicine Gynaecological oncology Haematology Immunology Immunology and allergy Infectious diseases Intensive care medicine Maternal-fetal medicine Medical administration Medical oncology Microbiology Neonatal and perinatal medicine Nephrology Neurology Neurosurgery Nuclear medicine Obstetrics and gynaecological ultrasound Obstetrics and gynaecology Occupational and environmental medicine Ophthalmology Oral and maxillofacial surgery Orthopaedic surgery Otolaryngology - head and neck surgery Paediatric cardiology Paediatric clinical pharmacology Paediatric emergency medicine Paediatric endocrinology Paediatric gastroenterology and hepatology Paediatric haematology Paediatric immunology and allergy Paediatric infectious diseases Paediatric intensive care medicine Paediatric medical oncology Paediatric nephrology Paediatric neurology Paediatric nuclear medicine Paediatric palliative medicine Paediatric rehabilitation medicine Paediatric respiratory and sleep medicine Paediatric rheumatology Paediatric surgery Paediatrics and child health Pain medicine Palliative medicine Pathology Physician Plastic surgery Psychiatry Public health medicine Radiation Oncology Radiology Rehabilitation medicine Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Respiratory and sleep medicine Rheumatology Sexual health medicine Sport and exercise medicine Surgery Urogynaecology Urology Vascular surgery Type of University work: Medical Student Medical Educator Medical Researcher Medical Registrar Pharmacy Student or Intern Other University Educators and Researchers Industry Specialty: Brand Manager Business Unit Director Business Unit Manager CEO Chief Medical Officer Country Manager Marketing Sales PR Comms Legal & Compliance Operations Practice Manager Recruitment Finance Other: Media and Agencies TMR Staff Government Employee Medical Writer Healthcare Industry Professional Healthcare Professional Industry Association Employee International Healthcare Professional Other (free-type) Other AHPRA Number Billing Address First Name Last Name Address 1 Address 2 City State Postal Code Country Afghanistan Aland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo (Brazzaville) Congo (Kinshasa) Cook Islands Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Honduras Hong Kong S.A.R., China Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao S.A.R., China Macedonia Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island North Korea Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Reunion Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Barthelemy Saint Helena Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin (French part) Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu U.S. Virgin Islands US Armed Forces Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States United States Minor Outlying Islands Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican Venezuela Vietnam Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Phone Payment Information We Accept Visa, Mastercard, American Express, and Discover Card Number Expiration Date 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 / 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 Security Code (CVC) (what's this?) Processing... wpDiscuzInsertAvian flu hits another Gauteng farm Subscribe Sign in Subscribe Sign in Redeem Home News South Africa Africa World Business Investigations Consumer Live Sci-Tech State Capture Videos Politics GNU 100 Days Opinion Letters Sport Soccer Rugby Cricket TshisaLIVE Lifestyle Motoring Spotlight Podcasts Premium Partners #1 Decline in mopane worm harvest already having a serious effect #2 EDITORIAL | Mandela family feuds make a mockery of the late statesman’s wishes #3 Scrap domestic system to give black cricketers fair crack at Proteas: Ntini #4 Current EU carbon tax cannot be just: global energy researcher #5 Child sexual abuse material is a growing problem in SA, says FPB #1 Decline in mopane worm harvest already having a serious effect #2 EDITORIAL | Mandela family feuds make a mockery of the late statesman’s wishes #3 Scrap domestic system to give black cricketers fair crack at Proteas: Ntini #4 Current EU carbon tax cannot be just: global energy researcher #5 Child sexual abuse material is a growing problem in SA, says FPB South Africa Avian flu hits another Gauteng farm 03 May 2021 - 15:53 By alex patrick Alex Patrick Senior reporter Just R20 for the first month. Support independent journalism by subscribing to our digital news package. Subscribe now The SA Poultry Association confirmed that a second outbreak of avian influenza had occurred on a broiler breeder farm in Johannesburg. File photo. Image: Marianne Schwankhart Another East Rand poultry farm has been hit by avian influenza. On Monday, the SA Poultry Association (Sapa) said the outbreak occurred on a broiler breeder farm. The farm is under quarantine and the birds are being culled. Sapa said the outbreak should only have a minimal effect on meat supply.The association said in a statement: “We regretfully advise that a second outbreak of HPAI (H5N1) has occurred on a broiler breeder farm ... The farm is under quarantine and the birds are being culled and disposed of under the department of agriculture, land reform and rural development's supervision.“This outbreak is in the same compartment as the first layer outbreak, and should not materially affect the trade restrictions already in place from our neighbouring countries.“The effects on the ongoing supply of broiler meat are minimal, and consumers are assured that broiler meat and eggs remain safe to eat provided proper cooking protocols are observed with temperatures exceeding 60°C achieved.”A commercial layer flock on the East Rand of Johannesburg was the first to confirm an outbreak of H5N1 on April 13. Bird flu outbreak confirmed in SA, Joburg farm quarantinedThe poultry industry was on high alert on Tuesday after an outbreak of avian influenza was confirmed in a commercial layer flock on the East Rand of ...News3 years ago This was the first outbreak of avian influenza on a commercial farm since 2017 when there was an outbreak of avian influenza H5N8.H5N8 had a significant effect on the layer industry and also marginally affected the broiler industry.In April, Sapa said the industry had been placed on high alert and the appropriate biosecurity contingency plans had been implemented. A restriction had been placed on people and bird movement for both bigger companies and SMMEs.A widespread outbreak of the avian influenza virus now in Europe was first confirmed in October 2020.Last month Sapa said the northern European countries had been predominantly affected. “However, these outbreaks have not caused as much of a loss to the poultry industry as the previous large-scale outbreaks of 2015 and 2017, due to lessons learnt previously.“The role of migratory wild birds in the spread of the virus has been previously proven, and containment of poultry flocks in covered environments is recommended to avoid possible contamination as far as possible.”According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the risk from H5N1 is low in people but sporadic human infections with Asian H5N1 virus have occurred, primarily in Asia and Africa. Most human infections with Asian H5N1 viruses in other countries have occurred after prolonged and close contact with infected sick or dead birds.They recommend that people only observe wild birds from a distance, avoid contact with domestic birds which appear to be ill or have died, and avoid contact with surfaces which appear to be contaminated with faeces from birds. TimesLIVE READ MORE: Hundreds of dead pelicans in Senegal test positive for H5N1 bird fluSome 750 pelicans found dead in a UNESCO World Heritage site in northern Senegal last week have tested positive for H5N1 bird flu, the head of the ...News3 years ago Dutch to cull 35,700 chickens after bird flu detectedDutch animal health authorities will cull 35,700 broiler chickens after a highly contagious strain of bird flu was found on a farm in the central ...News4 years ago African penguins succumb to avian flu in the CapeAfrican penguins have succumbed to the highly pathogenic H5N8 avian flu along the coastline of the Western Cape.News6 years ago Just R20 for the first month. Support independent journalism by subscribing to our digital news package. Subscribe now Next Article newsletter News and promos in your inbox subscribe Most read WhatsApp business group admins in Zimbabwe required to pay licensing fee Africa Police foil planned fuel station heists in Northern Cape South Africa More environmental health practitioners needed to prevent food poisoning ... South Africa Cargo moving again between South Africa and Maputo South Africa Woman, 82, killed at neighbour's house in Tzaneen, suspect arrested South Africa Latest Videos Separatist group claims deadly bomb blast at a Pakistan train station | REUTERS Pedro Páramo | Official Trailer | Netflix Main menu News Politics GNU 100 Days Opinion Sport TshisaLIVE Lifestyle Podcasts Premium Partners Our Network Read More About usContact usAdvertiseSubscribeMobile siteFAQsTerms & conditionsPrivacy policy Our network SowetanLIVEBusinessLIVEBusiness DayFinancial MailHeraldLIVEDispatchLIVEWanted OnlineSA Home OwnerBusiness Media MAGSArena EventsCareers and Tenders © 2024 Arena Holdings (Pty) Ltd. All rights reserved. Please click here to view our site optimised for your device.