Co-infection of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus causes more severe and prolonged pneumonia in hamsters | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Co-infection of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus causes more severe and prolonged pneumonia in hamsters Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 28 October 2021 Co-infection of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus causes more severe and prolonged pneumonia in hamsters Takaaki Kinoshita1,2, Kenichi Watanabe3, Yasuteru Sakurai1,2, Kodai Nishi4, Rokusuke Yoshikawa1,2 & …Jiro Yasuda1,2,5 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 11, Article number: 21259 (2021) Cite this article 10k Accesses 43 Citations 103 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Infectious diseasesVirology AbstractCoronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is currently a serious public health concern worldwide. Notably, co-infection with other pathogens may worsen the severity of COVID-19 symptoms and increase fatality. Here, we show that co-infection with influenza A virus (IAV) causes more severe body weight loss and more severe and prolonged pneumonia in SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters. Each virus can efficiently spread in the lungs without interference by the other. However, in immunohistochemical analyses, SARS-CoV-2 and IAV were not detected at the same sites in the respiratory organs of co-infected hamsters, suggesting that either the two viruses may have different cell tropisms in vivo or each virus may inhibit the infection and/or growth of the other within a cell or adjacent areas in the organs. Furthermore, a significant increase in IL-6 was detected in the sera of hamsters co-infected with SARS-CoV-2 and IAV at 7 and 10 days post-infection, suggesting that IL-6 may be involved in the increased severity of pneumonia. Our results strongly suggest that IAV co-infection with SARS-CoV-2 can have serious health risks and increased caution should be applied in such cases. Similar content being viewed by others Ad26 vaccine protects against SARS-CoV-2 severe clinical disease in hamsters Article Open access 03 September 2020 Pathogenesis and transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in golden hamsters Article 14 May 2020 Infection with novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) causes pneumonia in Rhesus macaques Article Open access 07 July 2020 IntroductionIn December 2019, the first cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), were reported in Wuhan, China. Since then, it has spread globally and the outbreak has been declared a pandemic. As of May 2021, the pandemic is still ongoing, with significant increase in cases each day.The clinical spectrum of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 is quite broad. Although the current case fatality is around 2%1, co-infection with other pathogens may worsen the COVID-19 symptoms and increase fatality. Among the pathogens that can establish a co-infection with SARS-CoV-2, influenza A virus (IAV) is one of the most likely candidates, because around one billion people are estimated to be infected with this virus every year, especially in the winter season. Both SARS-CoV-2 and IAV follow similar transmission routes and mainly cause respiratory diseases. Indeed, quite a few cases of co-infection by these viruses have been reported2,3,4,5,6. However, the number of cases is not high enough to conclude how co-infection by IAV affects the symptoms of COVID-19. As both the pathogens commonly affect the respiratory system, co-infection may enhance the pathogenic effects. Contrastingly, it is also possible that SARS-CoV-2 and IAV may inhibit each other’s infection and replication, since co-infecting viruses have been reported to interfere with the replication of the other7.The hamster model has been established as an animal model for SARS-CoV-2 infection, since hamsters are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection and show symptoms, including pneumonia, mimicking those of COVID-19 in humans8,9. Hamsters infected with a high dose of SARS-CoV-2 showed significant body weight loss by 7 days post infection with the progression of pneumonia and then recovered by day 14. Efficient viral replication was observed in the lung of hamsters, where the cellular receptor of SARS-CoV-2, angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), is present10. Hamsters have also been used in studies on potential therapeutic antibodies and compounds against SARS-CoV-211,12,13,14,15. They are also used as an animal model for human influenza virus infection16.Therefore, in this study, we investigated the effects of IAV co-infection on the pathogenicity and the in vivo proliferation of SARS-CoV-2 using a hamster model.ResultsBody weight change by infectionTo investigate if the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 is altered by IAV co-infection, hamsters were infected with SARS-CoV-2, IAV, or both. In this study, we used a mouse-adapted influenza A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (H1N1) virus (PR8) and a clinical isolate of SARS-CoV-2, JPN/NGS/SC-1/2020, which was isolated from a fatal case.In a group of hamsters infected with only IAV (PR8), the body weight slightly decreased until 3 days post-infection (dpi) and then gradually increased (Fig. 1A). At 10 dpi, the body weights were similar to those of mock-infected hamsters. By contrast, hamsters infected with only SARS-CoV-2 or both SARS-CoV-2 and IAV showed significant decrease in body weight until 6 or 7 dpi, respectively. Co-infected hamsters showed more significant body weight loss than those infected with only SARS-CoV-2 at 7 dpi. In addition, body weight recovery in co-infected hamsters was delayed by a day compared with that in hamsters infected with only SARS-CoV-2.Figure 1Effect of co-infection on body weight and virus replication. (A) Body weight changes in Syrian hamsters during infection. Hamsters (n = 6 per group) were intranasally inoculated with 1 × 105 PFU of IAV (PR8), 3 × 105 PFU of SARS-CoV-2, or a mixture of both viruses (co-infection). The hamsters of the mock-infected group were administered DMEM. Mean percentage increase or decrease in body weight at 0 dpi ± SD is shown at each consecutive dpi. P values were calculated using Tukey’s multiple-comparison test (*P < 0.05; between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-2/IAV). (B) SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA was detected by RT-qPCR for SARS-CoV-2N gene in the lung homogenate at 4 and 7 dpi. N gene copies per lung weight (mg) were recorded at 4 and 7 dpi for each treatment. (C) IAV viral RNA was determined by RT-qPCR for IAV M gene in lung homogenate at 4 and 7 dpi. M gene copies per lung weight (mg) were recorded at 4 and 7 dpi for each treatment. P values were calculated using Student’s t-test. (n.s.: not significant).Full size imageVirus replication in the lungsNext, we analyzed the virus replication in the lungs of infected hamsters at 4 and 7 dpi by real time RT-qPCR. SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA load in the lungs at 4 dpi was higher than that at 7 dpi, whereas there was no significant difference in the viral RNA levels in the lungs of SARS-CoV-2 single-infected and co-infected hamsters at both 4 and 7 dpi (Fig. 1B). Similarly, the level of IAV RNA was higher at 4 dpi, and both IAV single-infected and co-infected hamsters showed similar levels of IAV RNA at 4 and 7 dpi (Fig. 1C).X-ray microcomputed tomographic (micro-CT) analysis of the lungsTo assess the influence of co-infection on lung pathology, we observed the abnormalities in the lungs during infection using in vivo micro-CT imaging. Hamsters of all three infected groups developed pneumonia (Fig. 2A). We evaluated the severity of pneumonia using the CT severity score9,17. At around 4 dpi, the hamsters infected with IAV exhibited the most severe lung abnormalities, while those in the SARS-CoV-2 single infection and co-infection groups showed the highest CT severity score at 6 and 8 dpi, respectively (Fig. 2B,C). Compared with SARS-CoV-2 single-infected hamsters, co-infected hamsters showed more severe pneumonia. Although both IAV and SARS-CoV-2 single-infected groups showed few lung abnormalities at 10 dpi, co-infected hamsters still showed pneumonia symptoms (Fig. 2C). These results indicated that co-infection with IAV and SARS-CoV-2 resulted in more severe and prolonged pneumonia compared with single virus infection.Figure 2Assessment of pneumonia during infection using micro-CT. Lung abnormalities during infection were observed until 10 dpi using micro-CT. (A) CT images showed pneumonia caused by each virus at 4, 7, and 10 dpi. (B) CT severity score exhibited level of lung abnormalities. (C) Mean of CT severity score ± SD (n = 4 per group). Observation was performed every 2 days until 10 dpi. P values were calculated using Tukey’s multiple-comparison test (*P < 0.05; between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-2/IAV).Full size imageHistological analyses of respiratory organsIn the IAV single-infected group, hamsters showed acute bronchointerstitial pneumonia. At 4 dpi, mild, diffuse thickening of alveolar septa with infiltration of lymphocytes and macrophages were observed in the lungs (Fig. 3A,B,K,L). In some cases, focal bronchioles and alveoli were filled with degenerated neutrophils and cellular debris, then suppletive inflammation was observed in the surrounding area. Mild edema, hemorrhage, and fibrin exudation were occasionally observed. Moreover, at 7 dpi, foamy alveolar macrophages accumulated in the alveoli (Fig. 3E,O). At 10 dpi, the inflammatory lesion regressed and the alveolar septa were slightly thickened (Fig. 3H,R). In immunohistochemistry (IHC), tracheal epithelium, bronchial epithelium, and respiratory epithelial cells were positive for influenza A virus nucleoprotein (IAV NP) at 4, 7, and 10 dpi. In the foci of bronchointerstitial pneumonia, the affected bronchial epithelium was positive for IAV NP (“IAV pattern”). The number of NP-positive cells gradually decreased after 4 dpi (Fig. 4A–J). In the nasal mucosa, a few neutrophils and mononuclear cells infiltrated the submucosal layer. The nasal respiratory epithelium was occasionally positive for IAV NP at 4 dpi (Fig. 4I).Figure 3Histopathological analysis of lungs of infected hamsters. Lung sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE). Leftmost, second left, second right, and rightmost columns show representative sections of IAV, SARS-CoV-2, co-infected, and mock-infected hamsters, respectively. (A–J) Low-magnification images of the lung sections. (K–T) High-magnification images of (A–J). Arrows and inset in (L) and (N) indicate bronchointerstitial pneumonia (IAV pattern). White arrowheads in (O, S, and T) indicate alveolar macrophages. Black arrowheads in (P and Q) indicate type 2 pneumocytes. Scale bars: 4 mm (A), 200 μm (K), 100 μm (L, N), 50 μm (M, O–T), and 20 μm (inset in L, N).Full size imageFigure 4Immunohistochemical analysis of IAV NP and SARS N antigens in the tissue of IAV and SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters, respectively. (A, B) Representative sections of tissue from the Mock-infected hamster stained with anti-SARS-CoV-2N antibody. (C–J) Representative sections of tissue from the IAV-infected hamster stained with anti-IAV NP antibody. (K–R) Representative sections of tissue from the SARS-CoV-2-infected hamster stained with anti-SARS-CoV-2N antibody. Lung are shown in (A–C, E, G, K, M and O). Trachea are shown in (D, F, H, L, N and P). Nasal mucosa are shown in (I, Q). Sections of the vomeronasal organ are shown in (J and R). Scale bars: 100 μm (A, B, I, Q) and 200 μm (C–H, J–P, R).Full size imageIn the SARS-CoV-2 infected group, the hamsters showed severe interstitial pneumonia. At 4 dpi, multifocal thickening of alveolar septa, mild to moderate, with infiltration of lymphocytes and macrophages, was observed (Fig. 3C,M). The lesions were located around the terminal bronchioles. Mild edema and hemorrhage were presented in the parenchyma. At 7 dpi, the foci were coalescent, developing a diffuse interstitial pneumonia. Proliferation of type 2 pneumocytes in the alveoli and infiltration of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages were observed. The thickening of alveolar septa was so prominent that about 30–60% of alveolar space collapsed (“SARS-CoV-2 pattern”) (Fig. 3F,P). Bronchial epithelia also showed cell proliferation, and epithelial cells were swollen and arranged in multiple layers. At 10 dpi, type 2 pneumocytes were reduced, and mild inflammation and diffuse alveolar thickening were observed. In the alveolar space, foamy alveolar macrophages accumulated (Fig. 3I,S). In IHC, a few bronchial epithelial and respiratory epithelial cells were positive for SARS-CoV-2N at 4 dpi (Fig. 4K–P). In the nasal mucosa, mononuclear cells infiltrated the submucosal layer. In IHC, the supporting cells of the vomeronasal organ were strongly positive for SARS-CoV-2N at 4 dpi (Fig. 4P). The nasal respiratory epithelium was also positive, but comparatively rare (Fig. 4O).In the lungs and other respiratory organs of co-infected hamsters, both SARS-CoV-2 and IAV infections were observed (Fig. 5). However, SARS-CoV-2 and IAV never co-existed at the same area in these organs. The examined lobes were clearly divided into SARS-CoV-2-patterned and IAV-patterned areas. At 4 dpi, focal inflammation with edema and hemorrhage was observed around the bronchioles (Fig. 3D,N). At 7 dpi, interstitial pneumonia with prominent proliferation of type 2 pneumocytes (SARS-CoV-2 pattern) and bronchointerstitial pneumonia (IAV pattern) were observed (Fig. 3G,Q). At 10 dpi, the alveolar septa were diffusely thickened with focal accumulation of foamy alveolar macrophages and atelectasis (Fig. 3J,T). As shown in Fig. 4, SARS-CoV-2 antigen was detected at 4 dpi, IAV antigen was detected at 4 and 7 dpi. At the surroundings of the SARS-CoV-2-positive bronchi, non-purulent interstitial pneumonia, as shown in SARS-CoV-2 single infection, was observed (Fig. 5A,B). By contrast, in the region surrounding the IAV-positive bronchi, acute bronchointerstitial pneumonia, as seen in IAV single infection, was observed (Fig. 5C,D). In the longitudinal section, bronchial epithelia were positive for both SARS-CoV-2 and IAV antigens, although each virus was independently distributed (not co-localized) (Fig. 5E,F). No viral antigen was detected at 10 dpi. In the nasal mucosa, SARS-CoV-2 and IAV were separately distributed in the nasal respiratory epithelium without co-localization at 4 dpi (Fig. 5G–I). SARS-CoV-2 was also observed in the supporting cells of vomeronasal organ (Fig. 5I).Figure 5Immunohistochemical analysis of IAV NP and SARS N antigens in the tissue of co-infected hamsters. (A–I) Sections of the co-infected hamster at 4 dpi. (A–F) Representative serial sections of bronchi. (G) Representative coronal section of the head stained with HE. Nasal respiratory epithelium and vomeronasal organ are shown in (H and I), respectively. Sections in (A, C, E, and H) were stained with anti-IAV NP antibody. Sections in (B, D, F, and I) were stained with anti-SARS-CoV-2N antibody. Scale bars: 200 μm (A–F), 3 mm (G), and 100 μm (H, I).Full size imageThere was no considerable difference in the pathology and virus replication sites in other examined organs in the single and co-infection group (data not shown).Induction of cytokines and chemokinesTo examine whether co-infection alters the induction patterns of cytokines and chemokines, we measured the serum levels of IP-10, MCP-1, TNF-α, IL-1-β, IL-6, IL-10, and IFN-γ over the course of infection using ELISA.IL-6, an inflammatory cytokine, was significantly elevated at 7 and 10 dpi in the co-infection group, but not in the other groups (Fig. 6). The abundance of IL-10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine, showed no apparent difference among the three groups. We also found that the serum levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were increased at 4 and 7 dpi in the IAV group and at 10 dpi in the SARS-CoV-2 and co-infection groups.Figure 6Measurement of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the serum. Inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines were quantified by ELISA. Data are presented as the mean value ± SD (n = 3 per group). P values were calculated using Tukey’s multiple-comparison test (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01).Full size imageDiscussionIn this study, we showed that co-infection of IAV in SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters causes more severe body weight loss, delayed recovery, and more severe and prolonged pneumonia than those observed with single infection by SARS-CoV-2 (Table 1). This finding suggests a correlation between body weight loss and the severity of pneumonia determined by micro-CT imaging. Consistent with these enhancements of pathology, co-infected hamsters showed pathological features of both IAV and SARS-CoV-2 infections and high levels of IL-6.Table 1 Summary of disease markers.Full size tableAs previously reported, hamsters were susceptible to both IAV and SARS-CoV-2 infections and both viruses could efficiently replicate in the lung8,9,16. The virus titers of IAV and SARS-CoV-2 in the lungs of infected hamsters were the highest at 3 dpi and declined at 6 dpi. Our results also showed similar growth patterns of both viruses in the lung (Fig. 1B,C). These results indicate that both viruses rapidly spread to the lung and efficiently replicate there.The IAV and SARS-CoV-2 loads in the lungs of co-infected hamsters were similar to the viral load in hamsters single-infected with each virus (Fig. 1B,C), indicating that both viruses can efficiently spread in the lungs without the mutual interference that is often observed in virus co-infection7. Viral interference was not observed in this study, at either the individual or organ level. Notably, IAV and SARS-CoV-2 were not detected at the same sites in the respiratory organs of co-infected hamsters (Figs. 4 and 5), suggesting either that these viruses have different in vivo cell tropism or that each virus inhibits the infection and/or replication of the other within a cell or adjacent area in the organ. A previous report showed that IAV significantly downregulated the expression of ACE2, a cellular receptor of SARS-CoV-2, via the proteasome pathway in vitro18. Therefore, the downregulation of this receptor by IAV may prevent the growth of SARS-CoV-2 and the co-existence of SARS-CoV-2 and IAV in the same area in organs in vivo.Significant increase in IL-6 was detected in the sera of the hamsters co-infected with SARS-CoV-2 and IAV at 7 and 10 dpi (Fig. 6, Table 1). IL-6 signaling play crucial roles in vascular endothelial cell dysfunction in cytokine release syndrome (CRS) and in the progression of acute inflammatory diseases such as sepsis and acute respiratory distress syndrome19. Therefore, the increase in serum IL-6 may be involved in the increased severity of pneumonia observed in this study. Moreover, serum IL-6 level is a known predictive biomarker of COVID-19 severity20. Collectively, these findings are consistent with the increased disease severity in co-infected hamsters, compared with that in single-infected hamsters, observed in the present study.In this study, VEGF significantly increased in hamster sera at 4 and 7 dpi in IAV-infected hamsters and at 10 dpi in SARS-CoV-2- and co-infected hamsters, respectively (Fig. 6, Table 1). In IAV-infected hamsters, pneumonia severity peaked at 4 dpi, whereas in the SARS-CoV-2 and co-infection groups, pneumonia severity peaked at 6 and 8 dpi, respectively (Fig. 2). VEGF production appears to be induced in order to recover from the damage caused by infection.Viral infection of vomeronasal cells is generally rare, although herpes simplex virus has been reported to replicate in these cells21. As shown in Fig. 5G and I, SARS-CoV-2, but not IAV, was detected in the supporting cells of the vomeronasal organ. This finding may provide a clue for understanding the occurrence of dysosmia in COVID-19 patients.Our data showed that hamsters infected with the IAV PR8 strain exhibited body weight loss at an early phase of infection and interstitial pneumonia as observed in human infection. In addition, we examined if the results from hamsters co-infected with a mouse-adapted IAV PR8 strain were similar to those from hamsters co-infected with the influenza A (H1N1) pdm09 strain, which has been recently known to cause human infections. Unlike a mouse-adapted PR8 strain, pdm09 strain did not cause body weight loss and any respiratory symptom (data not shown). Previous report also showed that, in the hamsters infected with pdm09 strains, the virus antigens were detected mainly in the olfactory epithelia rather than in the respiratory epithelia, and any respiratory symptom was not observed16, suggesting that the hamster infected with mouse-adapted PR8 strain, but not pdm09 strain, should be appropriate as a pathological model of influenza.The hamsters co-infected with SARS-CoV-2 and IAV showed more severe and prolonged pneumonia. This observation is also consistent by a case report of a co-infected patient (32-year-old man) who exhibited severe pneumonia and died of persistent respiratory failure22. Clinical report also showed that COVID-19 patients with influenza exhibited more severe inflammation and organ injury23. However, another report suggested that co-infection with influenza was not associated with increased disease severity of COVID-19 pneumonia24. Therefore, further studies might be needed to understand effects of co-infection on patients.Taken together, our data strongly suggest that co-infection with IAV poses a serious risk to SARS-CoV-2 infected patients and should be taken into consideration in the treatment and management of these patients.MethodsCells and virusesVeroE6/TMPRSS2 cells, a VeroE6 cell line constitutively expressing TMPRSS2 provided by National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition (NIBIOHN), Osaka, Japan25, and Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, kindly provided by Yoshihiro Kawaoka, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) and minimal essential medium (MEM; Sigma Aldrich) with 5% FCS, respectively. SARS-CoV-2 strain, JPN/NGS/SC-1/2020 (GISAID Accession ID: EPI_ISL_481254), was isolated from a COVID-19 patient and propagated in Vero/TMPRSS2 cells in DMEM containing 1% FCS. Mouse-adapted influenza A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (H1N1) virus was propagated in MDCK cells in MEM containing 1 × Vitamin (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), 0.1% BSA (Sigma Aldrich), 1 × MEM Non-Essential Amino Acids (NEAA; Gibco) and 0.00075% Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich).Infection of Syrian hamstersFive-week-old female Syrian hamsters (Japan SLC Inc., Shizuoka, Japan) were used in this study. In infection experiments, hamsters were intranasally inoculated with 3 × 105 PFU (in 100 µl) of SARS-CoV-2 and/or 1 × 105 PFU (in 100 µl) of IAV. Body weight was monitored daily for 10 days. At 4, 7, or 10 dpi, hamsters were euthanized by exsanguination under deep isoflurane anesthetize, and serum and organs were collected. For pathological examinations, organs were fixed with a 10% formalin neutral buffer solution (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical, Tokyo, Japan). For quantification of the viral RNA in organs, the collected organs were immersed in lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then disrupted by high-speed shaking using a TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). All experiments with hamsters were performed in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines.Quantitative real-time RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) of viral RNATotal RNA was extracted from organs by Pure link RNA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). RT-qPCR was performed with viral gene specific primers26,27 using the One Step PrimeScript™ III RT-qPCR Mix (Takara Bio Inc., Shiga, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The N gene of SARS-CoV-2 or the M gene of IAV was amplified using the following paired primers and probes; forward primer 5′-AAATTTTGGGGACCAGGAAC-3′, reverse primer 5′-TGGCAGCTGTGTAGGTCAAC-3′, probe 5′-(FAM)ATGTCGCGCATTGGCATGGA(BHQ)-3′ (SARS-CoV-2) or forward primer 5′-CCMAGGTCGAAACGTAYGTTCTCTCTATC-3′, reverse primer 5′-TGACAGRATYGGTCTTGTCTTTAGCCAYTCCA-3′, probe 5′-(FAM)ATYTCGGCTTTGAGGGGGCCTG(MGB)-3′ (IAV), respectively. The following template cDNA were used for standard; 5′-GCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGCGAAGGAAATTTTGGGGACCAGGAACTAATCAGACAAGGAACTGATTACAAACATTGGCCGCAAATTGCACAATTTGCCCCCAGCGCTTCAGCGTTCTTCGGAATGTCGCGCATTGGCATGGAAGTCACACCTTCGGGAACGTGGTTGACCTACACAGGTGCCATCAA-3′ (SARS-CoV-2) and 5′-AGTCTTCTAACCGAGGTCGAAACGTACGTTCTCTCTATCATCCCGTCAGGCCCCCTCAAAGCCGAGATCGCACAGAGACTTGAAGATGTCTTTGCAGGGAAGAACACCGATCTTGAGGTTCTCATGGAATGGCTAAAGACAAGACCAATCCTGTCACCTCTGACTA-3′ (IAV).micro-CT imagingCT images were acquired using Triumph combined PET/SPECT/CT systems (TriFoil Imaging, Chatsworth, CA, USA). The animals were anesthetized with 1.5% isoflurane, and CT was performed for observation of lung field. Acquired CT data were processed using OsiriX MD (Pixmeo, Bernex, Switzerland). The severity of pneumonia was determined as a CT severity score according to previous methods9,17.Histopathological analysisOrgans (liver, spleen, kidney, heart, lung, pancreas, duodenum, ileum, colon, brain, and nasal part of frontal bone) were fixed in neutral buffered formalin and processed using routine methods. After fixation, the frontal bone was decalcified with 10% EDTA solution (pH 7.4). Serial sections, 4 μm thick, were sliced from paraffin-embedded tissues and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE). IHC was performed using mouse anti-SARS-CoV-2N monoclonal antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or rabbit anti-influenza A virus NP polyclonal antibody (Genetex Inc, Irvine, CA, USA). Antigen retrieval was performed by microwave heating with citrate buffer (pH 6.0) at 95 °C for 15 min. Signals were visualized using the Envision system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and 3,3’-diaminobenzidine.ELISA for quantitation of cytokines and chemokinesBlood from hamsters was centrifuged (1000×g, 15 min, RT) and serum was collected. Cytokines and chemokines were quantified using the Hamster ELISA kit (MyBioSource, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.Statistical analysisStatistical evaluation of the differences between the groups was performed using the Student’s t-test and the Tukey’s multiple-comparison test by using R software version 3.2.2. P < 0.05 was considered significant.Ethics statementOur protocol for the experiments involving hamsters followed the Nagasaki University Regulations for Animal Care and Use and were approved by the Animal Experiment Committee of Nagasaki University (approval number 2003031600-4). All experiments with SARS-CoV-2 were performed in BSL-3 laboratories at Nagasaki University. Referenceshttps://covid19.who.int/.Wehl, G., Laible, M. & Rauchenzauner, M. Co-infection of SARS CoV-2 and influenza A in a pediatric patient in Germany. Klin. Padiatr. 232, 217–218 (2020).Article Google Scholar Zheng, X. et al. Co-infection of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus in early stage of the COVID-19 epidemic in, China. J. Infect. 81, e128–e129 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Wu, X. et al. Co-infection with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A virus in patient with pneumonia, China. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 26, 1324–1326 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Azekawa, S., Namkoong, H., Mitamura, K., Kawaoka, Y. & Saito, F. Co-infection with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A virus. ID Cases 20, e00775 (2020).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kim, D., Quinn, J., Pinsky, B., Shah, N. H. & Brown, I. Rates of co-infection between SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory pathogens. JAMA 323, 2085–2086 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Kumar, N., Sharma, S., Barua, S., Tripathi, B. N. & Rouse, B. T. Virological and immunological outcomes of coinfections. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 31, 17 (2018).Article Google Scholar Sia, S. F. et al. Pathogenesis and transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in golden hamsters. Nature 583, 834–838 (2020).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Imai, M. et al. Syrian hamsters as a small animal model for SARS-CoV-2 infection and countermeasure development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 16587–16595 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Tostanoski, L. H. et al. Ad26 vaccine protects against SARS-CoV-2 severe clinical disease in hamsters. Nat. Med. 26, 1694–1700 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Li, W. et al. Rapid identification of a human antibody with high prophylactic and therapeutic efficacy in three animal models of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 29832–29838 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Yuan, S. et al. Metallodrug ranitidine bismuth citrate suppresses SARS-CoV-2 replication and relieves virus-associated pneumonia in Syrian hamsters. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 1439–1448 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Kreye, J. et al. A therapeutic non-self-reactive SARS-CoV-2 antibody protects from lung pathology in a COVID-19 hamster model. Cell 183, 1058–1069 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Kaptein, S. J. F. et al. Favipiravir at high doses has potent antiviral activity in SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters, whereas hydroxychloroquine lacks activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 26955–26965 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Baum, A. et al. REGN-COV2 antibodies prevent and treat SARS-CoV-2 infection in rhesus macaques and hamsters. Science 370, 1110–1115 (2020).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Iwatsuki-Horimoto, K. et al. Syrian hamster as an animal model for the study of human influenza virus infection. J. Virol. 92, 4 (2018).Article Google Scholar Chung, M. et al. CT imaging features of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Radiology 295, 202–207 (2020).Article Google Scholar Liu, X. et al. Downregulation of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 by the neuraminidase protein of influenza A (H1N1) virus. Virus Res. 185, 64–71 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Kang, S. et al. IL-6 trans-signaling induces plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 from vascular endothelial cells in cytokine release syndrome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 22351–22356 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Del Valle, D. M. et al. An inflammatory cytokine signature predicts COVID-19 severity and survival. Nat. Med. 26, 1636–1643 (2020).Article Google Scholar Mori, I. et al. Herpes simplex virus US3 protein kinase regulates virus-induced apoptosis in olfactory and vomeronasal chemosensory neurons in vivo. Microbes Infect. 8, 1806–1812 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Lew, S., Manes, P. & Smith, B. Coinfection with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A virus in a 32-year-old man. Am. J. Case Rep. 21, e926092 (2020).Article Google Scholar Ma, S., Lai, X., Chen, Z., Tu, S. & Qin, K. Clinical characteristics of critically ill patients co-infected with SARS-CoV-2 and the influenza virus in Wuhan, China. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 96, 683–687 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Yu, C. et al. Lopinaviritonavir is associated with pneumonia resolution in COVID-19 patients with influenza coinfection: A retrospective matched-pair cohort study. J. Med. Virol. 93, 472–480 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Matsuyama, S. et al. Enhanced isolation of SARS-CoV-2 by TMPRSS2-expressing cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 7001–7003 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Shirato, K. et al. Development of genetic diagnostic methods for detection for novel coronavirus 2019(nCoV-2019) in Japan. Jpn. J. Infect. Dis. 73, 304–307 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Nakauchi, M. et al. One-step real-time reverse transcription-PCR assays for detecting and subtyping pandemic influenza A/H1N1 2009, seasonal influenza A/H1N1, and seasonal influenza A/H3N2 viruses. J. Virol. Methods 171, 156–162 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Editage (www.editage.com) for English language editing and Dr. T. Matsui (Obihiro University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Japan) and Dr. K. Sudo (Tokyo Medical University, Japan) for their valuable discussion. We also thank the National Institute of Infectious Diseases (NIID), Japan, for providing VeroE6/TMPRSS2 cells. We are grateful to all the members of the Department of Emerging Infectious Diseases, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University. This research was supported by grants from the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED) (Grant No. JP20wm0125006; JY) and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) (Grant No. JP19K24679; JY).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Emerging Infectious Diseases, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Nagasaki, 852-8523, JapanTakaaki Kinoshita, Yasuteru Sakurai, Rokusuke Yoshikawa & Jiro YasudaNational Research Center for the Control and Prevention of Infectious Diseases (CCPID), Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, JapanTakaaki Kinoshita, Yasuteru Sakurai, Rokusuke Yoshikawa & Jiro YasudaResearch Center for Global Agromedicine, Obihiro University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Obihiro, JapanKenichi WatanabeDepartment of Radioisotope Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, JapanKodai NishiGraduate School of Biomedical Science, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, JapanJiro YasudaAuthorsTakaaki KinoshitaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKenichi WatanabeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYasuteru SakuraiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKodai NishiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRokusuke YoshikawaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJiro YasudaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsT.K., Y.S., R.Y., and J.Y. performed the animal experiments. K.W. performed the histological analyses. T.K. and K.N. performed the micro-CT analysis. T.K. performed the biochemical analyses and analysed the data. T.K., K.W., Y.S., and J.Y. discussed results and wrote the paper. J.Y. designed the research.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Jiro Yasuda.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleKinoshita, T., Watanabe, K., Sakurai, Y. et al. Co-infection of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus causes more severe and prolonged pneumonia in hamsters. Sci Rep 11, 21259 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-00809-2Download citationReceived: 12 June 2021Accepted: 12 October 2021Published: 28 October 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-00809-2Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by An RNA-hydrolyzing recombinant minibody prevents both influenza A virus and coronavirus in co-infection models Quynh Xuan Thi LuongPhuong Thi HoangSukchan Lee Scientific Reports (2024) An intranasal live-attenuated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine limits virus transmission Julia M. AdlerRicardo Martin VidalJakob Trimpert Nature Communications (2024) Comparison of genome replication fidelity between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A virus in cell culture Yoshiko KawasakiHaruka AbeJiro Yasuda Scientific Reports (2023) Introduction of graphene oxide-supported multilayer-quantum dots nanofilm into multiplex lateral flow immunoassay: A rapid and ultrasensitive point-of-care testing technique for multiple respiratory viruses Wenqi WangXingsheng YangShengqi Wang Nano Research (2023) Rational development of a combined mRNA vaccine against COVID-19 and influenza Qing YeMei WuCheng-Feng Qin npj Vaccines (2022) Download PDF Associated content Collection Top 100 in Microbiology Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingThe Flu Pandemic hit Nenana 100 Years Ago (U.S. National Park Service) Skip to global NPS navigation Skip to the main content Skip to the footer section National Park Service Search Search This Site All NPS Open Menu Close Menu Explore This Park Explore the National Park Service Exiting nps.gov Cancel Contact Us Article The Flu Pandemic hit Nenana 100 Years Ago Figure 1. The Nenana cemetery on the southwest side of town contains numerous graves of those who perished during the 1920 flu pandemic. NPS Photo One of the great tragedies to strike one of our gateway communities occurred in May, 1920. If you stroll through the Nenana cemetery on the southwest side of town and read the dates on the graves or visit the Mitch Dementieff Tribal Hall on the west side and observe the photographs on the wall, evidence of its magnitude is tangible. Figure 2. Fannie Quigley of Kantishna reportedly went to Nenana when there was a nursing shortage during the 1920 flu outbreak. She is the shorter woman in the center-right of the photo. For nearly two years Nenana contemplated the arrival of the “Spanish” influenza (H1N1 Influenza A virus), and, in the lead-up to its onset, had contingency plans in place (such as repurposing the town’s new Cooney Hotel into a make-shift hospital space).[1] In early April 1920, in the Nenana Daily News, the local health board issued a statement reassuring residents about the virus’s relatively insignificant threat in Interior Alaska. By the end of April, flu cases started to appear in Fairbanks, and Nenana officials quickly implemented closures of large gathering places including schools and churches. Almost exactly a month after the Nenana Daily News statement was published telling town residents not to worry, the town was overrun by the flu. So many residents fell ill at once that Nenana was overwhelmed and effectively shut down. In early May 1920, the make-shift hospital was full, the newspaper shut down, the telegraph station shut, railroad travel suspended, and, according to the June 12, 1920 edition of the Cordova Daily Times, a fire department official pleaded with the community “to please not have any conflagrations” because he was unable to fight them single-handedly. In an account published by Reverend Robert Diven in June 1920 (see figure 3), he described people dying because the local health care system was overloaded. Figure 3. This account of the 1920 Nenana flu outbreak appeared in the Albany Daily Democrat (Albany, Oregon) on June 16, 1920. Whole Town has Flu in Alaska Rev. Robert J. Diven Writes of Experiences During Epidemic Albany friends of Rev. and Mrs. Robert J. Diven, formerly of the Grace Presbyterian church, will be interested in the following letter to C. M. Grigsby from their home in Nenana, Alaska: Nenana Alaska, May 26, 1920. Dear Friends: We are all nearly well again. Mrs. Diven did not have the flu, but she nursed Lucile and me through it. There were nearly five hundred cases in town, which is more people than we thought we had here—almost every soul in town had it. Sixty odd died. Over two hundred were down at the same. We had great difficulty to keep the dead moving to the cemetery fast enough, for warm weather had set and the ground was thawer [sic] only a little below the surface. The graves took much work, even much blasting. We were short of help to nurse, and that is why some died, perhaps. It was pneumonia in each case that killed the folks. People exposed themselves to the air while sweating. They went quickly. We had a very malignant type of flu here. Fairbanks, with about twelve hundred people had over eight hundred cases and only twenty-some died. They had a very mild form and had all the advantages for handling a lot of people. That is an old-town, a home town. Our town is a new town and more of a camp than a really truly town. It is NOT a home town. Lucile and I were kept in the chapel while we were sick. It made a dandy little hospital. We are weak yet, but both are eating and doing very well again. Figure 4. Harry and Carrie Dott donned face masks during the 1918 "Spanish" influenza outbreak in Southeast Alaska. Harry and Carrie Dott Photograph Collection, Alaska State Library Historical Collections, ASL-P593-009 It is difficult to get exact numbers, but during the first two weeks of May 1920, various reports showed that the majority of Nenana’s population was infected by the flu (between 50-90% depending on the report) and nearly 10% perished (around 60-65 people).[2] Alaska Natives endured the majority of the deaths, and reports of this devastation circulated throughout the United States. The “Spanish” influenza first arrived in southeast Alaska in the fall of 1918 about the same time that the “second wave” of the pandemic was afflicting the rest of the United States. Between 1918 and 1919, an estimated 51% of all deaths in the Alaska Territory were caused by the flu, and it disproportionately devastated Alaska Native communities, which suffered 82% of the deaths. On a per capita basis, Alaska suffered one of the pandemic’s worst death rates in the world.[3] The near complete annihilation of the Brevig Mission near Nome has garnered recent attention not just because only eight of the village’s eighty residents survived the pandemic, but because the site became significant as scientists, with the cooperation of Inupiak elders, studied strains of the "Spanish" flu. The fourth wave of the influenza that hit Interior Alaska in 1920 is often left out of the pandemic analyses, possibly because the world-wide deaths had fallen significantly by that point.[4] As we grapple with our own pandemic, it is useful to look to the lessons of the past. What happened in our neighboring community occurred in numerous communities around the globe, but only arrived in this small town after the rest of the world endured devastation and was on the road to recovery. In 1920, like 2020, people came together to help the larger community and lessen the severity of the crisis. Quarantines were put into place, masks were required in certain places, and life changed dramatically for hundreds of millions of people. This week we remember those whose lives were lost and those whose lives were forever altered in Nenana 100 years ago. Figure 5. This list of Nenana's deceased appeared in the May 18, 1920 edition of the Cordova Daily Times. The list does not capture the names of Alaska Natives who made up the majority of the people who perished. List of Nenana Dead [1920 influenza epidemic] Those who died at Nenana are: William Lanshan Mrs. Joe O'Connor, wife of one of the proprietors of the Terminal Hotel Herman Roseberg, owner of the Coliseum moving picture house Mrs. George Bennett Lottie Cavanaugh Mrs. Pat Carroll Bob Smith, owner of the Portland block, including a large hotel and cigar store. Mrs. Mike Cooney, owner of the largest Nenana hotel. Ed Herber Ralph Waechter, manager of the Nenana branch of Waechter Bros. Cold Storage Company Axel Endstrom Sam Tetrich Mrs. Bert Johnson, wife of well known freighter Mrs. Steele Jack Forest Mrs. McLain D. Covington Dan McGinnis Mrs. Joe Burns Mrs. George Harrington Larry O'Keefe, formerly of Dawson and manager of the Northern Commercial Company's store at Nenana The situation there is reported still serious [1] The “Spanish” influenza received its name because Spain was the first country to report on the outbreak in its newspapers, not because it originated there. There is not absolute certainty about where this influenza originated but a few scholars have argued a likely origin of Haskell County, Kansas. [2] The 1920 census reports 634 residents in Nenana and 172 residents in the Nenana Native Village. In 1921 the Austin American Statesman published an interview with J.H. Steele, who said Nenana had about 500 residents—about 300 infected and 65 dead. Steele’s wife served as a nurse in Nenana and died of the flu. Rev. Diven’s report (see figure 3) says that nearly everyone in town came down with the flu and “sixty odd died.” [3] Samoa has been reported as being the only place with a higher per capita death rate than Alaska. [4] The “fourth wave” of the “Spanish” influenza that spread in 1920 is discussed in American Pandemic: the Lost Worlds of the 1918 Influenza Epidemic by Nancy Bristow, and “Global Mortality of the 1918-1920 ‘Spanish’ Influenza Pandemic” featured in Bulletin of the History of Medicine, Vol. 76, No. 1 (Spring 2002) by Niall P.A.S. Johnson and Juergen Mueller. The four waves of the 1918-20 flu pandemic are temporally defined as: first wave - spring 1918; second wave - fall 1918; third wave - winter/spring 1919; fourth wave - spring 1920. You Might Also Like Loading results... Tags denali national park & preserve history scoop pandemic influenza spanish flu epidemic alaska native alaska stories indigenous people Denali National Park & Preserve Last updated: October 27, 2021 This Site All NPS Experience Your America. Download the NPS app to navigate the parks on the go. National Park Service U.S. Department of the Interior Accessibility Privacy Policy FOIA Notices Contact The National Park Service NPS FAQ No Fear Act Disclaimer Vulnerability Disclosure Policy USA.govTreating Mucus Hypersecretion in Colds and Influenza - Clinical Advisor Menu SECTIONS News Features CME/CE Clinical Tools Conferences Special Collections Multimedia DermDx OrthoDx Clinical Challenge Advisor Forum Legal Advisor Submit a Manuscript Topics Allergy and Immunology Cardiovascular Cases Dermatology Diabetes Diet and Nutrition Endocrinology Gastroenterology General Medicine Geriatrics Hematology Infectious Disease Legal Advisor Men’s Health Nephrology Neurology Ob/GYN Obesity Oncology Opinion Orthopedics Pain Pediatrics Practice Management Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Surgery Urology Women’s Health Haymarket Medical Network Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMedical BagMPRNeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Search for: News CME/CE Features Opinion Advisor Forum Meetings Resources Drug info Jobs Part of the News and Features CME/CE Conferences Clinical Tools Special Collections Multimedia Share this article Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Share by Email Print Treating Mucus Hypersecretion in Colds and Influenza Kami Whitney, MPAS, PA-C | October 25, 2021 woman blowing nose on tissue. This review covers the role of mucus hypersecretion in the pathogenesis of colds and flu and treatment options for mucus hypersecretion. Acute respiratory tract infection (ARI) is the most common reason for primary care visits worldwide.1 Approximately 1 billion cases of ARI occur per year in the US.2 The most frequent ARIs are of viral origin and include the common cold and influenza (flu). Flu activity was unusually low throughout the 2020-2021 flu season in part because of COVID-19 mitigation measures.2 Rates of many other respiratory pathogens also remained decreased in early 2020, with rates starting to rise in Spring 2021.2 With the reopening of schools and offices this fall, the number of visits for ARI is expected to increase in both primary care and urgent care settings. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has warned that clinicians should be aware of increases in some respiratory virus activity and remain vigilant for off-season increases.2 Figure. Number of specimens tested and the percentage of positive tests for influenza viruses and respiratory syncytial virus by year — United States, 2016–2021. Source: CDCa,2 The common cold is a term for a heterogeneous group of mild, self-limited upper respiratory illnesses caused by more than 100 different viruses such as rhinoviruses, adenoviruses, and coronaviruses. Acute respiratory tract infections peak in childhood at 6 to 8 episodes per year and decline to about 1 per year after age 603; these infections are the primary reason that children miss school and adults miss work. Children are particularly susceptible to these infections due to poor personal hygiene, lack of acquired immunity to the most common viruses, and difficulty adhering to social distancing rules. A lack of long-standing immunity to respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), parainfluenza virus, and human coronavirus can lead to repeated infection with these viruses in adulthood.4 Influenza can be caused by a number of different circulating influenza strains in any given flu season. While there are 4 types of influenza viruses, types A and B tend to be the most virulent; type A viruses are responsible for most influenza pandemics.5 Symptoms of flu can range from mild to severe or even fatal (Figure).6 Source: CDC.a,6 Symptoms of Colds vs Influenza Acute respiratory tract infection is characterized by overproduction of mucus by airway mucosa. This leads to accumulation of mucus causing the most bothersome symptoms such as cough and dyspnea. Understanding the role of mucus in these conditions may lead to improved treatment of these symptoms for more patients. The classic symptoms of flu are sudden onset of fever, chills, myalgia, and other upper respiratory complaints. The common cold follows a more gradual onset and is characterized by stuffyunny nose, sore throat, sneezing, and low-grade to no fever. Less severe cases of influenza may easily be mistaken for the common cold (Table 1).7 In the clinic, rapid flu tests can assist in differentiating between colds and influenza and determining which patients might benefit from antiviral therapies in addition to symptomatic treatment. Table 1. Differences in Flu and Cold Clinical Symptoms SymptomFluCommon ColdOnsetSuddenGradualRunny NoseYes (less common)Yes (very common)Stuffy NoseSometimesCommonSore ThroatYes (less common)Yes (very common)SneezingSometimesYesChest discomfortYesMild-moderateHigh FeverYesRare (low-grade fever)ChillsYesUncommonHeadacheYesRareMyalgiaYesRareFatigue/weaknessYesRareAdapted from CDC.7 Mechanisms Underlying Cold and Influenza Symptoms In nonasthmatic individuals, symptoms of the common cold and influenza are generally limited to the upper respiratory tract. The most prominent symptoms, rhinorrhea and nasal obstruction, are associated with a neutrophilic inflammatory response resulting in increased vascular permeability and stimulation of mucus hypersecretion.8 A growing body of data suggest that the host response to these viral infections is the primary driver of the clinical and pathologic changes observed during these illnesses rather than direct viral injury of respiratory cells.9 Viral replication begins in the nasopharyngeal epithelium leading to a cascade of local and systemic immune responses through various mechanisms.10 Viral replication triggers cytokine-mediated local inflammatory reactions, which in turn generate systemic symptoms.10 Bradykinin, an inflammatory mediator, is believed to have a major role in generating local symptoms such as sore throat and nasal congestion by increasing blood vessel permeability.10 Sneezing, an inflammatory response in the nose and nasopharynx, may be mediated via histamine receptors on the trigeminal nerves.10 Parasympathetic neural pathways activate and coordinate local responses such as blood vessel dilation and capillary leakage, which leads to edema and accumulation of transudates in the nasal passages.11,12 Airway hyper-responsiveness and mucus secretion is induced by the tachykinin peptides neurokinin A and B and substance P, resulting in mild to copious exudative discharge.13,14 Pages: 1 2 Kami Whitney, MPAS, PA-C Kami Whitney, MPAS, PA-C, is an Internal Medicine provider at Arjun Medical Center in Gainesville, VA. Picked for You US Supreme Court Agrees to Hear Case on Medical Care for Transgender Youth Arimoclomol vs Placebo in Early ALS Does Not Improve Clinical Outcomes How Does Outdoor Temperature Affect Seasonality of Influenza Transmission? Latest News Metabolic Syndrome Predicts Reduced Neurocognitive Function in Patients With HIV Upadacitinib in Crohn Disease Improves HRQoL Outcomes as Early as 4 Weeks Semaglutide and Greater Weight Loss in Women Than Men With Obesity-Related HFpEF Cookie Settings ABOUT ADVERTISE CONNECT Remarkable healthcare content Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMcKnight’s Home CareMcKnight’s Long-term CareMcKnight’s Senior LivingMedical BagMPRmyCMENACENeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Copyright © 2024 Haymarket Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in any form without prior authorization. Your use of this website constitutes acceptance of Haymarket Media’s Privacy Policy and Terms & Conditions. Close more info about Treating Mucus Hypersecretion in Colds and Influenza Loading... Close more info about Treating Mucus Hypersecretion in Colds and Influenza Loading...How to prevent the flu > Air Force Materiel Command > Article Display An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Official websites use .mil A .mil website belongs to an official U.S. Department of Defense organization in the United States. Secure .mil websites use HTTPS A lock (lock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .mil website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Skip to main content (Press Enter). U.S. Air Force Logo Home GPC News Photos Videos About Us Strategic Plan Biographies Fact Sheets Featured Topics AcqDemo SAPR Contracting History Uniforms Small Business Faces of AFMC Digital Units AFMC Headquarters Air Force Installation and Mission Support Center Air Force Life Cycle Management Center Air Force Nuclear Weapons Center Air Force Research Laboratory Air Force Sustainment Center Air Force Test Center Resiliency Connect SAPR Employee Assistance Programs EEO Careers AcqDemo AFMC Mentoring Wage Grade AQIC Library Contact Us Questions DoD Inspector General Air Force Materiel Command NewsroomOur TeamAbout UsBiographiesContact Stop the Spread: Fight the Flu Influenza (flu) season happens every year. It starts in the fall and continues into the spring. Flu is a potentially serious illness that can lead to a few days of feeling bad and missing work, or it may result in more serious health complications. Photo Details / Download Hi-Res How to prevent the flu Published Oct. 25, 2021 By Greg Chadwick, Air Force Materiel Command Health & Wellness Team Air Force Materiel Command WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE, Ohio -- Influenza (flu) season happens every year. It starts in the fall and continues into the spring. Flu is a potentially serious illness that can lead to a few days of feeling bad and missing work, or it may result in more serious health complications. What is the flu? The flu is a contagious respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses that infect the nose, throat, and sometimes the lungs. How does the flu spread? People who have the flu can spread the virus by coughing or sneezing. Droplets released when a sick person coughs, sneezes, or talks can land in the mouths of noses or people who are nearby. The droplets can also be inhaled into the lungs. People may also catch the flu by touching their mouth or nose after touching something with the virus on it, such as doorknobs, tables, or an infected person’s dirty hand. Flu germs can linger on surfaces for up to 8 hours. Why should people get vaccinated against flu? The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends annual flu vaccination as the best way to protect against the flu. Vaccination has been shown to have many benefits including reducing the risk of flu illnesses, hospitalizations and flu-related deaths. How do flu vaccines work? Flu vaccines cause antibodies to develop in the body about two weeks after vaccination. These antibodies provide protection against infection with circulating influenza viruses. Why do I need a flu vaccine every year? A flu vaccine is needed every year for two reasons. First, a person’s immune protection from vaccination declines over time, so an annual flu vaccine is needed for optimal protection. Second, because flu viruses are constantly changing, the composition of flu vaccines is reviewed annually and vaccines are updated to protect against the viruses that research indicates will be most common during the upcoming flu season. Will a flu vaccine protect me against COVID-19? No, flu vaccines are not designed to protect against COVID-19. Flu and COVID-19 are both contagious respiratory illnesses, but they are caused by different viruses. Also, according to the CDC, a person can receive a COVID-19 vaccine and a flu vaccine at the same visit. Where can I get a flu vaccine? Influenza vaccinations for all military members are a mandatory requirement, and are available through each installation’s Medical Group or at any participating Tricare eligible pharmacies. Tricare beneficiaries are also eligible for flu shots through immunization clinics on base, or at no cost at Tricare eligible pharmacies. For the civilian workforce, all Federal Employee Health Benefit plans cover flu shots at no cost for members and are available at local retail pharmacies. What are everyday preventive actions that are recommended to reduce the spread of flu? Wash your hands often with soap and water. If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand rub. Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth. Germs spread this way. Cover your nose and mouth with a tissue when you cough or sneeze. Throw the tissue in the trash after you use it. Clean and disinfect surfaces and objects that may be contaminated with viruses that cause flu. Avoid close contact with people who are sick. If you are sick, limit contact with others as much as possible to keep from infecting them. If you sick with flu-like symptoms, the CDC recommends that people stay home for at least 24 hours after their fever is gone except to get medical care or other necessities. Fever should be gone without the need to use fever-reducing medicine. If you want your immune system to be in good enough shape to fight off the flu and other germs, you need to practice healthy lifestyle habits. Get 7 to 9 hours of sleep a night, exercise at least 4 days a week, drink plenty of fluids, and eat nutritious foods. For more information on preventing the flu, visit USAFwellness.com or contact your local Civilian Health Promotion Services team. Comprehensive information on healthy habits to prevent flu can be found at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website at cdc.gov. flu Flu season vaccinations Quick Links Contact UsUSA.govInformation QualityDoD Strategic Management PlanEqual OpportunityFOIA | Privacy | Section 508Inspector GeneralOpen GovernmentJAG Court-Martial DocketLink DisclaimerNo FEAR ActOSI Tip LineQuestionsPlain WritingResilienceSite MapVeterans Crisis Line Careers Join the Air ForceAir Force BenefitsAir Force CareersAir Force Reserve Air National GuardCivilian Service Connect Get Social with Us U.S. Air Force Logo Official United States Air Force Website Hosted by Defense Media Activity - WEB.milArmy distributes over 1.5 million doses of flu vaccine | Article | The United States Army MENU HOME SEARCH About Who We Are Organization Quality of Life Army A-Z News Army Worldwide Press Releases Soldier Features Multimedia Photos Videos Publications Leaders Secretary Under Secretary Chief of Staff Vice Chief of Staff Sergeant Major of the Army Features Valor Events Heritage Army 101 Newsroom Public Affairs Social Media Guide Join FAQs AKO Contact Us Search news, photos and videos on Army.mil Army distributes over 1.5 million doses of flu vaccine By C.J. LovelaceOctober 28, 2021 Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share on Reddit Share on LinkedIn Share via Email Col. Timothy Walsh, deputy commander for U.S. Army Medical Logistics Command, receives his influenza vaccine during a clinic Oct. 27 at Fort Detrick, Maryland. Administering Walsh's flu shot is Spc. Neal Burnett, healthcare specialist for U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases. (Photo Credit: C.J. Lovelace) VIEW ORIGINAL FORT DETRICK, Md. — As the annual flu season ramps up, the U.S. Army Medical Materiel Agency is hard at work distributing more than 1.5 million doses of vaccine to protect the fighting force, their Families and retirees. The Army’s allotment of the yearly influenza vaccine makes up nearly half of the 3.3 million doses currently being distributed throughout the Department of Defense, according to Liz Andrews, deputy director of USAMMA’s Distribution Operations Center, or DOC. USAMMA’s DOC oversees the annual distribution process for active-duty and reserve Soldiers, as well as Department of Army Civilians and Family members. The organization works closely with other DOD agencies to ensure prompt delivery and availability each year. “This season is going really well,” Andrews said. “We are ahead of schedule compared to the last four years. Early requirement gathering and early solicitation from the Defense Logistics Agency has enabled this season to be a success.” USAMMA is a direct reporting unit to Army Medical Logistics Command. Both units are headquartered at Fort Detrick, Maryland. While seasonal influenza viruses can circulate year-round, they typically begin increasing in October before peaking between December and February in the U.S., according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. However, significant flu activity can last as late as May. Clinicians recommend getting a flu shot every year, and especially now during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The most effective way to protect yourself from both influenza and COVID-19 is to get vaccinated against both viruses, according to the World Health Organization. Flu season was less significant in 2020 due to several reasons, including that many people more often wore masks when out in public, practiced physical distancing, frequently washed hands or simply stayed home in an effort to protect against possible COVID-19 infection. “This year’s season is expected to be much higher due to more people traveling again,” said Lt. Col. Todd Reeder, pharmacy consultant and director of the DOC. “People should still continue to wear their mask as they are effective in preventing the spread of droplets from a sneeze or cough.” In addition to handwashing and continued physical distancing when possible, Reeder said an annual flu shot continues to be the best preventative measure against the flu virus. Distribution abroad The first doses of this season’s flu vaccine began shipping out in late August, destined for priority sites outside the continental United States, Andrews said. Some of the abroad shipments go to DOD’s theater lead agents for medical materiel, also known as TLAMMs, which then further carry out distribution to beneficiaries around the globe. AMLC’s two other direct-reporting units — U.S. Army Medical Materiel Center-Europe in Germany and U.S. Army Medical Materiel Center-Korea in South Korea — serve as major distribution hubs for their respective theaters. Supporting beneficiaries throughout U.S. European Command and U.S. African Command, USAMMC-E is the conduit for about 122,000 doses this season. USAMMC-E shipments began Sept. 8. “We receive the EUCOM and ARICOM flu shot allotments and distribute according to customer requirements,” said Maj. Todd Schwarz, chief of the Pharmacy and Lab Division at USAMMC-E. “We also receive, repackage and ship to Navy customers and [the U.S. Army Medical Materiel Center-Southwest Asia].” On the Korean Peninsula, USAMMC-K is distributing 62,000 doses in total. As of Sept. 7, USAMMC-K had received an initial shipment of 19,250 via the DOC with additional shipments expected through November. “We have begun distribution across the peninsula, providing the vaccine to Army and Air Force medical treatment facilities, as well as to the U.S. Embassy,” said Capt. Daniel Miller, materiel management and accountability officer at USAMMC-K. Flu shots ‘extremely important’ Miller stressed the importance for Soldiers, families and other beneficiaries to get their yearly flu shot as a protection measure for the forward-operating force. “The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, along with the recent surge in cases, makes it extremely important to get your flu vaccination,” he said. Even though last year was particularly mild when it came to flu, Miller urged everyone to be more vigilant this season. “Last year, the U.S. saw a record low number of flu cases,” he said. “With children back in schools and more of society working on returning to normal, there is a high probability we will see a lot more flu cases this year.” RELATED STORIES October 28, 2022Department of the Army updates Total Army COVID-19 vaccination statistics September 16, 2022Department of the Army updates Total Army COVID-19 vaccination statistics July 22, 2022Department of the Army announces Total Army COVID-19 vaccination statistics July 15, 2022Army announces Total Army COVID-19 vaccination statistics April 18, 2022U.S. Army Chief of Staff tests positive for COVID-19 April 12, 2022U.S. Army STAND-TO! | Army Organic Industrial Base Modernization Implementation Plan March 11, 2022Department of the Army announces updated COVID-19 vaccination statistics March 4, 2022Department of the Army announces updated COVID-19 vaccination rates February 10, 2022Department of the Army announces updated COVID-19 vaccination statistics May 12, 2021U.S. Army surpasses one million COVID vaccines administered at Medical Treatment Facilities March 17, 2021Update on Army Soldiers supporting FEMA and NORTHCOM COVID-19 vaccination mission Flu shot Official U.S. Army Facebook Official U.S. Army Twitter Official U.S. Army YouTube Official U.S. Army Instagram Official U.S. Army LinkedIn Home Contact Us Privacy Terms Of Use Accessibility FOIA No FEAR Act Social Sharing Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share on Reddit Share on LinkedIn Share via EmailWhat Is Canine Influenza? | ASPCA Skip to content ASPCA Our WorkHelping Shelters, People and PetsInvestigations and RescueAnimal Care and RecoveryImproving Laws for AnimalsThe Puppy IndustryProtecting Farm AnimalsAdvancing Horse WelfareASPCA GrantsVeterinary Services NationwideLocal ServicesNew York CityLos AngelesMiami, FLAsheville, NCOklahoma City, OKHow You Can HelpWays to GiveGet InvolvedFind More Humane FoodAdopt a PetAdvocate for AnimalsReceive Text Updates Primary Nav Menu Our WorkHelping Shelters, People and Pets Investigations and Rescue Animal Care and Recovery Improving Laws for Animals The Puppy Industry Protecting Farm Animals Advancing Horse Welfare ASPCA Grants Veterinary Services Nationwide Local ServicesNew York City Los Angeles Miami, FL Asheville, NC Oklahoma City, OK How You Can HelpWays to Give Get Involved Find More Humane Food Adopt a Pet Advocate for Animals Receive Text Updates Search form Search About Us Adopt NYC News ASPCA Pro Donate You are hereNews What Is Canine Influenza? October 27, 2021 Now that people are returning to work and beginning to travel again, it is likely more pets are being boarded or attending doggy daycare. While these facilities are super helpful, there have been recent news reports of an increase in canine influence virus (CIV), which currently has two strains affecting dogs in the United States and can be easily spread. To keep pet parents informed, the ASPCA wants to give you the run down on what CIV is, how it spreads and what the signs and symptoms are. CIV is a contagious respiratory disease transmitted by respiratory droplets that come from coughing or sneezing of infected dogs or direct contact of the nose or mouth. Depending on the type of strain contracted, a dog can shed the virus for up to three to four weeks. Typical clinical signs of CIV include coughing, sneezing, nasal discharge and a mild fever. In some cases, pneumonia and death may even occur. Some infected dogs will remain asymptomatic; it has been estimated that up to 20% of those infected with CIV will not show clinical signs of the disease. Luckily, vaccinations are available and encouraged by veterinarians to prevent the spread of CIV. Contact your veterinarian today to get your dog vaccinated! If you believe your pet may have or may have come in contact with canine influenza, please contact your veterinarian. Other Ways to Help: Become a Monthly Member Take the Cruelty Pledge Join the Advocacy Brigade Advocate for Animals Volunteer or Foster Related News Victory for People, Pets and Vets – Colorado Passes Prop 129! ASPCA Reaches Animal Relocation Milestone With 50,000 Animals Transported by Air 5 Expert Tips for Caring for Senior Pets Share this page: Help the ASPCA Put a Stop to Animal Cruelty Donate Stay Connected First Name * Last Name * Email Address * Mobile Number (Optional) By providing my mobile number, I agree to receive 2-4 text messages per month from the ASPCA, which may include requests for charitable donations. Text STOP to opt-out, HELP for more info. Message and data rates may apply. Terms & Conditions / Privacy Policy Leave this field blank ASPCA About Us Careers Contact Press Strategic Cause Partnerships Pet Care Shop © 2024 American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. All rights reserved.The ASPCA is a 501(c)(3) non-for-profit organization. Privacy Policy Legal Info FacebookTwitterYoutubeInstagramTikTok Our Partnerships Subaru ASPCA Pet Health Insurance Underwritten by Independence American Insurance CompanyFunctionality of the putative surface glycoproteins of the Wuhan spiny eel influenza virus | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Functionality of the putative surface glycoproteins of the Wuhan spiny eel influenza virus Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 25 October 2021 Functionality of the putative surface glycoproteins of the Wuhan spiny eel influenza virus Guha Asthagiri Arunkumar ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3665-27081,2, Disha Bhavsar1, Tiehai Li3, Shirin Strohmeier1, Veronika Chromikova1, Fatima Amanat ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8029-82271,2, Mehman Bunyatov4, Patrick C. Wilson ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3537-12455, Ali H. Ellebedy ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6129-25326, Geert-Jan Boons3,4, Viviana Simon ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6416-50961, Robert P. de Vries4 & …Florian Krammer ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4121-776X1 Show authors Nature Communications volume 12, Article number: 6161 (2021) Cite this article 5369 Accesses 10 Citations 51 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusViral membrane fusion AbstractA panel of influenza virus-like sequences were recently documented in fish and amphibians. Of these, the Wuhan spiny eel influenza virus (WSEIV) was found to phylogenetically cluster with influenza B viruses as a sister clade. Influenza B viruses have been documented to circulate only in humans, with certain virus isolates found in harbor seals. It is therefore interesting that a similar virus was potentially found in fish. Here we characterize the putative hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) surface glycoproteins of the WSEIV. Functionally, we show that the WSEIV NA-like protein has sialidase activity comparable to B/Malaysia/2506/2004 influenza B virus NA, making it a bona fide neuraminidase that is sensitive to NA inhibitors. We tested the functionality of the HA by addressing the receptor specificity, stability, preferential airway protease cleavage, and fusogenicity. We show highly specific binding to monosialic ganglioside 2 (GM2) and fusogenicity at a range of different pH conditions. In addition, we found limited antigenic conservation of the WSEIV HA and NA relative to the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus HA and NA. In summary, we perform a functional and antigenic characterization of the glycoproteins of WSEIV to assess if it is indeed a bona fide influenza virus potentially circulating in ray-finned fish. Similar content being viewed by others Human-type sialic acid receptors contribute to avian influenza A virus binding and entry by hetero-multivalent interactions Article Open access 13 July 2022 Structural basis for VLDLR recognition by eastern equine encephalitis virus Article Open access 02 August 2024 Sites responsible for infectivity and antigenicity on nervous necrosis virus (NNV) appear to be distinct Article Open access 11 February 2021 IntroductionInfluenza A and B viruses cause widespread infections in humans on an annual basis resulting in significant morbidity and mortality1. In addition to human infections, influenza A virus has been shown to have a broad host tropism, infecting a variety of different avian and mammalian species2. This enhances the pandemic potential of these viruses due to an increased possibility of reassortment in a commonly infected host3. In contrast, influenza B viruses have a comparatively limited host range comprising predominantly of infections in humans. Sporadic outbreaks have been observed in harbor seals and gray seals, and this has brought into question the possibility of non-human reservoirs for influenza B viruses4,5. However, sequence analysis of influenza B virus isolates from seals suggests that the causative agents were human strains6. Partial sequences of isolates of influenza B viruses identified in swine farms across the USA displayed high homology to human influenza B virus isolates as well7. Overall, studies have documented spillage of influenza B virus infections from humans to other species, however, there is limited evidence for the existence of sustained animal reservoirs for these viruses.The overall understanding of RNA virus diversity outside of avian and mammalian species has been limited stemming from sampling biases towards these hosts8. A study by Shi et al. aimed at addressing this dearth of sampling in amphibians, fish, and reptiles, and identified 214 vertebrate species-associated virus sequences through a meta-transcriptomic approach. Most of these viruses could be categorized into 17 vertebrate-specific viral families, significantly enhancing the diversity of viral families historically known to have mammalian or avian hosts. Three novel influenza viruses were identified in ray-finned fish (spiny eel), jawless fish (hagfish), and amphibians (Asiatic toad). These were the first documented sequences of putative influenza viruses in fish9.For the Wuhan spiny eel influenza virus (WSEIV), all eight genomic segments were recovered following the sampling and analysis of the transcripts in the gill tissues of lesser spiny eels (Macrognathus aculeatus). A striking aspect of this virus is its phylogenetic clustering as a sister clade to influenza B viruses, more so than influenza A viruses do. Alignment of the coding regions of the eight segments of WSEIV indicates percentage identity as high as 76% (PB1) and as low as 34% (NS) with the closest hits all being in the influenza B virus species. The surface viral glycoproteins, hemagglutinin (HA), and the neuraminidase (NA) of the WSEIV have a 45% and 48% amino acid identity to the respective HA and NA of influenza B viruses9.Given our interest in studying viral glycoproteins, we decided to take a deeper dive into characterizing the HA and NA of the WSEIV and their influenza B virus counterparts. This could provide valuable insight into this novel influenza B-like virus, and its implication of non-human reservoirs for influenza B viruses. Additionally, influenza B viruses are largely understudied relative to influenza A viruses in the context of the functionality and antigenic landscape, and the findings from this study contribute towards addressing this gap10. The questions raised during the conception of this study were as follows. Does the WSEIV HA have sialic acid-binding activity and what receptor specificity does it possess? Does the WSEIV neuraminidase have sialidase enzymatic activity? How do the functional and antigenic aspects of these proteins compare to those of influenza B virus HAs and NAs and how does this inform the potential of this virus to spill over into humans?Here, we demonstrate that the WSEIV HA and NA show opposing similarity profiles relative to influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus HA and NA. The WSEIV HA appears to strongly interact with a unique gangliosidic receptor, displaying drastically different target receptor specificity compared to influenza B virus HAs. Additionally, we show that the WSEIV HA can be activated by trypsin, but not any human airway proteases, and it is fusogenic. Taken together, the WSEIV HA interacts with a sialic acid-containing receptor, can be activated by a protease, and can mediate fusion. On the contrary, the WSEIV NA, showing sialidase activity, has a notably similar activity profile relative to the control influenza B virus NA. Cleavage of the sialic acid residue on this gangliosidic receptor by the WSEIV NA was also confirmed. Additional functional characterization further reinforces this dichotomous nature of the HA and NA. Overall, we show that this WSEIV is indeed a bona fide influenza virus from a functional standpoint. We also address the antigenic conservation of the WSEIV HA and NA using a panel of broadly cross-reactive monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and a set of serum samples from humans positive for the influenza B virus.ResultsRepresentative HA and NA amino acid sequences of influenza A and B viruses were selected and phylogenetically compared to the WSEIV HA and NA. Along the lines of the whole virus genome alignments in the study identifying this virus, we observed the proximal clustering of the WSEIV HA and NA to influenza B virus HAs and NAs (Fig. 1A, E). This encompasses the seasonal vaccine strains from the two influenza B virus antigenic lineages, B/Victoria/2/1987-like and B/Yamagata/16/1988-like, and the ancestral pre-divergence B/Lee/1940 virus too11. The sequences of each glycoprotein were superimposed onto the publicly available structure of influenza B/Brisbane/60/2008 virus counterparts to visualize where the ~45% (HA) and ~48% (NA) identity is present (Fig. 1B, F). As a comparative control, influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 (part of the B/Victoria/2/1987-like lineage) virus was selected and the HA and NA of this virus were used for the experiments detailed in this study. These glycoproteins have previously been expressed in our laboratory at high yields and purity. We are also equipped with a mouse-pathogenic B/Malaysia/2506/2004 challenge virus and reverse genetics system for possible future research avenues to study the WSEIV HA and NA. A pair-wise alignment of the WSEIV HA and NA with the influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus HA and NA was carried out (Fig. 1C, G). In the context of the HA, there appeared to be mismatches in the residues that constitute the sialic acid interacting receptor binding site12,13. This lack of conservation was indicative of a potentially altered receptor binding profile of the WSEIV HA. Additionally, the WSEIV HA also appeared to have a reduced number of putative N-linked glycosylation sites as identified by the consensus sequence N-X-(S/T). The reduced glycosylation on the WSEIV HA relative to the influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA was confirmed using a deglycosylation assay with the respective recombinant proteins. A larger difference in molecular weight was observed on a reducing sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) gel for the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA pre- and post-deglycosylation in comparison to the WSEIV HA (Fig. 1D). From an antigenic standpoint, the target epitope of the pan-influenza virus HA mAb, CR9114, was found to have some mismatches too14. A large number of matched residues, however, appear to be in the stalk domain of the HA, consistent with previous studies showing higher levels of conservation in this region across all influenza virus HAs15. Significant mismatches were observed in the region immediately upstream to the fusion peptide, largely conserved, encompassing the proteolytic cleavage site essential for activation of the HA. The comparison of the NA sequences, on the other hand, demonstrated a conserved enzymatic active site, as are the regions in its immediate vicinity. A deglycosylation analysis of the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 and WSEIV NA did not reveal any overt differences in glycosylation patterns across the glycoproteins with comparable shifts in molecular weights pre- and post-deglycosylation (Fig. 1H).Fig. 1: Comparative sequence analysis of the WSEIV glycoproteins.Phylogenetic trees based on the amino acid sequences of the WSEIV glycoproteins and the representative influenza A and B HAs (A) and NAs (E) obtained from GISAID are shown. The scale bar indicates a 5% difference in amino acid sequence. Amino acid conservation of the WSEIV HA (B) and WSEIV NA (F) relative to influenza B virus HA and NA are represented by the residues highlighted in red. The structure and sequence of influenza virus strain B/Brisbane/60/2008 were used as a template for comparison. Pairwise alignments of the WSEIV HA and NA are displayed against influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus HA and NA, (C) and (G), respectively. Identical residues are indicated by asterisks. Functionally and antigenically relevant features have been annotated. Recombinantly expressed HAs (D) and NAs (H) of influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus and WSEIV were visualized on an SDS–PAGE gel in deglycosylated and non-deglycosylated conditions. A representative of two independent assays is shown. Structures are based on PDB# 4FQM50 for HA and PDB# 4CPL51 for NA.Full size imageThe WSEIV HA and NA were studied and characterized in the form of recombinant proteins as opposed to in a viral backbone for several reasons. The available sequences for these proteins comprised only the coding regions from the study identifying them. Consequently, the packaging sequences in the non-coding regions essential to rescuing these glycoproteins in an influenza B virus backbone were not available. More importantly, introducing novel glycoproteins into a known human pathogen, e.g. a human-adapted influenza B virus backbone possesses a biosafety risk. As a result, these proteins were studied in a recombinant form to ensure to meet safety concerns. The B/Malaysia/2506/2004 and WSEIV HAs and NAs were expressed using a baculovirus expression system as previously described16. Since the available sequence for the WSEIV HA consisted of a truncated signal sequence, a full-length signal peptide from the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus HA was added instead. A C-terminal T4 trimerization domain was used to ensure the expression of the HAs in their native trimeric state. An N-terminal vasodilator stimulating phosphoprotein (VASP) tetramerization domain was used to maintain tetrameric structures of the respective neuraminidases.To determine whether the WSEIV HA is capable of hemagglutinating erythrocytes, a conventional hemagglutination assay was carried out. Recombinant WSEIV and B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA were incubated with 0.5% chicken and turkey erythrocytes starting at a concentration of 10 µg of recombinant HA. The B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA caused hemagglutination of both chicken and turkey RBCs while an absence of hemagglutination was observed with the WSEIV HA at the same concentrations (Fig. 2A). Although this has been observed for recent H3N2 virus isolates, we were intrigued by the lack of hemagglutination and questioned the receptor usage of the WSEIV HA17. The receptor binding specificity of the hemagglutinin protein of influenza viruses is a vital parameter in addressing the potential of these viruses to cross species barriers and determining host and tissue tropism for infection18. Glycan arrays are an instrumental tool in identifying the target receptor specificity for influenza virus HAs in determining whether they preferentially bind to α2,3-linked or α2,6-linked sialic acid receptors. We took advantage of this approach to further interrogate interactions between WSEIV HA and its potential binding partners. As a control, the recombinant H5 HA from A/Vietnam/1203/2004 H5N1 influenza A virus, influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus rHA, and the WSEIV rHA were applied to a glycan array comprising of a variety of asialo, α2,3-linked, α2,6-linked and gangliosidic structures (Fig. 2B). All recombinant HAs were probed with a fluorescently tagged anti-hexahistidine antibody to determine the extent of binding to different glycans present on the array. In line with previously published receptor specificity profiles for avian HAs, the H5 rHA preferentially and predominantly binds to α2,3-linked sialic acids present on the array19. The rHA of influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus shows binding to both α2,3-linked and α2,6-linked sialic acids, which has previously been attributed to the presence of a Phe95 residue in influenza B virus HA as opposed to a conserved tyrosine residue at the same site in influenza A viruses20,21. The WSEIV HA showed a unique binding profile on the glycan array (Fig. 2B), no binding was observed to α2,3-linked or α2,6-linked sialic acids of increasing length as seen for the influenza B virus HA. Strong fluorescence intensity indicative of binding was observed on a singular spot on the array corresponding to a ganglioside oligosaccharide, GM2. This monosialylated ganglioside has an α2,3-linked sialic acid at the penultimate galactose residue. To validate this interaction of the WSEIV HA and GM2, bio-layer interferometry was applied to determine a dissociation constant (Kd) and thereby binding affinity (Fig. 2C). To do so, Ni-nitriloacetic acid (Ni-NTA) sensors were loaded with fixed concentrations of hexahistidine-tagged rHA proteins (10 µg/ml) and dipped in 1.5× fold serial dilutions of recombinant GM2 starting at 100 µM. After ensuring that the sensors were loaded to saturation with the hexahistidine-tagged HAs, the association and dissociation kinetics of the HA–GM2 interaction were studied. An A/flat-faced bat/Peru/033/10 H18 hemagglutinin was applied as a negative control given its unconventional nature to interact with MHC class II as receptors for entry as opposed to sialic acid residues22. No binding was observed for the H18 rHA and as observed previously in the glycan array, B/Malaysia/2506/2004 rHA also showed no binding to GM2. The WSEIV HA on the other hand shows excellent association and dissociation profiles in a biphasic fashion with GM2 in a dose-dependent manner. Analysis of this binding allowed us to determine the Kd value of this interaction at 7.36 × 10−7 M, in the micromolar range, with R2 and χ2 indicating good curve fits. These findings indicate and validate that the GM2 ganglioside is a target receptor for this WSEIV HA. Evidently, the WSEIV HA has a contrasting sialic acid-binding profile in comparison to the influenza B virus rHA control.Fig. 2: The WSEIV HA has a divergent functional profile relative to the influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus HA.A Recombinant HA proteins starting at 10 µg serially diluted two-fold were applied in a classical hemagglutination assay with 0.5% chicken or turkey erythrocytes. B Receptor binding specificity of the WSEIV HA was determined using a glycan microarray. A/Vietnam/1204/2004 H5 and B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HAs served as controls to compare binding profiles of the HAs. Glycans 1-4 represent asialic structures with the indicated backbones. Glycans 5-8 and 9-12 are α2,3- and α2,6-linked sialic acid glycans, with A–L comprising complex glycans and gangliosides. A simplified structure of the GM2 ganglioside, sample B on the array is shown. The mean signal for each glycan–HA binding is shown with each glycan printed in replicates of 6. Error bars indicate standard deviation and technical replicates were performed. The binding was confirmed with two separate batches of recombinant WSEIV HA. C The WSEIV HA–GM2 ganglioside interaction was validated by bio-layer interferometry. B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA and H18 HA were used as negative controls with expected absence of binding towards GM2. The association and dissociation kinetics curve fits of the interaction are shown and the dissociation constant (Kd) was calculated accordingly. D Western blotting was performed to determine the proteolytic cleavage profile of the WSEIV and B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HAs by human airway proteases. Cell lysate was generated following co-transfection with pCAGGS HAs and pcDNA3.1 protease expressing plasmids. HA1 was detected as a marker for proteolytic cleavage alongside uncleaved HA0. Cells transfected with pCAGGS HA either untreated or exposed to TPCK-treated trypsin served as controls for proteolytic cleavage. Representative images of two independent assays are shown. E A polykaryon formation assay was applied to determine the fusogenicity of the WSEIV HA. HeLa cells transfected with the pCAGGS WSEIV HA were treated with TPCK-treated trypsin, exposed to different indicated pH conditions, and allowed to recover to determine for cell-to-cell fusion. This assay was performed in independent duplicates and a representative image is shown.Full size imageTypically, following the receptor interaction of the HA with sialic acid, the HA mediates membrane fusion of the influenza virion allowing for the subsequent steps of infection and replication to occur. However, this requires the HA to be fusion competent, a state that is reliant on host cell protease-mediated activation. Cleavage by host proteases at the target site on the HA upstream of the fusion peptide splits the HA0 precursor into the HA1 and HA2 polypeptides23. Recently, a study dissected the difference in preferential proteolytic cleavage of influenza A and influenza B virus HAs by human airway proteases24. This is crucial in addressing host adaptation of HAs and instrumental in the crossing of species barriers with relative ease as observed with highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses containing a polybasic cleavage site, resulting in easier cleavage and priming of the HA by furin-like proteases25. Influenza B virus HAs have been found to be cleaved by a broad range of human airway proteases belonging to the type II transmembrane serine protease and kallikrein protease families24. We assessed the extent to which these proteases can cleave the WSEIV HA (Fig. 2D). Human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells were co-transfected with pCAGGS expression plasmids encoding for either the WSEIV or the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA and pcDNA expression plasmids encoding individual human airway proteases. The proteases selected here have been previously shown to cleave influenza B virus HAs24. As an untreated control, HEK293T cells were transfected only with pCAGGS expression plasmids encoding the respective HAs. N-tosyl-l-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-treated trypsin was used as an additional control, with pCAGGS HA-transfected cells being incubated with exogenous trypsin briefly prior to harvesting of the cells. Cleavage of HA0 was detected through Western blotting after running the transfected cell lysate on a reducing sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) gel. A pool of monoclonal antibodies that are broadly cross-reactive to influenza B virus HAs and polyclonal sera raised against the WSEIV rHA in mice were used to detect cleavage of the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA and WSEIV HA, respectively. Proteolytic cleavage of the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA was detected to varying extents with this panel of human airway proteases, evidenced by the presence of the HA1 bands (~50 kDA) in addition to the HA0 bands (75 kDA). Strikingly, none of the selected human airway proteases were able to cleave and activate the WSEIV HA. HA1 was detectable only in the trypsin treated sample (Fig. 2D). To determine whether the WSEIV HA is fusogenic, a polykaryon formation assay was performed at different pH conditions. HeLa cells were transfected with pCAGGS expressing the WSEIV HA. Following trypsin treatment to activate the HAs expressed on the cell surface, the cells were exposed to different pH conditions and incubated for 4 h to allow fusion to occur. Visualization of the cells at different pH conditions showed the presence of polykaryons at a variety of different pHs tested from pH 4.5 to 5.9 (Fig. 2E). No polykaryons were formed at a control pH of 7.4 or in untransfected cells. Overall, this result supports the notion that the WSEIV HA is functionally divergent from the influenza B virus HA. The WSEIV HA interacts with a unique GM2 gangliosidic receptor, is not activated by human airway proteases, and is fusogenic at a wide range of pH conditions.Given that the primary active site residues crucial for the sialidase activity of the NA are conserved, we tested the functional activity of the WSEIV NA. To do so, a conventional enzyme-linked lectin assay (ELLA) was carried out using fetuin as a substrate (Fig. 3A). Recombinant NAs were applied in 3-fold serial dilutions starting at 15 µg/ml and the extent of NA activity was determined based on the extent of sialic acid cleavage, detected by binding of peanut agglutinin lectin to exposed galactose residues. The overnight incubation of the rNA with fetuin was carried out at four different temperatures, 4, 20, 33, and 37 °C to determine the temperature dependence of the NA activity. These were selected to encompass the possible temperatures encountered by the spiny eels in their freshwater environment in the Wuhan area. Given that the enzymatic activity of the influenza B NA is understudied, an N9 rNA from the A/Anhui/1/2013 H7N9 virus was used as a comparative control. The major observation was that the WSEIV NA does indeed have neuraminidase activity (Fig. 3A). This enzymatic activity is also starkly similar to that of the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 NA at the tested temperatures. Preliminary analysis suggests that the N9 rNA appears to have higher enzymatic activity compared to both the influenza B virus and influenza B virus-like NAs. To better understand the temperature dependency, the specific activity of the NA was determined using the inverse of the half-maximum lectin binding. As expected, we observe a step-wise reduction in the activity of each NA at lower temperatures. The specific activity profile is also almost identical for the WSEIV NA and the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 NA.Fig. 3: Functionally, the WSEIV NA is strikingly similar to the influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus NA.A Sialidase activity of recombinant WSEIV, influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 and A/Anhui/1/2013 H7N9 NA proteins was evaluated in an enzyme-linked lectin assay using fetuin, at four temperatures; 4, 20, 33, 37 °C. The curves indicate absorbance measured at 490 nm with error bars indicating standard deviation. Specific enzyme activity (inverse of half-maximum lectin binding) determined by these absorbance curves are shown for each individual NA at each temperature. B Susceptibility to NA inhibitors was tested in an ELLA-based neuraminidase inhibition assay . Error bars indicate standard deviation. Absorbance at 490 nm based on lectin binding was measured with increasing concentrations of oseltamivir, peramivir or zanamivir. C Neuraminidase substrate specificity was assessed using an ELLA with fetuin and lectins with different specificities (ECA, PNA, SNA, and MALI). Specific enzyme activity was determined as described in (A) and it is represented as a percentage normalized to fetuin-ECA. D Michaelis–Menten parameters, Vmax and Km, were estimated based on enzymatic activity of recombinant NAs against MUNANA substrate. The A/Anhui/1/2013 N9 NA served as a comparative control for both the WSEIV and B/Malaysia/2506/2004 NAs. E Cleavage of sialic acid on GM2 by the WSEIV NA was confirmed using an assay to measure free sialic acid content (sialic acid NANA assay kit, Abcam). F Thin layer chromatography was used to visualize the presence of cleaved GM2 following treatment with the WSEIV NA. The arrow shows the direction in which the chromatography was run. A representative image is shown after the assay was performed in independent duplicates. Technical duplicates were performed once for (A–E).Full size imageKeeping in mind the novel aspect of the WSEIV NA recently identified in a non-human host, we investigated its potential sensitivity to the NA inhibitor such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu), peramivir or zanamivir (Fig. 3B). This was tested using a neuraminidase inhibition ELLA assay wherein fixed concentrations of rNAs were pre-incubated with oseltamivir starting at 156.28 µM and serially diluted two-fold prior to being transferred onto fetuin coated plates. The extent of inhibition was estimated by increased lectin binding with lower oseltamivir concentrations. The WSEIV NA was sensitive to oseltamivir, and the dose dependency was identical for all the tested recombinant NAs (Fig. 3B). Similar results were obtained with peramivir and zanamivir although these drugs showed higher potency than oseltamivir. These findings also align with the aforementioned observation that the active site of the WSEIV NA and the surrounding regions are well conserved to the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 NA allowing for the binding and inhibition by NA inhibitors.To follow up on the unique receptor binding profile shown by the WSEIV HA, we questioned whether the WSEIV NA has altered substrate specificity compared to the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 NA (Fig. 3C). To probe this, ELLAs were carried out as previously described in a study looking at N9 NA in H7N9 influenza A viruses26. Lectins with different binding specificities were used to determine if the NAs preferentially cleaved α2,3-linked or α2,6-linked sialic acids using fetuin as a substrate which carries both these linkages in a 2:1 ratio27. Specifically, Erythrina crista-galli (ECA), peanut agglutinin (PNA), Maackia amurensis lectin I (MALI), and Sambucus nigra lectin (SNA) were used. ECA and PNA both have been found to show binding to non-siaylated N- and O-linked sugars respectively, hence their binding would be higher in the presence of a NA28,29. MALI and SNA preferentially bind only α2,3- and α2,6-linked sialic acids, respectively, and their binding decreases with NA cleavage of the target substrates30,31. As described earlier, the specific activity of the NA was determined and normalized to that seen with fetuin-ECA for each NA. In line with the enzymatic activity, the WSEIV and B/Malaysia/2506/2004 NA have equivalent substrate specificities, with both having comparable cleavage profiles (Fig. 3C). Although a similar conclusion can be drawn for the A/Anhui/1/2013 N9 neuraminidase, this preferential cleavage appears to be more polarized. Subsequently, we characterized the kinetics of the enzymatic reactions of these NAs, i.e. do these NAs have comparable enzyme kinetics despite having similar temperature-dependent activity and substrate specificity? To investigate this, we derived the Michaelis–Menten parameters, Vmax and Km, from the NA–sialic acid enzyme–substrate reaction (Fig. 3D). At a fixed concentration, rNAs were incubated with the fluorogenic 4-methylumbelli-feryl N-acetyl-α-d-neuraminic acid (MUNANA) substrate and the relative fluorescence readings were taken every 90 s for 40 min as previously described32. The velocity of the reactions were determined for each concentration of MUNANA (starting at 1000 µM) and accordingly the Vmax and Km were calculated. The maximum enzymatic activity, Vmax, for both the WSEIV and B/Malaysia/2506/2004 NA are similar to each other, and they both display a high affinity for the MUNANA substrate (indicated by the 1/Km). The N9 rNA shows exponentially higher maximum enzymatic activity and a markedly lower affinity for the substrate, which could possibly explain the stronger specific activity seen earlier while measuring substrate affinity.The neuraminidase plays a crucial role in the viral life cycle in the context of facilitating viral egress and release through the cleavage of sialic acid bound to the viral HA. This allows for productive infection cycles in the host. In context of WSEIV, this would require the NA-mediated cleavage of the α2,3-linked sialic acid residue on the cognate GM2 receptor of the WSEIV HA. To determine whether the WSEIV NA possesses this ability, a free sialic acid assay and a thin layer chromatography-based approach were used in parallel. Recombinant GM2 was incubated with the WSEIV NA and the free sialic acid content was evaluated using a commercially available kit. As a negative control, GM2 was incubated with an irrelevant protein (bovine serum albumin). Fetuin incubated with WSEIV NA was used as a positive control. Cleavage of the sialic acid on GM2 was observed as determined by the presence of free sialic acid (Fig. 3E). This was also visualized following thin-layer chromatography wherein GM2 incubated with WSEIV NA ran further on the chromatogram in comparison to untreated GM2 or GM2 treated with BSA (Fig. 3F). Fetuin incubated with WSEIV NA was not visualized on this chromatogram given the higher molecular weight of fetuin compared to GM2, and hence the lack of migration following sample spotting.Having characterized the functionality of the WSEIV HA and NA, we focused on surveying the extent to which broadly cross-reactive epitopes identified on influenza B virus HAs are conserved on these glycoproteins (Fig. 4A, B). Probing of the WSEIV HA and NA was carried out using a panel of broadly cross-reactive human and mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) previously characterized to bind to both antigenic divergent and ancestral lineages of influenza B viruses14,33,34,35,36,37. Control enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) were performed for these mAbs against the influenza B/Malaysia/2506/2004 virus HA and NA and robust binding profiles for most of the tested antibodies were observed. Five antibodies showed strong binding to the WSEIV HA, namely, 1B5, 4C10, 8G3, 9B9, and 11C12 (all murine mAbs, Fig. 4A). With the exception of 1B5, all these mAbs bind to linear epitopes on the conserved long alpha helix in the stalk domain of the influenza B virus HA33. As stated earlier, conservation between the WSEIV and B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA (or influenza B virus HAs at large) is relatively high in this region (Fig. 1B, C). No binding of the pan-influenza virus HA human mAb CR9114 was detectable, as anticipated from the mismatches in the binding epitope of the antibody14. The binding of CR9114 to influenza B virus HA was low but detectable. Of the panel of human and mouse mAbs used to probe the WSEIV NA, only one antibody showed detectable and strong binding (Fig. 4B). This human mAb, 1G01, has been characterized to have a target binding epitope in the active site of the NA facilitated by a long heavy chain CDR3 loop. Consequently, the breadth of the antibody encompasses influenza A and B virus NAs, showing neuraminidase inhibition activity against most of the tested influenza virus NAs35. Overall, we observe an interesting profile for the WSEIV HA and NA from an antigenic standpoint. For a functionally dissimilar WSEIV HA, there are a larger number of conserved epitopes distributed in the stalk domain. Conversely, identical functionality seen for the WSEIV NA with B/Malaysia/2506/2004 NA is accompanied by an absence of this conservation outside of the enzymatic active site pocket (Fig. 1E, F). Additionally, serum samples from humans post-seasonal influenza vaccination (collected between 2017 and 2019) were used in ELISAs against the WSEIV HA and NA (Fig. 4C). This was done to identify basal or pre-existing cross-reactive immunity against the WSEIV HA or NA in humans as a consequence of seasonal vaccination or prior influenza virus infection. Safely assuming immunological naivety, a recombinant glycoprotein from Mopeia virus, belonging to the arenavirus family, was used as a target antigen in ELISAs to establish baseline reactivity in our assay. No pre-existing immunity or post-vaccination-induced antibodies were detected against the WSEIV HA or NA further reinforcing the limited conservation of broadly cross-reactive target epitopes as determined by the panel of mAbs earlier.Fig. 4: Epitopes that are broadly conserved in influenza B virus glycoproteins are largely absent the WSEIV HA and NA, with cross-reactivity being mostly restricted to the stalk domain of the HA and active site of the NA.A and B Binding profiles of broadly cross-reactive anti-influenza B virus HA and NA human (H) and mouse (M) monoclonal antibodies in ELISAs are shown against recombinant B/Malaysia/2506/2004 and WSEIV HA and NAs. 4F11 (anti-influenza B virus NA) and 4C2 (anti-influenza B virus HA) mouse mAbs were used as negative controls for the ELISAs against the HAs and NAs respectively. C Presence of pre-existing immunity or induction of cross-reactive antibodies against the WSEIV HA and NA was evaluated through ELISAs using human serum samples obtained post-seasonal influenza vaccination (n = 18). Mopeia virus glycoprotein was used as a negative control for baseline establishment, and area under the curve was calculated with a cutoff of average plus three times the standard deviation of the blank wells. The geometric mean for each group is indicated with a line. Experiments were performed once in technical duplicates.Full size imageDiscussionHere, we have characterized the putative HA and NA of the Wuhan spiny eel influenza virus, an influenza B-like virus identified via sequence analysis in lesser spiny eels. The two studies that identified the WSEIV and a salamander influenza-like virus that also clusters close to influenza B viruses discuss the occurrence of prolonged virus–host co-divergence with several host-switching events over time9,38. Largely, influenza B viruses have been discounted from being a pandemic threat due to the absence of an identified sustained non-human reservoir. Co-circulating influenza B viruses in humans have been shown to have reassortment potential within the two antigenic lineages, with B/Victoria/2/87-like viruses acquiring gene segments from B/Yamagata/16/88-like viruses39. Taken together, this strengthens the unmet need for studies characterizing novel influenza B-like viruses in undersampled hosts and subsequently understanding the functionalities of these understudied viruses. Considering that vaccine approaches towards influenza viruses predominantly target the dominant HA - and more recently the NA - surface glycoproteins, it is vital to have a comprehensive understanding of these proteins of influenza B-like viruses too40. In addition, our characterization of the B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA and NA also supplements existing literature on influenza B virus glycoproteins which is finite in contrast to studies addressing influenza A viruses.Along with showing limited antigenic conservation, we demonstrate that the WSEIV HA interacts with an a-series ganglioside, GM2, as a target receptor. Although GM2 has been identified as an interacting partner for some reoviruses and rotaviruses, it has been shown to be not recognized by influenza A viruses, with studies demonstrating that gangliosides are entirely non-essential for influenza virus entry41,42,43,44. As a therapeutic target, overaccumulation of GM2 on neuronal cells has been implicated in Tay Sachs and Sandhoff diseases with mutations rendering hexosaminidases non-functional45. GM2 overexpression is also observed in a variety of human cancers and has been linked with increased tumor angiogenesis and metastatic potential46,47. The WSEIV HA also appears not to bind to GM1a or GM3 as observed from the glycan array binding analysis. The receptor binding also seems to rely on the terminal GalNAc residue given that the loss of this in GM3 is accompanied by abrogation in binding. The location of the α 2,3-linked sialic acid residue in GM2 appears to be crucial as no binding is seen to a galactose extended GM1a ganglioside. From the perspective of gene therapy, having a viral glycoprotein that selectively targets this ganglioside could prove to be instrumental when pseudotyped into viral vectors for gene delivery. In an aquatic setting, GM2 has been found to be over-expressed in gills, brain, heart, and reproductive organs of fish (zebrafish) corroborating the discovery of the WSEIV in the gills of lesser spiny eels48. For the WSEIV NA, our findings highlight the strong conservation of enzymatic activity and kinetics, substrate specificity, and neuraminidase inhibitor sensitivity with the corresponding influenza B virus NAs. Especially the similar temperature profiles of WSEIV and influenza B virus NAs are interesting since the expectation was that the WSEIV NA would be more active at lower temperatures as found in the habitat of the lesser spiny eel. This also raises the possibility that the WSEIV is actually of mammalian or avian origin. Additional studies are needed to further determine if the virus is a bona fide fish virus or if it originated from other, warm-blooded animals.The abundant expression of GM2 across different organs in zebrafish supports the possibility that the WSEIV could infect other species of fish as well. Consequently, human infection could occur with individuals directly interacting with these aquatic species at, e.g. at commercial fisheries or aquaria as well as during recreational fishing or swimming. The lesser spiny eel (M. aculeatus) and other Macrognathus species are distributed throughout Southeast Asia and are farmed and harvested for food49. Of note, GM2 is of course also present in humans. In addition, we found very limited antigenic similarity between WSEIV and influenza B virus glycoproteins. Cross-reactivity of mAbs was limited to a small subset of antibodies and no cross-reactivity was found in human serum suggesting that humans are immunologically naïve to the WSEIV glycoproteins.In summary, the WSEIV HA and NA proteins show varying degrees of similarity to their influenza B virus counterparts. The HA displays sialic acid binding activity specifically towards GM2 and thereby differs substantially from known influenza A and B virus HAs, and the NA is indeed a sialidase with very similar functionality compared to influenza B virus NA. The data provided in this study contribute to our overall understanding of influenza B and influenza B-like viruses, and to understanding of the pandemic potential of the influenza B-like viruses from non-human reservoirs.MethodsCells and proteinsHuman embryo kidney 293T cells were cultured in complete Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Life Technologies) constituted by DMEM supplemented with Pen-Strep antibiotics (100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin; Gibco), 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, HyClone), and 10 ml of 1 M 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES, Life Technologies). Sf9cells (ATCC CRL-1711) and High Five cells (BTI-TN-5B1-4 subclone; Vienna Institute of Biotechnology) were grown in Trichoplusia ni medium-formulation Hink (TNM-FH) insect medium (Gemini Bioproducts) supplemented with Pen-Strep and 10% FBS, and serum free medium (SFM) insect cell medium (HyClone), respectively33.The recombinant proteins used in this study (WSEIV HA, WSEIV NA, B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA, B/Malaysia/2506/2004 NA, A/Vietnam/1203/2004 H5 HA, A/flat-faced bat/Peru/033/2010 H18 HA, A/Anhui/1/2013 N9 NA) were expressed and purified from High Five cell culture supernatant as described in detail previously16.Phylogenetic and comparative sequence analysisPhylogenetic trees for the HA and NA were generated as described previously33. Briefly, sequences were obtained from the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID), aligned using Clustal Omega (v1.2.4), and the phylogenetic trees were generated using FigTree (v1.4.3). The annotation of the tree was carried out in Adobe Illustrator CS5.1. Pairwise alignment of the WSEIV HA and NA (MG600041.1 and MG600042.1) and B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA and NA (CY040449.1 and CY040451.1) was performed using Clustal Omega v1.2.4, following which the features of note were labeled in Adobe Illustrator CS5.1. For the rendered model of glycoproteins displaying sequence conservations, the WSEIV HA and NA were aligned pairwise against the B/Brisbane/60/2008 HA and NA. The alignment was superimposed on the B/Brisbane/60/2008 HA and NA structures publicly available on PDB (HA: 4FQM50; NA: 4CPL51) using UCSF Chimera.SDS–PAGE and Western blottingRecombinant proteins (10 µg) were applied to 4–20% gradient polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad) after heating them for 20 min at 95 °C in 2× Laemmli buffer with 2% β-mercaptoethanol (BME). SDS–PAGE was performed at 200 V for 35 min following which the gels were stained with SimplyBlue Safe Stain (Thermo Fisher) to visualize the bands alongside a color prestained protein broad range standard (New England Biolabs). Deglycosylation was carried out using the Protein Deglycosylation Mix II (New England Biolabs) as per the manufacturer’s instructions.Western blotting procedures to determine the proteolytic cleavage of the HA were carried out as previously described24,33. HEK293T cells were co-transfected with pCAGGS expression plasmids encoding for the corresponding HA and pcDNA3.1 plasmids encoding human airway proteases (Genscript). The Western blotting procedure was carried out with cell lysates, probing with either polyclonal sera raised against the WSEIV HA in female BALB/c mice (at a dilution of 1:100) or with a pool of anti-influenza B virus HA mAbs (at 10 µg/ml) characterized in this ref. 33.Hemagglutination assayRecombinant HA starting at 10 µg diluted serially 2-fold was incubated with 0.5% chicken or turkey erythrocyte suspension and incubated at 4 °C for an hour. The plates were then scanned to determine the extent of hemagglutination of these erythrocytes.Glycan arrayGlycan array binding analysis of the rHAs was carried out as described here52,53. Briefly, recombinant hexahistidine-tagged HA was precomplexed with a mouse anti-his Alexa 647 (antibody mouse anti-his 647 antibody, Abcam, ab237337, clone EPR20547) and goat-anti-mouse Alexa 647 antibodies (Thermo, Cat # A28181; RRID: AB_2536165). This was done in 50 µl PBS-T (phosphate-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20) in a 4:2:1 molar ratio, incubated for 15 min on ice, and the applied on the array for 90 min in a humidified chamber. Following multiple washes with PBS-T, PBS, and deionized water the arrays were scanned to detect HA binding. Mean RFU and standard deviation values were imported into Prism 7.0 and the corresponding graph was generated.Bio-layer interferometryAs described previously, biolayer interferometry with an Octet Red96 instrument (ForteBio) was used to determine the dissociation constant of the HA-GM2 receptor interaction54. Recombinant hexahistidine-tagged HAs at 10 µg/ml was loaded onto Ni-NTA biosensors (Fortebio) for 780 s to ensure saturation after a baseline step was established for 60 s. A second baseline was established post-loading spanning 120 s. Then the association (300 s) and dissociation (900 s) kinetics were recorded as the HA-loaded sensors were dipped into 1.5-fold serially diluted concentrations of recombinant GM2 (Sigma Aldrich). The reaction was carried out in a 1× kinetics buffer comprising of 1× PBS, 0.01% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 0.002% Tween 20. The dissociation constant was calculated accordingly using the suitable model for a biphasic association and dissociation profile, and global curve fit was applied to all the sensors. Octet Red96 Data Acquisition v12.0 software was used to acquire the biolayer-interferometry data.Fusion assayA polykaryon formation assay to determine the fusogenicity of the WSEIV HA was performed as described in detail previously24. HeLa cells (CCL-2, ATCC) were seeded in 96-well tissue culture plates (Corning) and transfected with a pCAGGS plasmid expressing the WSEIV HA. The following day, the cells were washed with Dulbecco’s phosphate buffer saline (DPBS), exposed to TPCK-treated trypsin at 5 µg/ml for 15 min, washed with DPBS, and subsequently exposed to pH adjusted DPBS ranging from pH 4.5 to 5.9 adjusted with citric acid. After 15 min of an acid pulse, the cells were washed and allowed to recover and fuse in complete DMEM for 4 h. The cells were then fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde in PBS and permeablized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 15 min each. All of these steps were performed at 33 °C. Staining was performed using the HCS Cell Mask Green (Life Technologies) as per manufacturer’s instructions for 30 min at 5 µg/ml. Imaging was performed using EVOS FL Cell Imaging microscope (Thermo Fisher) and the images were collectively processed using Adobe Photoshop and annotated using Adobe Illustrator.ELLAsELLAs were performed as described in detail previously to determine the enzymatic activity of the NAs or the NA inhibitor sensitivity of the NAs55. Briefly, Immulon 4 HBX plates (Thermo Scientific) were coated with 100 µl/well of fetuin (Sigma) at 25 µg/ml overnight at 4 °C. The fetuin-coated plates were incubated with 2 fold dilutions of recombinant NAs starting at 10 µg/ml in 5% BSA in PBS overnight at the indicated temperatures. The following day, the plates were washed three times with PBS-T and were incubated with 5 µg/ml of peanut agglutinin conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (PNA-HRP) for two hours at room temperature. The plates were washed with PBS-T three times and developed with 100 µl of Sigmafast o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (OPD) (Sigma Aldrich). The only applied variation was that the overnight incubation was carried out at four different temperatures (4, 20, 33, and 37 °C) to determine the temperature-dependent profile of the NAs. When oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir were used, the starting concentration applied was 156.28 µM with 2-fold serial dilutions, and they were pre-incubated with the recombinant NAs for 1 h shaking at 37 °C after which the conventional ELLA protocol was followed. Substrate specificity characterization and specific enzyme activity determination was performed in ELLA assays identical to that described in ref. 26. Absorbance measurements were carried out at 490 nm following the development with Sigmafast OPD, and the specific enzyme activity (inverse of half-maximum lectin binding) was determined following a non-linear regression analysis in Graphpad Prism 7, and was plotted normalized to the fetuin-ECA to determine activity per amount of protein in context of cleavage of α2,3 or α2,6-linked sialic acids.Michaelis–Menten kineticsEnzyme kinetics and the Michaelis–Menten parameters were determined as described previously32. Briefly, recombinant NAs at a fixed concentration of 10 µg/ml were incubated with 1.5 fold dilutions of the fluorogenic MUNANA substrate in MES (2-ethanesulfonic acid2-ethanesulfonic acid) buffer with suitable blank controls for background fluorescence. The plates were incubated at 37 °C and readings for relative fluorescence units (RFUs) were recorded at every 90 s for 40 min using a Gen5 v3.0 Software and a Synergy H1 Microplate Reader (BioTek). The RFU readings were captured at excitation and emission wavelengths of 360 and 448 nM. Velocity of the reaction was determined by plotting the RFU readings against time, and the Michaelis–Menten parameters Vmax and Km were determined through non-linear regression fits of the velocity and MUNANA concentrations in Graphpad Prism 7.Free sialic acid assay and thin layer chromatographyRecombinant GM2 (100 μM) was incubated with WSEIV NA or BSA at 10 μg/ml. As a positive control, fetuin (100 μM) was incubated with WSEIV NA (10 μg/ml). The reactions were then analyzed using a Sialic Acid (NANA) assay kit (Abcam) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The amount of free sialic acid was determined by extrapolation from a standard curve and graphed using Graphpad Prism 7. The same samples were also applied using a 700 series microliter syringe (Hamilton) onto pre-scored silica gel TLC plates (Millipore Sigma) and placed in a running buffer of ethanol:acetic acid:water at 5:2:1. As a control for both experiments, GM2 was also incubated with BSA as an irrelevant protein. Assay buffer without GM2 was also applied to the TLC plate as a blank control. The plates were visualized using a Bio-Rad Gel Doc (Bio-Rad), and the chromatogram was annotated on Adobe Illustrator.ELISAsELISAs were performed as previously described in detail33. Immulon 4 HBX plates (Thermo Scientific) were coated overnight with 2 µg/ml of recombinant protein in 1× coating buffer (Seracare). The plates were blocked with 3% milk powder in PBS-T for one hour at room temperature following which they were incubated with 3-fold dilutions of mAbs starting at 30 µg/ml or human serum samples at a dilution of 1:250 for two hours at room temperature. The plates were washed three times with PBS-T and stained with the appropriate goat anti-human (Invitrogen, 31410) or goat anti-mouse HRP-tagged (Rockland, 610-1302) antibody at a dilution of 1:3000 in PBS-T and developed using Sigmafast OPD. Information surrounding individual antibodies used in the primary staining procedure are available in the cited references.Human serum samplesSerum samples were obtained from healthy participants participating in a longitudinal, observation, non-interventional study (STUDY-16-01199, PI: V. Simon) approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine. Informed consent was obtained prior to study participation and participants provided written permission to biospecimen banking and future research use. Samples were collected between 2017 and 2019. All samples were de-identified and analyzed in a blinded manner.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability All data are available in the manuscript or the supplementary materials. Source data are provided with this paper. HA (4FQM) and NA (4CPL) structures for B/Brisbane/60/2008 were obtained from PDB. Sequences for the HAs and NAs for the phylogenetic trees were obtained from GISAID (H1-H18: H1-H18: EPI1349891, EPI899625, EPI673678, EPI1007628, EPI942074, EPI1154383, EPI1090164, EPI1154159, EPI1103524, EPI953583, EPI774886, EPI1007631, EPI967018, EPI750076, EPI965435, EPI939704, EPI356309, EPI486922; B/Lee/1940 HA: EPI243230; B/Phuket/3073/2013 HA: EPI1799824; B/Colorado/06/2017 HA: EPI969380; N1-N11: EPI1381203, EPI899627, EPI939823, EPI1154448, EPI1007658, EPI939830, EPI750078, EPI941550, EPI965439, EPI356311, EPI356298; B/Lee/1940 NA: EPI366432; B/Phuket/3073/2013 NA: EPI1799823; B/Colorado/06/2017 NA: EPI969379). WSEIV HA and NA (MG600041.1 and MG600042.1) and B/Malaysia/2506/2004 HA and NA (CY040449.1 and CY040451.1) sequences were used for the pairwise alignment represented in Fig. 1. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesThompson, W. W. et al. Mortality associated with influenza and respiratory syncytial virus in the United States. JAMA 289, 179–186 (2003).Article PubMed Google Scholar Long, J. S., Mistry, B., Haslam, S. M. & Barclay, W. S. Host and viral determinants of influenza A virus species specificity. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17, 67–81 (2019).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Steel, J. & Lowen, A. C. Influenza A virus reassortment. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 385, 377–401 (2014).PubMed Google Scholar Osterhaus, A. D., Rimmelzwaan, G. F., Martina, B. E., Bestebroer, T. M. & Fouchier, R. A. Influenza B virus in seals. Science 288, 1051–1053 (2000).Article ADS PubMed CAS Google Scholar Bodewes, R. et al. Recurring influenza B virus infections in seals. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 19, 511–512 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bodewes, R. et al. No serological evidence that harbour porpoises are additional hosts of influenza B viruses. PLoS ONE 9, e89058 (2014).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Ran, Z. et al. Domestic pigs are susceptible to infection with influenza B viruses. J. Virol. 89, 4818–4826 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Shi, M. et al. Redefining the invertebrate RNA virosphere. Nature 540, 539–543 (2016).Article ADS PubMed CAS Google Scholar Shi, M. et al. The evolutionary history of vertebrate RNA viruses. Nature 556, 197–202 (2018).Article ADS PubMed CAS Google Scholar Koutsakos, M., Nguyen, T. H., Barclay, W. S. & Kedzierska, K. Knowns and unknowns of influenza B viruses. Fut. Microbiol. 11, 119–135 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Rota, P. A. et al. Cocirculation of two distinct evolutionary lineages of influenza type B virus since 1983. Virology 175, 59–68 (1990).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Wang, Q., Cheng, F., Lu, M., Tian, X. & Ma, J. Crystal structure of unliganded influenza B virus hemagglutinin. J. Virol. 82, 3011–3020 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Velkov, T. The specificity of the influenza B virus hemagglutinin receptor binding pocket: what does it bind to? J. Mol. Recognit. 26, 439–449 (2013).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Dreyfus, C. et al. Highly conserved protective epitopes on influenza B viruses. Science 337, 1343–1348 (2012).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Kirkpatrick, E., Qiu, X., Wilson, P. C., Bahl, J. & Krammer, F. The influenza virus hemagglutinin head evolves faster than the stalk domain. Sci. Rep. 8, 10432 (2018).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Margine, I., Palese, P. & Krammer, F. Expression of functional recombinant hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins from the novel H7N9 influenza virus using the baculovirus expression system. J. Vis. Exp. e51112, (2013) https://doi.org/10.3791/51112.Mogling, R. et al. Neuraminidase-mediated haemagglutination of recent human influenza A(H3N2) viruses is determined by arginine 150 flanking the neuraminidase catalytic site. J. Gen. Virol. 98, 1274–1281 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Shi, Y., Wu, Y., Zhang, W., Qi, J. & Gao, G. F. Enabling the ‘host jump’: structural determinants of receptor-binding specificity in influenza A viruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 822–831 (2014).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Paulson, J. C. & de Vries, R. P. H5N1 receptor specificity as a factor in pandemic risk. Virus Res. 178, 99–113 (2013).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Matrosovich, M. N. et al. Probing of the receptor-binding sites of the H1 and H3 influenza A and influenza B virus hemagglutinins by synthetic and natural sialosides. Virology 196, 111–121 (1993).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Ni, F., Mbawuike, I. N., Kondrashkina, E. & Wang, Q. The roles of hemagglutinin Phe-95 in receptor binding and pathogenicity of influenza B virus. Virology 450-451, 71–83 (2014).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Karakus, U. et al. MHC class II proteins mediate cross-species entry of bat influenza viruses. Nature 567, 109–112 (2019).Article ADS PubMed CAS Google Scholar Klenk, H. D., Rott, R., Orlich, M. & Blodorn, J. Activation of influenza A viruses by trypsin treatment. Virology 68, 426–439 (1975).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Laporte, M. et al. Hemagglutinin cleavability, acid stability, and temperature dependence optimize influenza B virus for replication in human airways. J. Virol. 94, (2019) https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01430-19.Stieneke-Grober, A. et al. Influenza virus hemagglutinin with multibasic cleavage site is activated by furin, a subtilisin-like endoprotease. EMBO J. 11, 2407–2414 (1992).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Dai, M. et al. Mutation of the second sialic acid-binding site, resulting in reduced neuraminidase activity, preceded the emergence of H7N9 influenza A virus. J. Virol. 91, (2017) https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00049-17.Baenziger, J. U. & Fiete, D. Structure of the complex oligosaccharides of fetuin. J. Biol. Chem. 254, 789–795 (1979).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Wu, A. M. et al. Differential affinities of Erythrina cristagalli lectin (ECL) toward monosaccharides and polyvalent mammalian structural units. Glycoconj. J. 24, 591–604 (2007).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Sharma, V., Srinivas, V. R., Adhikari, P., Vijayan, M. & Surolia, A. Molecular basis of recognition by Gal/GalNAc specific legume lectins: influence of Glu 129 on the specificity of peanut agglutinin (PNA) towards C2-substituents of galactose. Glycobiology 8, 1007–1012 (1998).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Geisler, C. & Jarvis, D. L. Effective glycoanalysis with Maackia amurensis lectins requires a clear understanding of their binding specificities. Glycobiology 21, 988–993 (2011).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Shibuya, N. et al. The elderberry (Sambucus nigra L.) bark lectin recognizes the Neu5Ac(alpha 2-6)Gal/GalNAc sequence. J. Biol. Chem. 262, 1596–1601 (1987).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Hai, R. et al. Influenza A(H7N9) virus gains neuraminidase inhibitor resistance without loss of in vivo virulence or transmissibility. Nat. Commun. 4, 2854 (2013).Article ADS PubMed CAS Google Scholar Asthagiri Arunkumar, G. et al. Broadly cross-reactive, nonneutralizing antibodies against influenza B virus hemagglutinin demonstrate effector function-dependent protection against lethal viral challenge in mice. J. Virol. 93, (2019) https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01696-18.Madsen, A. et al. Human antibodies targeting influenza B virus neuraminidase active site are broadly protective. Immunity 53, 852–863 e857 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Stadlbauer, D. et al. Broadly protective human antibodies that target the active site of influenza virus neuraminidase. Science 366, 499–504 (2019).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Wohlbold, T. J. et al. Broadly protective murine monoclonal antibodies against influenza B virus target highly conserved neuraminidase epitopes. Nat. Microbiol. 2, 1415–1424 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Kirkpatrick, E. et al. Characterization of novel cross-reactive influenza B virus hemagglutinin head specific antibodies that lack hemagglutination inhibition activity. J. Virol. 94, (2020) https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01185-20.Parry, R., Wille, M., Turnbull, O. M. H., Geoghegan, J. L. & Holmes, E. C. Divergent influenza-like viruses of amphibians and fish support an ancient evolutionary association. Viruses 12, (2020) https://doi.org/10.3390/v12091042.Vijaykrishna, D. et al. The contrasting phylodynamics of human influenza B viruses. Elife 4, e05055 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Krammer, F. et al. NAction! How can neuraminidase-based immunity contribute to better influenza virus vaccines? mBio 9, (2018) https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02332-17.Martinez, M. A., Lopez, S., Arias, C. F. & Isa, P. Gangliosides have a functional role during rotavirus cell entry. J. Virol. 87, 1115–1122 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Reiss, K. et al. The GM2 glycan serves as a functional coreceptor for serotype 1 reovirus. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1003078 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Bergelson, L. D. et al. Role of gangliosides in reception of influenza virus. Eur. J. Biochem 128, 467–474 (1982).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Matrosovich, M. et al. Gangliosides are not essential for influenza virus infection. Glycoconj. J. 23, 107–113 (2006).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Scriver, C. R. The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease 7th edn (McGraw-Hill, Health Professions Division, 1995).Yamada, T. et al. Genetically engineered humanized anti-ganglioside GM2 antibody against multiple organ metastasis produced by GM2-expressing small-cell lung cancer cells. Cancer Sci. 102, 2157–2163 (2011).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Sasaki, N. et al. Ganglioside GM2, highly expressed in the MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell line, is correlated with growth, invasion, and advanced stage. Sci. Rep. 9, 19369 (2019).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Yamakawa, N. et al. Systems glycomics of adult zebrafish identifies organ-specific sialylation and glycosylation patterns. Nat. Commun. 9, 4647 (2018).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Islam, S., Sultana, R. & Paul, P. Larval rearing of lesser spiny eel, Macrognathus aculeatus in the captivity with emphasis on their development stages. Int. J. Biosci. 11, 93–103 https://doi.org/10.12692/ijb/11.5.93-103 (2017).Dreyfus, C. et al. Highly conserved protective epitopes on influenza B viruses. Science 337, 1343–1348 (2012).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Escuret, V. et al. A novel I221L substitution in neuraminidase confers high-level resistance to oseltamivir in influenza B viruses. J. Infect. Dis. 210, 1260–1269 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Broszeit, F. et al. N-Glycolylneuraminic acid as a receptor for influenza A viruses. Cell Rep. 27, 3284–3294 e3286 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Li, T. et al. Chemoenzymatic synthesis of Campylobacter jejuni lipo-oligosaccharide core domains to examine Guillain–Barre syndrome serum antibody specificities. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 19611–19621 (2020).Article PubMed CAS PubMed Central Google Scholar Henry Dunand, C. J. et al. Both neutralizing and non-neutralizing human H7N9 influenza vaccine-induced monoclonal antibodies confer protection. Cell Host Microbe 19, 800–813 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Wohlbold, T. J. et al. Hemagglutinin stalk- and neuraminidase-specific monoclonal antibodies protect against lethal H10N8 influenza virus infection in mice. J. Virol. 90, 851–861 (2016).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Andrew Duty and Tom Moran at the Department of Microbiology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai for letting us use their BLI device. We would also like to thank Edward Holmes at The University of Sidney for inspiring us to perform this study and for making the sequence information available. This work was partially funded by NIAID CEIRS contract HHSN272201400008C and NIAID grant R01 AI117287. R.P.dV is a recipient of an ERC Starting Grant from the European Commission (802780) and a Beijerinck Premium of the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences. Synthesis and microarray analysis were funded by a grant from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO TOPPUNT 718.015.003) to G.-J.B.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAGuha Asthagiri Arunkumar, Disha Bhavsar, Shirin Strohmeier, Veronika Chromikova, Fatima Amanat, Viviana Simon & Florian KrammerGraduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAGuha Asthagiri Arunkumar & Fatima AmanatComplex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USATiehai Li & Geert-Jan BoonsDepartment of Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Utrecht University, Utrecht, NetherlandsMehman Bunyatov, Geert-Jan Boons & Robert P. de VriesDepartmentof Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USAPatrick C. WilsonDepartment of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USAAli H. EllebedyAuthorsGuha Asthagiri ArunkumarView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDisha BhavsarView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTiehai LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShirin StrohmeierView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarVeronika ChromikovaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFatima AmanatView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMehman BunyatovView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPatrick C. WilsonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAli H. EllebedyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGeert-Jan BoonsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarViviana SimonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRobert P. de VriesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFlorian KrammerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsG.A.A. and F.K. designed the research. G.A.A., D.B., T.L., S.S., V.C., F.A., M.B., and R.P.d.V. performed the experiments. G.A.A. analyzed the data. G.A.A. and F.K. wrote and finalized the manuscript with suitable scientific and formatting input from all co-authors. P.C.W., A.H.E., V.S., G.-J.B., and F.K. supervised the experiments carried out by the aforementioned co-authors.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Florian Krammer.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPeer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationReporting SummarySource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleArunkumar, G.A., Bhavsar, D., Li, T. et al. Functionality of the putative surface glycoproteins of the Wuhan spiny eel influenza virus. Nat Commun 12, 6161 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26409-2Download citationReceived: 18 January 2021Accepted: 23 September 2021Published: 25 October 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26409-2Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Bat-borne H9N2 influenza virus evades MxA restriction and exhibits efficient replication and transmission in ferrets Nico Joel HalweLea HambergerMartin Beer Nature Communications (2024) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingHealthy You: Influenza is in Oregon. Get your flu shotSkip to main content HomeTime & MoneyHealthHome & GardenFood Healthy You: With influenza coming to Oregon, it's time to get your flu shotDr. Bob Pelz | Special to The Register-GuardShow Caption Hide Caption CDC leader: Flu shot 'doubly important' this yearThe message is clear: Get your flu vaccine. The U.S. is gearing up in case of a bad flu season on top of the continuing COVID-19 crisis. Public health experts pleaded Thursday for Americans to get vaccinated against both. (Oct. 7)APTo provide our community with important public health information, The Register-Guard is making this content free to read. To support important local journalism like this, please consider becoming a digital subscriber. With everyone’s focus on COVID-19, it’s easy to forget that we’re all still susceptible to the flu. About 35 million people get influenza in a typical flu season in the United States. Last year, there were only about 2,000 cases. Experts are concerned that the low number of cases last year may mean fewer people will be immune this year, leading to a difficult flu season. In fact, we are already seeing cases of influenza in Southern Oregon quite a bit earlier than is typical here. Since flu seems to have arrived in Oregon, the time to get the flu shot is now. Remember, once you receive your shot, it takes approximately two weeks for the vaccine to reach its full effect. Who should get a flu vaccine? Since 2010, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has recommended that everyone 6 months and older get a flu vaccine with rare exceptions. How effective is the flu vaccine? How well flu vaccines work can vary from season to season based on how well the vaccines “match” the flu viruses spreading in the community that year. When there is a good match between flu vaccines and circulating viruses, vaccination provides substantial benefits by preventing flu illness and complications. Additionally, a person’s age and health can also affect the vaccine’s efficacy. In the end, if you do still “catch” the flu, your symptoms are likely to be much milder if you receive the vaccine than if you do not. In addition to decreasing your risk of getting flu, the vaccine decreases the risk of hospitalization by about half. This is critical this year not only for patients but for our health care workers who are already facing tremendous challenges from the ongoing pandemic. Subscriber offer: Support local journalism that makes a difference in the community. Subscribe today!Are there different types of flu shots? Which one should I get? There are different types of flu vaccines, and your age or allergies to vaccines or their ingredients will determine which vaccine you should receive. Consult with your doctor before getting your shot if you have any questions or concerns. Can I get the flu and COVID-19 at the same time? What would the symptoms look like? Because influenza and COVID-19 are two different viruses, it is possible to contract both. Because last year’s flu season was so light, there is not a great deal of data on the effects of getting both infections at the same time, but it is likely that it could lead to very serious illness. Can I get the flu and COVID-19 vaccines at the same time? Yes. When the COVID-19 vaccines were still new, the CDC had recommended spacing out the COVID-19 shot with other vaccines. Now that we know more about these vaccines, we know it’s safe to not only receive the vaccines close together, but at the same time. The same is true for the COVID-19 booster, should you qualify for the additional shot. If you haven’t made your appointment already, sign up to get your flu shot today. And if you haven’t received your COVID-19 shot, or are eligible for a booster shot, you can sign up to get those at the same appointment. Where can I get my flu vaccine? Call your primary care provider to schedule an appointment. PeaceHealth Medical Group clinics in Eugene-Springfield, Cottage Grove and Florence all offer opportunities to get your flu vaccination. More information is available online at peacehealth.org/flushot. Other options include urgent care clinics, same-day clinics and many area pharmacies. Dr. Bob Pelz is an infectious disease specialist at PeaceHealth Sacred Heart Medical Center at RiverBend and medical director of Infection Prevention at PeaceHealth. Facebook Twitter EmailHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices© Copyright Gannett 2024From 1918 to COVID-19, epidemics are stories about people - Century of Science | Science News Skip to content Menu All Topics Health Humans Life Earth Physics Space Magazine Menu All Stories Multimedia Reviews Collections Century of Science For Educators Coronavirus Outbreak Newsletters About For Students Our Store SIGN IN Donate Science News INDEPENDENT JOURNALISM SINCE 1921 Century of Science from ScienceNews SIGN IN Search Open search Close search SIGN IN Donate Scott Olson/Getty Images Century of Science: Theme Epidemics and their aftermath from ScienceNews Home Themes Shaking up Earth Our wild universe Our brains, our futures Cracking the atom Mystery of reproduction Other worlds The science of us The human story Epidemics and their aftermath Materials that made us Quantum reality The human blueprint The future of computing Our climate change crisis Connections Let’s talk New vistas Unsung characters Human imagination Twists and turns Milestones About Partners The deep end of disease Virus hunters Vaccine victories Sanatoriums and stigma Emerging fungal threats The aftermath Milestones From the archive The latest The deep end of disease The emergency hospital, a partially demolished building hastily enclosed with wooden partitions, was about to open. It was the fall of 1918 in Philadelphia, and influenza was spreading fast. With many of the city’s doctors and nurses serving in World War I, 23-year-old Isaac Starr and his third-year classmates at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine were needed to help tend the sick. They’d had just one lecture on influenza. Their first job was to assemble the hospital beds, about 25 to a floor. Aviators training during World War I recovered from influenza in a hangar at Eberts Field in Arkansas in 1918. Influenza moved swiftly through crowded military camps during the 1918 pandemic.War Department/National Archives #45499287 Starr was assigned a 4 p.m. to midnight shift. The beds soon filled with patients who had fevers, he recalled in a 1976 essay for Annals of Internal Medicine. Many who developed influenza recovered. But Starr watched as some patients became starved for air, their skin turning blue. Soon, they were “struggling to clear their airways of a blood-tinged froth that sometimes gushed from their nose and mouth,” Starr wrote. “It was a dreadful business.” After a mask mandate was issued by Seattle’s commissioner of health in late October of 1918, people were not allowed in stores or on streetcars without wearing face coverings.National Archives #45499311 There were no effective treatments. Patients, desperate for breath, became delirious and incontinent and would die within days. “When I returned to duty at 4 p.m., I found few whom I had seen before,” Starr wrote. “This happened night after night.” In October, around the pinnacle of the pandemic, roughly 11,000 Philadelphians perished. Some who died in the makeshift hospital stuck with Starr. There was Mike the piano mover, who in a frenzy left his bed and was about to leap from a window before medical staff grabbed him. Mike died shortly after. There was the young woman, “flushed with fever,” whose large family kept vigil at her bedside, hoping for a recovery that never came. Recovery never came for the estimated 50 million people worldwide who died during the 1918 influenza pandemic. The century since has seen many vaccines and treatments become available to combat infectious diseases. But beyond those medical feats, the story of epidemics remains a story about people: people who become sick, people who die, people whose lives are upended, people who care for others. And ultimately, people who remember what happened and people who forget. The public memory of that 1918 pandemic, which lasted into 1919, faded quickly in the United States, with few historical accounts or memorials to victims in the aftermath. One of the first major histories of the pandemic, by Alfred Crosby, didn’t arrive until 1976, the same year Starr published his reflections on serving in an influenza ward. (Crosby’s book, first called Epidemic and Peace, 1918, was later reissued as America’s Forgotten Pandemic: The Influenza of 1918.) While most patients with influenza “recovered uneventfully,” Isaac Starr wrote, some developed severe pulmonary complications. “Indeed the rumor got about that the ‘black death’ had returned.”University Archives and Records Center, University of Pennsylvania Since 1918, we have faced many epidemics, but COVID-19 has been the first to rival the great flu in how it has changed people’s daily lives. “We are living through a historic pandemic,” says Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md. But a hundred years’ worth of advances in virology, medical understanding and vaccine development has made a difference. It was 11 months from the discovery of the SARS-CoV-2 virus to “having a vaccine that you could put in people’s arms,” Fauci says, “a beautiful testimony to the importance of investing in biomedical research.” The COVID-19 pandemic is also a stark reminder of what hasn’t changed. “Pandemics just surface all the muck,” says internist, medical humanities scholar and historian of medicine Lakshmi Krishnan of Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. Ever present but often ignored societal inequities become unavoidable. The disproportionate weight of COVID-19 disease and death on Black, Latino and Native American communities in the United States — “we better not forget,” says Fauci. “We really need to address the social determinants of health that lead to these very, very obvious disparities.” U.S. COVID-19 deaths by race and ethnicity E. Otwell; Source: APM Research LabE. Otwell; Source: APM Research Lab Black, Indigenous and Pacific Islander Americans have faced a disproportionate death toll from COVID-19, as shown in this graph. When the data are adjusted for the age distribution of the populations, the disparities are larger, with the COVID-19 death rate for Indigenous, Black, Pacific Islander and Latino Americans double or more that of White and Asian Americans. Yet outbreak after outbreak, our collective memory falters. The urgency of the predicament eventually fades. The communities left behind, families mourning the loss of loved ones, people struggling with unmet medical needs, with stigma, become small islands of remembrance ever threatened by vast seas of forgetfulness and indifference. Sometimes forgetfulness comes from a lack of reckoning. The United States moved on from the 1918 pandemic without addressing what was lost. Sometimes the success of vaccines obscures their power. The fear that surrounded polio subsided in the United States after the country rolled up its sleeves for polio vaccines. The dread of many other childhood illnesses has also diminished, leaving some to take prevention measures for granted. Sending the message Posters from the last century reveal how public health officials assuaged fears and provided advice. Some messages are specific to the time, while others are timeless. Flu, 1918 GRANGER Flu and tuberculosis, 1925 Rensselaer County Tuberculosis Association/National Library of Medicine Smallpox, 1939 Photo12/Universal Images Group via Getty Images Polio, 1963 CDC, Mary Hilpertshauser General immunization, 1977 Courtesy of the U.S. National Library of Medicine HIV, 1989 N.Y. Department of Health/National Library of Medicine HIV, ca. 1990 Smith Collection/Gado/Getty Images HIV and tuberculosis, 1992 Mississippi State Department of Health, Tuberculosis Control Program, 1992 HIV, 1992 Alberta Health Services/National Library of Medicine Measles, year unknown National Institutes of Health COVID-19, 2020 Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division, © Tes One. Courtesy of Amplifier, LC-DIG-ppss-01153 COVID-19, 2020 Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division, © Das Frank. Courtesy of Amplifier, LC-DIG-ppss-01107 There are infectious diseases that are global terrors but don’t command much attention in the United States. Tuberculosis, an ancient disease found in mummy remains, killed an estimated 1.5 million people worldwide in 2020. Fungal diseases, long neglected and a growing threat, cause an estimated 2 million deaths globally each year. These illnesses often strike the most vulnerable in society, those already struggling to be seen. To look back at infectious diseases since 1918 is not only to observe what we’ve learned about the viruses, bacteria and fungi with which we share our world, and observe the strides made in lessening their harms. It’s a call to listen to the stories of how infectious diseases have shaped people’s lives. Outbreaks “have occurred throughout history and they occur now,” says Fauci. “And they will continue to occur.”— Aimee Cunningham Clerks wear masks in October of 1918 as they work in New York. As with the COVID-19 pandemic today, public health officials encouraged and sometimes mandated masks during the 1918 influenza pandemic. Newspapers printed how-tos on making and washing the face coverings, typically constructed of gauze.War Department/National Archives #45499337 Virus hunters The two young men were among the millions serving in the U.S. Army in 1918. The 21-year-old had trained at Camp Jackson in South Carolina and the 30-year-old at Camp Upton in New York. Both were admitted to their camp hospitals with influenza. Both died of the disease on the same September day, the 26th, never reaching the battlefields of the Great War. Lung tissue from each young man was preserved in a formaldehyde solution and embedded in wax for an Army collection of autopsy specimens. About two months after the soldiers’ deaths, influenza struck a village on the Seward Peninsula in Alaska. In five days that November, 72 of the 80 adult residents died. Their final resting place was a mass grave in the frozen ground. But decades later, lung tissue from one of the villagers, a woman whose name and age at death are unknown, together with the two soldiers’ samples led to the discovery of the virus behind the 1918 influenza pandemic. Today, we can rapidly identify the culprit of an outbreak. After a cluster of mysterious pneumonia cases arose in December of 2019, it took just weeks for scientists to decipher the pathogen’s genetic letters and identify it as a coronavirus. But decades of earlier research and discovery made such speed possible. The task of uncovering the 1918 virus’s genetic blueprint had to wait for such advances and benefited from an amazing amount of luck. At the start of the 20th century, the idea of viruses was just beginning to form in scientists’ minds. It wasn’t yet known what pathogen caused influenza. Some believed that a bacterium discovered in 1892 was guilty, even giving it the name Bacillus influenzae. That same year, a botanist reported that something smaller than bacteria — because the infectious agent could pass through a filter that bacteria could not — appeared to cause a troublesome infectious disease of tobacco plants. In 1930, Science News-Letter reported on the “existing confusion” and “outstanding difficulty” of identifying the cause of epidemic flu.Science News Scientists couldn’t see viruses, only their effects on living tissue, says A. Oveta Fuller, a virologist at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. Light microscopes, long available at the time, could spot bacteria but couldn’t bring viruses into focus. Scientists in London were able to “discover” human influenza virus in 1933 during a flu epidemic by filtering throat washings from symptomatic people and showing that the filtrate infected ferrets. It took the 1931 invention of the electron microscope — which relied on a beam of electrons to probe the submicroscopic world — to makes viruses visible. By the end of the 1930s, the first electron micrographs of viruses were published, including the rod-shaped particles of the tobacco mosaic virus. As the 20th century moved on, the study of viruses took off. Scientists learned about the inner workings of these parasitic pathogens, made of genetic material and proteins, that commandeer a cell’s machinery to make more virus. Along the way, laboratory techniques to copy and read genetic material became available. By the ’90s, the know-how was there to try to decipher the 1918 influenza virus. The next step was to reach back in time. In 1995, Jeffery Taubenberger (left), Ann Reid (right) and colleagues set out to recover and decipher genetic material from the 1918 influenza virus. It took nearly a decade to complete the project, which relied on the most advanced technology at the time and several strokes of luck.National Museum of Health and Medicine Online Exhibit – MIS 377212 In 1995, a team of scientists at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in Washington, D.C., amid talk of a potential closure, set out to showcase the value of the institute’s extensive collection of autopsy specimens, dating to the Civil War. In describing the collection, Ann Reid, a molecular biologist who had been on that team, evokes another treasure trove: “The last scene in Raiders of the Lost Ark, where they’re in this huge warehouse — it’s like that, except the boxes are teeny.” The scientists decided to look for genetic fragments of the 1918 influenza virus in the specimens, says Jeffery Taubenberger, a pathologist and virologist who was also on the team. “Here was a pandemic that killed tens of millions of people … just an unbelievably severe outbreak,” he says. The team hoped that the 1918 virus’s genetic material would reveal some signpost of its lethality. The high mortality and the age distribution of the victims sets the 1918 pandemic apart in influenza history. An estimated 50 million people died worldwide, compared with estimates of up to several million for each of the pandemics in 1957 and 1968. And whereas influenza characteristically strikes the very young and very old, nearly half of the influenza-related deaths in the United States during the pandemic were among 20- to 40-year-olds. Young men in the military, mobilizing for World War I, were at high risk — making the Armed Forces pathology collection a good place to look. Deaths from influenza and pneumonia by age E. Otwell; Source: J.K. Taubenberger and D. M. Morens/Emerging Infectious Diseases 2006E. Otwell; Source: J.K. Taubenberger and D.M. Morens/Emerging Infectious Diseases 2006 Young children, adults around 20 to 40 years old, and adults 65 and older had the highest death rates from the 1918 flu pandemic, resulting in a W-shaped mortality curve (solid line). The usual mortality pattern for influenza, shown here for the years 1911 to 1917, for example, is a U-shaped curve (dashed line), with no spike for young adults. But a 1918 influenza death from the collection wasn’t enough. “Most people who died of the 1918 flu didn’t die directly from the virus,” Reid says. “They died from bacterial pneumonia that set in after the influenza virus injured their lungs.” The patients who succumbed to bacterial pneumonia tended to die a week to 10 days after they first had flu symptoms. By then, the virus would be gone. So the team needed tissue that displayed the pathological signs of a viral pneumonia, which killed its victim within days. After finding a few samples to work with, it was on to recovering the virus’s genetic material, with fingers crossed it wasn’t hopelessly degraded. The researchers used a technique developed in the 1980s called polymerase chain reaction. With knowledge of more recent influenza viruses, the team designed short strings of genetic letters, called primers, to latch onto the 1918 virus’s genetic material. The technique makes millions of copies of the stretches of letters targeted by the primers. The researchers incorporated a radioactive form of an element into the copies of viral genetic material so that the material would show up on film. It finally did, after a year and a half. “I really developed a lot of blank film,” Reid says. The 1918 influenza virus, shown here in a colorized transmission electron microscope image, was a great ancestor to flu viruses that have emerged since.C. Goldsmith/Public Health Image Library #11098 Once the team had some genetic material, they could begin to determine the blueprint of the virus with a technology called sequencing. First, the researchers determined the sequence of letters for nine fragments of the virus’s genetic material, from the Camp Jackson soldier, work published in Science in 1997. But the tissue sample — a pinkie fingernail–sized piece of lung, maybe an eighth of an inch thick, says Taubenberger — had very little viral genetic material. So the team screened the collection again and, luckily, found the Camp Upton soldier’s sample. Then luck struck again, in the form of a fax from a man named Johan Hultin. “It was this really long handwritten fax in this very old-fashioned script,” recalls Reid. Hultin, a pathologist, had once gone in search of the 1918 virus. In 1951, he received the blessing of the Alaskan village devastated in the pandemic — today called Brevig Mission — to exhume bodies from the mass grave. Hultin took samples of lung tissue but wasn’t able to retrieve the virus. After reading of the new effort in Science, Hultin contacted Taubenberger to volunteer to return to Brevig Mission. The village council permitted him to reopen the grave. In 1997, Hultin, at 72, excavated a well-preserved woman, buried among other victims whose remains had decomposed during periods of thawing. He removed her lungs and shipped them to the team. The tissue tested positive for influenza. Taubenberger, Reid and their colleagues now had enough material to continue. The team published the genetic instructions for the proteins the virus uses to get into and out of cells in 1999 and 2000. In 2005 came the last of a series of papers that together provided the complete sequence of the 1918 influenza virus. It took almost 10 years to complete the project, says Taubenberger, using techniques that at the time “were as cutting-edge as possible, kind of Star Trek–y.” Taubenberger, now at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md., still studies influenza. In his laboratory today, he could sequence the 1918 virus from an autopsy case in about a week, he says. With the genetic blueprint in hand, the researchers were able to reveal some of the virus’s backstory. They compared the 1918 sequence to that of influenza viruses that sicken birds, pigs and people. That way, the team could put together a kind of influenza family tree. It turned out the 1918 virus was the great ancestor. “In some real ways, the 1918 flu never went away,” says Taubenberger. The 1918 virus was an influenza A virus, the type that causes pandemics. Influenza A viruses’ primary homes are the guts of aquatic birds, but the viruses are also found in pigs, horses, people and other animals. When influenza A viruses that have been circulating in different species infect a single animal, say a duck or a pig, the viruses can swap genes for proteins that are important for getting into and out of cells. In November of 1918, influenza killed nearly all the adults living in a small village, now called Brevig Mission, on the Seward Peninsula in Alaska (cross marks the mass grave there). Decades later, lung tissue from a woman who died there proved crucial to the hunt for the 1918 influenza virus.Ned Rozell Sometimes bird-specific versions of these genes can end up in influenza viruses that infect people. The proteins from these genes take the human immune system by surprise. If the virus can spread easily, a pandemic can happen. The family tree suggested that the 1918 virus wasn’t just a few different versions of genes in a more familiar package. The whole virus looked birdlike and appeared to be completely unknown to people. “The 1918 virus was a fundamentally new and different virus that has been able to survive in one form or another for over 100 years,” says David Morens, senior scientific adviser to director Anthony Fauci at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md. But there wasn’t a signpost in the sequence that could explain the 1918 virus’s killer nature. Taubenberger and others turned to research in animals to look for answers. That work has found that the virus induces a strong inflammatory response that harms the lungs. White blood cells called neutrophils swarm into the lungs and cause a lot of bystander damage, says Taubenberger. “It’s not just the virus, it’s the host response to the virus,” he says. “It’s so important to understand the role of the host in this.” How ill someone becomes after a viral infection is influenced by the circumstances of the infection, a person’s age and genetic instruction book, the intricacies of a person’s immune response and the presence of other pathogens. But as we’ve seen with COVID-19, we still don’t know enough to be able to predict who will do well and who will do poorly when viruses invade or “to figure what’s going on inside their body that’s going to turn the tide to end up killing them,” Morens says. “It’s eerie going through another pandemic now, having spent so many years of my life really digging through the accounts of the 1918 flu,” says Reid, executive director of the National Center for Science Education in Oakland, Calif. Many of the mysteries about who became severely ill in that long-ago pandemic have cropped up again a century later with COVID-19. “Why do some people get so sick from the coronavirus and other people don’t … [people] who look on paper like they have a similar risk?”— Aimee Cunningham Support our next century 100 years after our founding, top-quality, fiercely accurate reporting on key advances in science, technology, and medicine has never been more important – or more in need of your support. The best way to help? Subscribe. Subscribe now To stem an outbreak of smallpox in 1947, New York City embarked on a massive vaccination campaign. Crowds formed two lines for free vaccinations on April 14 at Morrisania Hospital in the Bronx.Bettmann/Getty Images Vaccine victories On February 24, 1947, Eugene Le Bar, an American merchant, boarded a bus in Mexico City. During the trip, his head began to ache and he broke out with a rash. He arrived in New York City on March 1 still not feeling himself. Four days later, he was admitted to the hospital. His stay overlapped with a mumps patient named Ismael Acosta and a little girl, almost 2, who had croup. While doctors searched for a diagnosis, Le Bar deteriorated. He died March 10. Acosta and the little girl had been discharged, but returned later in March with rashes. The results of tests for those two led to a review of Le Bar’s autopsy. All together, the information led to a public health emergency. The diagnosis was smallpox, a disease that kills about 30 percent of those sickened and leaves survivors disfigured by prominent scars. More victims turned up. A little boy with whooping cough who had been at the hospital developed a rash. So did Acosta’s 26-year-old wife, Carmen; she died days later. Soon the number of people with smallpox reached 12. New York City embarked on a massive vaccination campaign. At the time, Anthony Fauci was 6 years old, growing up in Brooklyn. Fauci, today the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, or NIAID, in Bethesda, Md., remembers his parents talking about a huge event that would be happening in the city. “We all had to get vaccinated, and vaccination means somebody would get a little needle and prick it multiple times in your arm.” (The smallpox vaccine wasn’t given as a shot; instead, a needle poked the skin repeatedly, ushering a drop of vaccine into the skin.) Fauci and his family were among the millions of New Yorkers immunized that spring, bringing the smallpox outbreak to a close without another person added to the count. In May of 1796, English physician Edward Jenner, depicted here, vaccinated 8-year-old James Phipps with material taken from cowpox sores on the hands and arms of a dairymaid. Two months later, Jenner inoculated Phipps with material from smallpox lesions. The boy did not develop the dreaded disease.Ernest Board/Wellcome Images Throughout history, smallpox was one of the most feared infectious diseases. A British historian penned this description in writing about the 1694 death of Queen Mary II from smallpox at age 32: “The smallpox was always present, filling the church-yards with corpses, tormenting with constant fears all whom it had not yet stricken, leaving on those whose lives it spared the hideous traces of its power.” Vaccination has increased dramatically worldwide in recent decades, though some countries have higher rates than others. Our World in Data tracks the progress by disease and country.OUR WORLD IN DATA Smallpox is also a starring character in the story of vaccines. At the end of the 18th century, the English physician Edward Jenner extracted fluid from a sore caused by cowpox on a dairymaid’s hand and inoculated a young boy with it, a test of the belief among some farmers that a case of cowpox protected against smallpox. The experiment propelled the concept of vaccination forward. By giving the immune system a preview of the pathogen, the body’s defenses were prepared for the main event. What followed exemplifies the fullest power of vaccination. After a worldwide campaign, smallpox was the first infectious disease to be declared eradicated from the globe, in 1980. A scourge that had plagued humankind for at least 3,000 years was consigned to the history books. Other vaccine-preventable diseases — especially those that afflict children — harm many fewer around the world today than in the near past. During the 20th century in the United States, cases of nine diseases, including polio, measles and Haemophilus influenzae type b, declined by 95 to 100 percent after vaccines for those diseases became widely used. Yet there can be “a lack of appreciation for what vaccines have done in terms of getting rid of or managing many infectious diseases,” says virologist A. Oveta Fuller of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. For many today, an understanding of polio also comes from history books. But others who grew up when summers meant polio outbreaks have sharp recollections. One of the most terrifying harms of the poliovirus was that it could weaken or paralyze muscles in the chest, making it impossible to breathe. Patients with this condition relied on an iron lung, also called a tank respirator. The device drew air into the lungs and forced it out by changing the pressure in the tank.Food Collection/Alamy Stock Photo Paul Offit, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, was 5 years old in 1956. After surgery for a problem with his foot, he stayed for about six weeks in a hospital’s chronic care facility. It was primarily a polio ward. He was surrounded by children whose limbs were suspended in traction or whose bodies were swallowed in iron lungs. The first polio vaccine became available in 1955, but Offit hadn’t been immunized for it yet. “It was a lonely, frightening experience,” Offit says. Parents were allowed to visit only one hour a week. He could see “how vulnerable and helpless and alone all of those children were.” Offit’s bed was next to a window, which gave him a view of the building’s front door. He’d stare at the entrance, “waiting for someone to come save me.” Nurse Grace Kyler cares for two young boys in leg braces, used when leg muscles were weakened by polio, at the Florida A&M University Hospital in Tallahassee. Sometimes the muscle damage from polio was temporary, but more often the disease left patients with permanent damage.Tallahassee Democrat Collection, Florida Memory, State Library and Archives of Florida As fate would have it, Offit later trained at that same hospital in Baltimore as a medical student. The ward he had languished in as a child was now a suite of offices. The room looked the same, even the molding, “and that window was still there,” Offit says. “I remember walking up and looking out that window and seeing the same thing I saw 20 years earlier and just fighting back tears. I remember it well.” Memorial Day weekend in the United States used to herald a season of polio fear, as cases rose in summertime. Children were barred from swimming pools and crowds. Anthony Fauci’s parents wouldn’t allow him and his sister to go to the beach at Coney Island. “All of us as kids knew somebody who’d been paralyzed,” says David Morens, who grew up in the 1950s and is senior scientific adviser to Fauci. Jonas Salk (shown) developed the first polio vaccine, based on an inactivated version of the virus. When clinical trial results for the vaccine were announced in 1955, U.S. church bells rang and people celebrated in the streets.Keystone Features/Getty Images Albert Sabin (left) developed an oral polio vaccine, made with a weakened version of the virus. The vaccine, delivered on a sugar cube, inspired the song “A Spoonful of Sugar” from Mary Poppins.World History Archive/Alamy Stock Photo Vaccines provided an exit from this recurring nightmare, and the two developed to thwart polio each drew on different advances. First came Jonas Salk’s “killed” polio vaccine, approved in 1955. Made with poliovirus that had been treated with formaldehyde, the virus could no longer cause harm, but the body could still mount an immune response against it. About seven decades earlier, Louis Pasteur had demonstrated that rabies virus could be inactivated to develop a rabies vaccine. Vaccine inspiration The Sherman Brothers wrote the lyrics to “A Spoonful of Sugar” after Robert B. Sherman’s son told him about receiving the oral polio vaccine at school in 1962. In 1961, Albert Sabin’s oral polio vaccine became available. Often delivered on a sugar cube, Sabin’s easily digested vaccine was the inspiration for the song “A Spoonful of Sugar” in Mary Poppins. Sabin’s approach was to weaken the poliovirus by making it replicate in nonhuman cells. Forced into an unfamiliar environment, the virus made genetic changes that diminished its ability to cause disease. This method, called attenuation, had first been used about 25 years earlier to create a yellow fever vaccine. Life before and after polio vaccines was like night and day. In 1952, polio paralyzed more than 21,000 people in the United States. Thirteen years later, that number had plummeted to 61. By 1979, polio was eliminated in the country. With new immunizations, one by one, common childhood ailments all but vanished in the United States: measles, rubella, chicken pox, and meningitis caused by bacteria. When Kathryn Edwards trained in pediatrics in Chicago in the mid- to late 1970s, “we were really in the grips of Haemophilus influenzae meningitis.” (H. influenzae, formerly Bacillus influenzae, is the misnamed bacterium that had once been suspected of causing influenza.) There would often be four or five children at a time hospitalized with this dangerous swelling of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord, says Edwards, an infectious disease pediatrician and vaccine researcher at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Nashville. Some children with H. influenzae meningitis were left with brain damage, while about 5 percent died. Edwards still remembers a young patient lost to the disease the last night of her training. Elvis Presley received his polio vaccination in 1956 in New York City at CBS Studio 50, before an airing of The Ed Sullivan Show. Leona Baumgartner (right), the city’s health commissioner, said she hoped Presley’s shot would encourage his teenage fans to get vaccinated. Seymour Wally/NY Daily News Archive via Getty Images A plea to parents President John F. Kennedy opened an address on April 12, 1961, the sixth anniversary of the Salk polio vaccine trial announcement, with a call for parents in America to get their children vaccinated. Source: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library/National Archives The first vaccine against H. influenzae type b, the type that most commonly caused meningitis and other severe infections, became available in the United States in 1985. More effective vaccines came a few years later, evaluated by Edwards and colleagues. Again the impact was unmistakable. Before 1985, close to 20,000 children, most of them under age 5, developed severe infections (those that invade usually germfree areas of the body like the blood) from H. influenzae type b each year, including 12,000 with bacterial meningitis. By 1994 and 1995, the incidence of severe disease had fallen 98 percent in children age 4 or younger. With the availability of vaccines against H. influenzae and other pathogens, says Edwards, “the practice of pediatrics is much different now than when I began 40 years ago.” The scope of infectious diseases children face worldwide is slowly changing too. From 2000 to 2018, 23 million deaths globally were prevented by measles vaccination. But there are still millions of children around the world missing out on basic immunizations that are routine in the United States. The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the problem: An estimated 23 million children did not receive childhood vaccines in 2020, about 3.7 million more than 2019. The work of developing vaccines against COVID-19 began shortly after researchers worked out the genetic sequence of the new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, in January 2020. Previous studies of the coronaviruses behind Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, or SARS, and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, or MERS, had identified a viral protein that would effectively ramp up an immune response. And the basic research that would underpin a new vaccine technology, which would be used for two of the first COVID-19 vaccines, had been going on for decades. The approach is based on messenger RNA, which carries out of the cell nucleus the instructions for making a protein. The vaccines have the guide for the viral protein; the body makes that protein and produces antibodies against it. Some of the crucial work, modifying the instructions for the viral protein so the body wouldn’t see the guide as an invader, came from RNA biologist Katalin Karikó, immunologist Drew Weissman and colleagues in the mid- to late 2000s. People attend a polio vaccine clinic in 1959 in the Hill District section of Pittsburgh.Charles ‘Teenie’ Harris/Teenie Harris Archive/Carnegie Museum of Art/Getty Image COVID-19 vaccines were created and tested in the shortest timeline for any vaccines yet. But that efficiency wasn’t matched in the distribution. While there haven’t been enough shots available globally, the United States, a country awash in supply, has struggled to immunize everyone eligible. Some people haven’t been vaccinated because they can’t take time off work to recover from side effects or are worried they’ll have to pay for the shots. Others don’t see COVID-19 as a threat and don’t see the need for the vaccine. COVID-19 has killed millions of people worldwide. Yet perhaps it would be more terrifying if it primarily threatened children. The horror of polio was that it could leave children paralyzed for the rest of their lives, Offit says; it was as though children had been injured in war. Fuller thinks that seeing the harm that polio could do to children helped make Americans eager for polio vaccines. During the COVID-19 pandemic, “because we were all isolated, we didn’t see each other really suffering or dealing with the effects of this virus,” she says. In 1954, 1.8 million children participated in the Salk polio vaccine trial. This Hearst newsreel from April 1, 1954, shows New York City children who were part of the trial, sponsored by the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis. The trial’s positive results were announced with much fanfare on April 12, 1955. When virologist Katherine Spindler of the University of Michigan was growing up, she had measles, mumps and rubella. The vaccines for those afflictions “came along too late for me,” Spindler says. She still remembers the name of her older brother’s classmate who died in eighth grade of an infectious disease. The routine immunizations that are now regular parts of pediatrician appointments mean that most of us “don’t know what it’s like to have polio or to die from measles.” Spindler found getting the COVID-19 vaccine “so meaningful,” thinking about all of the science that came together to develop it. People have e-mailed her with questions about the vaccine. One woman who had an appointment but wasn’t sure she wanted to keep it wrote several times. Spindler spent a few hours responding. Finally, she got an e-mail back with a picture of the woman in her car getting the shot. “Tears came to my eyes,” Spindler says. “One person vaccinated feels like such a victory.”— Aimee Cunningham Spotlight Epidemics and their aftermath Vaccine hesitancy is nothing new. Here’s the damage it’s done over centuries Pockets of people have railed against vaccines as long as the preventives have existed. By Tara HaelleMay 11, 2021 Sanatoriums and stigma When Cynthia Dockrell’s brother was just shy of 4 years old, he had to leave the family. It was December 1955, and he had been diagnosed with tuberculosis. He spent the next two years of his life at a children’s sanatorium, much of it strapped to a bed, the tactic employed to keep young patients at rest. Patti Barnaby Koltes was in fifth grade in 1964 when her mother left for a sanatorium. Barnaby Koltes remembers being tucked in her bed with the lights out, her mother kneeling next to her, telling Barnaby Koltes she was going away. Barnaby Koltes asked if her mother was going to die. Patti Barnaby Koltes and her three siblings are shown here in 1962, when Barnaby Koltes (second from left), the eldest, was 9 years old. When Barnaby Koltes’ mother left for a tuberculosis sanatorium two years later, the siblings had one visit with her, at Christmas.Courtesy of Patti Barnaby Koltes Dockrell’s brother and Barnaby Koltes’ mother had tuberculosis at a time when old and new treatment approaches overlapped. A diagnosis could still mean a long stay in a sanatorium. But now, finally, there was a cure: antibacterials. In 1882 the German physician Robert Koch announced his discovery of the germ that causes tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis. But it was decades before researchers could target the pathogen. A chance finding in 1928 by the Scottish bacteriologist Alexander Fleming, that a moldy spot on a petri dish of bacteria had stopped the bacteria’s growth, helped usher in the antibacterial era. By 1940, scientists at Oxford University had demonstrated that penicillin protected animals from several different bacterial infections. By 1945, pharmacies in United States carried the drug. Antibiotics (derived from molds and bacteria) like penicillin and other antibacterials such as the chemical sulfanilamide changed medicine and extended lives. The drugs meant that people no longer died regularly from infections that set in after injuries or surgeries. Antibacterials also made chemotherapy and organ transplants, during which the immune system is suppressed, possible. Raining down sorrow American singer and songwriter Jimmie Rodgers, the first performer inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame, worked on the railroad as a baggage master and brakeman until he developed tuberculosis in 1924. He then turned his full attention to music, finding fame just a few years later. His career was cut short when he died of a hemorrhage in 1933 at age 35. Scientists discovered antibacterials that worked against tuberculosis by the mid-1940s, with more and better options arriving in the next two decades. The death rate from tuberculosis had been declining in some parts of the world since roughly the mid-1800s, likely due in part to improved living conditions and nascent public health measures. People expected that antibacterials would hasten the end of tuberculosis. But the drugs were not a death knell, nor could antibacterials fully do away with the stigma that shadowed the disease. Treatments for tuberculosis are lifesaving, yet this ancient disease and its trauma are decidedly still here. M. tuberculosis has been infecting and killing people for thousands of years. The ancient Greeks called it phthisis, which translates to consumption. Hippocrates gave the disease this name, and wrote of its deadly nature: “For consumption was the worst of the diseases that occurred, and alone was responsible for the great mortality.” The body’s deterioration tracked the disease’s progression — the pallid sufferer coughed up blood and lost weight, seeming to waste away. People with tuberculosis have faced stigma throughout history, from when it was thought to be hereditary through the discovery of M. tuberculosis, which focused attention on germs that people carried or those in their homes. Today, there is still the assumption that “you caught it because you were dirty or unhygienic,” says social scientist Amrita Daftary of York University in Toronto. Cynthia Dockrell’s brother spent two years at a juvenile tuberculosis sanatorium in North Reading, Mass. Dockrell’s parents celebrated Christmas with their son at the sanatorium in 1956. Courtesy of Cynthia Dockrell But a person can be exposed to tuberculosis just by taking a breath. The airborne disease spreads by talking, singing, sneezing or coughing. Five to 15 percent of those infected become sick with tuberculosis in the following months to a few years, developing symptoms such as fever, cough, night sweats, weakness and fatigue. People with the disease are contagious. The majority of those who become infected don’t develop the disease in this time frame. Instead, they control the infection, don’t have symptoms and aren’t contagious — though the infection can eventually progress to tuberculosis, especially if the immune system stops working well. Why “some people progress to active tuberculosis and then others can control” the infection and not get sick is still a big research question, says Jyothi Rengarajan, an immunologist and microbiologist at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta. As M. tuberculosis and the immune system duel it out in the lungs, a structure called a granuloma forms. It’s a mass of immune cells that walls off the bacteria but can also allow the pathogen to persist inside. In some people, the granuloma contains the infection. In others, it breaks down, destroying lung cells and allowing the bacteria to spread. Without treatment, lung damage continues and can be fatal. The Trudeau Sanitarium in Saranac Lake, N.Y., had “a summer camp–like atmosphere … with its central infirmary building and surrounding fieldstone cottages set in the foothills of the Adirondack mountains,” wrote Gordon Snider, who arrived at Trudeau in 1949 to train in pulmonary disease. Several of the sanitarium’s cottages and the chapel are shown here.Detroit Publishing Co. no. 019168; Gift: State Historical Society of Colorado/Library of Congress Dockrell’s brother was exposed to tuberculosis by their great-uncle, who lived with their grandparents. Barnaby Koltes’ mother was likely exposed while working as a nurse before her four children were born, becoming ill years later. Dockrell, a writer and former editor who lives in Newton, Mass., doesn’t recall the day her brother left for the sanatorium. But she has a clear memory of visiting him once. She wasn’t allowed inside, so her brother came to the window. “I can still see his face looking down at me,” she says. The first sanatoriums opened in the mid-1800s, embracing a treatment of fresh air, nutritious meals and, ultimately, bed rest for tuberculosis. The facilities also separated the contagious sick from everyone else. Regimens were strict. A 32-year-old woman chronicled her time at a tuberculosis sanatorium in England in the 1940s, away from her husband and 15-month-old son. She described the sanatorium’s rules in her diary: “Absolute and utter rest of mind and body — no bath, no movement except to toilet once a day, no sitting up except propped by pillows and semi-reclining, no deep breath. Lead the life of a log, in fact.” At the Trudeau Sanitarium in Saranac Lake, N.Y., “the initial prescription for most patients was bed rest 24 hours a day,” wrote Gordon Snider, who arrived there in 1949 to train in pulmonary disease. Founded in 1884 by the American physician and tuberculosis sufferer Edward Livingston Trudeau, the facility had two hospital units for new and very sick patients and, for recovering patients, cottages with screened porches to provide fresh air. The day that Cynthia Dockrell’s brother was discharged from the sanatorium, the family celebrated with an outing to a park. Dockrell, shown here with her brother during that outing, recalls of his absence, “I just waited … for this strange time to be over and for my brother to come back.”Courtesy of Cynthia Dockrell The first antibacterial available to treat tuberculosis, streptomycin, was used at Trudeau soon after the drug’s discovery in the early 1940s. But scientists quickly realized that M. tuberculosis could become resistant to the effects of one drug. In 1950, a British clinical trial established that the disease was best treated with a combination of drugs, at that time streptomycin and para-aminosalicylic acid, or PAS. However beneficial, PAS tasted horrible and left people nauseous and bloated. At Trudeau, “patients hated it,” Snider wrote in Annals of Internal Medicine in 1997. “The window screens of patients’ rooms and the walls below them became white with discarded para-aminosalicylic acid.” Better antibacterials were on the horizon. In 1952 came news of a “wonder drug” called isoniazid that was safe and well-tolerated. Over the next two decades, three additional, effective drugs for the disease — ethambutol, rifampin and pyrazinamide — arrived. These four drugs are still used today, combined in a six-month regimen. As studies showed that sanatoriums didn’t add to what antibacterials offered, the facilities began closing, with most shuttered or shifted to other uses by the late 1970s. But the United States was not finished with tuberculosis. The 1980s and ’90s saw a resurgence of the disease, as strains developed resistance to several drugs and as the epidemic of HIV, which weakened the immune system, took off. Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, caused by bacteria that can fend off isoniazid and rifampin, is still curable but needs a longer treatment with different, more toxic drugs. Patti Barnaby Koltes’ mother and father took a cruise in 1964 (the two are shown on the deck) after Barnaby Koltes’ mother returned from a six-month stay at a tuberculosis sanatorium in Schenectady County, N.Y. Courtesy of Patti Barnaby Koltes When Dockrell’s brother and Koltes’ mother had tuberculosis, they didn’t have to worry about multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. They were cured with the drugs available at the time. But there was no treatment offered for the trauma that remained. For Dockrell’s parents, the pain of separation and the worry over their son’s health was compounded by stigma. Her parents’ friends stayed away. Dockrell was kept from other kids. Even Dockrell’s maternal grandparents vanished from the family’s lives. Six of her grandmother’s siblings had had the disease, and her grandmother, Dockrell says, “just could not deal with it.” The day her brother finally came home was joyous. “My parents were very happy in a way that they hadn’t been in a long time,” Dockrell says. Her parents were advised to put the illness and absence behind them and move on. “There was so much trauma surrounding this event that was never processed,” Dockrell says. The grief and fear that remained “had lasting psychological effects for all of us.” Barnaby Koltes sensed that she couldn’t rely on her mother upon her return from the sanatorium. The experience left Barnaby Koltes’ mother bitter and suspicious. She felt abandoned by friends. She thought she had lost her status as a doctor’s wife, Barnaby Koltes says. Her mother had kept the house clean as an operating room, Barnaby Koltes remembers, yet she had had this “dirty disease.” Battle cry American singer and AIDS activist Michael Callen, the author of Surviving AIDS, was diagnosed with the disease in 1982. He wanted to change how people thought about living with AIDS. “I don’t say hope will guarantee you’ll beat AIDS,” he said, “but you’ve got to have it to be in the running.” A survivor for a dozen years, he died of AIDS-related complications in 1993 at the age of 38. Barnaby Koltes’ mother developed dementia later in life. At one point, Barnaby Koltes, a newspaper columnist who lives in Naperville, Ill., was helping her parents choose a Florida retirement community that offered assisted living. Barnaby Koltes suggested a place called The Glenridge. Her mother did not want to see it. “She didn’t want to go because of the name,” Barnaby Koltes says. It was the same name as the sanatorium she had stayed at decades earlier. Stigma can be painful, isolating and discriminatory. “Persons who had been treated for tuberculosis were seriously stigmatized,” Gordon Snider wrote. “The fears and myths that grew up around the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) soon after its appearance in the early 1980s reminded me of tuberculosis as I had known it at mid-century.” The HIV epidemic is ongoing. People who become HIV positive can still be reluctant to tell their families and friends because of stigma. But decades of research and advocacy have led to powerful antiretroviral drugs that can make HIV a chronic, manageable illness. The effectiveness of the drugs — a person taking antiretroviral therapy who has an undetectable amount of virus in the blood cannot spread the virus through sex — inspired the prominent undetectable = untransmittable campaign, which seeks to reduce HIV-related stigma. There is no similar stigma-reducing campaign for tuberculosis, says Daftary. She argues that along with messaging about contagiousness and distancing, patients need to hear that tuberculosis is curable. “Yes, it’s contagious, but you can become noninfectious” with treatment, she says. The stigma and fear that still trail tuberculosis can stop people from seeking the care and antibacterials they need. Global deaths from tuberculosis and HIV E. Otwell; Sources: HIV and TB: IHME Global Burden of Disease; COVID: WHOE. Otwell; Sources: HIV and TB: IHME Global Burden of Disease; COVID: WHO The leading killers globally among infectious diseases in recent decades include HIV and tuberculosis. During its peak in the early 2000s, HIV overtook tuberculosis in worldwide deaths. In 2020, estimated deaths from COVID surpassed both. In 2020, there were an estimated 1.5 million deaths from tuberculosis. (It was the top infectious disease killer from a single pathogen globally in 2019, but COVID-19 took the lead spot in 2020.) Though the worldwide toll of tuberculosis is glaring, the disease remains largely out of view in the United States, where it tends to strike people who are poor, homeless or in prison, or immigrants from countries with high case rates — people who are already facing inequities in society. In an echo back to the time when sanatoriums kept families apart, the COVID-19 pandemic has separated many from ill loved ones. In the spring of 2020, Dockrell’s mother developed COVID-19 in her nursing home. Visitors weren’t allowed inside. So Dockrell stood by the entrance, eyes lifted to a fifth-floor window to see her mother — much like as a child, Dockrell had looked up to see her brother’s face.— Aimee Cunningham Spotlight Epidemics and their aftermath After 40 years of AIDS, here’s why we still don’t have an HIV vaccine The unique life cycle of HIV has posed major challenges for scientists in the search for an effective vaccine. By Erin Garcia de JesúsJune 4, 2021 Emerging fungal threats Tyson Bottenus once captained an 80-foot schooner called the Aquidneck. He sailed tourists off the coast of Newport, R.I., discussing the area’s history and sites. In January of 2018, he had finished another season at the schooner’s helm and had recently gotten engaged to his partner of many years, Liza Burkin. To celebrate, the couple, avid cyclists who’ve ridden through New Zealand and Japan, set off for a bike tour of Costa Rica. For Tyson Bottenus, shown here at the helm of the Aquidneck, being the captain of a schooner was “one of the best jobs I’ve ever had.” When he toured passengers around the sites of Newport, R.I., he also liked to discuss marine pollution and other environmental topics. Courtesy of Bottenus At one point, riding to Montezuma, on the Nicoya Peninsula, “we were on this very, very dusty road for a long time,” Bottenus says. “It was a dirty, sandy, hard-packed road.” While going downhill, Bottenus crashed, badly scraping his elbow. The next morning, he went to a doctor, who spent about an hour picking out little rocks and cleaning dirt from the wound before she bandaged it up. The injury kept him from swimming but otherwise didn’t disrupt the trip. About a month after returning to Rhode Island, Bottenus started having headaches. And he couldn’t control his mouth properly — his speech was off, and he was drooling. Eventually his doctor ordered an MRI. It revealed a lesion in his brain. “My first thought was, I must have some sort of cancer,” he says. “I’m only 31…. I’m way too young for this.” Doctors believe Tyson Bottenus picked up a fungal infection during a biking trip in Costa Rica. He is shown here after a crash that injured his arm.Courtesy of Bottenus It wasn’t cancer. Nor was it one of a series of infections proposed as doctors searched for a diagnosis. Bottenus had two brain biopsies, but neither provided enough tissue to identify the problem. In August of 2018, Bottenus became very ill and was hospitalized. He was having problems with his right leg and couldn’t walk. His mouth muscles weren’t working. And he could no longer tie the drawstring of his pants with a square knot. Sailors commonly use a square knot to fasten two ropes together. It’s a knot Bottenus has taught others and could previously do with his eyes closed. “I’m a captain of boats, supposedly,” he remembers thinking. “I am not the person I think I am.” The bright spot in this image of Tyson Bottenus’ brain from 2018 shows a lesion that was later diagnosed as an infection with the fungus Cladophialophora bantiana. Courtesy of Bottenus Doctors performed a third brain biopsy, taking a slightly larger amount of tissue this time. Finally, Bottenus got a diagnosis: He had a fungus growing in his brain. It was a black mold called Cladophialophora bantiana that can breach the blood-brain barrier. The best medical guess is that Bottenus was exposed in Costa Rica — likely from the dusty air he inhaled, or perhaps from his debris-laden elbow wound. People are exposed to fungi all the time, and usually we get along just fine. Fungi are in the air, in the soil and in us, part of the community of microbes that live in our bodies. Root-associated fungi form crucial partnerships with more than 90 percent of land plant species, helping the plants absorb water and nutrients from the soil in exchange for food. But some fungi are also infectious pathogens that can cause pneumonia, blindness and meningitis. An estimated 2 million people globally die from fungal diseases each year. And pathogenic fungi tend to harm those with the least means. Fungal keratitis, an infection of the cornea, strikes more than a million people annually, estimates suggest, and blinds around 600,000. Found in tropical and subtropical areas, the disease — usually treatable with early diagnosis — often impacts young, poor agricultural workers. Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis, as another example, is a lung infection that commonly occurs in people already burdened with lung damage from tuberculosis. Fungal infections are also a threat to people with HIV, a virus that weakens the immune system. When defenses are down, typically benign fungi can take advantage of the gaps in our immunological armor and cause an infection. In resource-rich areas, fungal infections have decreased with earlier HIV diagnosis and the availability of antiretroviral drugs. But where people can’t get early, consistent HIV care, fungal infections have stubbornly persisted as dangerous complications to HIV and AIDS. Advances in modern medicine that have extended lives have also led to opportunities for fungi to infect. Organ transplantation and treatments for cancer and autoimmune diseases have created a large population of people who regularly take drugs that inhibit components of the immune system, leaving these patients susceptible to fungal invaders. Some fungi have emerged more recently as threats to human health. First reported in 2009, as a source of an ear infection, Candida auris unexpectedly caused outbreaks of invasive infections — those that reach the blood or spinal fluid or other sterile areas of the body — on three continents a few years later. Hospital patients are at risk from the yeast, which has proved resistant to certain antifungal drugs. Scientists have proposed that the emergence of C. auris as a danger to people may be tied to our warming climate, with the yeast gaining temperature tolerance in the environment. That could explain why C. auris can replicate inside human bodies, a niche that’s usually too hot for many fungi. The warming climate may make other fungal pathogens more widespread. Coccidioides, a fungus that shape-shifts from a soil-dwelling, fluffy mold to aerosolized spores to round, parasitic cells at the site of infection, causes a disease called valley fever. Someone who breathes in the spores might not have symptoms at all or could become fatigued, short of breath and develop a fever, cough and night sweats. It’s among the fungal pathogens that also strike healthy immune systems. In the United States in 2019, 18,407 cases were reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Coccidioides is primarily found in southwestern states, but global warming could change that. “The entire western United States has been identified as potential habitat,” says medical mycologist Bridget Marie Barker of Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff. The fungi thrive in hot, dry environments where there are brief, heavy rains. Global warming is expected to make western states hotter and alter precipitation patterns. Research reported in GeoHealth in 2019 predicts that by 2100 the areas impacted by Coccidioides could expand north in the western half of the country and annual cases could increase by 50 percent. By the end of the century, global warming could expand the habitat of the fungus that causes a disease known as valley fever throughout the western United States. These maps show the predicted increase in the incidence of the disease. Symptoms include fever, fatigue and cough.M.E. Gorris et al/Geohealth 2019By the end of the century, global warming could expand the habitat of the fungus that causes a disease known as valley fever throughout the western United States. These maps show the predicted increase in the incidence of the disease. Symptoms include fever, fatigue and cough.M.E. Gorris et al/Geohealth 2019 Despite the heavy burden of fungal diseases and the potential for that burden to grow, there are no approved vaccines against fungi, and the medicine cabinet of fungal remedies does not go deep. There are only a few different types of antifungal drugs. It’s difficult to develop antifungals in part because fungi are eukaryotes — like us, and unlike bacteria, their cells have distinct membrane-bound compartments, including a nucleus that holds their genetic material. That shared biology means that if a drug can kill fungi, it could harm us too. The antifungals that do exist “are not spectacular,” says pediatric infectious disease physician and medical mycologist Damian Krysan of the University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine. Even with treatment, invasive fungal infections are difficult to survive. For example, an invasive infection with the mold Aspergillus has a mortality rate ranging from 40 to 90 percent in immunocompromised patients, depending on where the infection is, among other factors. For a cancer patient with a great prognosis who develops an Aspergillus infection, Krysan says, “you can be cured of your cancer and die of your fungal infection.” Even diagnosing a fungal infection is challenging. For one, there are fewer diagnostic tests specific to fungi than there are for viruses and bacteria. Another problem is that the symptoms of a fungal infection can resemble those caused by other pathogens. And fungi grow slowly, so it takes longer to confirm that a blood or tissue sample is infected with a fungus. A delayed diagnosis can mean delayed treatment, which complicates the chances of recovery. 1.5 million Estimated deaths from tuberculosis in 2020 1.8 million to 3 million Estimated deaths from COVID-19 in 2020 2 million Estimated annual deaths from fungal diseases Source: World Health Organization; Global Action Fund for Fungal Infections Into this uncertain medical terrain landed Bottenus, a previously healthy young man who acquired an exceedingly rare fungal infection in his brain. Bottenus has been treated with antifungal drugs and steroids. It’s been a “vicious cycle,” says Robbie Goldstein, an infectious disease physician at Massachusetts General Hospital who has been part of Bottenus’ team of doctors. The steroids reduce the inflammation from the infection, which puts dangerous pressure on Bottenus’ brain. But the steroids also suppress his immune system, impairing his ability to clear the fungus. Whenever Bottenus’ doctors have tried to taper his steroids, the inflammation in his brain has gotten worse. As the COVID-19 pandemic began, Bottenus became nervous that being immunocompromised put him at greater risk of getting sick from the virus. He decided to stop taking the steroids. The resulting inflammation triggered a stroke at the end of March 2020. Pandemic restrictions prevented Burkin from going to the hospital with Bottenus or visiting him during the weeks he was there. Bottenus is still coping with the effects of the brain infection and the stroke. He has lost most of his peripheral vision. His speech is altered. Navigation is a struggle — he has a hard time finding his way around even in his home. Bottenus kept telling himself that he’d wake up one day and be back to where he used to be, “but of course that’s a fantasy,” he says. Yet other brain functions don’t seem to have been harmed. Bottenus was able to begin graduate school in the fall of 2020, and he has done well in his classes. “He can’t really bike across our neighborhood by himself,” Burkin says, “but he can write like a 20-page research paper.” The whole experience has changed Bottenus’ personality, says Burkin. Her adventurous partner has become reliant on structure and routine. “I think that’s really normal for people who’ve gone through a life-threatening disease, where you have no control,” she says. Bottenus says, living “is as much adventure as I can get.” In the published cases of C. bantiana infections, the death rate can be as high as 70 percent. Many times the infection isn’t diagnosed until a patient’s autopsy, Goldstein says. For those who live with this infection, he says, the studies “don’t say what that life is like.” Bottenus and Burkin are crossing uncharted medical territory in real time. For now, Bottenus is a passenger on friends’ boats. When he bikes, he follows Burkin, or they ride a tandem. He makes sure to have his cell phone when he goes out, in case he gets lost. “He used to literally be able to do celestial navigation and lead us on bike tours across continents,” Burkin says. “I don’t know that it is permanent, these changes. I don’t think there’s any way to know.” Tyson Bottenus and his partner, Liza Burkin, an urban planner, ride their tandem bike in the spring of 2021. Bottenus’ infection with a rare fungus is “the universe being purely chaotic,” Burkin says.Courtesy of Bottenus But “I can’t blame this fungus,” she says. “We were out on a bike ride and some dirt got into his body.” Sometimes a doctor meets a patient after they’ve already been seriously harmed by an infection, Goldstein says. But he got to know Bottenus from the beginning, when Bottenus was a sailing captain, searching for a diagnosis. Goldstein says this experience has made him really aware, when he’s talking to a patient, of how devastating an infection can be to the life they had before. “Before there was an infection,” he says, “there was a person.”— Aimee Cunningham The aftermath At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, Lakshmi Krishnan and S. Michelle Ogunwole were internists at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. Patients were dying. There wasn’t enough personal protective equipment for staff. So much about COVID-19 was still unknown. “It was terrifying,” says Krishnan, now at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. Some of her colleagues were making wills. S. Michelle Ogunwole treated patients at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. “It was a really chaotic time,” she says. It was difficult to keep her distance from her patients.Courtesy S. Michelle Ogunwole And the patients were largely alone. Ogunwole, also a health disparities researcher at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, remembers an older Black woman who had been hospitalized with COVID-19 for months. She was well enough to move out of the intensive care unit but was extremely debilitated because she hadn’t walked in so long, Ogunwole says. A tube in her windpipe made it difficult to talk. The woman’s family was not there. “There was nobody to speak for her,” Ogunwole says. It made Ogunwole think of her mother, “an incredibly vibrant person … the life of the party.” If it was her mom in that bed, no one would have known who she is. That she likes to dance for no reason. That she picks up a different sport every year. Ogunwole felt her patient’s sorrow and loss. Millions are reckoning with the pandemic’s cost to their physical and mental health. The toll is not unlike that of tuberculosis, AIDS, fungal diseases, childhood infectious diseases or the many other outbreaks and epidemics of the last century. Singer Ricky Likabu, of the Congolese band Staff Benda Bilili, which means “look beyond appearances,” performs a song describing his experience with polio and encouraging vaccination. Trinity Film/YouTube We should know by heart how lives — and whose lives — are changed by infectious disease outbreaks. But time and again, there’s a clamor to leave outbreaks behind us. And the trauma and the inequities stay. The question this time, says historian Nancy Bristow of the University of Puget Sound in Tacoma, Wash., is, “Can we do a better job of continuing to hear the stories of those who have been affected?” 1 million Estimated number of children who lost one or both parents to COVID-19 from March 2020 to April 2021 17 million Estimated number of children who have lost one or both parents to AIDS during the 30 years of the global HIV epidemic SOURCE: S.D. HILLIS ET AL/LANCET 2021; USAID The stories of children who have lost one parent or both, for example. For her book American Pandemic: The Lost Worlds of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic, Bristow interviewed Lillian Kancianich, born in a small town in North Dakota. Kancianich’s mother died of influenza when Kancianich was a baby. The story was that her mother was out sweeping the porch on Armistice Day and then was never seen again, Bristow says. Kancianich bounced among extended family members’ houses for two years before she was able to call one home. She told Bristow that as a child, when asked what she wanted to be when she grew up, her answer was a stepmother. “The loss of that parent changed her life completely,” Bristow says. These stories have continued. In roughly the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic, an estimated 1 million children worldwide experienced the death of a mother, a father or both, researchers reported in July in the Lancet. The number is staggering, and yet a fraction of the estimated 17 million children who have lost one or both parents to AIDS in roughly the last three decades, according to the United States Agency for International Development. Ninety percent of those children live in sub-Saharan Africa. The COVID-19 pandemic is “a generation defining event,” says Lakshmi Krishnan, a historian of medicine. “It’s going to change us in different ways.”Courtesy of Lakshmi Krishnan Nearly 105,000 children in the United States are facing life without one or both parents due to COVID-19, the study in the Lancet found. “Evidence from previous epidemics shows that ineffective responses to the death of a parent or caregiver, even when there is a surviving parent or caregiver, can lead to deleterious psychosocial, neurocognitive, socioeconomic, and biomedical outcomes for children,” the authors write. An earlier study on parental death due to COVID-19 in the United States took race and ethnicity into account. While Black children make up only 14 percent of children in the United States, they made up 20 percent of those who had lost a parent, researchers reported in April in JAMA Pediatrics. When Krishnan was treating patients early in the pandemic, she remembers noting, “It’s all my Black and brown patients that are getting upgraded to the intensive care unit.” Research has revealed a disproportionate impact among Black, Latino and Native Americans in terms of infection, hospitalization and death. S. Michelle Ogunwole, a health disparities researcher, says the COVID-19 pandemic has brought more awareness that racism in the United States is a public health crisis. Courtesy of S. Michelle Ogunwole “COVID has unveiled disparities in health,” but the pandemic didn’t create them, says A. Oveta Fuller, a virologist at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. “This is not new.” At the turn of the 20th century, Black Americans’ death rates were higher than white Americans for tuberculosis, pneumonia and, in children, diarrheal disease and diseases of malnutrition, wrote W.E.B. Du Bois in 1906, “an indication of social and economic position.” Racism and segregation restricted access to health care, housing and wealth for Black Americans. The accounts from 1918 in Black newspapers in Philadelphia and Chicago leave the impression that the rates of influenza in Black communities were lower than in white communities, says medical historian and physician Vanessa Northington Gamble of George Washington University in Washington, D.C. Yet it was clear that the number of Black people who did have flu “overwhelmed the medical care facilities that were available to them,” she says. White hospitals wouldn’t accept Black patients or sent them to the basement or other segregated areas. Black hospitals didn’t have the capacity for everyone who needed care. So Black communities came together to provide for their own, Northington Gamble says. When every one of the 75 beds at Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital in Philadelphia filled up, its medical director, with no support from the city’s board of health, managed to open an emergency annex for Black patients. Black women volunteers in Chicago made house visits to tend to the sick. Black nurses also cared for Black influenza patients in their homes. Bessie B. Hawes, a 1918 graduate of the Tuskegee Institute’s nursing program, described her experience caring for a family of 10, “dying for the want of attention,” in a rural area of Alabama. “As I entered the little country cabin, I found the mother dead in bed, the father and the remainder of the family running temperatures of 102 to 104˚. Some had influenza and others had pneumonia…. I saw at a glance that I had much work to do…. I milked the cow, gave medicine, and did everything I could to help conditions.” One of the legacies of the 1918 pandemic is “this long-standing tradition of the Black community of standing up and taking care of itself,” says Northington Gamble. The tradition continues, she says, with the work of organizations including the Black Doctors COVID-19 Consortium, created to make it easier for Black communities in the Philadelphia area to receive COVID-19 testing and vaccination. Black nurses were barred from military service during World War I. As the influenza pandemic raced through military training camps, the army finally accepted Black nurses two days after the war ended. Nine of the first group of 18, shown here around 1919, went to Camp Sherman in Ohio.Special Collections and University Archives, University of Massachusetts Amherst Libraries When Black people did become ill with influenza in the 1918 pandemic, they were more likely to die than white people with influenza, researchers reported in 2019 in the International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. That higher likelihood of death “could be attributed to several factors still present today: higher risk for pulmonary disease, malnutrition, poor housing conditions, social and economic disparities, and inadequate access to care,” Krishnan, Ogunwole and their colleague Lisa Cooper of Johns Hopkins University wrote last year in Annals of Internal Medicine. The societal systems that foster racial discrimination and lead to health inequities must be addressed, says Ogunwole. “There is no amount of resilience that overcomes that.” The suffering of the 1918 pandemic was overshadowed by the end of World War I, says Bristow. The war was publicly memorialized with monuments and a holiday. “The pandemic goes unspoken,” she says, because it doesn’t fit with the victorious narrative of the war. Only a few fictional works that drew upon the 1918 pandemic were published in the following decades. A memorial displays the names of victims of COVID-19 on yellow hearts outside of the U.S. Capitol on May 5 in Washington, D.C. In September, the number of people in the United States who had died of COVID-19 surpassed the country’s total, an estimated 675,000, from the 1918 influenza pandemic.Drew Angerer/Getty Images But those books — such as Pale Horse, Pale Rider, by Katherine Anne Porter, who survived her influenza illness but whose fiancé died — as well as private letters reveal deep loss, Bristow says. “It’s very clear that the trauma stayed with people, even if there’s not public grieving, and that’s what’s so sad about it,” she says. “There was no public acknowledgement of all of this loss.” The country marched ahead, and people “were expected to hop in line and march along too.” Krishnan, also a medical humanities scholar and a historian of medicine, says we must preserve a record of the COVID-19 pandemic. A hopeful sign that stories of how people felt, lived, loved and died won’t be lost are the many oral history projects spearheaded by universities and libraries. “We cannot forget,” Krishnan says, “because it will happen again.”— Aimee Cunningham Editor’s note: This story was published October 27, 2021. Milestones Published in 1930 The discovery of a germ-fighting constituent from mold — penicillin — by Alexander Fleming (shown) launches a renaissance in the control of infectious disease. Published in 1931 The electron microscope is invented by Max Knoll and Ernst Ruska (shown), allowing for the investigation of a wide range of materials, including biological samples. Published in 1942 DDT first arrives in the United States (1945 treatment shown), with immediate implications for curbing the spread of insect-borne diseases. In 1972, amid concerns of its toxicity to humans and other animals, William Ruckelshaus, Environmental Protection Agency administrator, announces the cancellation of all uses of DDT in the United States. Published in 1950 Microbiologist Elizabeth Lee Hazen (left) and chemist Rachel Fuller Brown (right) discover the first effective antifungal, nystatin. Published in 1955 A polio vaccine based on an inactivated, or “killed,” virus shows promising results in a large clinical trial, reports Jonas Salk (shown vaccinating a child). Published in 1965 Doctors report that Staphylococcus bacteria are becoming resistant to anti­biotics (Staphylococcus aureus is shown). Published in 1980 Smallpox is declared eradicated following intensive global health campaigns. Published in 1986 Results from a trial of the drug azidothymidine, or AZT (shown), find it can prolong the life of AIDS patients. Published in 2014 An Ebola outbreak in West Africa that began in 2014 and continued through 2016 is the largest to date (health workers assisting a patient in Guinea are shown). The second largest outbreak, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, begins in 2018 and ends in 2020. All Epidemics Milestones From the archive Published in 1921 Smallpox increases where laws are lax A Science News Bulletin report describes an increase in the prevalence of smallpox in the United States, attributing the increase at least in part to “laxity in the enforcement of vaccination laws.” Published in 1921 Bacteria-eaters discovered The discovery of a parasite on bacteria, dubbed a “bacteriophage,” or bacteria-eater, could lead to cures for dysentery, typhoid fever, hemorrhagic septicemia and bubonic plague, according to an announcement from the Pasteur Institute. Published in 1943 Penicillin for All A researcher shares a detailed recipe so that any doctor could make at home “a supply of crude penicillin for treatment of … infections in or near the surface of the skin.” Published in 1951 Polio Research Brings Hope “Sometimes crippling and occasionally killing, poliomyelitis, also called infantile paralysis, is perhaps the most terrifying of any disease to parents and children alike.” Published in 1966 Vaccines: Past to Future Science News medical writer Faye Marley looks back at the development of vaccines and expresses hope for what’s ahead. Published in 1972 Antibiotics in Animal Feeds: Threat to Human Health? Medical sciences writer Joan Arehart-Treichel asks whether antibiotics in animal feeds are a threat to human health. Published in 1985 Cancer Virus Redux Scientists struggle to understand the role of viruses in cancer — “after a decade out of the limelight, they’re back again.” Published in 1985 AIDS: Disease, Research Efforts Advance A report from the first International AIDS conference, held in Atlanta, describes “a grim picture of a disease that remains one step ahead of the researchers seeking ways to stop it.” Published in 1999 Modern Hygiene’s Dirty Tricks Science writer Siri Carpenter introduced Science News readers to the hygiene hypothesis – the idea that microbe-free environments can lead to weakened immune systems. Published in 2004 Know Your Enemy Researchers begin teasing out the molecular underpinnings that make the tuberculosis bacterium so infectious and enable it to evade the body’s immune response. Published in 2014 Experimental drugs and vaccines poised to take on Ebola Writer Nathan Seppa describes the experimental drugs and vaccines that might halt the Ebola epidemic. Published in 2018 A 5,000-year-old mass grave harbors the oldest plague bacteria ever found Bacterial DNA recovered from a Scandinavian woman buried in a mass grave around 5,000 years ago could yield clues to the origins of the plague. Published in 2019 For people with HIV, undetectable virus means untransmittable disease Science News biomedical writer Aimee Cunningham covers the strides made in treating and preventing HIV, as well as the effort to get lifesaving medications in the hands of those who need them. The latest Published in 2022 COVID-19 has killed a million Americans. Our minds can’t comprehend that number We intuitively compare large, approximate quantities but cannot grasp such a big, abstract number as a million U.S. COVID-19 deaths. By Sujata GuptaMay 18, 2022 Published in 2022 At a long COVID clinic, here’s how doctors are trying to help one woman who is struggling As more people experience long-term health problems from COVID-19, long COVID clinics try to help patients manage symptoms, like brain fog and fatigue. By Meghan RosenNovember 17, 2022 Published in 2022 The world is ‘losing the window’ to contain monkeypox, experts warn As the global monkeypox outbreak surges, the world is giving the “virus room to run like it never has before,” researchers say. By Tina Hesman SaeyJuly 22, 2022 Published in 2023 Fungi that cause serious lung infections are now found throughout the U.S. Doctors should be on the lookout for three types of fungi that, when inhaled, can lead to serious infections, researchers say. By Tina Hesman SaeyJanuary 4, 2023 Published in 2023 WHO declares an end to the global COVID-19 public health emergency Global COVID-19 deaths are down and immunity is up. But with the virus here to stay, it’s time to shift to more long-term health measures. By McKenzie PrillamanMay 5, 2023 Published in 2024 The United States was on course to eliminate syphilis. Now it’s surging Science News spoke with expert Allison Agwu about what’s driving the surge and how we can better prevent the disease. By Aimee CunninghamFebruary 22, 2024 Science News is published by Society for Science Previous « The human story Next Materials that made us » Science News Science News was founded in 1921 as an independent, nonprofit source of accurate information on the latest news of science, medicine and technology. Today, our mission remains the same: to empower people to evaluate the news and the world around them. It is published by the Society for Science, a nonprofit 501(c)(3) membership organization dedicated to public engagement in scientific research and education (EIN 53-0196483). Science News Explores Science News Learning Subscriber Services Subscribe Renew Give a Gift Subscription Customer Service Follow Science News on Facebook Follow Science News on X Follow Science News via RSS Follow Science News on Instagram Follow Science News on YouTube Follow Science News on TikTok More Information FAQ Newsletters Rights & Permissions Advertise Contact Society for Science About the Society Society Store Donate Careers © Society for Science & the Public 2000–2024. All rights reserved. 1719 N Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036 202.785.2255 Terms of Service Privacy Policy Privacy Manager Close Log in Subscribers, enter your e-mail address for full access to the Science News archives and digital editions. Not a subscriber? Become one now. Client key* E-mail Address* Log InBoo to the Flu: Free influenza vaccines administered in Jensen BeachSkip to main content HomeElection 2024Voter GuideStateNewsIndian River CountySt. Lucie CountyMartin CountyIndian River LagoonFlorida PoliticsCrimeInvestigationsNational PoliticsUSA TODAYFlorida VoicesShaping Our FutureVero Beach Centennial VNA, Cleveland Clinic give free flu shots at Boo to the Flu vaccine clinic in Jensen Beach15 PHOTOSHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024Has the COVID pandemic driven a flu strain extinct? | Doherty Website Search Please do not fill-in this field About Our Work Services & Facilities People Education Careers News & Events Support COVID-19 Research Searchss A joint venture between The University of Melbourne and The Royal Melbourne Hospital Search About Overview Laureate Professor Peter Doherty Governance Reports & Publications Brochures Venue Hire Support our work Advocacy Contact Us Our Work Institute Themes Immunology Viral Infectious Diseases HIV Hepatitis Influenza Emerging Infections COVID-19 Antimicrobial Resistance Bacterial and Parasitic Infections Malaria Tuberculosis Buruli Ulcer Cross-Cutting Disciplines Discovery Research Public Health Clinical and health systems research Global Health Education & Professional Development Indigenous Health Computational Science and Genomics Services & Facilities Services Facilities People Education Study at the Doherty Institute Research Projects PhD Clinician Graduate Research Training Meet our graduate researchers Prospective Student Information Session Contacts Careers News & Events News Events Setting it Straight Podcast: Infection and Immunity - Evidence Explained Publications Support COVID-19 Research News 28 Oct 2021 Has the COVID pandemic driven a flu strain extinct? Originally published by Cosmos as Has the COVID pandemic driven a flu strain extinct? By Dr Manuela Callari According to two studies from the Doherty Institute in Melbourne, one of the four influenza virus types that every year circulate among humans might have gone extinct thanks to the COVID-19 pandemic. The studies, one published in Nature Reviews Microbiology in September and one under review, show that the influenza B/Yamagata virus has not been detected since April 2020 anywhere in the world. Dr Marios Koutsakos, a researcher at the department of microbiology and immunology at the Doherty Institute and one of the authors of the published study, says that it’s highly unusual that B/Yamagata has not been detected in over 18 months. “It’s difficult to say with certainty, but that indicates it might have gone.” But he said B/Yamagata could still be present somewhere in the world at extremely low levels. The COVID-19 pandemic has driven global influenza cases to a record low. Before the pandemic, Australia recorded an average of 100,000 flu cases, with a few hundred deaths every year. In 2019, Australia saw one of the worst flu seasons in recent times, recording over 300,000 cases and more than 900 deaths. But from the start of this year, the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System has recorded only 550 notifications and no deaths. Every year, seasonal flu emerges in east and Southeast Asia and is transmitted from person to person through coughs, sneezes and breathing. As people travel across the globe, the virus is carried from place to place, hitting the northern and southern hemispheres during winter. Limited movement of people across the globe and quarantine systems in place in most countries have broken the cycle, stopping the flu from spreading globally. “Border closure has probably had the biggest impact on global spread,” says Koutsakos. In addition, the broad range of measures taken to control the COVID-19 pandemic – social distancing, masks, shutting non-essential indoor venues, hand hygiene – has prevented significant flu outbreaks within countries. Two main types of influenza, A and B, cause seasonal epidemics every year. Each includes two subtypes. A/H3N2 and A/H1N1 jump from humans to animals, causing pandemics such as the swine flu or the bird flu. B/Victoria and B/Yamagata don’t have an animal reservoir. Case numbers have fallen for all influenza virus types, but the Melbourne researchers think that the B/Yamagata lineage might have disappeared altogether. Because B/Yamagata only circulated among humans, Koutsakos says it hasn’t evolved much over the past decade, and humans have developed high levels of immunity against it, making the lineage particularly vulnerable. “The vaccine component for the [B/Yamagata] lineage hasn’t changed in about seven or eight years,” he says. “It’s possible that a large part of the population has built up immunity to that lineage, driving it to extinction.” Researchers have long thought that high vaccination coverage would eventually eradicate B/Yamagata, and the COVID-19 pandemic might have accelerated the process. But as countries begin to reopen their borders and influenza recommence to spread across the world with eager travellers, we should not forget the lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic. Adequate ventilation in public buildings must remain a priority. As Geoff Hanmer, an architect and adjunct professor of architecture at the University of Adelaide, told Cosmos, we don’t need to accept getting flu and colds as a normal part of winter. Respiratory viruses could be controlled by making sure people have access to clean air. Good hygiene and mask-wearing in crowded places are good habits we should keep, Koutsakos says, and a high level of vaccination next winter could whip B/Yamagata once and for all. Originally published by Cosmos as Has the COVID pandemic driven a flu strain extinct? News Archive 2024 January February March April May June July August September October November 2023 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2022 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 June July August October November December KEEP INFORMED Facebook Twitter Instagram Subscribe for the latest news, events and research For any media enquiries, please contact: Communications Team P: +61383441911 E: doherty-media@unimelb.edu.au Contact Us 792 Elizabeth Street Melbourne, 3000 Get Directions doherty-reception@unimelb.edu.au +61 3 9035 3555 Contact Us Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Keep informed Subscribe for the latest news, events and research First name Last name Email Subscribe We acknowledge the Wurundjeri people of the Kulin Nation as the traditional custodians of the land where our Institute stands. We are committed to collaboration with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities to reduce the unacceptable burden of infectious disease. We are committed to training the next generation of exceptional Indigenous leaders in infection and immunity. Copyright The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity Privacy Policy | Intranet | Site by LemonadeNATIONAL INFLUENZA VACCINATION WEEK - December 6-12, 2024 - National Today Skip to content National Today Menu National Today Today Birthdays January February March April May June July August September October November December Holidays Animals Arts & Entertainment Cause Cultural Federal Food & Beverage Health Relationships Religious Special Interest Month January February March April May June July August September October November December Resources Reviews Gift Guides Blog Log in Sign up Search Search Cancel Search National Today Submit Got an idea for a holiday? Send it to us Submit Now ShareTweetPin169 Shares ShareTweetPin169 Shares December6–12Featured AwarenessDiseasesHistorical National Influenza Vaccination Week – December 6-12, 2024 U.S. History Timeline FAQs Importance Observe Related National Influenza Vaccination Week (N.I.V.W.) is observed between December 6 and 12 as a gentle reminder for you to stay protected in the upcoming winter months. If you haven’t already taken your vaccination shot, it’s not too late. We encourage you to get your dose as early as possible. The season for flu is quite unpredictable; it can begin as early as fall and last up to spring. Conventionally, flu activity is at its peak during winter, and so public healthcare professionals, advocates, and communities join hands to promote flu vaccination. Many people tend to show a cavalier attitude toward flu, dismissing it as a bad cold. But it’s more than that. It can cause serious health complications, such as bacterial infections or pneumonia, and can get you admitted to a hospital. If not treated at the right time, the flu can even lead to death. To prevent such mishaps and to raise awareness, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (C.D.C.) created N.I.V.W. in 2005. History of National Influenza Vaccination Week Has any of your grandparents ever mentioned the Spanish Flu? Also known as the 1918 Influenza pandemic, the Spanish Flu was one of the deadliest flu outbreaks in human history. Caused by the H1 N1 influenza virus, the disease spread across the globe, toward the end of World War I. The earliest case of the flu was detected in military personnel in Kansas, March 1918. The Spanish flu infected almost one-third of the world’s population, in four successive waves. It recorded a high death toll, ranging from 25-50 million worldwide, killing 675,000 people in the U.S. alone. The high mortality rate among young adults, between the ages of 20 and 40, was a remarkable feature of the influenza pandemic. Although vaccination against influenza began in the 1930s, it was only until 1945 that it saw widespread availability among civilians in America. One of the lead researchers of this vaccine was Dr. Jonas Salk, who is best known for developing the polio vaccine in the 1950s. The U.S. still witnesses tens of thousands of deaths caused by influenza each year. Flu can affect anyone, but those at a higher risk are the aged (65+), little children, pregnant women, and people with chronic illnesses. An infected person can pass it to someone at a high risk of severe illness, including babies younger than 6 months, who are too young to get a flu vaccine. To prevent this spread, the Advisory Committee of C.D.C. urges every individual to get vaccinated, including people in good health. Let’s celebrate National Influenza Vaccination Week as responsible citizens and continue the flu vaccination season, in order to protect as many people as possible. National Influenza Vaccination Week timeline 1933 First Isolation of Influenza Virus Scientists isolate Influenza A viruses, proving that flu is not caused by bacteria. 1960 Annual Flu Vaccination is recommended The U.S. Public Health Service recommends annual flu shots for people at high risk of contracting flu — people with chronic diseases, anyone above 65, and pregnant women. 2003 First Nasal Spray Licensed The first nasal spray flu vaccine gets authorized for public use. 2005 Genomes of Flu Virus Sequenced The genomes of the virus from the 1918 pandemic are fully sequenced. National Influenza Vaccination Week FAQs What’s the best time to get the flu vaccine? pregnant women can get their shot in any trimester. But doctors sometimes advise pregnant women to get the vaccine in their third trimester, so the baby is safe after birth. When is the right time to get the vaccine for a pregnant person? pregnant women can get their shot in any trimester. But doctors sometimes advise pregnant women to get the vaccine in their third trimester, so the baby is safe after birth. Can I get infected after vaccination? Yes! It’s possible to contract the virus even after receiving the vaccination. On the bright side, the vaccine reduces the risk of falling sick by 40-60%. How long does the vaccine take to work? Ideally, a flu vaccine takes up to two weeks to develop antibodies to fight the virus. So, it’s wise to be cautious and avoid close contact during this period, to help stop the spread. How To Observe National Influenza Vaccination Week Spread awareness through social mediaPost a status on your social media platforms to let your folks know of the importance of flu vaccination. You can also share your personal story to inspire others and save lives.Volunteer at a vaccination driveWhat could be a better tribute to vaccination week than volunteering at a vaccination drive? Help people register for slots, make fun placards to direct them over to vaccination centers or reach out to underprivileged people.Attend a Webinar on Vaccination Promotion It’s always nice to be conscious of matters as serious as the flu vaccination. C.D.C. usually hosts webinars to promote the vaccination week, and you can be a part of it. 5 Facts About Influenza Vaccination You Should Know Side effectsInfluenza vaccines have mostly proved to be safe. Common side effects include muscle pain, tiredness, and mild fever among 5–10% of children.Time to recoverFlu patients with good immunity normally take about two weeks to recover, but some people might develop serious complications.Contagious before symptoms showThe flu is highly contagious even before visible symptoms appear: you must strictly avoid contact with anyone for up to five to seven days after you are diagnosed.Beware of allergic reactionsApart from babies below six months old, the vaccine could be a hazard for people who have acute allergic reactions to it.Quite the spreaderMuch like the COVID-19 virus, the flu virus can enter your body through your eyes, nose, and mouth. Why is Influenza Vaccination Important Minimizes risk of flu-associated hospitalizationFlu vaccinations reduce the risk of getting admitted to hospitals every year. In 2019 and 2020, vaccination drives prevented an estimated 105,000 hospitalizations.Prevents respiratory infections in pregnant peopleThe vaccine protects pregnant women from contracting lung infections during and after their pregnancy. Studies have also shown that vaccination prevents the baby from getting sick for several months after birth.A lifesaver for childrenFlu vaccination can significantly reduce the chances of a child dying from the flu. National Influenza Vaccination Week dates Year Date Day 2024 December 6 Friday 2025 December 6 Saturday 2026 December 6 Sunday 2027 December 6 Monday 2028 December 6 Wednesday National Influenza Vaccination Week related holidays SunMay 18Featured National HIV Vaccine Awareness Day AugustFeatured National Immunization Awareness Month April21–28Featured National Infant Immunization Week See More NovDecemberJan Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat1234567 891011121314 15161718192021 22232425262728 293031 Computer Science Education Week National Influenza Vaccination Week Older Driver Safety Awareness Week Día de la Constitución Finland Independence Day Foundation of Quito Day King Bhumibol’s Birthday Mitten Tree Day National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women National Gazpacho Day National Microwave Oven Day National Miners Day National Pawnbrokers Day Put on Your Own Shoes Day St Nicholas Day St. Nicholas Day World Trick Shot Day View all December holidays Holidays Straight to Your Inbox Every day is a holiday!Receive fresh holidays directly to your inbox. Log In With Google 6,174 Days celebrated 18,522 Ways to celebrate 10,000,000+ Happy users About us Our Mission Our Story Resources For Businesses For Journalists For Brands For Influencers FAQs News Contact Us Submit a Holiday Promote an Event Work With Us Submit an Error Our Services Create A Holiday Sponsor A Holiday Data Licensing Months January February March April May June July August September October November December Upcoming Today Tomorrow Monday All Months National Today Calendar Gifts Reviews and Gift Guides Blog Blog Home Shopping Reviews Baby Car Children Health & Fitness Home & Garden Kitchen Pets Sleep Tech Travel Gift Guides By Age By Interest By Occasion By Price By Recipient Popular Holidays National Girlfriend Day Day of the Dead National Boyfriend Day National Sons Day Mexican Independence Day Pride Month National Best Friends Day National Daughter Day World Bicycle Day National Dog Day About National TodayWe keep track of fun holidays and special moments on the cultural calendar — giving you exciting activities, deals, local events, brand promotions, and other exciting ways to celebrate. Follow us on Follow @NatlToday Copyright © 2017–2024 by National Today. Privacy policyGet your flu shot on campus this fall Campus & Community Campus Updates Faculty & Staff Student Life University Circle University News Awards Publications & Presentations Appointments Op-ed Research Health & Wellness Science & Tech Business, Law & Politics Humanities, Art & Social Sciences Events People About Editorial Guidelines Submit to The Daily Vaccine or flu shot in injection needle. Doctor working with patient's arm. Physician or nurse giving vaccination and immunity to virus, influenza or HPV with syringe. Appointment with medical expert.Get your flu shot on campus this fallOctober 27, 2021Campus Updates· Flu vaccinations will be available on campus for faculty, staff and students on five more dates this fall: Oct. 29, Nov. 2, Nov. 4, Nov. 5 and Nov. 16. Walk-in visits are available and appointments may be scheduled. Get detailed information on the Wellness website. wellness programRelated Posts Benefit Fair on-campus day November 6, 2024Events· Town hall sessions on 2025 benefits October 24, 2024Events· Archives Archives Select Month November 2024 October 2024 September 2024 August 2024 July 2024 June 2024 May 2024 April 2024 March 2024 February 2024 January 2024 December 2023 November 2023 October 2023 September 2023 August 2023 July 2023 June 2023 May 2023 April 2023 March 2023 February 2023 January 2023 December 2022 November 2022 October 2022 September 2022 August 2022 July 2022 June 2022 May 2022 April 2022 March 2022 February 2022 January 2022 December 2021 November 2021 October 2021 September 2021 August 2021 July 2021 June 2021 May 2021 April 2021 March 2021 February 2021 January 2021 December 2020 November 2020 October 2020 September 2020 August 2020 July 2020 June 2020 May 2020 April 2020 March 2020 February 2020 January 2020 December 2019 November 2019 October 2019 September 2019 August 2019 July 2019 June 2019 May 2019 April 2019 March 2019 February 2019 January 2019 December 2018 November 2018 October 2018 September 2018 August 2018 July 2018 June 2018 May 2018 April 2018 March 2018 February 2018 January 2018 December 2017 November 2017 October 2017 September 2017 August 2017 July 2017 June 2017 May 2017 April 2017 March 2017 February 2017 January 2017 December 2016 November 2016 October 2016 September 2016 August 2016 July 2016 June 2016 May 2016 April 2016 March 2016 February 2016 January 2016 December 2015 November 2015 October 2015 September 2015 August 2015 July 2015 June 2015 May 2015 April 2015 March 2015 February 2015 January 2015 December 2014 November 2014 October 2014 September 2014 August 2014 July 2014 June 2014 May 2014 April 2014 March 2014 February 2014 January 2014 December 2013 November 2013 October 2013 September 2013 August 2013 July 2013 June 2013 May 2013 April 2013 March 2013 February 2013 January 2013 December 2012 November 2012 October 2012 September 2012 August 2012 July 2012 June 2012 May 2012 April 2012 March 2012 February 2012 January 2012 December 2011 November 2011 October 2011 September 2011 August 2011 July 2011 June 2011 May 2011 Upcoming Events “Gaza Before and After: Genocide and the International Political Order” “Wings of Wonder” Plum Market Kitchen seasonal beer and eggnog tasting View all Events Recently Featured A childhood dream: Engineering student wins Project for Peace grant to establish technology center in Tanzania November 6, 2024 Higher ed finance leader named Case Western Reserve’s next executive VP, CFO November 5, 2024 View all Recently Featured © 2023 Case Western Reserve University 10900 Euclid Ave. Cleveland, Ohio 44106 216.368.2000 (legal notice) Submit To The Daily Submit an Article Editorial Guidelines Subscribe Subscribe to The Daily Follow Us Campus & Community Campus Updates faculty & staff Student Life University Circle University News Awards Publications & Presentations Appointments Op-ed Research Health & Wellness Science & Tech Business, Law & Politics Humanities, Art & Social Sciences Events People About Submit to The Daily Editorial Guidelines Type to search or hit ESC to close See all resultsAncestral sequence reconstruction pinpoints adaptations that enable avian influenza virus transmission in pigs | Nature Microbiology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature microbiology articles article Ancestral sequence reconstruction pinpoints adaptations that enable avian influenza virus transmission in pigs Download PDF Download PDF Article Published: 26 October 2021 Ancestral sequence reconstruction pinpoints adaptations that enable avian influenza virus transmission in pigs Wen Su1, Rhodri Harfoot2,3, Yvonne C. F. Su ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4349-92114, Jennifer DeBeauchamp2, Udayan Joseph4, Jayanthi Jayakumar4, Jeri-Carol Crumpton2, Trushar Jeevan2, Adam Rubrum2, John Franks2, Philippe Noriel Q. Pascua2, Christina Kackos2, Yuqin Zhang1, Mengting Zhang1, Yue Ji1, Huyen Trang Bui1, Jeremy C. Jones ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9980-21122, Lisa Kercher2, Scott Krauss2, Stephan Pleschka5, Michael C. W. Chan1, Robert G. Webster2, Chung-Yi Wu6, Kristien Van Reeth7, Malik Peiris ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8217-59951, Richard J. Webby ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-4397-71322, Gavin J. D. Smith ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5031-468X4 & …Hui-Ling Yen ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2493-36091 Show authors Nature Microbiology volume 6, pages 1455–1465 (2021)Cite this article 7449 Accesses 7 Citations 27 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Evolutionary geneticsInfluenza virus AbstractUnderstanding the evolutionary adaptations that enable avian influenza viruses to transmit in mammalian hosts could allow better detection of zoonotic viruses with pandemic potential. We applied ancestral sequence reconstruction to gain viruses representing different adaptive stages of the European avian-like (EA) H1N1 swine influenza virus as it transitioned from avian to swine hosts since 1979. Ancestral viruses representing the avian-like precursor virus and EA swine influenza viruses from 1979–1983, 1984–1987 and 1988–1992 were reconstructed and characterized. Glycan-binding analyses showed stepwise changes in the haemagglutinin receptor–binding specificity of the EA swine influenza viruses—that is, from recognition of both α2,3- and α2,6-linked sialosides to recognition of α2,6-linked sialosides only; however, efficient transmission in piglets was enabled by adaptive changes in the viral polymerase protein and nucleoprotein, which have been fixed since 1983. PB1-Q621R and NP-R351K increased viral replication and transmission in piglets when introduced into the 1979–1983 ancestral virus that lacked efficient transmissibility. The stepwise adaptation of an avian influenza virus to a mammalian host suggests that there may be opportunities to intervene and prevent interspecies jumps through strategic coordination of surveillance and risk assessment activities. Similar content being viewed by others Re-evaluation of the evolution of influenza H1 viruses using direct PCA Article Open access 17 December 2019 Influenza A virus reassortment in mammals gives rise to genetically distinct within-host subpopulations Article Open access 11 November 2022 Modulation of human-to-swine influenza a virus adaptation by the neuraminidase low-affinity calcium-binding pocket Article Open access 01 October 2024 MainPandemic influenza viruses must acquire an ability for sustained human-to-human transmissibility, an ability aided by antigenic novelty and a resulting absence of human population immunity. Although antigenic novelty can be readily expected for influenza viruses emerging from animal reservoirs, sustained transmissibility is a rare and poorly defined trait that needs to be acquired to foster optimal virus–host interactions1,2,3,4,5. The emergence of the A(H1N1)pdm09 pandemic influenza virus from pigs is a clear reminder of the capability of influenza viruses crossing mammalian species barriers and becoming established in humans6. However, only a limited number of influenza viruses of avian origin are known to have successfully crossed the species barriers and established in a new mammalian host3,7. These viruses offer the best opportunities to identify the molecular determinants for successful establishment of avian influenza viruses in mammals.The European avian-like (EA) swine H1N1 lineage viruses transitioned from avian to swine hosts in the late 1970s7,8, with all eight gene segments derived from Eurasian avian influenza viruses9,10. The EA swine viruses are prevalent among pigs in China and European countries8,11,12,13; they donated the neuraminidase (NA) and M gene segments to the A(H1N1)pdm09 virus6 and have demonstrated pandemic potential, including resistance to human MxA13,14, airborne transmissibility in ferrets12,15 and antigenic novelty (for example, limited cross-reactivity with the antibodies that humans have developed against circulating influenza strains)12,13,15. Here we identify and characterize the cumulative molecular changes present in naturally occurring EA swine viruses that were responsible for the avian-to-swine adaptation. By generating ancestral viruses at different points in the early evolution of EA swine viruses16,17, we specifically investigated whether the sustained swine transmissibility of EA swine viruses was an intrinsic trait of the precursor avian influenza virus or whether it was acquired in pigs through subsequent adaptations.ResultsEA swine H1N1 viruses demonstrated stepwise changes in receptor-binding propertiesA change in receptor binding specificity is a critical step for avian-to-mammalian interspecies transmission18. We examined the receptor binding preference of 11 EA swine viruses isolated from 1979 to 2011 (Extended Data Fig. 1). Compared with the avian H1N1 influenza virus A/duck/Bavaria/2/1977 (DK/77), which preferentially recognizes α-2,3-linked sialosides (Fig. 1a), early EA swine viruses, represented by A/swine/Germany/2/1981 (SW/81), showed dual binding specificity to both α-2,3- and α-2,6-linked sialosides (Fig. 1b). The EA swine viruses isolated after 1990, represented by A/swine/Schleswig-Holstein/1/1992 (SW/92), bound exclusively to α-2,6-linked sialosides (Fig. 1c). In agreement with previous results19,20, EA swine viruses showed no apparent changes in their haemagglutinin (HA) fusion pH over time, with values ranging from pH 5.2 to pH 5.8 (Supplementary Table 1).Fig. 1: Avian and EA swine influenza viruses differed in receptor binding profiles, in vitro and ex vivo replication efficiencies and contact transmissibility in pigs.a–c, Glycan array analysis of the avian influenza virus DK/77 (a) and EA swine influenza viruses SW/81 (b) and SW/92 (c). Glycan array data are shown as the mean + s.d., calculated from six replicate spots of each glycan. SIA, sialoside; r.f.u., relative fluorescence units. d, Multicycle replication kinetics in NPTr cells. Data are the mean ± s.d. from three repeats in one of two independently performed experiments; the significant P values (P < 0.05) between SW/81 and DK/77 are shown. e,f, Replication kinetics in ex vivo cultures of pig lungs (e) and trachea (f). Tissues from three healthy pigs were used to prepare lung and tracheal (n = 3 per pig for both) explants for the experiments. Each data point represents one explant sample. Data are the mean ± s.d. from nine data points; the significant P values (P < 0.05) are indicated. d–f, Statistical differences were calculated by two-way ANOVA, followed by a Tukey’s post-hoc test. The detection limit was 10 plaque forming units (p.f.u.) per ml and was shown with the dashed horizontal line. g–i, Contact transmissibility of DK/77 avian influenza virus (g) and SW/81 (h) and SW/92 (i) EA swine influenza viruses in pigs. Each virus was tested in duplicate with a total of four donors and four direct contacts. Pigs housed in the same pen are denoted by the same colour. The limit of detection (log10(TCID50 ml−1) = 1.789; TCID50, 50% tissue culture infectious dose) is shown by the horizontal dashed line.Source dataFull size imageThe replication efficiency of avian (DK/77) and swine (SW/81 and SW/92) influenza viruses exhibiting differential binding for α-2,3- and α-2,6-linked sialosides (Fig. 1a–c) were evaluated in vitro. In newborn pig trachea (NPTr) cells, SW/81 replicated to a higher titre than the DK/77 and SW/92 viruses at all time points (two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey’s post-hoc test, P < 0.01; Fig. 1d). In pig-lung explants, both SW/81 and SW/92 replicated to a higher titre than DK/77 at 24 h post infection (h.p.i.; two-way ANOVA, P < 0.01 and Tukey’s post-hoc test, P < 0.05; Fig. 1e). No significant differences in replication were observed in the pig trachea explants (Fig. 1f).EA swine H1N1 viruses demonstrated stepwise changes in contact transmission potential in pigsThe contact transmission potential of the DK/77, SW/81 and SW/92 viruses were further compared in piglets (3–4 weeks old). Inoculated donor pigs were co-housed with naive contact pigs 1 d post inoculation (d.p.i.) at a 2:2 donor/contact ratio, with a total of four donors and four direct contacts in duplicated experiments. The area under the curve (AUC) values were calculated to approximate the total viral load over the course of infection (Fig. 1g–i). In donors, the avian DK/77 virus replicated (AUC = 1.58 ± 1.59, mean ± s.d.) to a lower titre than the swine viruses SW/81 (3.81 ± 1.1) and SW/92 (5.8 ± 0.78; Kruskal–Wallis test, P = 0.0031; Dunn’s post-hoc test, P = 0.61 and 0.013, respectively). There was no significant difference in AUC between the SW/81- and SW/92-inoculated donors (Dunn’s post-hoc test, P = 0.35). Correspondingly, the avian DK/77 virus failed to transmit to any contact (Fig. 1g) and none of the donor and contact pigs seroconverted (haemagglutination inhibition (HI) titre < 1:20). The SW/81 virus replicated better than DK/77, with infectious virus detected in the nasal cavity of 4/4 donors and seroconversion in 3/4 donors (HI titre of 1:40 to 1:80). However, SW/81 transmitted inefficiently to contact pigs, as infectious virus was detected transiently in 2/4 contacts at later time points post exposure (Fig. 1h), with seroconversion detected in 2/4 contacts (1:40). In contrast, robust replication and transmission of the SW/92 virus was detected in all donors and contacts (Fig. 1i), with seroconversion detected in all donors (1:160 to 1:320) and contacts (1:80 to 1:320). These results suggest that the EA swine viruses may have gone through sequential adaptation during the avian-to-pig host transition by increasing the replicative capacity in pig nasal tissues, followed by developing efficient transmissibility among pigs.Reconstructed ancestral EA swine H1N1 viruses possessed comparable phenotypes to the wild-type virusesTo comprehensively map the molecular changes associated with EA swine virus adaptation in pigs, maximum-likelihood phylogenies for the eight viral gene segments were constructed using EA swine viruses isolated from 1979 to 2014 and avian viruses isolated from 1949 to 2013 (Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2). Ancestral sequence reconstruction was used to infer sequences of four major nodes that represent different evolutionary stages of EA swine influenza viruses (Fig. 2a). Four ancestral viruses were generated using gene synthesis and plasmid-based reverse genetics. Their full genomes were deposited to the public database Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID, https://www.gisaid.org/; accession number: EPI_ISL_539852-5). RG-EA1 virus was constructed based on the inferred nodal sequences at the split between avian and EA swine lineages (Fig. 2a and Node 1 in Supplementary Fig. 2). RG-EA2 virus was constructed to represent the early evolutionary stage of EA swine viruses from 1979–1983 (Fig. 2a and Node 2 in Supplementary Fig. 2), whereas the RG-EA3 and RG-EA4 viruses represented EA swine viruses from 1984–1987 and 1988–1992, respectively (Fig. 2a and Nodes 3 and 4 in Supplementary Fig. 2).Fig. 2: Characterization of reconstructed EA influenza viruses representing different evolutionary stages of EA swine influenza viruses.a, The maximum-likelihood phylogeny of HA gene sequences was constructed using avian (n = 69) and EA swine viruses (n = 344) isolated from 1977 to 2014. The phylogenetic tree was rooted to the branch of DK/77. The red asterisks indicate the phylogenetic position of the reconstructed sequences of RG-EA1 to RG-EA4 and wild-type viruses used in the experiments. The scale bar indicates the branch length representing 0.02 nucleotide substitutions per site. b–e, Receptor-binding profiles of the RG-EA1 (b), RG-EA2 (c), RG-EA3 (d) and RG-EA4 (e) viruses. The glycan array data are shown as the mean + s.d. fluorescence calculated from six replicate spots for each glycan (left) and the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay results are shown as the mean absorbance (450 nm) from three replicates in one of two independently performed experiments (right). SIA, sialoside; 3′SLN, Neu5Acα2,3Galβ1,4GlcNAcβ-PAA-biotin; 6′SLN, Neu5Acα2,6Galβ1,4GlcNAcβ-PAA-biotin. f, Multicycle replication kinetics in NPTr cells. The mean from three repeats in one of two independently performed experiments is shown. Statistical differences were calculated by two-way ANOVA (P < 0.0001), followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test, and the significant P values are shown. At 12 h post-infection, RG-EA1 was significantly different from RG-EA2 (P < 0.0001), RG-EA3 (P < 0.0001) and RA-EA4 (P < 0.0001); at 24 h post-infection, RG-EA1 was significantly different from RG-EA2 (P < 0.0001), RG-EA3 (P < 0.0001) and RG-EA4 (P < 0.0001), while RG-EA2 and RG-EA3 were also different (P = 0.0013); at 36 h post-infection, RG-EA1 was significantly different from RG-EA2 (P = 0.0042), RG-EA3 (P = 0.0066) and RG-EA4 (P = 0.0182). g,h, Polymerase activity in NPTr (g) and 293T (h) cells. Data show the mean ± s.d. from three repeats (dots) in one of two independently performed experiments. Statistical differences were calculated by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test, and the significant P values (P < 0.05) are shown.Source dataFull size imageThe receptor binding profiles of the RG-EA1, RG-EA2, RG-EA3 and RG-EA4 viruses were compared. The avian-like precursor RG-EA1 showed exclusive binding to α-2,3-linked sialosides (Fig. 2b). The RG-EA2 virus showed dual binding for α-2,3- and α-2,6-linked sialosides (Fig. 2c) that resembled early EA swine isolates (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1). The RG-EA3 and RG-EA4 viruses bound predominantly to α-2,6-linked sialosides (Fig. 2d,e) and resembled late EA swine isolates (Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 1). The four resurrected EA viruses showed comparable HA stability with fusion pH 5.8–5.9 (Supplementary Table 2) that resembled EA swine viruses but not the avian virus DK/77 (Supplementary Table 1). In NPTr cells, RG-EA1 replicated to a significantly lower titre than the RG-EA2, -EA3 and -EA4 viruses at 12, 24 and 36 h.p.i. (two-way ANOVA, P < 0.01 and Tukey’s post-hoc test, P < 0.05; Fig. 2f). We also observed an increase in the polymerase activity from RG-EA1 to RG-EA4 in NPTr cells (Fig. 2g), with RG-EA4 showing the highest polymerase activity, determined using a minigenome assay, in human 293T cells (Fig. 2h)21,22. These results also support the stepwise adaptation of EA swine viruses in pigs since its introduction from the avian hosts.EA swine H1N1 viruses sequentially acquired efficient pig-to-pig transmissibility after 1983The RG-EA1, RG-EA2, RG-EA3 and RG-EA4 viruses were further evaluated for their transmissibility among pigs by direct contact. The avian-like RG-EA1 virus was transiently detected in the nasal swabs of 3/4 donors and 1/4 contacts (Fig. 3a), with no seroconversion in the donors or contacts. RG-EA2, which genetically resembles EA swine viruses of the 1979–1983 era, was transiently detected in 2/4 donors and 1/4 contacts (Fig. 3b), with seroconversion in 1/4 donors (1:40). RG-EA3 and EA4, which resemble EA swine viruses of the post-1983 era replicated more efficiently in all donors (Fig. 3c,d) and were transmitted to all contacts with seroconversion detected in donors (1:40 to 1:320) and contacts (1:320 to 1:640). The viral load in the nasal swabs of donors inoculated with RG-EA1 (AUC = 2.48 ± 2.25), RG-EA2 (0.91 ± 1.05), RG-EA3 (4.72 ± 3.23) or RG-EA4 (5.18 ± 1.39) were moderately different (Kruskal–Wallis test, P = 0.051). Collectively, we noted a positive correlation between the viral loads of the donor nasal swabs and viral transmissibility in pigs (Spearman’s coefficient of correlation (r) = 0.90, P = 0.014; Fig. 3e), suggesting the importance of achieving high viral loads at the nasal epithelial cells before acquiring efficient transmissibility.Fig. 3: EA swine H1N1 viruses acquired efficient pig-to-pig transmissibility after 1983.a–d, Transmissibility of RG-EA1 (a), RG-EA2 (b), RG-EA3 (c) and RG-EA4 (d) in pigs. Contact transmission experiments were performed in duplicate, with a total of four donors and four direct contacts. Pigs housed in the same pen are denoted by the same colour. The limit of detection (log10(TCID50 ml−1) = 1.789) is shown by the horizontal dashed line. e, Two-sided Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient analysis was used to evaluate the correlation between the viral loads in the donor nasal swabs (mean AUC from four pigs) and onward transmissibility (percentage infected out of four exposed contact pigs).Source dataFull size imageIntroduction of HA and NA genes derived from RG-EA3 virus did not increase the transmissibility of RG-EA2 virus in pigsThirty-three amino-acid differences exist between the non-transmissible RG-EA2 and transmissible RG-EA3 viruses (Fig. 4a). Among the 12 amino-acid differences found in the HA protein of the RG-EA2 and RG-EA3 viruses, HA1-N121T, HA1-Y138H, HA1-N207Y, HA1-K311Q, HA2-A65S and HA2-D158N (H1 numbering) were detected at high frequencies (>90%) among EA swine viruses isolated from 1979 to 2016 (Fig. 4a). Introduction of these mutations into the HA protein of RG-EA2 reduced binding for α-2,3-linked sialosides and marginally enhanced binding for α-2,6-linked sialosides (Fig. 4b). In the NA protein, RG-EA2 and RG-EA3 differed by a Y344N mutation (N1 numbering; Fig. 4a). RG-EA1, RG-EA3 and RG-EA4 had a comparable Michaelis constant, which was higher than that of RG-EA2 (one-way ANOVA and Turkey’s post-hoc test, P = 0.15); however, the avian-like RG-EA1 had the highest velocity of an enzyme-catalysed reaction at infinite concentration of substrate (P < 0.01; Supplementary Table 2).Fig. 4: Introduction of HA and NA genes derived from the RG-EA3 virus did not enhance the efficient contact transmissibility of the RG-EA2 virus in pigs.a, Detection frequency of the 33 amino acids that differed between the RG-EA2 and RG-EA3 EA swine viruses among PB2 (n = 417), PB1 (n = 381), polymerase acidic protein (PA; n = 382), HA1 and HA2 (n = 454), NP (n = 495), NA (n = 429) and non-structural protein 1 (NS1; n = 391) of EA swine influenza A viruses isolated from 1979 to 2016. HA and NA are numbered according to H1 and N1 numbering, respectively. b, Receptor-binding profile of RG-EA2HA1-N121T,HA1-Y138H,HA1-N207Y,HA1-K311Q,HA2-A65S,HA2-D158N. The glycan array data are shown as the mean + s.d., calculated from six replicate spots for each glycan (left), and the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay results are shown as the mean absorbance (450 nm) from three replicates in one of two independently performed experiments (right). SIA, sialoside. c, Contact transmissibility of RG-EA2×EA3SG virus containing the internal genes from RG-EA2 and the surface genes derived from RG-EA3 in pigs. The contact transmission experiments were performed in duplicate, with a total of four donors and four direct contacts. Pigs housed in the same pen are denoted by the same colour. The limit of detection (log10(TCID50 ml−1) = 1.789) is shown by the horizontal dashed line.Source dataFull size imageTo investigate whether the surface gene segments from RG-EA3 dictate the different transmission phenotypes of the RG-EA2 and RG-EA3 viruses, we generated RG-EA2×EA3SG virus, which contained the internal genes from RG-EA2 and the surface genes derived from RG-EA3. The RG-EA2×EA3SG virus was transiently detected in the nasal swabs of 2/4 inoculated donors, with peak titres detected 8 and 10 d.p.i. (Fig. 4c), respectively; none of the donors had seroconverted by 11 d.p.i. RG-EA2×EA3SG was transiently detected in 2/4 contacts with peak titres at late time points, that is, 11 and 13 d post exposure (d.p.e.), respectively (Fig. 4c), with none of the contact pigs seroconverting. These results suggest that introduction of the HA and NA genes of the RG-EA3 virus was insufficient to confer increased transmissibility to the RG-EA2 virus.Molecular determinants associated with efficient transmission in pigs reside in the internal genesAmong the 20 amino acids that differentiate the internal proteins of the RG-EA2 and RG-EA3 viruses, polymerase basic protein 1 (PB1)-Q621R and nucleoprotein (NP)-R351K were detected at high frequencies (>90%) among the EA swine influenza viruses isolated from 1979 to 2018 (Fig. 4a). PB1-R621 and NP-K351 were also highly enriched among classical H1N1 swine viruses and human influenza A viruses isolated from 1933 to 2019 (Fig. 5a). Introduction of the PB1-Q621R but not the NP-R351K mutation increased the polymerase activity of RG-EA2 (one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s post-hoc test, P < 0.01; Fig. 5b). Both the PB1-R621Q and NP-K351R mutations reduced the polymerase activity of RG-EA3 (P < 0.01; Fig. 5b). In NPTr cells, RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351K replicated to a higher titre than the RG-EA2 and RG-EA2NP-R351K viruses at 24 (P = 0.019) and 36 h.p.i. (P = 0.024), respectively (Fig. 5c). Interestingly, the NP-R351K mutation facilitated the accumulation of viral RNP in the nucleus at earlier time points compared with the RG-EA2 virus (P < 0.05; Fig. 5d,e).Fig. 5: The NP-R351K mutation in EA swine influenza viruses was the minimal molecular change required to facilitate the transmission of the non-transmissible RG-EA2 virus.a, Detection frequency of Q/R at PB1 residue 621 (n = 74,095) and R/K at NP residue 351 (n = 80,188) in avian, human and other mammalian influenza A viruses. b, The effects of amino-acid substitutions at PB1 residue 621 and NP residue 351 on the viral polymerase activity were determined using a minigenome assay in 293T cells. Data are the mean ± s.d. from three repeats (dots) in one of two independently performed experiments. A one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test was performed, and the significant P values (P < 0.05) are shown. c, Multicycle replication kinetics of recombinant viruses in NPTr cells. Data are the mean from three repeats in one experiment. A two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test was performed, and the significant P values (P < 0.05) are shown, including the comparison between RG-EA2 and RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351K at 24 h.p.i. and between RG-EA2NP-R351K and RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351K at 36 h.p.i. d,e, Nucleus localization of NP protein at different time points in NPTr cells infected with RG-EA2, RG-EA2NP-R351K and RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351R at a multiplicity of infection (m.o.i.) of five. d, Representative images from two replicates of one experiment are shown. Scale bars, 100 µM. e, Mean ± s.d. of the NP-positive rate (percentage of NP-positive cells per 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)-positive cells) from two replicates (dots) of one experiment calculated for different times following infection. Statistical significance was calculated using a two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test and significant P values (P < 0.05) are shown. f–h, Contact transmissibility of the RG-EA2×EA3IG (f), RG-EA2NP-R351K (g) and RG-EA2 PB 1-Q621R,NP-R351K viruses in pigs. The contact transmission experiments were performed in duplicate, with a total of four donors and four direct contacts. Pigs housed in the same pen are denoted by the same colour. The limit of detection (log10(TCID50 ml−1) = 1.789) is shown by the horizontal dashed line; *, donor in the RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351K group that was euthanized on day 4 post infection due to respiratory distress with abdominal distention, severe lethargy and vomiting.Source dataFull size imageNext, we generated RG-EA2×EA3IG virus containing surface genes from RG-EA2 and internal genes from RG-EA3. The RG-EA2×EA3IG virus was detected in the nasal swabs of 2/4 inoculated donors, with the peak titre occurring earlier (4 and 6 d.p.i.; Fig. 5f) than those inoculated with the RG-EA2×EA3SG virus (Fig. 4c). In the contact pigs, RG-EA2×EA3IG virus was transiently detected in 2/4 contacts (Fig. 5f), with the peak titre occurring earlier (7 d.p.e.; Fig. 5f) than those exposed to RG-EA2×EA3IG (11 and 13 d.p.e.; Fig. 4c); seroconversion was detected in one pig (1:160). These results suggest that the RG-EA2×EA3IG virus showed better replication in the inoculated donors and transmitted more rapidly to contact pigs than the RG-EA2×EA3SG virus.We focused on these two mutations and compared the transmissibility of the RG-EA2NP-R351K and RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351K viruses in pigs. RG-EA2NP-R351K was detected in the nasal swabs of all donors and contacts (Fig. 5g), and seroconversion was detected in 4/4 donors (1:80 to 1:160) and 3/4 contacts (1:80 to 1:160). RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351K was detected in the nasal swabs of all donors and contacts (Fig. 5h), with seroconversion in all donors (1:80 to 1:160) and contacts (1:160 to 1:640). The total amount of virus shed by the RG-EA2NP-R351K-inoculated donors (AUC = 2.74 ± 2.63) was comparable to that of the RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351K-inoculated donors (3.78 ± 1.67; two-sided Mann–Whitney test, P = 0.69). In the contact pigs, the viral load shed by RG-EA2NP-R351K-infected contacts (AUC = 3.04 ± 1.57) was slightly lower than that of the contacts infected with RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351K (5.4 ± 1.31; two-sided Mann–Whitney test, P = 0.11). Next-generation sequencing analyses were performed on the peak-titre nasal swab samples of each contact pig infected with RG-EA2NP-R351K or RG-EA2PB1-Q621R,NP-R351K and we did not observe common adaptive mutations in more than one pig (Supplementary Table 3). Together, these results show that introduction of the NP-R351K mutation is sufficient to enhance the transmissibility of the reconstructed early EA2 swine virus.Sequence analyses of archived EA swine viruses in pig-lung homogenates from 1979We adopted an evolution-guided approach to generate recombinant EA swine viruses based on the posterior distributions of ancestral states at their corresponding nodes of the virus phylogeny. This approach may be biased if the viral sequences contained mutations that emerge after sequential passages in embryonated chicken eggs or in cell culture. To validate the predicted ancestral sequences, direct sequencing of EA swine viruses in two archived pig-lung homogenates from 1979 was performed: a partial genome of A/swine/Belgium/1/1979 (designated as Be01-lung; GISAID accession number: EPI_ISL_1055769) and full genome of A/swine/Belgium/2/1979 (designated as Be02-lung; GISAID accession number: EPI_ISL_1055773) were recovered. The Be01-lung and Be02-lung sequences shared 98.8–99.3% nucleotide homology and 98.9–99.4% amino-acid homology with the RG-EA2 virus. Among the 33 amino acids that differed between the RG-EA2 and RG-EA3 viruses, the Be02-lung sample only differed from the RG-EA2 virus by one amino acid (PB2-483M in Be02-lung and T in RG-EA2; Extended Data Fig. 2). In comparison with RG-EA2, the partial sequence of the Be01-lung sample showed four amino-acid differences at HA1 residues that are highly variable among EA swine viruses (Extended Data Fig. 2). The PB1-621 and NP-351 residues of the two pig-lung homogenates were identical to that of the RG-EA2 virus (Extended Data Fig. 2). Collectively, both archived pig-lung sequences shared high homology with the ancestral sequence of RG-EA2 that genetically resembles EA swine viruses from the 1979–1983 era. Additional serial passages of recombinant RG-EA2 virus carrying the HA and NA genes derived from the Be02-lung (designated as RG-Be02-lungSG×EA2IG) or RG-EA1, RG-EA2, RG-EA3 and RG-EA4 viruses in embryonated chicken eggs, MDCK cells or NPTr cells failed to identify any common amino-acid changes associated with egg adaptation (Supplementary Tables 4–6).DiscussionUsing ancestral sequence reconstruction, we demonstrated that sustained pig-to-pig transmissibility of the EA swine influenza viruses was not an intrinsic property possessed by the avian-like precursor virus before its introduction into mammals. Instead, EA swine viruses acquired efficient transmissibility after 1983 through stepwise avian-to-pig adaptations. Specifically, we observed changes in receptor binding specificity—from recognition of both α-2,3- and α-2,6-linked sialosides (RG-EA2) to recognition of only α-2,6-linked sialosides (RG-EA3 and RG-EA4) and gradually increased polymerase activity, which probably contributed to viral replication in pig nasal epithelial cells and the subsequent efficient transmissibility in pigs. Interestingly, further analyses using RG-EA2 and RG-EA3 viruses, which differed in receptor binding specificity and transmission potential in pigs, identified that the NP-R351K mutation was the minimal molecular change required to significantly enhance transmissibility in pigs. Our results illustrate the multi-step process for avian influenza viruses to sequentially adapt in mammalian hosts.Ancestral sequence reconstruction is a powerful tool that has been used to investigate the function of unsampled genes23 and improve influenza vaccine designs17,24. Here we show that ancestral sequence reconstruction is an excellent approach to study important adaptive processes underpinning the interspecies transmission of influenza viruses. Although the predictive power of the corresponding algorithms is dependent on the number of available sequences, direct sequencing of EA swine influenza viruses from archived pig-lung homogenates from 1979 has confirmed the robustness of the approach in constructing representative viruses that circulated naturally at different evolutionary nodes.Our results suggest that the early EA swine viruses (1979–1983) possessed inefficient transmission potential among pigs. Transmission may be facilitated by the housing conditions of the pig farms—with close contact, contaminated surfaces and shared water—as well as self-resolving disease signs in pigs. The first events that allowed introduction of an avian-like virus to swine hosts may have involved ecological factors that facilitated exposure to the avian-like H1N1 viruses (for example, overlapping habitats) and viral factors that permitted replication of the avian-like H1N1 virus in the pig respiratory epithelial cells (for example, dual receptor binding specificity possessed by the early EA swine viruses). The fact that the introduction of the NP-R351K mutation was able to facilitate efficient transmission of RG-EA2, an early EA swine virus that possesses dual binding specificity, indicates that an exclusive α-2,6-linked sialoside binding specificity may not be essential for efficient influenza transmission in pigs.The NP-R351K amino-acid change has been fixed not only in the EA swine viruses but also in other human and swine influenza viruses. The NP gene of human seasonal A(H1N1), A(H2N2) and A(H3N2) influenza viruses descended from the 1918 pandemic influenza virus25, and the 1918 NP protein was probably of avian origin26. Consistent with its putative avian origin, the 1918 virus contained NP-R351. The NP-R351K mutation was quickly fixed in the human seasonal A(H1N1) viruses from 1918 to 1957, with 39 of 42 (92.86%) available sequences containing K351. This adaptive mutation has been maintained in human A(H2N2) and A(H3N2) viruses, as K351 is found in 100% (129/129) of the A(H2N2) sequences from 1957 to 1968 and in 99.93% (26,895/26,915) of the A(H3N2) sequences from 1968 to 2019. The recent A(H1N1)pdm09 virus derived its NP gene from the classical swine influenza viruses that share the same origin as the 1918 pandemic virus6. Given that the NP-R351K mutation was also fixed in 97.08% (1,993/2,053) of the classical swine influenza viruses, the A(H1N1)pdm09 virus continued to harbour the NP-R351K mutation at a high frequency (99.97%, 17,621/17,626) from 2009 to 2019. NP residue 351 is in proximity to residue 319, which is known to interact with importin-α proteins that mediate nucleus importation27,28. In addition, interaction with interferon-induced MxA protein may select NP residues that confer MxA resistance29,30,31. The potential interaction of the NP-R351K mutation with Mx1 and MxA has been studied in the context of A(H1N1)pdm09 (ref. 30) and EA swine influenza viruses14, highlighting that the NP-R351K mutation alone did not confer resistance to Mx1 or MxA. Further studies are needed to delineate the functional role conferred by the NP-R351K mutation.The reconstructed ancestral influenza A viruses represent excellent models for the study of interspecies transmission and host adaptation. Influenza viruses with segmented genomes may rapidly expand genetic diversity and acquire viral fitness through genetic reassortment, as seen with the A(H1N1)pdm09 virus6. While this study did not address the effect of genetic reassortment, swine viruses containing genes derived from the EA swine influenza viruses have been frequently detected in recent years13,15, which warrants further studies. RNA viruses will continue to cross species barriers and there is a need to maintain vigilance for the next pandemic virus. Our results suggest that there may be the opportunity to intervene at an early stage as avian influenza viruses adapt to mammalian hosts. Continuous surveillance that is strategically coordinated with risk assessment studies may help identify viruses with pandemic potential before they become fully adapted in mammalian species. Intervention strategies implemented before full adaption to the new host are most likely to be successful and represent the best use of limited preparedness resources.MethodsEthics statementsPig experiments were performed in an animal biosafety level 2+ facility at St. Jude Children Research Hospital, in compliance with the NIH and the animal Welfare and with the approval of the St. Jude Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol 428).Research approach and oversightThis study adopted a retrospective study design to follow the natural evolutionary path of the EA swine influenza viruses. The ancestral viruses that we constructed based on the consensus sequences of existing low pathogenic avian influenza viruses and EA swine influenza viruses were, by design, anticipated to have characteristics of wild-type, naturally occurring, virus isolates. In essence, we aimed to dissect and study viral evolution that had already occurred in nature, rather than anticipate mutations that may lead to increased mammalian transmissibility or virulence. All of the ancestral viruses that we generated were anticipated to be less mammalian adapted (loss-of-mammalian-function) than present-day EA viruses circulating widely in swine in Europe and Asia. All viral protein sequences encoded by the reconstructed EA1, EA2, EA3 and EA4 viruses showed high identity (99–100%) with 0–4 amino-acid differences to the avian and swine influenza virus sequences deposited in GenBank or GISAID. Given the high mutation rate of influenza viruses and limited surveillance conducted in birds and pigs in the 1970s and 1980s, it is therefore probable that these viruses existed in nature but remain unsampled.All experimental work on the reconstructed EA swine viruses were performed in biosafety level 2 and biosafety level 2-enhanced laboratories with restricted access following approved standard operating procedures. Refresher training of the study personnel is provided annually. All reagents (plasmids and viruses) were stored in locked freezers in rooms with restricted access. During the animal-challenge studies all staff wore full personal protective equipment including respiratory protection.The research approach was reviewed from a dual use/gain-of-function perspective by institutional and funding agency committees. The US (this study was funded by a US federal agency) Dual Use Research of Concern policies are restricted to 15 microbial agents. As the avian and swine influenza viruses used in this study are not included in the 15 agents, these policies were not considered further. The work was assessed during the US Gain-of-Function (GOF) Research Funding Pause in 2014 for activities that would enhance the pathogenicity and/or transmissibility of influenza viruses in mammals via the respiratory route. Institutional and US NIAID review of the study determined that it did not meet the criteria for the GOF research funding pause. The rationale for this decision included that “the reconstruction of a precursor wild-type virus by reverse genetics that exists in nature is not gain-of-function” and that “the resultant virus is expected to be more avian-like than currently circulating swine viruses and be less pathogenic and/ or transmissible in mammals”.Cells and virusesMadin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and maintained in minimal essential medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% penicillin-streptomycin (P/S) and 1% vitamins, and buffered with 25 mM HEPES. Human embryonic kidney 293T (293T) cells were obtained from the ATCC and maintained in Opti-MEM medium supplemented with 5% FCS and 1% P/S. The NPTr cells were obtained from Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale, della Lombardia e dell’Emilia Romagna and maintained in MEM supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% P/S and 1% sodium pyruvate. African green monkey kidney (Vero) cells were obtained from the ATCC and maintained in MEM supplemented with 10% FCS and 1% P/S. The cells were cultured at 37 °C in 5% CO2. All of the cells used in the study tested negative in routine tests for Mycoplasma species using real-time PCR conducted by the Faculty Core Facility, the University of Hong Kong (HKU).Avian influenza virus DK/77 and EA swine influenza A(H1N1) viruses A/swine/Netherlands/3/1980, SW/81, A/swine/Netherlands/12/1985, A/swine/Italy/670/1987 and SW/92 were provided by R. Webster from St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. The EA swine influenza virus A/swine/Arnsberg/6554/1979 (H1N1) was provided by S. Pleschka from Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Germany. The EA swine influenza viruses A/swine/Hong Kong/8512/2001, A/swine/Hong Kong/72/2007, A/swine/Hong Kong/1559/2008, A/swine/Hong Kong/NS29/2009 and A/swine/Hong Kong/NS4848/2011 were isolated and stored at the University of Hong Kong. Archived pig-lung homogenates of EA swine viruses (Be01-lung and Be02-lung) were provided by K. Van Reeth from Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium. Viruses were cultured at an m.o.i. of 0.005 on MDCK cells cultured in MEM supplemented with 0.3% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% P/S, 1% vitamin, 25 mM HEPES and 1 μg ml−1 l-1-tosylamide-2-phenylmethyl chloromethyl ketone-treated trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). The viruses were passaged twice on MDCK cells and their genomes were confirmed by Sanger sequencing (Centre for PanorOmic Sciences, HKU). Stock viruses were stored at −80 °C. The stock viruses were titrated in MDCK cells to determine their concentration (p.f.u. ml−1).Ancestral sequence reconstructionOver 2,000 nucleotide sequences of HA-H1NX (n = 410), NA-HXN1 (n = 443) and HXNX (for all the six internal genes: PB2 (n = 454), PB1 (n = 427), PA (n = 397), NP (n = 417), MP (n = 495) and NS (n = 400) were downloaded from the NCBI database before 2014. Sequences that were smaller than 500 bp were removed from the datasets. Identical sequences and outliers were also removed from the datasets. For each gene segment, independent maximum-likelihood analyses were performed using RAxML version 8.0 (ref. 32) in Geneious R9.0.3 (Biomatters Ltd.) to generate ten input trees for ancestral state reconstruction. For each gene segment, internal nodes were assigned to indicate the transmission events of EA swine virus from avian to swine and to also represent different evolutionary stages of EA swine viruses in pigs. We used the Lazarus software package (version 2.0)33, which utilizes baseml to reconstruct maximum-likelihood ancestral states for ancestral nodes using a general time-reversible nucleotide substitution model with four gamma-distributed discrete categories of among-site rate variation.To visualize the evolutionary positions of the reconstructed ancestral nucleotide sequences, we included those sequences in the individual gene datasets and constructed maximum-likelihood phylogenies using RAxML. The reconstructed ancestral nodes for RG-EA1 to RG-EA4 are located in the same position in individual gene trees, with the exception of the highly conserved M1 and M2 genes, which have shared nodes for RG-EA2 and RG-EA3. We then used the treesub programme34 to infer amino-acid substitutions at the tree nodes, which were mapped onto the gene phylogenies to show fixation of amino acids within each gene.Generation of recombinant virusesThe nodal sequences derived from the phylogenetic analyses of eight gene segments of avian and EA swine influenza viruses were synthesised by GeneArt and Synbio Technologies. The synthesised genes were cloned into the pHW2000 vector by mega-primer PCR as described35,36. Recombinant viruses were generated by transfecting eight plasmids into 293T cells. The virus titres were determined on MDCK cells in six-well plates by plaque assay. All rescued viruses were propagated twice on MDCK cells at an m.o.i. of 0.005 to prepare virus stocks. Their genomes were confirmed via Sanger sequencing.Solid-phase binding assayThe solid-phase binding assay is described in the Supplementary Methods.Glycan microarrayA synthesised glycan microarray comprising 38 glycans of α2,3-linked sialosides (glycans 1–38), three glycans containing both α2,3- and α2,6-linked sialosides (glycans 39–41) and 32 glycans of α2,6-linked sialosides (glycans 42–73; Extended Data Fig. 3) was utilized for virus-binding studies using viruses that were inactivated by 0.025% formaldehyde for 7 d at 4 °C. The glycan array slides were blocked by SuperBlock (PBS) blocking buffer (Pierce) for 1 h at room temperature. To avoid the influence of NA, the NA inhibitor zanamivir was added to the virus stocks at a final concentration of 10 µM. Formalin-inactivated viruses were diluted to 64 HA U per 50 µl, and 100 µl of the inactivated viruses were added to the wells of the glycan array. The array slides were incubated at room temperature with slow shaking (13 r.p.m.) for 1 h. The bound viruses were detected using a 1:6.7 dilution of HA2-targeting human monoclonal antibody (MED18852), followed by a 1:40 dilution of goat anti-human IgG (H+L) secondary antibody labelled with Alexa Fluor 647 (Invitrogen TM, Thermo Fisher). The slides were scanned by an InnoScan 710 AL microarray scanner (Innopsys) equipped with two laser sources, visible wavelength 635 nm and 532 nm. The data were analysed using the GenePix Pro 6.0 software (Molecular Devices).Syncytium-formation assayThe syncytium-formation assay is described in the Supplementary Methods.Viral replication kinetics in vitroConfluent MDCK and NPTr cells in 12-well plates were inoculated with virus at an m.o.i. of 0.001 in 1 ml infection medium, with two repeats. The supernatants were collected at 0, 2, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60 and 72 h.p.i. and titrated on MDCK cells in a six-well plate by plaque assay.Preparation and infection of swine trachea and lung explantsThe preparation and infection of swine trachea and lung explants are described in the Supplementary Methods.Site-directed mutagenesisPrimers designed using QuickChange primer design (https://www.agilent.com/store/primerDesignProgram.jsp) were used to introduce specific mutations in the HA, PB1 and NP genes. These specific primers are listed in Supplementary Table 7. The PCR reactions were performed using a QuickChange multi site-directed mutagenesis kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Agilent).Minigenome assayPolymerase activity was evaluated using a minigenome assay21,22. 293T or NPTr cells in six-well plates were transfected with 1 µg of the plasmids encoding the viral PB2, PB1 or PA genes and 2 µg of the plasmid that encodes the viral NP gene, 1 µg reporter plasmid encoding firefly luciferase flanked by the noncoding region of the influenza M gene driven by either the human Polymerase I promoter37 or swine Polymerase I promoter38 and 0.1 µg phRL-CMV plasmid (Renilla luciferase driven by the CMV promotor) using TransIT (MIRUS) reagent according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. After 24 h, the luciferase activity was measured with the dual-luciferase reporter system (Promega) on a SpectraMax iD5 Multi-Mode Microplate Reader (Molecular Devices).Transmissibility of EA viruses in pigsMale and female Yorkshire crossbred piglets (Midwest Research Swine LLC.), 3–4 weeks old, were randomized into different groups. Before performing the experiments, the pigs were confirmed as seronegative for influenza A virus NP protein (ID.vet) and showed HI titres of ≤1:10 for the homologous EA swine influenza virus. Two donor pigs were intranasally inoculated with 1 × 106 p.f.u. virus in 1 ml PBS under anaesthesia and two naive pigs were introduced to co-house with two donors 1 d.p.i. Each experiment was independently performed in duplicate with a total of four donors and four direct contacts. No statistical methods were used to predetermine the sample sizes, but our sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous publications39,40. Nasal swabs were collected from both nostrils of the donors 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 or 11 d.p.i. The donors were euthanized 11 d.p.i. for post-infection sera collection. Nasal swabs were collected from both nostrils of all contact pigs 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10 and 11 or 13 d.p.e. The contact pigs were euthanized 10 or 13 d.p.e. for post-exposure sera collection. All nasal swabs were placed into 1 ml of viral transport medium and stored at −80 °C. The TCID50 of the nasal swabs was determined by titration in MDCK cells41.HI assayAntibodies to the homologous virus from donor and contact pigs were tested by HI assay following standard procedures. Pig sera were treated with receptor-destroying enzyme, RDE (Denka Seiken), for 18–20 h in a 37 °C water bath and then inactivated for 30 min at 56 °C. The final dilution of RDE-treated sera was 1:10. After preparing two-fold serial dilutions in a 96-well V-bottom microplate, the corresponding virus at the volume of 25 µl containing four HA units was added to the plates and then incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, 50 µl of 0.5% turkey red blood cells (LAMPIRE Biological Laboratories, Inc.) was added, and the plate was slightly shaken and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The HI titres were expressed as the highest dilution of serum that completely inhibited agglutination of virus and erythrocytes. The detection limit was 1:10. Seroconversion was applied using HI titre ≥ 1:20 as the cut-off value.Sequence analysisH1N1-subtype swine influenza viruses and avian influenza viruses were downloaded from NCBI and GISAID (https://www.gisaid.org/). The sequences that clustered with the gene segments of A/duck/Bavaria/1/1977 (H1N1) were extracted from these maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees. Finally, eight gene segments—PB2 (n = 417), PB1 (n = 381), PA (n = 382), HA (n = 454), NP (n = 495), NA (n = 429), M (n = 396) and NS (n=391)—of EA swine influenza viruses isolated from 1979 to 2016 were used for specific amino-acid prevalence analysis. To investigate whether mutations (that is, PB1-Q621R and NP-R351K) are conserved among influenza A viruses, the PB1 of 74,095 influenza A viruses and NP of 80,188 influenza A viruses isolated from 1933 to 2019 were downloaded from GISAID. Sequences were aligned using MAFFT42 at the CIPRES science gateway (version 3)43. The number of amino acids were counted using BioEdit (version 7.0).Serial passages in vitro and in ovoTo compare mutations that may emerge after passaging in vitro and in ovo, the recombinant viruses RG-Be02-lungSG×EA2IG, RG-EA1, RG-EA2, RG-EA3 and RG-EA4 were serial passaged in MDCK and NPTr cells as well as ten-day-old embryonated chicken eggs using transfection supernatant as the starting material. In vitro infections were performed using an m.o.i. of 0.001–0.005 at each passage and in ovo infections were performed using 1 × 104 p.f.u. in 0.1 ml. Three independent serial passages were performed in parallel for each condition. The culture supernatants or allantoic fluids harvested from passage three were analysed by next-generation sequencing.Next-generation sequencingViral RNA was extracted from samples using a QIAamp viral RNA mini kit (Qiagen). The RNA was transcribed into complementary DNA using SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). The gene segments were amplified by Q5 High Fidelity DNA polymerase (NEB) using a pair of primers (454-Tag1-U12, GCCGGAGCTCTGCAGATATCAGCRAAAGCAGG; and 454-Tag1-U1, GCCGGAGCTCTGCAGATATCAGTAGAAACAAGG). Libraries were prepared based on the Nextera DNA flex library preparation standard protocol44. The PCR products (300 ng) were cleaved and tagged by bead-linked transposome at 55 °C and the tagmented DNA was amplified with a pair of indexes using a five-cycle PCR programme. After purification, the libraries were finally eluted using 32 µl resuspension buffer. The libraries were quantified using an Agilent fragment analyser automated CE system with the high-sensitivity NGS fragment analysis 474 kit (Agilent). Pool libraries (100–150 pM) containing index adaptors allowing multiplex sequencing of four samples per iSeq 100 i1 cartridge were run on an iSeq 100 sequencing system (Illumina). The output data were analysed on CLC Genomic workbench (version 20; Qiagen) using 1% as the variant-calling threshold. The nucleotide substitutions with a frequency of 5% or more were further analysed.NA kineticsThe NA kinetics analysis is described in the Supplementary Methods.Immunofluorescence stainingTo investigate the effect of mutations in NP on the cellular distribution of NP during the virus life cycle, NPTr cells were infected with virus at an m.o.i. of five. Infections were stopped at 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 h.p.i. by fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences). The cells were then permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 30 min and labelled with a 1:200 dilution of mouse monoclonal IgG2a influenza A NP antibody (Santa Cruz Biotech, Inc) at 4 °C overnight. The cells were subsequently incubated with a 1:200 dilution of fluorescein isothiocyanate-labelled goat anti–mouse IgG/IgM (BD Pharmingen) for 3 h at room temperature in the dark. After three washes, the nuclei were counterstained at a 1:1,000 dilution of DAPI in SlowFade gold antifade mountant (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at room temperature for 15 min. Cell imaging and fluorescence were carried out using a Nikon Eclipse Ti-S fluorescence microscope equipped with a Nikon DS-Qi2 camera and the iNIS-Elements BR imaging software (version 4.40). The positive cells were enumerated using FIJI45.Statistical analysesBlinding on the conditions of the experiments was not performed during data collection and analyses. No animal or data point was excluded from the analyses. One-way ANOVA was used to compare multiple groups and two-way ANOVA was used to compare virus titres over time, followed by Tukey’s multiple-comparisons post-hoc tests. The AUC was calculated from the nasal swabs of the donor and contact pigs. A two-sided Mann–Whitney U-test was performed to compare two groups, and Kruskal–Wallis and Dunn’s multiple-comparisons post-hoc tests were used to compare multiple groups. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient analysis was performed for the monotonic relationship between virus-replication efficiency and viral transmissibility. Data were analysed in Microsoft Excel for Mac, version 16.28, and GraphPad Prism version 8.4.1 for Windows. All statistical parameters for specific analyses are shown in the corresponding figure legends. Statistically significant P values (P < 0.05) are indicated in the figures.Reporting SummaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability Sequences of Sanger sequencing validated in the study were deposited to the public database GISAID under the following accession numbers: DK/77, EPI_ISL_539860; A/swine/Arnsberg/6554/1979, EPI_ISL_539869; Be01-lung, EPI_ISL_1055769; Be02-lung, EPI_ISL_1055773; A/swine/Netherlands/3/1980, EPI_ISL_539861; SW/81, EPI_ISL_539862; A/swine/Netherlands/12/1985, EPI_ISL_539863; SW/92, EPI_ISL_539864; A/swine/Hong Kong/8512/2001, EPI_ISL_539865; A/swine/Hong Kong/72/2007, EPI_ISL_539866; A/swine/Hong Kong/1559/2008, EPI_ISL_539867; A/swine/Hong Kong/NS4848/2011, EPI_ISL_539868; RG-EA1, EPI_ISL_539852; RG-EA2, EPI_ISL_539853; RG-EA3, EPI_ISL_539854; and RG-EA4, EPI_ISL_539855. Samples of next-generation sequencing have been deposited in the Sequence Read Archive of the NCBI under project accession number PRJNA725802. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesKuiken, T. et al. Host species barriers to influenza virus infections. Science 312, 394–397 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Parrish, C. R. et al. Cross-species virus transmission and the emergence of new epidemic diseases. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 72, 457–470 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Taubenberger, J. K. & Kash, J. C. Influenza virus evolution, host adaptation, and pandemic formation. Cell Host Microbe 7, 440–451 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lipsitch, M. et al. Viral factors in influenza pandemic risk assessment. Elife 5, e18491 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Long, J. S., Mistry, B., Haslam, S. M. & Barclay, W. S. Host and viral determinants of influenza A virus species specificity. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17, 67–81 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Smith, G. J. et al. Origins and evolutionary genomics of the 2009 swine-origin H1N1 influenza A epidemic. Nature 459, 1122–1125 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pensaert, M., Ottis, K., Vandeputte, J., Kaplan, M. M. & Bachmann, P. A. Evidence for the natural transmission of influenza A virus from wild ducts to swine and its potential importance for man. Bull. World Health Organ. 59, 75–78 (1981).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Brown, I. H. History and epidemiology of swine influenza in Europe. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 370, 133–146 (2013).PubMed Google Scholar Krumbholz, A. et al. Origin of the European avian-like swine influenza viruses. J. Gen. Virol. 95, 2372–2376 (2014).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Joseph, U., Vijaykrishna, D., Smith, G. J. D. & Su, Y. C. F. Adaptive evolution during the establishment of European avian-like H1N1 influenza A virus in swine. Evol. Appl. 11, 534–546 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vijaykrishna, D. et al. Long-term evolution and transmission dynamics of swine influenza A virus. Nature 473, 519–522 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yang, H. et al. Prevalence, genetics, and transmissibility in ferrets of Eurasian avian-like H1N1 swine influenza viruses. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 392–397 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Henritzi, D. et al. Surveillance of European domestic pig populations identifies an emerging reservoir of potentially zoonotic swine influenza A viruses. Cell Host Microbe 28, 614–627 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Dornfeld, D., Petric, P. P., Hassan, E., Zell, R. & Schwemmle, M. Eurasian avian-like swine influenza A viruses escape human MxA restriction through distinct mutations in their nucleoprotein. J. Virol. 93, e00997-18 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sun, H. et al. Prevalent Eurasian avian-like H1N1 swine influenza virus with 2009 pandemic viral genes facilitating human infection. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 17204–17210 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thornton, J. W., Need, E. & Crews, D. Resurrecting the ancestral steroid receptor: ancient origin of estrogen signaling. Science 301, 1714–1717 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ducatez, M. F. et al. Feasibility of reconstructed ancestral H5N1 influenza viruses for cross-clade protective vaccine development. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 349–354 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rogers, G. N. & Paulson, J. C. Receptor determinants of human and animal influenza virus isolates: differences in receptor specificity of the H3 hemagglutinin based on species of origin. Virology 127, 361–373 (1983).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Baumann, J., Kouassi, N. M., Foni, E., Klenk, H. D. & Matrosovich, M. H1N1 swine influenza viruses differ from avian precursors by a higher pH optimum of membrane fusion. J. Virol. 90, 1569–1577 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Russier, M. et al. H1N1 influenza viruses varying widely in hemagglutinin stability transmit efficiently from swine to swine and to ferrets. PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006276 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Pleschka, S. et al. A plasmid-based reverse genetics system for influenza A virus. J. Virol. 70, 4188–4192 (1996).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Salomon, R. et al. The polymerase complex genes contribute to the high virulence of the human H5N1 influenza virus isolate A/Vietnam/1203/04. J. Exp. Med. 203, 689–697 (2006).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thornton, J. W. Resurrecting ancient genes: experimental analysis of extinct molecules. Nat. Rev. Genet. 5, 366–375 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Giles, B. M. & Ross, T. M. A computationally optimized broadly reactive antigen (COBRA) based H5N1 VLP vaccine elicits broadly reactive antibodies in mice and ferrets. Vaccine 29, 3043–3054 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Taubenberger, J. K. & Morens, D. M. The 1918 influenza pandemic and its legacy. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 10, a038695 (2020).Article PubMed Google Scholar Reid, A. H., Fanning, T. G., Janczewski, T. A., Lourens, R. M. & Taubenberger, J. K. Novel origin of the 1918 pandemic influenza virus nucleoprotein gene. J. Virol. 78, 12462–12470 (2004).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gabriel, G., Herwig, A. & Klenk, H. D. Interaction of polymerase subunit PB2 and NP with importin α1 is a determinant of host range of influenza A virus. PLoS Pathog. 4, e11 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Gabriel, G. et al. Differential use of importin-α isoforms governs cell tropism and host adaptation of influenza virus. Nat. Commun. 2, 156 (2011).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Zimmermann, P., Mänz, B., Haller, O., Schwemmle, M. & Kochs, G. The viral nucleoprotein determines Mx sensitivity of influenza A viruses. J. Virol. 85, 8133–8140 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mänz, B. et al. Pandemic influenza A viruses escape from restriction by human MxA through adaptive mutations in the nucleoprotein. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003279 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Ashenberg, O., Padmakumar, J., Doud, M. B. & Bloom, J. D. Deep mutational scanning identifies sites in influenza nucleoprotein that affect viral inhibition by MxA. PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006288 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Stamatakis, A. RAxML version 8: a tool for phylogenetic analysis and post-analysis of large phylogenies. Bioinformatics 30, 1312–1313 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Finnigan, G. C., Hanson-Smith, V., Stevens, T. H. & Thornton, J. W. Evolution of increased complexity in a molecular machine. Nature 481, 360–364 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tamuri, A. U. Treesub: annotating ancestral substitution on a tree. Github https://github.comamurireesub (2013).Stech, J. et al. Rapid and reliable universal cloning of influenza A virus genes by target-primed plasmid amplification. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, e139 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Hoffmann, E., Neumann, G., Kawaoka, Y., Hobom, G. & Webster, R. G. A DNA transfection system for generation of influenza A virus from eight plasmids. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 6108–6113 (2000).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hoffmann, E., Neumann, G., Hobom, G., Webster, R. G. & Kawaoka, Y. ‘Ambisense’ approach for the generation of influenza A virus: vRNA and mRNA synthesis from one template. Virology 267, 310–317 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Moncorge, O. et al. Investigation of influenza virus polymerase activity in pig cells. J. Virol. 87, 384–394 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhu, H. et al. Infectivity, transmission, and pathology of human-isolated H7N9 influenza virus in ferrets and pigs. Science 341, 183–186 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nishiura, H., Yen, H. L. & Cowling, B. J. Sample size considerations for one-to-one animal transmission studies of the influenza A viruses. PLoS ONE 8, e55358 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Reed, L. J. & Muench, H. A simple method of estimating fifty percent endpoints. Am. J. Hyg. 27, 493–497 (1938). Google Scholar Katoh, K., Misawa, K., Kuma, K. & Miyata, T. MAFFT: a novel method for rapid multiple sequence alignment based on fast Fourier transform. Nucleic Acids Res. 30, 3059–3066 (2002).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Miller, M. A., Pfeiffer, W. & Schwartz, T. Creating the CIPRES Science Gateway for inference of large phylogenetic trees. In 2010 Gateway Computing Environments Workshop (GCE) 1–8 (IEEE, 2010).Bruinsma, S. et al. Bead-linked transposomes enable a normalization-free workflow for NGS library preparation. BMC Genomics 19, 722 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank the St. Jude core facilities, including the Animal Resources Centre and the Veterinary Pathology Core for technical support. This study was supported by contract HHSN272201400006C from NIAID, NIH, USA, and the Theme-Based Research Scheme (grant nos T11-705/14N and T11-712/19-N) from the Research Grants Council, Hong Kong SAR, China. Y.C.F.S., U.J., J.J. and G.J.D.S. are supported by the Duke–NUS Signature Research Programme funded by the Ministry of Health, Singapore.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsSchool of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, ChinaWen Su, Yuqin Zhang, Mengting Zhang, Yue Ji, Huyen Trang Bui, Michael C. W. Chan, Malik Peiris & Hui-Ling YenDepartment of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USARhodri Harfoot, Jennifer DeBeauchamp, Jeri-Carol Crumpton, Trushar Jeevan, Adam Rubrum, John Franks, Philippe Noriel Q. Pascua, Christina Kackos, Jeremy C. Jones, Lisa Kercher, Scott Krauss, Robert G. Webster & Richard J. WebbyDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New ZealandRhodri HarfootProgramme in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke–NUS Medical School, Singapore, SingaporeYvonne C. F. Su, Udayan Joseph, Jayanthi Jayakumar & Gavin J. D. SmithInstitute of Medical Virology, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, GermanyStephan PleschkaGenomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of ChinaChung-Yi WuLaboratory of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Virology, Parasitology and Immunology, Ghent University, Merelbeke, BelgiumKristien Van ReethAuthorsWen SuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRhodri HarfootView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYvonne C. F. SuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJennifer DeBeauchampView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarUdayan JosephView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJayanthi JayakumarView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeri-Carol CrumptonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTrushar JeevanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdam RubrumView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJohn FranksView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPhilippe Noriel Q. PascuaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChristina KackosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYuqin ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMengting ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYue JiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHuyen Trang BuiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeremy C. JonesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLisa KercherView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarScott KraussView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarStephan PleschkaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMichael C. W. ChanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRobert G. WebsterView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChung-Yi WuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKristien Van ReethView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMalik PeirisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRichard J. WebbyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGavin J. D. SmithView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHui-Ling YenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsH.-L.Y., G.J.D.S. and R.J.W. conceived and designed the experiments. W.S., Y.C.F.S., U.J., J.J. and G.J.D.S. performed the sequence analyses. W.S., Y.Z., M.Z. and Y.J. performed in vitro experiments. W.S. and H.T.B. performed ex vivo experiments. W.S., R.H., J.D., J.-C.C., T.J., A.R., J.F., P.N.Q.P., C.K., J.C.J. and L.K. performed in vivo animal experiments. S.K., S.P., M.C.W.C., R.G.W., C.-Y.W., K.V.R. and M.P. provided novel reagents to support the study. W.S., Y.C.F.S., G.J.D.S., R.J.W., M.P. and H.-L.Y. wrote the draft manuscript, and all authors reviewed the paper.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Richard J. Webby, Gavin J. D. Smith or Hui-Ling Yen.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPeer review information Nature Microbiology thanks Eric Gaucher, Larisa Rudenko and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Extended dataExtended Data Fig. 1 Receptor binding profile of avian and EA swine influenza A viruses.An ELISA-based assay was employed to investigate receptor binding preference of avian and EA swine H1N1 influenza viruses. 3'SLN (shown in cyan circles) and 6'SLN (shown in pink squares) were coated in 96-well plates at concentrations of 5 to 0.1 µg/ml. Infectious viruses (diluted to 64 HAU/50µL) were added to each well and co-incubated with 3'SLN and 6'SLN. The plates were washed with PBS and the detection of bound virus was done using a rabbit polyclonal antibody against HA from A/Duck/NZL/160/1976(H1N3) (Sino Biological Inc., Beijing, China) followed by polyclonal Goat Anti-Rabbit Immunoglobulins/HRP (Dako, Denmark). The absorbance at 450 nm was plotted against glycan concentration. Results are shown with the mean and s.d. absorbance from 3 replicates in one of two independently performed experiment.Source dataExtended Data Fig. 2 EA swine virus sequence from archived pig-lung homogenates in 1979 shared high homology with the ancestral sequence of RG-EA2 that genetically resembles 1979–1983 era EA swine viruses.Full genome of A/swine/Belgium/2/1979 (Be02-lung) and a partial genome of A/swine/Belgium/1/1979 (Be01-lung) EA swine influenza viruses were sequenced from two archived pig-lung homogenates from 1979. Four recombinant viruses were resurrected using ancestral sequence reconstruction, with RG-EA1 representing the precursor virus of EA swine viruses, RG-EA2 representing the early evolutionary stage of EA swine viruses in 1979–1983, and RG-EA3 and RG-EA4 representing EA swine viruses in 1984–1987 and 1988–1992, respectively. Among the 33 amino acids that differentiate the non-transmissible RG-EA2 virus and transmissible RG-EA3 virus, the sequences of Be01 and Be02 showed high homology to RG-EA2. /, unsuccessfully determined.Extended Data Fig. 3 Structure of glycans used for glycan array.A synthesised glycan microarray comprised of 38 glycans of 𝛼2,3-linked sialosides (glycan 1–38), 3 glycans containing both 𝛼2,3 & 𝛼2,6-linked sialosides (glycan 39–41) and 32 glycans of 𝛼2,6-linked sialosides (glycan 42–73) was utilized for glycan array assay.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationSupplementary Methods, Supplementary Figs. 1,2 and Supplementary Tables 1–7.Reporting SummaryPeer Review FileSource dataSource Data Fig. 1Numerical source data for Fig. 1.Source Data Fig. 2Numerical source data for Fig. 2b–h.Source Data Fig. 3Numerical source data for Fig. 3.Source Data Fig. 4Numerical source data for Fig. 4.Source Data Fig. 5Numerical source data for Fig. 5a–c,e–h.Source Data Extended Data Fig. 1Numerical source data for Extended Data Fig.1.Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleSu, W., Harfoot, R., Su, Y.C.F. et al. Ancestral sequence reconstruction pinpoints adaptations that enable avian influenza virus transmission in pigs. Nat Microbiol 6, 1455–1465 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-021-00976-yDownload citationReceived: 18 April 2021Accepted: 07 September 2021Published: 26 October 2021Issue Date: November 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-021-00976-yShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Human-type sialic acid receptors contribute to avian influenza A virus binding and entry by hetero-multivalent interactions Mengying LiuLiane Z. X. HuangErik de Vries Nature Communications (2022) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Journal Metrics About the Editors Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Editorial Policies Content Types Community Contact Publish with us Submission Guidelines For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Microbiology (Nat Microbiol) ISSN 2058-5276 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingA stochastic model explains the periodicity phenomenon of influenza on network | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article A stochastic model explains the periodicity phenomenon of influenza on network Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 25 October 2021 A stochastic model explains the periodicity phenomenon of influenza on network Hong Yang1,2 & Zhen Jin1,2 Scientific Reports volume 11, Article number: 20996 (2021) Cite this article 1079 Accesses Metrics details Subjects DiseasesMathematics and computing AbstractInfluenza is an infectious disease with obvious periodic changes over time. It is of great practical significance to explore the non-environment-related factors that cause this regularity for influenza control and individual protection. In this paper, based on the randomness of population number and the heterogeneity of population contact, we have established a stochastic infectious disease model about influenza based on the degree of the network, and obtained the power spectral density function by using the van Kampen expansion method of the master equation. The relevant parameters are obtained by fitting the influenza data of sentinel hospitals. The results of the numerical analysis show that: (1) for the infected, the infection period of patients who go to the sentinel hospitals is particularly different from the others who do not; (2) for all the infected, there is an obvious nonlinear relationship between their infection period and the visiting rate of the influenza sentinel hospitals, the infection rate and the degree. Among them, only the infection period of patients who do not go to the sentinel hospitals decreased monotonously with the infection rate (increased monotonously with the visiting rate), while the rest had a non-monotonic relationship. Similar content being viewed by others A computational model of epidemic process with three variants on a synthesized human interaction network Article Open access 29 March 2024 Analysis of stochastic epidemic model with awareness decay and heterogeneous individuals on multi-weighted networks Article Open access 05 November 2024 General protocol for predicting outbreaks of infectious diseases in social networks Article Open access 12 March 2024 IntroductionInfluenza is an respiratory infection caused by a virus. Since the outbreak of the Spanish flu in 1918, there has been a large amount of literature on influenza, among which mathematical model is a very important tool for studying influenza1,2,3,4. The traditional deterministic mean-field model5,6,7,8 regards different populations as uniformly mixed and ignores the differences in the contact process and behavior among individuals. In general, this contact process can be viewed as a network in which nodes represent individuals and edges represent contacts between individuals. Network has its unique topology structure, such as degree k (i.e. the number of edges connecting to one node), degree distribution (i.e. P(k) denotes the probability that a randomly chosen node in the network has degree k), clustering coefficient (i.e. the average probability that two neighbors of a node are themselves neighbors) and so on9,10. The topological structure of complex network may lead to some results of overthrowing the traditional, for instance, there is no epidemic threshold in a scale-free network which follows a degree distribution of power-law (\(P(k)\propto k^{-\gamma }\) when \(1<\gamma \le 3\)), for the SIS model11 raised by Pastor. So far, there are many epidemic disease modelling methods based on different features of the network, such as pairwise model12, edge-based compartmental modelling13, degree-based modelling14 and effective degree modelling15.The recurrent of epidemic brings a big challenge for people to treat the disease16. Many diseases exhibit the phenomenon of annual, biennial, multi-annual and irregular oscillations, such as measles, whooping cough, influenza and so on. The prediction of these diseases by using deterministic dynamic model satisfactorily both the internal mechanism and persistence properties exhibited by case report remains elusive, especially the multi-year periodicity phenomenon, which can be regarded as the comprehensive results of nonlinear dynamics, random factors and seasonal forcing17. Many works of literature related to seasonal cases using the deterministic dynamic model where the contact rate is temporal18,19, and the period is artificial, yet, the endogenous period is not always fixed at 1 year in reality. By using some methods, such as Fourier transform and wavelet analysis, which are used in the following part, we can get the endogenous frequency of these case data, which better conforms to the actual situation and helpful in controlling a pandemic.In addition, noise is usually considered a nuisance, yet it is unavoidable in reality. However, many researches show that it may play a constructive role. Noise interacting with the deterministic dynamic system may lead to some different results: (1) extinction20, the disease may die out even though the basic reproduction number \(R_{0}\) is larger than one in the deterministic system; (2) fluctuation21, the autonomous system is allowed to remain oscillation around the unique nonzero stable equilibrium, which is one of the main themes of this paper; (3) stochastic phase transition22, the system is caused to shift between different attractors.Distinction from the general Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered-Susceptible model for influenza, which is abbreviated as SIRS, we divide the infected people into two part: ones who go to the sentinel hospitals (H) and the others (I) who do not. In this paper, we consider the SHIRS model based on the degree to describe analytically the fluctuations produced by demographic stochasticity, in which, the method called van Kampen’s system-size expansion23 is used. The power spectral densities (PSD) of the number of infected and susceptible individuals can be derived to describe the effect of stochastic amplification and heterogeneity by using this method, which based on individual-based formulation has been applied to epidemiology24,25. However, the researches which involve in the relevant work on network are still relatively few.The influenza week data from the sentinel hospitals of Taiyuan since 2013–2016 have a period of semi-annual to annual through wavelet method26,27 illustrated by Fig. 1. To investigate the relationship between the multi-span phenomenon of period and network structure, we first develop a fully stochastic heterogeneous SHIRS model. Then, the PSD is obtained from the Langevin equations by Fourier transformation which provides a prediction for the dominant period of the flu, and the sensitivity of parameters is analyzed, in which the values of the corresponding parameters are obtained from the part of data mentioned above by using least square estimation. Finally, we discuss the limitations and extensions of this method. Our analysis sheds new light on the importance of heterogeneity for influenza outbreaks and persistence.Figure 1Temporal periodicity analysis of influenza in Taiyuan using the wavelet method. (a) Weekly infective number of influenza from 2013 to 2016 of Taiyuan sentinel hospitals. (b) The wavelet spectrum analysis corresponds to time series of the data of (a). High power values are colored in yellow, orange and cyan denote intermediate power, blue denotes low one. Note the black line is the \(95\%\) confidence level. Only patterns within these lines which can neglect the edge effects are considered reliable. (c) The average wavelet spectrum (blue line) and the corresponding \(95\%\) confidence contour(red).Full size imageThe stochastic SHIRS model on networkStochastic modellingIn this paper, we divide the population N into four classes, in which S denotes the number of individuals who are susceptible to disease, but are not yet infected at the moment; H or I represents the size of those who are infected with the disease and are able to transmit disease to the susceptible people by contacting with them, the only difference between them is whether to go to the sentinel hospitals, in which H denotes the infected people who have gone to the sentinel hospitals, yet I not; R is the size of people who have recovered from the infected and immune to the disease.The number of contacts (i.e. the degree) is extraordinary different because of the diversity of factors between people like age, profession and so on. For example: people in school due to the factors of enormous population density has a higher degree. So degree is a important indicator to depict the heterogeneity. Similar to the modelling method proposed by Pastor11,14, we mark off the whole population into n groups according to the degree, i.e. \(N=N_{1}+...+N_{n}\), in which, \(N_{k}\) is the size of population with degree \(k, (k=1,2,...,n)\). \(P(k)=\frac{N_{k}}{N}\) is the degree distribution of the network, \(\langle k\rangle\) is the mean degree, i.e. \(\langle k\rangle =\sum \limits _{k=1}^{n}kP(k)\), similarly, \(\langle k^{2}\rangle =\sum \limits _{k=1}^{n}k^{2}P(k)\) is the secondary moment of the degree distribution.Based on the classification of disease we mentioned above, people in one group can be divided to four classes: \(S_{k}, H_{k}, I_{k}, R_{k}\), in which \(S_{k}\) denotes the number of the susceptible people with degree k, and \(H_{k}, I_{k}, R_{k}\) have the similar meanings. We assume the total population size and degree distribution do not change with time, which implies that the \(N_{k}\) is a constant. By using the relationship expression: \(R_{k}=N_{k}-S_{k}-H_{k}-I_{k}\), we can obtain the recovered individual \(R_{k}\) under the new \((S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})\) framework, so the state of the system can be defined by the three integers \((S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})\).Though the deterministic ordinary differential equation can be viewed as the approximate solution of the stochastic differential equation when the number of population is large, the stochastic modelling method is more accurate, in which continuous time Markov modelling is used in our paper.At first, we should understand the whole transfer processes of the disease and the corresponding transfer rate, which has been listed in Table 1. Figure 2 has shown the schematic diagram of our model, from which we can know people in one compartment may enter into another due to the three processes:Table 1 List of transition rates.Full size tableFigure 2Schematic diagram of the SHIRS based on degree, the parameters meaning are listed in Table 2.Full size image Infection \(S_{k}\) may become infected by contacting with a infected individual in any group. i.e. \(S_{k}{\mathop {\rightarrow }\limits ^{\rho \beta kS_{k}\theta }}H_{k}\), \(S_{k}{\mathop {\rightarrow }\limits ^{(1-\rho )\beta kS_{k}\theta }}I_{k}\), where \(\rho\) is the proportion of infected people who have go to the sentinel hospitals, \(\beta\) is the probability of infection per contact, if the correlation of the states of the diseases and the degree have been neglected, under this condition, \(\theta\) which means the probability of any chosen edge being connected to infected has the following form:$$\begin{aligned} \theta _{A} \triangleq \frac{\sum \limits _{m=1}^{n}mH_{m}}{\sum \limits _{m=1}^{n}mN_{m}}, \theta _{I} \triangleq \frac{\sum \limits _{m=1}^{n}mI_{m}}{\sum \limits _{m=1}^{n}mN_{m}}, \theta \triangleq \theta _{H}+\theta _{I}, \end{aligned}$$ (1) Because of the Markov property, the current system state just depends on the one of last time, so we use \(T(\delta '|\delta )\) to denote the transfer rate of the system state changing from \(\delta\) to \(\delta '\), then the transition rate of the infection process can be written as:$$\begin{aligned} T(S_{k}-1,H_{k}+1,I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})&= \rho \beta kS_{k}\theta ,\\ T(S_{k}-1,H_{k},I_{k}+1|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})&= (1-\rho )\beta kS_{k}\theta . \end{aligned}$$ (2) Recovery Infective people can move out this compartment because of recovery over time, \(H_{k}{\mathop {\rightarrow }\limits ^{\gamma _{1}}}R_{k}, I_{k}{\mathop {\rightarrow }\limits ^{\gamma _{2}}}R_{k}\), where \(\gamma _{1}\) and \(\gamma _{2}\) are recovery rates. This transition rate can be denoted as:$$\begin{array}{l} T({S_k},{H_k} - 1,{I_k}|{S_k},{H_k},{I_k}) = {\gamma _1}{H_k},\\ T({S_k},{H_k},{I_k} - 1|{S_k},{H_k},{I_k}) = {\gamma _2}{I_k}. \end{array}$$ (3) Lose immunity The recovered people will lose immunity after some time, \(R_{k}{\mathop {\rightarrow }\limits ^{\alpha }}S_{k}\), in which, \(\alpha\) is the rate of lose immunity. The corresponding transition rate of this process is:$$\begin{aligned} T(S_{k}+1,H_{k},I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}) = \alpha (N_{k}-S_{k}-H_{k}-I_{k}). \end{aligned}$$ (4) Now, this continuous time Markov process can be modeled using a master equation, which has the general form:$$\begin{aligned} \frac{dp(\delta ,t)}{dt}=\sum _{\delta '\ne \delta }T(\delta |\delta ')p(\delta ',t) -\sum _{\delta '\ne \delta }T(\delta '|\delta )p(\delta ,t). \end{aligned}$$ (5) This equation describes the process of state transition of the system: some system states shift from \(\delta '\) to \(\delta\), meanwhile \(\delta\) changes to the other system state \(\delta '\), \(p(\delta ,t)\) is the probability of the system state in the \(\delta\) at time t. The explicit form of the master equation involving the three processes is given below:$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t)}{dt}&=T(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}|S_{k}+1,H_{k}-1,I_{k})p(S_{k}+1,H_{k}-1,I_{k},t)\\&\quad +T(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}|S_{k}+1,H_{k},I_{k}-1)p(S_{k}+1,H_{k},I_{k}-1,t)\\&\quad +T(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k}+1,I_{k})p(S_{k},H_{k}+1,I_{k},t)\\&\quad +T(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}+1)p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}+1,t)\\&\quad +T(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}|S_{k}-1,H_{k},I_{k})p(S_{k}-1,H_{k},I_{k},t)\\&\quad -[T(S_{k}-1,H_{k}+1,I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})+T(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}-1|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})\\&\quad +T(S_{k},H_{k}-1,I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})+T(S_{k}-1,H_{k},I_{k}+1|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})\\&\quad +T(S_{k}+1,H_{k},I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})]p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t). \end{aligned}$$ (6) The deterministic limit systemFrom the last section, the master equation has been obtained, which contains all information of the system, in this section, we will study the deterministic limit system corresponding to the (6).For the mean values$$\begin{aligned} \langle {S}_{k}\rangle&=\sum \limits _{S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}} S_{k}p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t), \langle {H}_{k}\rangle =\sum \limits _{S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}} H_{k}p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t),\\ \langle {I}_{k}\rangle&=\sum \limits _{S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}} I_{k}p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t) \end{aligned}$$may be obtained by multiplying Eq. (6) by \(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}\) in turn, and then summing over all the states of the system, the mean field theory takes the explicit form: $$\begin{aligned} \frac{d\langle {S}_{k}\rangle }{dt}=\sum _{S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}}\{&- T(S_{k}-1,H_{k},I_{k}+1|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t) \nonumber \\&-T(S_{k}-1,H_{k}+1,I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t) \nonumber \\&+T(S_{k}+1,H_{k},I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t)\}, \end{aligned}$$ (7a) $$\begin{aligned} \frac{d\langle {H}_{k}\rangle }{dt}=\sum _{S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}}\{&T(S_{k}-1,H_{k}+1,I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t) \nonumber \\&-T(S_{k},H_{k}-1,I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t)\}, \end{aligned}$$ (7b) $$\begin{aligned} \frac{d\langle {I}_{k}\rangle }{dt}=\sum _{S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}}\{&T(S_{k}-1,H_{k},I_{k}+1|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t)\nonumber \\&-T(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}-1|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t)\}. \end{aligned}$$ (7c) When we substitute these transition rates of Eqs. (2)–(4) into the above and introduce the corresponding density variables in the limit \(N_{k}\rightarrow \infty\),$$\begin{aligned} s_{k}=\lim _{N_{k}\rightarrow \infty }\frac{\langle {S}_{k}\rangle }{N_{k}}, h_{k}=\lim _{N_{k}\rightarrow \infty }\frac{\langle {H}_{k}\rangle }{N_{k}}, i_{k}=\lim _{N_{k}\rightarrow \infty }\frac{\langle {I}_{k}\rangle }{N_{k}}. \end{aligned}$$ (8) The corresponding deterministic equations of \(s_{k}\), \(h_{k}\) and \(i_{k}\) can be obtained:$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d s_{k}}{dt}=&-\beta ks_{k}\theta +\alpha (1-s_{k}-h_{k}-i_{k})=f_{1}(s_{k},h_{k},i_{k}),\\ \frac{d h_{k}}{dt}=&\rho \beta ks_{k}\theta -\gamma _{1}h_{k}=f_{2}(s_{k},h_{k},i_{k}),\\ \frac{d i_{k}}{dt}=&(1-\rho )\beta ks_{k}\theta -\gamma _{2}i_{k}=f_{3}(s_{k},h_{k},i_{k}), \end{aligned}$$ (9) in which \(\theta\) has the following equivalent form:$$\begin{aligned} \theta _{h}=\theta _{H}=\sum \limits _{m=1}^{n}\frac{mP(m)h_{m}}{\langle k\rangle }, \theta _{i}=\theta _{I}=\sum \limits _{m=1}^{n}\frac{mP(m)i_{m}}{\langle k\rangle }, \theta =\theta _{h}+\theta _{i}. \end{aligned}$$ (10) It is easy to obtain that for the system (9), the basic reproduction number \(R_{0}=[\frac{\rho \beta }{\gamma _{1}}+\frac{(1-\rho )\beta }{\gamma _{2}}]\frac{\langle k^{2}\rangle }{\langle k\rangle }\) is the critical threshold, which means the average number of secondary infections caused by one infected individual in a susceptible population. Theorem 2.1 For the system (9), the following situations hold (1) when \(R_{0}<1\), the disease-free equilibrium \(E^{0}(1,0,0)\) is locally asymptotically stable; (2) when \(R_{0}>1\), the system has a unique epidemic equilibrium \(E^{*}(s_{k}^{*},h_{k}^{*},i_{k}^{*})\) in which, $$\begin{aligned} s_{k}^{*}=\frac{\gamma _{1}\gamma _{2}}{\beta k\theta _{h_{k}^{*}}(\rho \gamma _{2}+(1-\rho )\gamma _{1})}h_{k}^{*}, i_{k}^{*}=\frac{(1-\rho )\gamma _{1}}{\rho \gamma _{2}}h_{k}^{*}, \end{aligned}$$\(h_{k}^{*}\) has no concrete expression, but it satisfies the conditions below:$$\begin{aligned} 1=h_{k}^{*}[1+\frac{\gamma _{1}}{\rho \alpha }+\frac{(1-\rho )\gamma _{1}}{\rho \gamma _{2}}+\frac{\gamma _{1}\gamma _{2}}{\beta k\theta _{h_{k}^{*}}(\rho \gamma _{2}+(1-\rho )\gamma _{1})}] \end{aligned}$$ (11) and the disease is permanent. The proof of the theorem is given in the supplementary, and in which$$\begin{aligned} \theta _{h}^{*}= \sum \limits _{m=1}^{n}\frac{mP(m)h_{m}^{*}}{\langle k\rangle }, \theta _{i}^{*}= \sum \limits _{m=1}^{n}\frac{mP(m)i_{m}^{*}}{\langle k\rangle }, \theta ^{*}= \theta _{h}^{*}+\theta _{i}^{*}. \end{aligned}$$ The periodicity in different groupsThrough the above analysis, we know that for the deterministic system (9), when \(R_{0}>1\), the disease ultimately fixed in the point of \(E^{*}\), yet, the influenza exhibits oscillating phenomenon in reality by the influence of noise even neglecting the seasonal factor, which can be seen from the Fig. 3. Hence we use the van Kampen’s system-size expansion method to obtain the higher-order terms which can be used to investigate the perturbations around the steady-state solution of the deterministic system. Figure 3A realization of a stochastic SHIRS model with the degree of 5 and its deterministic counterpart. The values of parameters used in this simulation are listed in Table 2. The stochastic simulation is implemented by the event algorithm of Gillespie with transition rates listed in Table 1. The deterministic curve is generated according to the Eq. (9).Full size imageFirstly, the new continuous random variables \(x_{k}, y_{k}, z_{k}\) are brought in , which have the following relationship between the discrete variables \(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}\) and the corresponding density variables \(s_{k},h_{k},i_{k}\)$$\begin{aligned} S_{k}/N_{k}=s_{k}+x_{k}/\sqrt{N_{k}},\\ H_{k}/N_{k}=h_{k}+y_{k}/\sqrt{N_{k}},\\ I_{k}/N_{k}=i_{k}+z_{k}/\sqrt{N_{k}}. \end{aligned}$$ (12) The variables \(x_{k}, y_{k}, z_{k}\) are corrections of \(s_{k},h_{k},i_{k}\), which are in \({N_{k}}^{-\frac{1}{2}}\) terms and can be viewed as the fluctuations around the epidemic equilibrium to be the order of \({N_{k}}^{-1}\), from the aspect of central-limit theorem.Second, in order to study the property of the fluctuation, we define a new probability distribution function \(\pi (x_{k},y_{k},z_{k},t)=p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t)\), the following equation can be obtained by using the chain rule:$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d p}{d t}=\frac{\partial \pi }{\partial t}-\sqrt{N_{k}}\frac{\partial s_{k}}{\partial t}\times \frac{\partial \pi }{\partial x_{k}}-\sqrt{N_{k}}\frac{\partial h_{k}}{\partial t}\times \frac{\partial \pi }{\partial y_{k}}-\sqrt{N_{k}}\frac{\partial i_{k}}{\partial t}\times \frac{\partial \pi }{\partial z_{k}}. \end{aligned}$$ (13) The detailed derivation process of (13) is given in the supplementary.By introducing the step operators below,$$\begin{aligned} \varepsilon _{S_{k}}^{\pm 1}f(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})= f(S_{k}\pm 1,H_{k},I_{k}),\\ \varepsilon _{H_{k}}^{\pm 1}f(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})= f(S_{k},H_{k}\pm 1,I_{k}),\\ \varepsilon _{I_{k}}^{\pm 1}f(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})= f(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}\pm 1), \end{aligned}$$ (14) the Eq. (6) with transition rates can be rewritten as$$\begin{aligned} \frac{d p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t)}{dt}&=[(\varepsilon _{S_{k}}^{+1}\varepsilon _{H_{k}}^{-1}-1) T(S_{k}-1,H_{k}+1,I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})\\&\quad +(\varepsilon _{S_{k}}^{+1}\varepsilon _{I_{k}}^{-1}-1)T(S_{k}-1,H_{k},I_{k}+1|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})\\&\quad +(\varepsilon _{H_{k}}^{+1}-1)T(S_{k},H_{k}-1,I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})\\&\quad +(\varepsilon _{I_{k}}^{+1}-1)T(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k}-1|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})\\&\quad +(\varepsilon _{S_{k}}^{-1}-1)T(S_{k}+1,H_{k},I_{k}|S_{k},H_{k},I_{k})] p(S_{k},H_{k},I_{k},t). \end{aligned}$$ (15) Expanding the step operators \(\varepsilon _{S_{k}}^{\pm 1}\), \(\varepsilon _{H_{k}}^{\pm 1}\) and \(\varepsilon _{I_{k}}^{\pm 1}\) in a power series in \({N_{k}}^{-\frac{1}{2}}\)$$\begin{aligned} \varepsilon _{S_{k}}^{\pm 1}=&1\pm \frac{1}{\sqrt{N_{k}}}\frac{\partial }{\partial x_{k}}+\frac{1}{2N_{k}}\frac{\partial ^{2}}{\partial x_{k}^{2}},\\ \varepsilon _{H_{k}}^{\pm 1}=&1\pm \frac{1}{\sqrt{N_{k}}}\frac{\partial }{\partial y_{k}}+\frac{1}{2N_{k}}\frac{\partial ^{2}}{\partial y_{k}^{2}},\\ \varepsilon _{I_{k}}^{\pm 1}=&1\pm \frac{1}{\sqrt{N_{k}}}\frac{\partial }{\partial z_{k}}+\frac{1}{2N_{k}}\frac{\partial ^{2}}{\partial z_{k}^{2}}, \end{aligned}$$ (16) and then substituting the (2)–(4), (12) and (16) into (15), making a comparison with (13) order by order yields the so-called macroscopic Eq. (9) to leading order and the following Fokker-Plance equation (FPE):$$\begin{aligned} \frac{\partial \pi }{\partial t}=&-A_{11}\frac{\partial (x_{k}\pi )}{\partial x_{k}}-A_{12}\frac{\partial (y_{k}\pi )}{\partial x_{k}}-A_{13}\frac{\partial (z_{k}\pi )}{\partial x_{k}}-A_{21}\frac{\partial (x_{k}\pi )}{\partial y_{k}}-A_{22}\frac{\partial (y_{k}\pi )}{\partial y_{k}}\\&-A_{23}\frac{\partial (z_{k}\pi )}{\partial y_{k}}-A_{31}\frac{\partial (x_{k}\pi )}{\partial z_{k}}-A_{32}\frac{\partial (y_{k}\pi )}{\partial z_{k}}-A_{33}\frac{\partial (z_{k}\pi )}{\partial z_{k}}+\frac{1}{2}B_{11}\frac{\partial ^{2}\pi }{\partial x_{k}^{2}}\\&+\frac{1}{2}B_{12}\frac{\partial ^{2}\pi }{\partial x_{k}y_{k}}+\frac{1}{2}B_{13}\frac{\partial ^{2}\pi }{\partial x_{k}z_{k}}+\frac{1}{2}B_{21}\frac{\partial ^{2}\pi }{\partial y_{k}x_{k}}+\frac{1}{2}B_{22}\frac{\partial ^{2}\pi }{\partial y_{k}^{2}}+\frac{1}{2}B_{23}\frac{\partial ^{2}\pi }{\partial y_{k}z_{k}}\\&+\frac{1}{2}B_{31}\frac{\partial ^{2}\pi }{\partial z_{k}x_{k}}+\frac{1}{2}B_{32}\frac{\partial ^{2}\pi }{\partial z_{k}y_{k}}+\frac{1}{2}B_{33}\frac{\partial ^{2}\pi }{\partial z_{k}^{2}}, \end{aligned}$$ (17) in which, the matrix \(A=(A_{uv})_{3\times 3}\) and \(B=(B_{uv})_{3\times 3}\) are evaluated at the epidemic equilibrium \(E^{*}\), whose concrete values are:$$\begin{aligned} A=(A_{uv})_{3\times 3}= \left( \begin{array}{ccc} \frac{\partial f_{1}}{\partial s_{k}} &{} \frac{\partial f_{1}}{\partial h_{k}} &{} \frac{\partial f_{1}}{\partial i_{k}}\\ \frac{\partial f_{2}}{\partial s_{k}} &{} \frac{\partial f_{2}}{\partial h_{k}} &{} \frac{\partial f_{2}}{\partial i_{k}}\\ \frac{\partial f_{3}}{\partial s_{k}} &{} \frac{\partial f_{3}}{\partial h_{k}}&{} \frac{\partial f_{3}}{\partial i_{k}}\\ \end{array} \right) _{(E^{*})}, \end{aligned}$$in which$$\begin{aligned} \begin{array}{ccc} A_{11}=-\beta k\theta ^{*}-\alpha ,&{}A_{12}=-\beta s_{k}^{*}\frac{k^{2}P(k)}{\langle k\rangle }-\alpha ,&{}A_{13}=-\beta s_{k}^{*}\frac{k^{2}P(k)}{\langle k\rangle }-\alpha ,\\ A_{21}=\rho \beta k\theta ^{*},&{}A_{22}=\rho \beta s_{k}^{*}\frac{k^{2}P(k)}{\langle k\rangle }-\gamma _{1}, &{}A_{23}=\rho \beta s_{k}^{*}\frac{k^{2}P(k)}{\langle k\rangle },\\ A_{31}=(1-\rho )\beta k\theta ^{*},&{}A_{32}=(1-\rho )\beta s_{k}^{*}\frac{k^{2}P(k)}{\langle k\rangle }, &{}A_{33}=(1-\rho )\beta s_{k}^{*}\frac{k^{2}P(k)}{\langle k\rangle }-\gamma _{2}.\\ \end{array} \end{aligned}$$and$$\begin{aligned} B=(B_{uv})_{3\times 3}= \left( \begin{array}{ccc} B_{11} &{} B_{12} &{} B_{13} \\ B_{21} &{} B_{22} &{} B_{23} \\ B_{31} &{} B_{32} &{} B_{33} \\ \end{array} \right) _{(E^{*})}, \end{aligned}$$in which B is a symmetric matrix,$$\begin{aligned} \begin{array}{ccc} B_{11}=\beta k s_{k}^{*}\theta ^{*}+\alpha (1-s_{k}^{*}-h_{k}^{*}-i_{k}^{*}), &{}B_{12}=-\rho \beta ks_{k}^{*}\theta ^{*},\\ B_{13}=-(1-\rho )\beta ks_{k}^{*}\theta ^{*}, &{}B_{22}=\rho \beta ks_{k}^{*}\theta ^{*}+\gamma _{1}h_{k}^{*},\\ B_{23}=0, &{}B_{33}=(1-\rho )\beta ks_{k}^{*}\theta ^{*}+\gamma _{2}i_{k}^{*}. \end{array} \end{aligned}$$which is the microscopic equation to the next-to-leading order. It is obvious that using the system-size expansion methods one can obtain the deterministic equation, which is just the leading order. For the microscopic equation, we want to describe the fluctuations about the stochastic model by using Fourier analyze. For this purpose, the following equivalent Langevin equations (LE) is fairly intuitive than the FPE (17),$$\begin{aligned} \frac{dx_{k}}{dt}=A_{11}x_{k}+A_{12}y_{k}+A_{13}z_{k}+\eta _{1},\\ \frac{dy_{k}}{dt}=A_{21}x_{k}+A_{22}y_{k}+A_{23}z_{k}+\eta _{2},\\ \frac{dz_{k}}{dt}=A_{31}x_{k}+A_{32}y_{k}+A_{33}z_{k}+\eta _{3}, \end{aligned}$$ (18) in which the stochastic variables \(x_{k}, y_{k}, z_{k}\) are corrections of \(s_{k}, h_{k}, i_{k},\) and \(\eta _{1}, \eta _{2}, \eta _{3}\) are Gaussian white noises whose mean are zero, correlation function are$$\begin{aligned} \langle \eta _{u}(t)\eta _{v}(t^{'})\rangle =B_{uv}\delta (t-t^{'})(u,v=1,2,3), \end{aligned}$$in which \(\delta (t-t^{'})\) denotes the Dirac delta function. The equivalence prove of LE and FPE can be found in28. Taking the Fourier transform of (18) gets the following results:$$\begin{aligned} -iw{\tilde{x}}_{k}=A_{11}{\tilde{x}}_{k}+A_{12}{\tilde{y}}_{k}+A_{13}{\tilde{z}}_{k}+{\tilde{\eta }}_{1},\\ -iw{\tilde{y}}_{k}=A_{21}{\tilde{x}}_{k}+A_{22}{\tilde{y}}_{k}+A_{23}{\tilde{z}}_{k}+{\tilde{\eta }}_{2},\\ -iw{\tilde{z}}_{k}=A_{31}{\tilde{x}}_{k}+A_{32}{\tilde{y}}_{k}+A_{33}{\tilde{z}}_{k}+{\tilde{\eta }}_{3},\\ <{\tilde{\eta }}_{u}(w){\tilde{\eta }}_{v}(w')>=B_{uv}\delta (w-w')(u,v=1,2,3). \end{aligned}$$ (19) in which, \({\tilde{x}}_{k}=\int ^{+\infty }_{-\infty }x_{k}(t)e^{iwt}dt\) and i is imaginary unit, similar to the \({\tilde{y}}_{k}\) and \({\tilde{z}}_{k}\). Because (18) is a OU process, the corresponding limits of the mean depend on the eigenvalues of A, when \(R_{0}>1\), by means of the Fig. 3, we can see the endemic equilibrium \(E^{*}\) is stable, i.e. the eigenvalues of A are negative, so when \(t\rightarrow \infty\), \(\langle {x}_{k}, {y}_{k}, {z}_{k}\rangle \rightarrow \mathbf{0}\).Solving the equation of (19), we can obtain:$$\begin{aligned} {\tilde{x}}_{k}=\frac{-(iw)^{2}{\tilde{\eta }}_{1}+(iw)C_{1}+D_{11}{\tilde{\eta }}_{1}+D_{21}{\tilde{\eta }}_{2}+D_{31}{\tilde{\eta }}_{3}}{D(w)},\\ {\tilde{y}}_{k}=\frac{-(iw)^{2}{\tilde{\eta }}_{2}+(iw)C_{2}+D_{12}{\tilde{\eta }}_{1}+D_{22}{\tilde{\eta }}_{2}+D_{32}{\tilde{\eta }}_{3}}{D(w)},\\ {\tilde{z}}_{k}=\frac{-(iw)^{2}{\tilde{\eta }}_{3}+(iw)C_{3}+D_{13}{\tilde{\eta }}_{1}+D_{23}{\tilde{\eta }}_{2}+D_{33}{\tilde{\eta }}_{3}}{D(w)},\\ \end{aligned}$$ (20) where$$\begin{aligned} C_{1}&=-(A_{22}+A_{33}){\tilde{\eta }}_{1}+A_{12}{\tilde{\eta }}_{2}+A_{13}{\tilde{\eta }}_{3},\\ C_{2}&=A_{21}{\tilde{\eta }}_{1}-(A_{11}+A_{33}){\tilde{\eta }}_{2}+A_{23}{\tilde{\eta }}_{3},\\ C_{3}&=A_{31}{\tilde{\eta }}_{1}+A_{32}{\tilde{\eta }}_{2}-(A_{11}+A_{22}){\tilde{\eta }}_{3}, \end{aligned}$$\(D_{uv}\) is the inverse of algebraic complement of the corresponding element \(A_{uv}\) of the matrix A, and the expression of denominator is given by$$\begin{aligned} D(w)&=(iw)^{3}+\mathrm {tr}{} \textit{A}(iw)^{2}+\Omega (iw)+\det \textit{A},\\ \Omega&=A_{11}A_{22}+A_{11}A_{33}+A_{22}A_{33}-A_{13}A_{31}-A_{12}A_{21}-A_{23}A_{32}, \end{aligned}$$where tr\(\textit{A}\) denotes the trace of A and \(\det \textit{A}\) means the value of the determinant of A.Averaging the squared moduli of \({\tilde{x}}_{k}\), \({\tilde{y}}_{k}\) and \({\tilde{z}}_{k}\) gives the power-spectrum:$$\begin{aligned} P_{S_{k}}(w)=\langle |{\tilde{x}}_{k}|^{2}\rangle =\frac{B_{11}w^{4}+\Lambda _{1}w^{2}+\Gamma _{1}}{|D(w)|^{2}},\\ P_{H_{k}}(w)=\langle |{\tilde{y}}_{k}|^{2}\rangle =\frac{B_{22}w^{4}+\Lambda _{2}w^{2}+\Gamma _{2}}{|D(w)|^{2}},\\ P_{I_{k}}(w)=\langle |{\tilde{z}}_{k}|^{2}\rangle =\frac{B_{33}w^{4}+\Lambda _{3}w^{2}+\Gamma _{3}}{|D(w)|^{2}},\\ \end{aligned}$$ (21) $$\begin{aligned} \Lambda _{1}\,=\,&B_{11}(A_{22}^{2}+A_{33}^{2})+B_{22}A_{12}^{2}+B_{33}A_{13}^{2}+2[B_{11}A_{22}A_{33}-B_{12}A_{12}(A_{22}+A_{33})\\&\quad -B_{13}A_{13}(A_{22}+A_{33})+B_{11}D_{11}+B_{12}D_{21}+B_{13}D_{31}],\\ \Lambda _{2}\,=\,&B_{11}A_{21}^{2}+B_{22}(A_{11}^{2}+A_{33}^{2})+B_{33}A_{23}^{2}+2[B_{13}A_{21}A_{23}\\&\quad +B_{22}A_{11}A_{33}-B_{12}A_{21}(A_{11}+A_{33})+B_{21}D_{12}+B_{22}D_{22}],\\ \Lambda _{3}\,=\,&B_{11}A_{31}^{2}+B_{22}A_{32}^{2}+B_{33}(A_{11}^{2}+A_{22}^{2})+2[B_{33}A_{11}A_{22}\\&\quad +B_{12}A_{31}A_{32}-B_{13}A_{31}(A_{11}+A_{22})+B_{31}D_{13}+B_{33}D_{33}],\\ \Gamma _{1}\,=\,&B_{11}D_{11}^{2}+B_{22}D_{21}^{2}+B_{33}D_{31}^{2}+2B_{12}D_{11}D_{21}+2B_{13}D_{11}D_{31},\\ \Gamma _{2}\,=\,&B_{11}D_{12}^{2}+B_{22}D_{22}^{2}+B_{33}D_{32}^{2}+2B_{12}D_{12}D_{22}+2B_{13}D_{12}D_{32},\\ \Gamma _{3}\,=\,&B_{11}D_{13}^{2}+B_{22}D_{23}^{2}+B_{33}D_{33}^{2}+2B_{12}D_{13}D_{23}+2B_{13}D_{13}D_{33},\\ |D(w)|^{2}&\,=\,(w^{3}-\Omega w)^{2}+(\det \textit{A}-w^{2}\mathrm{tr}{} \textit{A})^{2}. \end{aligned}$$Up to this point, the analytical expression of PSD have been derived, because of the difficulty of the calculation in high-dimension coupled system, the concrete expressions of the epidemic equilibrium can’t be obtained, so we can analysis the frequency of different groups just depending on the numerical simulation.ResultsIn this section, we will use the influenza data of Taiyuan sentinel hospitals in the first quarter of 2013 to fit about our model in order to avoid the influence of environment changing, and then discuss the influence of heterogeneity to the periodicity of influenza.Estimation of parametersBased on the statistical bulletion on national economic and social development of Taiyuan, the number of population in 2013 is 4.3 million. Removal rate can be set to \(\gamma _{1}\,=\,7/3\), \(\gamma _{2}\,=\,1\) and the rate of lose immunity is supposed to be \(\alpha =1/52\) according to the mean disease course of influenza. The infection probability \(\beta\) is an estimated parameter. As for the degree distribution, the power-law distribution usually conforms to the features of real world in most cases, hence, \(P(k)=2m^2k^{-v}(m=3, v=3.5)\)29, is used in this paper.As far as we know, Chinese National Influenza Center (CNIC) has set up 554 sentinel hospitals all over the country. The city of Taiyuan has two of which: Taiyuan central hospital and the first affiliated hospital of Shanxi medical university. We have the influenza data from the two sentinel hospitals, yet, a small enough number compared with those in the whole city of Taiyuan, so \(\rho\) as the proportion of Taiyuan influenza patients in sentinel hospitals, is a parameter to be evaluated.We adopt the least-square estimation to obtain the parameters sets \(\Lambda =\{\beta ,\rho \}\), which minimizes the objective function: \(Y(\Lambda )=[Y(t)-\rho N\sum \limits _{k=\min }^{\max }P(k)\beta k s_{k}\theta ]^{2}\), in which Y(t) denotes the actually influenza data from sentinel hospitals at week t. The Fig. 4 shows that the model data agrees well with the actual data, and the corresponding value of parameters are summarized in Table 2.Figure 4Sentinel hospitals data in the first quarter of 2013 and fitting data by using least-square are showed. The minimum (maximum) degree is 5 (500) and the mean degree is 7.5.Full size imageTable 2 Notation for model formulation and parameters value.Full size tablePrevalence of influenza in TaiyuanCNIC has a history of more than 60 years since its foundation in 1957, especially the recently decade, the wholesome national influenza surveillance network system has made the influenza data more transparent. Our influenza data from Taiyuan sentinel hospitals are just a very small part of this system. We use the week data from 2013 to 2016 to detect whether there exists a periodic phenomenon. The data reveals a clear periodicity in the outbreaks of influenza, which can be confirmed through the wavelet power spectrum of Fig. 1. The wavelet analysis can reveal the periodic changing of a time-series, which performs the spectral characteristics as a function of time. The oscillations of influenza have a obvious annual variation, yet, the wavelet analysis based on the data shows another significant periodicity: semi-annual.Influence of stochasticity and network structure on influenza outbreaksThe difference between the deterministic and stochastic simulation is revealed in Fig. 3, which is a particular case of fluctuation who has been mentioned in introduction. It indicates that the demographic noise and network struction can induce rich periodic phenomenon. We can understand the influence of network struction on the expected fluctuations of influenza via our analysis.The accuracy of the theoretical analysis consequence of PSD via (21) has been verified with the simulated results in Fig. 5, using the parameters listed in Table 2. We can go further to detect how the period of influenza varies with the changes of degree k by using the formula (21). Based on this, the x-coordinate (i.e. \(\omega\)) for the maximum value of the PSD can be obtained from the analytical expression, then the corresponding period (i.e. \(1/\omega\)) for different parameters are plotted in Figs. 6, 7, 8, and 9. In order to have a better visual effect, we just present the degree from 5 to 25 in these figures, on the whole, it does not affect our conclusions, because this group accounts for 99 percent of the total population.Figure 5Comparisons between the theoretical prediction of PSD (21) and the average PSD obtained from the stochastic simulation, for the fluctuations of the infected with degree 5.Full size imageFigure 6The period of H with different degree and \(\beta\), when \(\rho =0.004\).Full size imageFigure 7The period of I with different degree and \(\beta\), when \(\rho =0.004\).Full size imageWhen the \(\rho =0.004\) is fixed, how the period is influenced by the degree and \(\beta\) is showed in Figs. 6 and 7. In Fig. 6, for the H whose degree is less than 16, the period goes up as the \(\beta\) decrease, yet, when the degree is large than 16, the relationship between \(\beta\) and period is nonmonotonic, as \(\beta\) increases, the period decreases and then increases. On the other hand, when \(\beta \geqslant 0.4\), as the degree increases, so does the H’s period, while \(\beta <0.4\), the period increases at the beginning and then decreases with the augment of the degree. There exists obvious nonlinear relationship between the I’s period, degree and \(\beta\). For the fixed degree, increasing the \(\beta\), the value of period becomes small, yet, when the \(\beta\) is fixed, the relationship between the degree and I’s period is non-monotonous. When the degree is small than \(\langle k\rangle\), the period becomes larger as the degree increases, yet, the trend is opposite on the other side of \(\langle k\rangle\), which can be obtained from the Fig. 7. This means that, for the infected people I whose degree more close to \(\langle k\rangle\), the more safer.When \(\beta =0.8\) is fixed, the relationship between the period, \(\rho\) and degree is showed in Figs. 8 and 9. From Fig. 8 we can observe that when \(\rho \leqslant 0.4\), for the infected people of H, the degree is more bigger, the period is more larger, which means that people are more safer, yet, when \(\rho >0.4\), with the degree increasing, the period increases firstly and decreases later, which means the people of H whose degree located intermediate is more safer. This is quite opposite for I in Fig. 9. On the other hand, when H’s degree is fixed, the period decreases at the beginning and then increases as the \(\rho\) increasing. This phenomenon from a side explains that the importance of the medical resources. For the infected people of I, the relationship is different in Fig. 9. With the increase of \(\rho\), which means more and more infected people go to the sentinel hospitals, leading the I becomes more and more safer, i.e. the period is more and more longer, this change is even more pronounced for I with higher degree. Figure 8The period of H with different degree and \(\rho\), when \(\beta =0.8\).Full size imageFigure 9The period of I with different degree and \(\rho\), when \(\beta =0.8\).Full size imageDiscussionIn this paper, we have investigated the effect of network structure on the frequency of the influenza outbreaks, focusing on the power-law networks, by adapting the van Kampen expansion approach from SHIRS disease to develop a fully stochastic model. This leads to a reasonable explanation for the periodic phenomena of influenza, and helps us to understand the complex fluctuations of influenza in Taiyuan with a dominant period of half years without the external factors of seasonal.We can have a better understanding of the interaction between the deterministic and stochastic components of the system by using the method of van Kampen expansion. The analytical solution of PSD agrees well with the simulation data. The result reveals that for the infected people who go to the sentinel hospitals, i.e. H, the relationship between the \(\rho\), \(\beta\) and period is nonlinear, even for the hospitals hospitalization rate \(\rho\), just an appropriate one is benefit for the patients. On the other hand, the nonlinear relationship between the three is also suitable for the infected people I in most cases, except that the relationship between \(\rho\) (or \(\beta\)) and period is monotonous when other parameters are fixed.Our work emphasizes the importance of heterogeneous contact network on the periodic outbreak of influenza, which further validates the truth that the combined action of the non-linear system and stochasticity may results many novel phenomena. On the other hand, our study also show that there exists a very close relation between the phenomenon of multi-cycle and the heterogeneity of contact.LimitationsTo obtain the specific analytical solutions are difficult for the high dimensional coupling system, so we can not give the explicit formula about the relationship between the period, degree, \(\beta\) and \(\rho\), and just have a intuitive understanding from the numerical simulation.The influenza date we obtained from the sentinel hospitals are weekly, so we set the time-boxed intervals measured in week. Comparing to the daily one, the weekly contact network will be not very precise and may cause the repeatedly contact problem, which one we omitted in this paper.The approach of van Kampen is limited to the following two conditions: a formal treatment of demographic stochasticity; the existence of stable non-zero solution, for simpleness we do not take into account the changing population, seasonal forcing and the correlation between the degree. In essence, the migration of population and behavioral changing in flu season is unavoidable, which is missing in our work.Possible extensionsIt is easy to adapt this method to many diseases exhibited fluctuations, such as malaria, cholera, hand foot and mouth disease and so on. Especially for childhood diseases, similar study may gives a good idea on avoiding frequent illness. At the same time, if there are several strains that coexist for a disease, such as influenza, our method may also deduce the period for each strain, which may be good news for the vaccine’s manufacturers.We can find that from Fig. 10, even among the very nearest cities, like Beijing and Tianjin, Jiangsu and Shanghai, though the climate differences can be ignored, the wavelet power spectrum is greatly different. This may prove the importance of the contact network. On the other hand, even though the climate characteristics of city are different from north part of China (Beijing and Tianjin) to the south part (Jiangsu and Shanghai), it is a surprise phenomenon that Tianjin and Shanghai exhibit the similar periodic law. Furthermore, the same method can also be used to the influenza data of tropical cities, then comparisons with existing temperate data may reveal the dominant factors. Which one is the key factor lead to this? Temperature, humidity, wind speed, haze or human behavior? It deserves our further investigation.Figure 10The results of wavelet analysis, where the monthly influenza data of (a) Shanghai, (b) Beijing, (c) Jiangsu province and (d) Tianjin obtained from CDC since 2009–2016.Full size image ReferencesColizza, V., Barrat, A., Barthelemy, M. & Vespignani, A. The role of the airline transportation network in the prediction and predictability of global epidemics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 103, 2015–2020 (2006).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Pei, S., Kandula, S., Yang, W. & Shaman, J. Forecasting the spatial transmission of influenza in the united states. Proc. Natl. Acad. Ences USA 115, 2752–2757 (2017).Article Google Scholar Merler, S. & Ajelli, M. The role of population heterogeneity and human mobility in the spread of pandemic influenza. Proc. Royal Soc. B Biol. Sci. 277, 557–565 (2010).Article Google Scholar Colijn, C. et al. What is the mechanism for persistent coexistence of drug-susceptible and drug-resistant strains of streptococcus pneumoniae. J. Royal Soc. Interface 7, 905–919 (2010).Article Google Scholar Dietz, K. & Heesterbeek, J. A. P. Daniel bernoullis epidemiological model revisited. Math. Biosci. 180, 1–21 (2002).Article MathSciNet Google Scholar EnKo, P. D. On the course of epidemics of some infectious diseases. Int. J. Epidemiol. 18, 749–755 (1989).Article CAS Google Scholar Bacar, N. A Short History of Mathematical Population Dynamics (Springer, New York, 2011).Book Google Scholar Kermack, A. G. & McKendrick, W. O. A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proc. Royal Soc. Math. Phys. Eng. Ences 115, 700–721 (1927).ADS MATH Google Scholar Newman, M. E. J. Networks: An Introduction (Oxford University Press, New York, 2010).Book Google Scholar Keeling, M. J. & Eames, K. T. D. Networks and epidemic models. J. Royal Soc. Interface 2, 295–307 (2005).Article Google Scholar Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3200–3203 (2001).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Peng, X., Xu, X. J., Small, M., Fu, X. & Jin, Z. Prevention of infectious diseases by public vaccination and individual protection. J. Math. Biol. 73, 1561–1594 (2016).Article MathSciNet Google Scholar Miller, J. C. A note on a paper by erik volz: Sir dynamics in random networks. J. Math. Biol. 62, 349–358 (2011).Article MathSciNet Google Scholar Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. Epidemic dynamics and endemic states in complex networks. Phys. Rev. E 63, 066117 (2001).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Lindquist, J., Ma, J., Driessche, P. V. D. & Willeboordse, F. H. Effective degree network disease models. J. Math. Biol. 62, 143–164 (2011).Article MathSciNet Google Scholar Stone, L., Olinky, R. & Huppert, A. Seasonal dynamics of recurrent epidemics. Nature 446, 533–536 (2007).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Rohani, N. P. Noise, nonlinearity and seasonality: The epidemics of whooping cough revisited. J. Royal Soc. Interface 5, 403 (2008).Article Google Scholar Ponciano, J. M., Capistrán, M. A. & Pascual, M. First principles modeling of nonlinear incidence rates in seasonal epidemics. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7, e1001079 (2011).Article MathSciNet CAS Google Scholar Keeling, M. J., Rohani, P. & Grenfell, B. T. Seasonally forced disease dynamics explored as switching between attractors. Phys. D Nonlinear Phenomena 148, 317–335 (2001).Article ADS Google Scholar Alonso, D. & Mckane, A. J. Extinction dynamics in mainland-island metapopulations: An n-patch stochastic model. Bull. Math. Biol. 64, 913–958 (2002).Article Google Scholar Chaffee, J. & Kuske, R. The effect of loss of immunity on noise-induced sustained oscillations in epidemics. Bull. Math. Biol. 73, 2552–2574 (2011).Article MathSciNet CAS Google Scholar Earn, D. et al. A simple model for complex dynamical transitions in epidemics. Science 287, 667–670 (2000).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Van Kampen, N. G. Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry (Third Edition) (The Netherlands:Elsevier, 1992).Alonso, D., Mckane, A. J. & Pascual, M. Stochastic amplification in epidemics. J. Royal Soc. Interface 4, 575–582 (2007).Article Google Scholar Wang, R. H., Jin, Z., Liu, Q. X., Koppel, J. V. D. & Alonso, D. A simple stochastic model with environmental transmission explains multi-year periodicity in outbreaks of avian flu. PLoS ONE 7, e28873 (2012).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Torrence, Christopher & Compo, Gilbert P. A practical guide to wavelet analysis. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 79, 61–78 (1998).Article ADS Google Scholar Cazelles, B., Chavez, M., De Magny, G. C., Guegan, J. & Hales, S. Time-dependent spectral analysis of epidemiological time-series with wavelets. J. Royal Soc. Interface 4, 625–636 (2007).Article CAS Google Scholar Gillespie, D. T. A general method for numerically simulating the stochastic time evolution of coupled chemical reactions. J. Comput. Phys. 22, 403–434 (1976).Article ADS MathSciNet CAS Google Scholar Jin, Z. et al. Modelling and analysis of influenza a (h1n1) on networks. BMC Public Health 11, 1–9 (2011).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61873154,11871316,11971279), Shanxi Key Laboratory (201705D111006), National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFD0501500) and Shanxi Scientific and Technology Innovation Team (201705D131028-5).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsComplex System Research Center, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006, Shanxi, ChinaHong Yang & Zhen JinShanxi Key Laboratory of Mathematical Techniques and Big Data Analysis on Disease Control and Prevention, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006, Shanxi, ChinaHong Yang & Zhen JinAuthorsHong YangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZhen JinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsH.Y. constructed the model, performed the data analysis and wrote the manuscript; Z.J. helped perform the analysis with constructive discussions.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Zhen Jin.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information 1.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleYang, H., Jin, Z. A stochastic model explains the periodicity phenomenon of influenza on network. Sci Rep 11, 20996 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-00260-3Download citationReceived: 02 February 2021Accepted: 24 September 2021Published: 25 October 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-00260-3Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: AI and Robotics newsletter — what matters in AI and robotics research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: AI and RoboticsCOVID and flu vaccines at once shows no serious side effects ☰ Request an Appointment Get a Second Opinion Share Your Story Donate Close Home Research Patient Stories Parenting Clinical Care Our Community Request an Appointment Get a Second Opinion Share Your Story Donate Answers Your destination for kids' health Two for one: It’s safe to get COVID and flu vaccines at the same time Posted on October 25, 2021 by Albert McKeon | Health and ParentingTags: coronavirus, flu, vaccines Doctors echo a recent study that it's safe to receive COVID and flu vaccines at once. (Photo: Michael Goderre, Boston Children's Hospital) Your child can greatly reduce the risk of serious illness by receiving COVID and flu vaccines in one sitting — all they have to do is roll up both sleeves. Now, getting a shot in each arm might give your child pause, but two infectious disease specialists at Boston Children’s Hospital say that a double inoculation shouldn’t be a concern. A recent study by several U.K. universities raised no safety concerns and showed no diminishment of the efficacy — basically, the immune response — of either vaccine. Is it safe to get COVID and flu vaccines at the same time? Yes, it is safe to receive both, according to the U.K. study. The study evaluated adults who had received a second dose of the Pfizer vaccine with either a flu shot or a placebo. It found that getting the flu and COVID shots together did not affect immune responses to either vaccine. And though children were not included in the study, says Dr. Kristin Moffitt, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at Boston Children’s, says parents should find comfort that side effects were generally mild and similar between the groups of adults receiving the COVID shot alone or with a flu shot. The most common side effects were fatigue, muscle aches, and soreness at the injection sites. It’s also worth noting the flu vaccines used in the U.K. study are similar to the vaccines that will be administered this year in the U.S., Dr. Moffitt says. Lastly, it might be assuring for parents to consider that most children have been receiving multiple vaccinations — including those for bacteria such as pneumococcus and pertussis and viruses such as hepatitis B and influenza — in one sitting since infancy. “There’s a decades-long history of doing that safely,” she says. “So, we’re relying on historical experience, but it’s reassuring at the same time to have a study like this.” What if my child balks at getting two shots in one sitting? If they haven’t done so, the opportunity is still there for kids to receive a COVID-19 vaccination, in addition to a flu vaccine, says Dr. Melanie Dubois, a Boston Children’s pediatric infectious disease specialist. If they’re nervous about possible side effects, she says, you can tell your child that any discomfort is only temporary and a sign that the body is working to protect them from the virus. COVID and flu vaccines can have similar side effects, including local symptoms such as pain, redness, and swelling at the site of the injection, as well as generalized symptoms such as headache, muscle aches, and fatigue. “Ultimately, you’re trying to prevent something more serious,” Dr. Dubois says. “You can tell them it’s an important step to prevent illness from both diseases and keep them healthy.” When should your child receive the vaccinations? If they haven’t yet had a COVID-19 vaccination, they can get one now. Dr. Dubois urges parents to get their children vaccinated against the flu as soon as possible. “Time is of the essence. It’s worth getting the shot now to protect ourselves, our family, and our community this fall and winter.” For more insight and advice about keeping your family safe from COVID-19, visit our “parenting resources” page. Share this:Related Posts : Covid variants 101: What parents should know First came Alpha, then Beta. It’s all about Delta right now, but Mu is already making headlines. You almost ... Keeping kids emotionally healthy during COVID-19 Children and teens have suffered immensely during the COVID-19 pandemic. Changing school and family routines, isolation at home, illness or ... Why do some children get MIS-C after COVID-19? Some early clues Several months into the COVID-19 pandemic, a small number of children began to develop a cluster of mysterious symptoms. These ... Five things to know about the flu It’s flu season again. In fact, about half of every year, from September to March, is “flu season.” Despite ... Tagged: coronavirus, flu, vaccines Stay connected! Sign up for our weekly email newsletter for the latest parenting tips, patient stories, and news for your family from Boston Children's Subscribe now Connect With Boston Children’s Hospital 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115 617-355-6000 800-355-7944 How Can We HelpInternational Visitors Centers and Services Conditions + Treatments Find a Doctor Get a Second Opinion Locations AboutAbout Us Giving to Boston Children’s Newsroom Quality & Patient Safety LegalHIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices Patient & Family Rights Terms of Use Public PolicyIs It Too Late To Get the Flu Shot? Plus, Vaccine and Death Rates HealthlineHealth ConditionsFeaturedAllBreast CancerIBD MigraineMultiple Sclerosis (MS)Rheumatoid ArthritisType 2 DiabetesSponsored TopicsArticlesAllAcid RefluxADHDAllergiesAlzheimer's & DementiaBipolar DisorderCancerCrohn's DiseaseChronic PainCold & FluCOPDDepressionFibromyalgiaHeart DiseaseHigh CholesterolHIVHypertensionIPFOsteoarthritisPsoriasisSkin Disorders and CareSTDsDiscoverWellness TopicsAllNutritionFitnessSkin CareSexual HealthWomen's HealthMental Well-BeingSleepProduct ReviewsAllVitamins & SupplementsSleepMental HealthNutritionAt-Home TestingCBDMen’s HealthOriginal SeriesAllFresh Food FastFood hacks to make eating healthier, easier.Diagnosis DiariesReal diagnosis stories from people who get it.You’re Not AloneStories from real people that destigmatize mental health conditions.Present TenseReal-world mindfulness for busy people.Video SeriesAllYouth in FocusMental health challenges facing our youth.Healthy HarvestMeet your food, from farm to table.Through An Artist's EyeA breast cancer story told through art.Future of HealthInnovations shaping the future of health.PlanHealth ChallengesMindful EatingSugar SavvyMove Your BodyGut HealthMood FoodsAlign Your SpineFind CareAllPrimary CareMental HealthOB-GYNDermatologistsNeurologistsCardiologistsOrthopedistsLifestyle QuizzesWeight ManagementAm I Depressed? A Quiz for TeensAre You a Workaholic?How Well Do You Sleep?Tools & ResourcesHealth NewsFind a DietFind Healthy SnacksDrugs A-ZHealth A-ZConnectFind Your Bezzy CommunityBezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.AllBreast CancerInflammatory Bowel DiseaseCOPDMigraineMultiple SclerosisPsoriasisFollow us on social mediaCan't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.SubscribeIs the Flu Shot Worth It? Vaccine and Mortality Rates, State by StateMedically reviewed by Meredith Goodwin, MD, FAAFP — Written by The Healthline Editorial Team on October 29, 2021With the global focus on COVID-19 vaccinations, it’s easy to push aside another preventative measure that should be at the center of the conversation right now: the seasonal flu vaccine.Some people may assume that, because they’re protected from the more deadly virus, they can skip the everyday, garden-variety flu vaccine. Other folks may struggle to find the time to make yet one more health-related appointment … or remember to get it at all. And vaccine hesitancy and skepticism may be fueled by concern about flu vaccines targeting the wrong strains of flu.But it’s definitely worth getting the flu vaccine. If we look beyond the fear and weariness to the cold, hard facts, there are compelling reasons for most everyone to get the flu vaccination — and if you haven’t yet, it’s not too late. Flu season can extend into May.The benefits of getting a flu shot are clearly supported by research. In addition to keeping you from getting sick and reducing risk of severe illness, a flu shot can also protect higher risk populations like pregnant people, children, and people with chronic conditions.If you are vigilant about getting your flu shot, you’re in good company. During the 2018-2019 flu season,* 169 million seasonal flu vaccines were distributed in the U.S. Translated: Of people 6 months and older, 49 percent were vaccinated.In the graphic below, you can see that flu season’s vaccination numbers broken down by state, along with a few fast facts.We can credit those vaccinated good Samaritans with amazing stats like these: In the 2019–2020 flu season, vaccination prevented 7.52 million illnesses, 3.69 million medical visits, 105,000 hospitalizations, and over 6,300 deaths in the U.S.On the flip side, however, 51 percent of the U.S. population did not get vaccinated against the flu.That reluctance to get immunized can have dire consequences. The CDC estimates that the flu has resulted in 52,000 deaths and 720,000 hospitalizations annually in the past decade.Below, you can see the number of flu deaths from the same flu season represented in the vaccination graphic above.The good news is that attitudes toward vaccines are shifting, and more people than ever before are willing to get their shot. For the 2020-2021 flu season, the estimated vaccine coverage rate for people 6 months and older is 52.1 percent.You can do your part by spreading the word and remembering to schedule that seasonal flu vaccination every year.*This data is from 2018-2019 because more recent flu numbers have been impacted by COVID-19.How we reviewed this article:SourcesHistoryHealthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.Public Health Emergency. (2021)..https://www.phe.gov/about/sns/Pages/default.aspxHistory. (2020)..https://www.history.comews/1918-flu-pandemic-whiskey-remedy-prohibitionNational Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. (2021)..https://www.cdc.gov/flu/fluvaxview/interactive-general-population.htmCDC WONDER. (2021)..https://wonder.cdc.gov/CDC WONDER. (2021)..https://wonder.cdc.gov/. (2011)..https://www.cdc.govcird/index.htmlBarry JM (2004). The site of origin of the 1918 influenza pandemic and its public health implications. Journal of translational medicine. DOI:3.https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5876-2-3Medical Device and Diagnostic Industry. (2014)..https://www.mddionline.com/drug-delivery/hypodermic-syringes-greatest-medical-device-all-time. (2021)..https://www.cdc.govcird/index.htmlGlauser (2004). Spanish Flu in Utah Timeline.. (2016).The FDA approves first generic version of widely used influenza drug, Tamiflu. (2016)..https://exhibits.lib.utah.edu/s/1918-flu-pandemic-in-utah/pageimelineDisease burden of flu. (2021)..Key facts about seasonal flu vaccine. (2021).. Prevention and Control of Seasonal Influenza with Vaccines: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, United States, 2020–21 Influenza Season. (2020)..https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/index.htmlShare this articleMedically reviewed by Meredith Goodwin, MD, FAAFP — Written by The Healthline Editorial Team on October 29, 2021Read this nextFDA Approves First Chikungunya Vaccine as Mosquito-Borne Diseases SpreadThis month the FDA announced the approval the first vaccine to treat Chikungunya, a tropical disease. The disease spreads via mosquitoes and has been…READ MOREWhat to Know About the New Malaria VaccineA new malaria vaccine has been approved and recommended for use by the World Health Organization (WHO). READ MOREWill The Flu Shot Work This Year? Here's Why Experts are HopefulA new report from the CDC finds that the flu vaccine was over 50% effective at preventing illness in the Southern Hemisphere. That may be a predictor…READ MOREWhy Ice-T Is Raising Awareness About Getting the Flu ShotFor 20 years, rapper Ice-T has been regularly getting the flu vaccine. Now he's 65 and raising awareness for the flu shot in a new Sanofi campaign…READ MORECDC Approves Updated COVID-19 Booster Shots to Target New VariantsA CDC advisory committee voted to recommend the updated COVID-19 vaccines for all Americans 6 months of age and older. The FDA has approved the new…READ MORECDC Advisory Panel Says Most Americans Should Get the Flu Shot This FallAn advisory panel to the CDC recommends that most Americans over the age of 6 months should receive the flu shot to protect themselves during flu…READ MORECDC Issues New Guidance for RSV Drug to Protect Infants: What to KnowThe CDC issued new guidance for an RSV drug that can help protect infants from severe illness. There has been an ongoing shortage of the drug, which…READ MOREWhy a Malaria Vaccine Isn't Available in the United StatesA half-dozen cases of malaria have been reported in Florida and Texas. However, experts say malaria is rare in the United States and there is no need…READ MORESide Effects of the Tetanus ShotMedically reviewed by Lindsay Slowiczek, PharmDMost tetanus shot reactions are signs that your body is responding to build immunity against tetanus. Tetanus, or lockjaw, is a disease caused by a…READ MOREAbout UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsSitemapMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzyUSA TODAY Subscription Offers, Specials, and DiscountsGet unlimited access with a subscriptionEssential Digital$5 for the first yearSubscribe NowWhat's includedUnlimited access to and our apps.The eNewspaper: a digital replica of the newspaper.Daily Plus$9.99 per monthSubscribe NowWhat's includedAll the features of Essential DigitalMonday - Friday print delivery of USA TODAY CrosswordNo commitment required. Cancel anytime.*Offer available to new customers only. All savings based off the regular rate. Read the full Subscription Terms and Conditions.© 2024 www.usatoday.comWill we remember the lessons of COVID-19 and past epidemics? | Science News Skip to content Subscribe today Every print subscription comes with full digital access Subscribe now Menu All Topics Health Humans Life Earth Physics Space Magazine Menu All Stories Multimedia Reviews Collections Century of Science For Educators Coronavirus Outbreak Newsletters About For Students Our Store SIGN IN Donate Science News INDEPENDENT JOURNALISM SINCE 1921 SIGN IN Search Open search Close search Science News INDEPENDENT JOURNALISM SINCE 1921 All Topics Earth Agriculture Climate Oceans Environment Humans Anthropology Health & Medicine Archaeology Psychology Life Animals Plants Ecosystems Paleontology Neuroscience Genetics Microbes Physics Materials Science Quantum Physics Particle Physics Space Astronomy Planetary Science Cosmology Tech Computing Artificial Intelligence Chemistry Math Science & Society All Topics Health Humans Humans Anthropology Health & Medicine Archaeology Psychology Genetics A common drug may help treat a rare genetic disease By Tina Hesman SaeyNovember 8, 2024 Health & Medicine ‘The Power of Prions’ explores misfolded proteins’ role in brain diseases By Meghan RosenNovember 6, 2024 Archaeology A digital exam reels in engraved scenes of Stone Age net fishing By Bruce BowerNovember 6, 2024 Life Life Animals Plants Ecosystems Paleontology Neuroscience Genetics Microbes Genetics A common drug may help treat a rare genetic disease By Tina Hesman SaeyNovember 8, 2024 Animals Bees flying near cars are dying by the millions, a roadkill study suggests By Amanda HeidtNovember 7, 2024 Animals Putting vampire bats on treadmills reveals an unusual metabolism By Susan MiliusNovember 5, 2024 Earth Earth Agriculture Climate Oceans Environment Environment Fire-prone neighborhoods on the fringes of nature are rapidly expanding By Nikk OgasaNovember 8, 2024 Climate Meet Chonkus, the mutant cyanobacteria that could help sink climate change By Carolyn GramlingNovember 7, 2024 Agriculture Exploiting a genetic quirk in potatoes may cut fertilizer needs By Javier BarbuzanoNovember 6, 2024 Physics Physics Materials Science Quantum Physics Particle Physics Particle Physics Antimatter could travel by truck, a test with protons shows By Emily ConoverNovember 8, 2024 Astronomy A star winked out of sight. Could it be a ‘failed supernova’? By Emily ConoverNovember 7, 2024 Tech Feather-inspired airplane flaps could boost flight performance By Nikk OgasaNovember 5, 2024 Space Space Astronomy Planetary Science Cosmology Astronomy A cosmic census triples the known number of black holes in dwarf galaxies By Lisa GrossmanNovember 8, 2024 Astronomy A star winked out of sight. Could it be a ‘failed supernova’? By Emily ConoverNovember 7, 2024 Astronomy A zombie star’s spiky filaments shed light on a 12th century supernova By Lisa GrossmanNovember 4, 2024 Health & Medicine Epidemics have happened before and they’ll happen again. What will we remember? A look back at past epidemics reveals progress in research and medicine as well as reminders of what still needs changing Aviators training during World War I recovered from influenza in a hangar at Eberts Field in Arkansas during the 1918 pandemic. The infectious disease moved swiftly through crowded military camps. WAR DEPARTMENT/NATIONAL ARCHIVES CATALOG #45499287 Share this:EmailFacebookTwitterPinterestPocketRedditPrint By Aimee Cunningham October 27, 2021 at 12:00 pm The emergency hospital, a partially demolished building hastily enclosed with wooden partitions, was about to open. It was the fall of 1918 in Philadelphia, and influenza was spreading fast. With many of the city’s doctors and nurses serving in World War I, 23-year-old Isaac Starr and his third-year classmates at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine needed to help tend the sick. They’d had just one lecture on influenza. Their first job was to assemble the hospital beds, about 25 to a floor. Starr’s shift was 4 p.m. to midnight. The beds soon filled with patients who had fevers, he recalled in a 1976 essay for Annals of Internal Medicine. Many who developed influenza recovered. But Starr witnessed some patients become starved for air, their skin turning blue. Soon, they were “struggling to clear their airways of a blood-tinged froth that sometimes gushed from their nose and mouth,” he wrote. “It was a dreadful business.” To celebrate our 100th anniversary, we’re highlighting some of the biggest advances in science over the last century. To see an expanded version of this story and more from the series, visit the Century of Science site at www.sciencenews.org/century Read More There were no effective treatments. Patients, desperate for breath, became delirious and incontinent and would die within days. “When I returned to duty at 4 p.m., I found few whom I had seen before,” Starr wrote. “This happened night after night.” In October, around the pinnacle of the pandemic, roughly 11,000 Philadelphians perished. Some who died in the makeshift hospital stuck with Starr. There was Mike the piano mover, who in a frenzy left his bed and was about to leap from a window before medical staff grabbed him. Mike died shortly after. There was the young woman, “flushed with fever,” whose large family kept vigil at her bedside, hoping for a recovery that never came. An estimated 50 million people worldwide died of influenza during the 1918 pandemic. The century since has seen many vaccines and treatments become available to combat infectious diseases. But beyond those medical feats, the story of epidemics remains a story about people: people who become sick, people who die, people whose lives are upended, people who care for others. And ultimately, people who remember what happened and people who forget. The public memory of the 1918 pandemic, which lasted into 1919, faded quickly in the United States, with few historical accounts or memorials to victims in the aftermath. One of the first major histories of the pandemic, by Alfred Crosby, didn’t arrive until 1976, the same year Starr published his reflections on serving in an influenza ward. Crosby’s book was eventually reissued with the fitting title America’s Forgotten Pandemic: The Influenza of 1918. This mortality chart shows the weekly accumulation of deaths above normal during the 1918 influenza pandemic. Philadelphia was one of the hardest hit U.S cities.NATIONAL MUSEUM OF HEALTH AND MEDICINE, OTIS HISTORICAL ARCHIVES ID: REEVE 002721 Since 1918, we have faced many epidemics, but COVID-19 has been the first to rival the great flu in how it has changed everyone’s daily lives. “We are living through a historic pandemic,” says Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md. But a hundred years’ worth of advances in virology, medical understanding and vaccine development has made a difference. It was 11 months from the discovery of the SARS-CoV-2 virus to “having a vaccine that you could put in people’s arms,” Fauci says, “a beautiful testimony to the importance of investing in biomedical research.” Related Stories Health & Medicine Millions of COVID-19 cases in the U.S. may have gone undiagnosed in March By Tina Hesman SaeyJune 25, 2020 Health & Medicine What will happen when COVID-19 and the flu collide this fall? By Tina Hesman SaeySeptember 18, 2020 Health & Medicine Cows might host both human and bird flus By Tina Hesman SaeyMay 14, 2024 The COVID-19 pandemic is also a stark reminder of what hasn’t changed. “Pandemics just surface all the muck,” says internist, medical humanities scholar and historian of medicine Lakshmi Krishnan of Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. Ever present but often ignored societal inequities become unavoidable. The disproportionate weight of COVID-19 disease and death on Black, Latino and Native American communities in the United States — “we better not forget,” says Fauci. “We really need to address the social determinants of health that lead to these very, very obvious disparities.” Yet outbreak after outbreak, our collective memory falters. The urgency of the predicament eventually fades. The families mourning the loss of loved ones, people struggling with unmet medical needs, with stigma, become small islands of remembrance ever threatened by vast seas of forgetfulness and indifference. Sometimes forgetfulness comes from a lack of reckoning. The United States moved on from the 1918 pandemic without addressing what was lost. Sometimes the success of vaccines obscures their power. The fear that surrounded polio subsided in the United States after the country rolled up its sleeves for polio vaccines. The dread of many other childhood illnesses, such as diphtheria and measles, has also diminished, leaving some to take prevention measures for granted. To look back at infectious diseases since 1918 is to observe what we’ve learned about the viruses, bacteria and fungi with which we share our world, and observe the strides made in lessening their harms. But it’s also a call to listen to the stories of how infectious diseases have shaped people’s lives. Outbreaks “have occurred throughout history and they occur now,” Fauci says. “And they will continue to occur.” Tell us about your Science News experience Help us improve by taking our 15-question reader survey. Take the survey now Vaccine victories On February 24, 1947, Eugene Le Bar, an American merchant, boarded a bus in Mexico City. During the trip, his head began to ache and he broke out with a rash. He arrived in New York City on March 1 still not feeling well. Four days later, he was admitted to the hospital. His stay overlapped with a mumps patient named Ismael Acosta and a little girl, almost 2, who had croup. Le Bar deteriorated while doctors searched for a diagnosis. He died March 10. Acosta and the little girl had been discharged, but returned later in March with rashes. The results of tests for those two led to a review of Le Bar’s autopsy. The diagnosis was smallpox, a disease that kills about 30 percent of those sickened and leaves survivors disfigured by prominent scars. More victims turned up. A little boy with whooping cough who had been at the hospital developed a rash. So did Acosta’s 26-year-old wife, Carmen, who died days later. Soon the number of people with smallpox reached 12. New York City embarked on a massive vaccination campaign. At the time, Anthony Fauci was 6 years old, growing up in Brooklyn. He remembers his parents talking about a huge event that would be happening in the city. “We all had to get vaccinated, and vaccination means somebody would get a little needle and prick it multiple times in your arm.” (The smallpox vaccine wasn’t given as a shot; instead, a drop of vaccine was placed on the skin and a needle poked the skin repeatedly to usher the vaccine into the body.) Fauci and his family were among the millions of New Yorkers immunized that spring, bringing the smallpox outbreak to a close without another person added to the count. A smallpox outbreak in New York City in 1947 spurred a huge vaccination effort. That April, people waited in two long lines at the Morrisania Hospital in the Bronx to be vaccinated.BETTMANN/GETTY IMAGES Throughout history, smallpox was one of the most feared infectious diseases. A British historian, writing about the 1694 death of Queen Mary II from smallpox at age 32, described the disease as “always present, filling the churchyards with corpses, tormenting with constant fears all whom it had not yet stricken, leaving on those whose lives it spared the hideous traces of its power.” Smallpox is also a starring character in the story of vaccines. At the end of the 18th century, the English physician Edward Jenner extracted fluid from a sore caused by cowpox on a dairymaid’s hand and inoculated a young boy with it, a test of the belief among some farmers that getting sick with cowpox protected against smallpox. The experiment propelled forward the concept of vaccination. By giving the immune system a preview of the pathogen, the body’s defenses were prepared for the main event. Sponsor Message What followed exemplifies the fullest power of vaccination. After a worldwide campaign, smallpox was the first infectious disease to be declared eradicated from the globe, in 1980 (SN: 11/03/79, p. 310). A scourge that had plagued humankind for at least 3,000 years was consigned to the history books. Other vaccine-preventable diseases — especially those that afflict children — harm many fewer around the world today than in the near past. During the 20th century in the United States, after vaccines became widely used for nine diseases, including polio, measles and Haemophilus influenzae type b, cases declined by 95 to 100 percent. Yet there can be “a lack of appreciation for what vaccines have done in terms of getting rid of or managing many infectious diseases,” says virologist A. Oveta Fuller of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. For many people today, an understanding of polio only comes from history books (SN: 1/20/51, p. 42). But others who grew up when summers meant polio outbreaks have sharp recollections. Paul Offit, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, was 5 years old in 1956. After surgery on his foot, he stayed for about six weeks in a Baltimore hospital’s chronic care facility. It was primarily a polio ward. He was surrounded by children whose limbs were suspended in traction or whose bodies were swallowed in iron lungs. If polio impaired the muscles in the chest, patients would be placed in an iron lung, which forced air in and out of their lungs so they could breathe.FOOD COLLECTION/ALAMY STOCK PHOTO “It was a lonely, frightening experience,” Offit says. Parents were allowed to visit only one hour a week. He could see “how vulnerable and helpless and alone all of those children were.” Offit’s bed was next to a window, which gave him a view of the building’s front door. He’d stare at the entrance, “waiting for someone to come save me.” Offit later trained at that same hospital as a medical student. The ward he had languished in as a child was now a suite of offices. The room looked the same, even the molding, “and that window was still there,” Offit says. “I remember walking up and looking out that window and seeing the same thing I saw 20 years earlier and just fighting back tears.” Memorial Day weekend in the United States used to herald a season of polio fear, as cases rose in summertime. Children were barred from swimming pools and crowds. Fauci’s parents wouldn’t allow him and his sister to go to the beach at Coney Island. “All of us as kids knew somebody who’d been paralyzed,” says David Morens, Fauci’s senior scientific adviser, who grew up in the 1950s. Nurse Grace Kyler cares for two young boys wearing leg braces, their limbs weakened by polio.TALLAHASSEE DEMOCRAT COLLECTION/FLORIDA MEMORY, STATE LIBRARY AND ARCHIVES OF FLORIDA Vaccines provided an exit from this recurring nightmare. The two vaccines developed to thwart polio each drew on different advances. First came Jonas Salk’s “killed” polio vaccine, approved in 1955 (SN: 4/16/55, p. 242). Made with poliovirus that had been treated with formaldehyde, the virus could no longer cause harm, but the body could still mount an immune response against it. About seven decades earlier, Louis Pasteur had demonstrated that rabies virus could be inactivated to develop a rabies vaccine. The second vaccine, Albert Sabin’s oral polio vaccine, became available in 1961 (SN: 12/14/63, p. 370). Often delivered on a sugar cube, Sabin’s easily digested vaccine was the inspiration for the song “A Spoonful of Sugar” in the movie Mary Poppins. Sabin’s approach was to weaken the poliovirus by making it replicate in nonhuman cells. Forced into an unfamiliar environment, the virus made genetic changes that diminished its ability to cause disease. This method, called attenuation, had first been used about 25 years earlier to create a yellow fever vaccine. Virologist Jonas Salk, shown here vaccinating a young girl, developed the first polio vaccine while at the University of Pittsburgh. When results of a large clinical trial attesting to the vaccine’s safety and efficacy were announced on April 12, 1955, U.S. church bells rang and people celebrated in the streets.HULTON ARCHIVE/GETTY IMAGES Vanishing ailments Life before and after polio vaccines was like night and day. In 1952, polio paralyzed more than 21,000 people in the United States. Thirteen years later, that number had plummeted to 61. By 1979, polio was eliminated in the country. With new immunizations, one by one, common childhood ailments all but vanished in the United States: measles, rubella, chicken pox, and meningitis caused by bacteria. When Kathryn Edwards trained in pediatrics in Chicago in the mid- to late 1970s, “we were really in the grips of Haemophilus influenzae meningitis.” (H. influenzae, formerly Bacillus influenzae, is the misnamed bacterium that had once been suspected of causing influenza.) She remembers seeing four or five children at a time hospitalized with this dangerous swelling of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord, says Edwards, an infectious disease pediatrician and vaccine researcher at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Nashville. Some children with H. influenzae meningitis were left with brain damage, while about 5 percent died. Edwards still remembers a young patient lost to the disease the last night of her training. The first vaccine against H. influenzae type b, the type that most commonly caused meningitis and other severe infections, became available in the United States in 1985. More effective vaccines came a few years later, evaluated by Edwards and colleagues. Again the impact was unmistakable. Before 1985, close to 20,000 children, most of them under age 5, developed severe infections from H. influenzae type b each year, including 12,000 with bacterial meningitis. By 1994 and 1995, the incidence of severe disease had fallen 98 percent in children age 4 or younger. With the availability of vaccines against H. influenzae and other pathogens, “the practice of pediatrics is much different now than when I began 40 years ago,” Edwards says. The scope of infectious diseases that children face worldwide is slowly changing too. From 2000 to 2018, 23 million deaths globally were prevented by measles vaccination. But there are still millions of children around the world missing out on basic immunizations that are routine in the United States. The COVID-19 pandemic has worsened the problem: An estimated 23 million children worldwide did not receive childhood vaccines in 2020; that’s about 3.7 million more than in 2019. Big impact Vaccines that came into wide use in the 20th century against diphtheria, polio, measles and other diseases drastically reduced or, in the case of polio, eliminated the illnesses by the end of the century in the United States. Smallpox was globally eradicated by 1980. DiseaseAnnual cases pre-vaccine*Annual cases in 1998Smallpox 48,1640Diphtheria 175,8851Pertussis 147,2716,279Polio 16,3160Measles 503,28289Mumps 152,209606Rubella 47,745345Haemophilus influenzae type b20,00054*Annual pre-vaccine cases are from the 3–5 years before vaccine approval, except for mumps and smallpox. Mumps cases are reported the first year after the vaccine was licensed. Smallpox cases are from the early 1900s, when the vaccine was not yet in widespread use. NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION PROGRAM, CDC/MMWR 1999 The work of developing vaccines against COVID-19 began shortly after researchers worked out the genetic sequence of the new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, in January 2020. Previous studies of the coronaviruses behind Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, or SARS (SN: 3/29/03, p. 198), and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, or MERS (SN: 5/31/14, p. 6), had identified a viral protein that would effectively ramp up an immune response. And the basic research that would underpin a new vaccine technology, which would be used for two of the first COVID-19 vaccines, had been going on for decades. The approach is based on messenger RNA, or mRNA, which carries out of the cell nucleus the instructions for making a protein. The vaccines have the guide for the viral protein; the body makes that protein and produces antibodies against it. Some of the crucial work, modifying the instructions for the viral protein so the body wouldn’t see the guide as an invader, came from RNA biologist Katalin Karikó, immunologist Drew Weissman and colleagues working at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine in the mid- to late 2000s. COVID-19 vaccines were created and tested in the shortest timeline for any vaccines yet. But that efficiency wasn’t matched in the distribution. While there haven’t been enough shots available globally (SN: 3/27/21, p. 6), the United States, a country awash in supply, has struggled to immunize everyone eligible. Some people haven’t been vaccinated because they can’t take time off work to recover from side effects or are worried they’ll have to pay for the shots. Others don’t see COVID-19 as a threat and don’t see the need for the vaccine. COVID-19 has killed millions of people worldwide. Yet perhaps it would be more terrifying if it primarily threatened children. The horror of polio was that it could leave children paralyzed for the rest of their lives, Offit says; it was as though children had been injured in war. Michigan’s Fuller thinks that seeing the harm that polio could do to children helped make Americans eager for polio vaccines. During the COVID-19 pandemic, “because we were all isolated, we didn’t see each other really suffering or dealing with the effects of this virus,” she says. One person vaccinated feels like such a victory.Katherine Spindler When virologist Katherine Spindler of the University of Michigan was growing up, she had measles, mumps and rubella. The vaccines for those afflictions “came along too late for me,” Spindler says. She still remembers the name of her older brother’s classmate who died in eighth grade of an infectious disease. The routine immunizations that are now regular parts of pediatrician appointments mean that most of us “don’t know what it’s like to have polio or to die from measles.” Spindler found getting the COVID-19 vaccine “so meaningful,” thinking about all of the science that came together to develop it. People have e-mailed her with questions about the vaccine. One woman who had an appointment but wasn’t sure she wanted to keep it wrote several times. Spindler spent a few hours responding. Finally, she got an e-mail back with a picture of the woman in her car getting the shot. “Tears came to my eyes,” Spindler says. “One person vaccinated feels like such a victory.” The aftermath At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, Lakshmi Krishnan and S. Michelle Ogunwole were internists at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. Patients were dying. There wasn’t enough personal protective equipment for staff. So much about COVID-19 was still unknown. “It was terrifying,” says Krishnan, now at Georgetown University. Some of her colleagues were writing their wills. And the patients were largely alone. Ogunwole, also a health disparities researcher at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, remembers an older Black woman who had been hospitalized with COVID-19 for months. She was well enough to move out of the intensive care unit but was extremely debilitated because she hadn’t walked in so long, Ogunwole says. A tube in her windpipe made talking difficult as well. The woman’s family was not there. “There was nobody to speak for her,” Ogunwole says. It made Ogunwole think of her own mother, “an incredibly vibrant person … the life of the party.” If it was her mom in that bed, no one would have known who she is. That she likes to dance for no reason. That she picks up a different sport every year. A memorial displays the names of victims of COVID-19 on yellow hearts outside of the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C., on May 5, 2021.DREW ANGERER/GETTY IMAGES Ogunwole felt her patient’s sorrow and loss. Millions are reckoning with the pandemic’s cost to their physical and mental health. The toll is not unlike that of tuberculosis, AIDS, fungal diseases, childhood infectious diseases or the many other outbreaks and epidemics of the last century. We should know by heart how lives — and whose lives — are changed by infectious disease outbreaks. But time and again, there’s a clamor to leave outbreaks behind us. And the trauma and the inequities linger. The question this time, says historian Nancy Bristow of the University of Puget Sound in Tacoma, Wash., is, “Can we do a better job of continuing to hear the stories of those who have been affected?” The stories of children who have lost one parent or both, for example. For her book American Pandemic: The Lost Worlds of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic, Bristow interviewed Lillian Kancianich, born in a small town in North Dakota. Kancianich’s mother died of influenza when Kancianich was a baby. The story was that her mother was out sweeping the porch on Armistice Day and then was never seen again, Bristow says. Kancianich bounced among extended family members’ houses for two years before she was able to call one home. She told Bristow that as a child, when asked what she wanted to be when she grew up, her answer was, a stepmother. “The loss of that parent changed her life completely,” Bristow says. These stories have continued. In roughly the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic, an estimated 1 million children worldwide experienced the death of a mother, a father or both, researchers reported in July in the Lancet. The number is staggering, and yet it is a fraction of the estimated 17 million children who have lost one or both parents to AIDS in roughly the last three decades, according to the United States Agency for International Development. Ninety percent of those children live in sub-Saharan Africa. Outbreak after outbreak, our collective memory falters. The urgency of the predicament eventually fades. Nearly 105,000 children in the United States are facing life without one or both parents due to COVID-19, the study in the Lancet found. “Evidence from previous epidemics shows that ineffective responses to the death of a parent or caregiver, even when there is a surviving parent or caregiver, can lead to deleterious psychosocial, neurocognitive, socioeconomic and biomedical outcomes for children,” the authors wrote. An earlier study on parental death due to COVID-19 in the United States took race and ethnicity into account. While Black children make up only 14 percent of children in the United States, they made up 20 percent of those who had lost a parent, researchers reported in April in JAMA Pediatrics. When Krishnan was treating patients early in the pandemic, she remembers noting, “It’s all my Black and brown patients that are getting upgraded to the intensive care unit.” Research has revealed a disproportionate impact among Black, Latino and Native Americans in terms of infection, hospitalization and death. “COVID has unveiled disparities in health,” but the pandemic didn’t create them, Fuller says. “This is not new.” At the turn of the 20th century, Black Americans’ death rates were higher than white Americans for tuberculosis, pneumonia and, in children, diarrheal disease and diseases of malnutrition, W.E.B. Du Bois wrote in 1906, “an indication of social and economic position.” Racism and segregation restricted access to health care, housing and wealth for Black Americans. The accounts from 1918 in Black newspapers in Philadelphia and Chicago “gave the impression that the epidemic did not substantially disrupt life in black communities,” wrote Vanessa Northington Gamble in Public Health Reports in 2010. Yet it was clear that the number of Black people who did have flu “overwhelmed the medical care facilities that were available to them,” says Northington Gamble, a physician and medical historian at George Washington University in Washington, D.C. White hospitals wouldn’t accept Black patients or would send them to the basement or other segregated areas. Black hospitals didn’t have the capacity for everyone who needed care. So Black communities came together to provide for their own, she says. The U.S. military banned Black nurses during World War I. These nine Black nurses, who cared for soldiers with influenza at Camp Sherman in Ohio, along with nine Black nurses assigned to Camp Grant in Illinois, were the first called to serve after the ban was lifted two days after the war ended on November 11, 1918.SPECIAL COLLECTIONS AND UNIVERSITY ARCHIVES, UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS AMHERST LIBRARIES When every one of the 75 beds at Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital in Philadelphia filled up, its medical director, with no support from the city’s board of health, managed to open an emergency annex for Black patients. Black women volunteers in Chicago made house visits to tend to the sick. Black nurses also cared for Black influenza patients in their homes. Bessie B. Hawes, a 1918 graduate of the Tuskegee Institute’s nursing program, described her experience caring for a family of 10, “dying for the want of attention,” in a rural area of Alabama. “As I entered the little country cabin, I found the mother dead in bed, the father and the remainder of the family running temperatures of 102 to 104˚. Some had influenza and others had pneumonia…. I saw at a glance that I had much work to do…. I milked the cow, gave medicine, and did everything I could to help conditions.” One of the legacies of the 1918 pandemic is “this long-standing tradition of the Black community of standing up and taking care of itself,” says Northington Gamble. The tradition continues, she says, with the work of organizations including the Black Doctors COVID-19 Consortium, created to make it easier for Black communities in the Philadelphia area to receive COVID-19 testing and vaccination. When Black people became ill with influenza in the 1918 pandemic, they were more likely to die than white people with influenza, researchers reported in 2019 in the International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. That higher likelihood of death “could be attributed to several factors still present today: higher risk for pulmonary disease, malnutrition, poor housing conditions, social and economic disparities, and inadequate access to care,” Krishnan, Ogunwole and their colleague Lisa Cooper of Johns Hopkins University wrote last year in Annals of Internal Medicine. The societal systems that foster racial discrimination and lead to health inequities must be addressed, Ogunwole says. “There is no amount of resilience that overcomes that.” We cannot forget because it will happen again.Lakshmi Krishnan The suffering of the 1918 pandemic was overshadowed by the end of World War I, Bristow says. The war was publicly memorialized with monuments and a holiday. “The pandemic goes unspoken,” she says, because it doesn’t fit with the victorious narrative of the war. Only a few fictional works that drew upon the 1918 pandemic were published in the following decades. But those books — such as the 1939 Pale Horse, Pale Rider, by Katherine Anne Porter, who survived an influenza illness but whose fiancé died — as well as private letters reveal deep loss, Bristow says. “It’s very clear that the trauma stayed with people, even if there’s not public grieving, and that’s what’s so sad about it,” she says. “There was no public acknowledgment of all of this loss.” The country marched ahead, and people “were expected to hop in line and march along too.” Krishnan, a historian of medicine, says we must preserve a record of the COVID-19 pandemic. A hopeful sign that stories of how people felt, lived, loved and died won’t be lost are the many oral history projects spearheaded by universities and libraries. “We cannot forget,” Krishnan says, “because it will happen again.” Trustworthy journalism comes at a price. Scientists and journalists share a core belief in questioning, observing and verifying to reach the truth. Science News reports on crucial research and discovery across science disciplines. We need your financial support to make it happen – every contribution makes a difference. Subscribe or Donate Now Questions or comments on this article? E-mail us at feedback@sciencenews.org | Reprints FAQ A version of this article appears in the November 6, 2021 issue of Science News. Citations Nancy K. Bristow. “‘It’s as bad as anything can be’: Patients, identity and the influenza pandemic.” Public Health Reports. 2010. Vanessa Northington Gamble. “‘There wasn’t a lot of comforts in those days’: African Americans, public health and the 1918 influenza epidemic.” Public Health Reports. 2010. About Aimee Cunningham E-mail X Aimee Cunningham is the biomedical writer. She has a master’s degree in science journalism from New York University. We are at a critical time and supporting climate journalism is more important than ever. Science News and our parent organization, the Society for Science, need your help to strengthen environmental literacy and ensure that our response to climate change is informed by science. Please subscribe to Science News and add $16 to expand science literacy and understanding. More Stories from Science News on Health & Medicine Genetics A common drug may help treat a rare genetic disease By Tina Hesman SaeyNovember 8, 2024 Health & Medicine ‘The Power of Prions’ explores misfolded proteins’ role in brain diseases By Meghan RosenNovember 6, 2024 Health & Medicine Why finding bird flu in a U.S. pig for the first time is raising new worries By Erin Garcia de JesúsNovember 1, 2024 Health & Medicine Limiting sugar in infancy reduces the risk of diabetes and hypertension By Skyler WareOctober 31, 2024 Health & Medicine Are synthetic food dyes bad for you? Here’s what the science says. By Sophie HartleyOctober 28, 2024 Health & Medicine Drop in vaping drives tobacco product use by U.S. youth to a record low By Aimee CunninghamOctober 25, 2024 Health & Medicine Male mosquitoes sometimes suck, too By Tina Hesman SaeyOctober 25, 2024 Health & Medicine A new implant tested in animals reverses drug overdoses By Anna GibbsOctober 23, 2024 Science News Science News was founded in 1921 as an independent, nonprofit source of accurate information on the latest news of science, medicine and technology. Today, our mission remains the same: to empower people to evaluate the news and the world around them. It is published by the Society for Science, a nonprofit 501(c)(3) membership organization dedicated to public engagement in scientific research and education (EIN 53-0196483). Science News Explores Science News Learning Subscriber Services Subscribe Renew Give a Gift Subscription Customer Service Follow Science News on Facebook Follow Science News on X Follow Science News via RSS Follow Science News on Instagram Follow Science News on YouTube Follow Science News on TikTok More Information FAQ Newsletters Rights & Permissions Advertise Contact Society for Science About the Society Society Store Donate Careers © Society for Science & the Public 2000–2024. All rights reserved. 1719 N Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036 202.785.2255 Terms of Service Privacy Policy Privacy Manager Close Log in Subscribers, enter your e-mail address for full access to the Science News archives and digital editions. Not a subscriber? Become one now. Client key* E-mail Address* Log In8 Medicine Cabinet Essentials for Cold, Flu Season Javascript is not enabled. Javascript must be enabled to use this site. Please enable Javascript in your browser and try again. Skip to content Refresh your driving skills with the Smart Driver online course! Save 25% in honor of Veterans Day. Join Renew Enroll Rejoin Membership & Benefits Members Edition Rewards Star AARP Rewards %{points}% Help Register Login Login Hi, %{firstName}% My Account Account Details My Inbox Communication Preferences Newsletters Customize Your Membership Community Staying Sharp Logout Hi, %{firstName}% My Account Account Details My Inbox Communication Preferences Newsletters Customize Your Membership Community Staying Sharp Logout Content starts here CLOSE × Search {"dropDownLabel":"All Topics","dropDownValue":"everywhere"},{"dropDownLabel":"Entertainment","dropDownValue":"entertainment"},{"dropDownLabel":"Health","dropDownValue":"health"},{"dropDownLabel":"Money","dropDownValue":"money"},{"dropDownLabel":"Policy & Research","dropDownValue":"research"},{"dropDownLabel":"Travel","dropDownValue":"travel"},{"dropDownLabel":"Work","dropDownValue":"work"},{"dropDownLabel":"Member Benefits","dropDownValue":"member benefits"},{"dropDownLabel":"Caregiving","dropDownValue":"caregiving"},{"dropDownLabel":"Rewards","dropDownValue":"rewards"},{"dropDownLabel":"Videos","dropDownValue":"videos"} Search Popular Searches Games Car rental AARP daily Crossword Puzzle Hotels with AARP discounts Life Insurance AARP Dental Insurance Plans Travel Suggested Links Help Show me my account info Change my Address How do I contact AARP? Where is my membership card? How do I get a digital card? AARP MEMBERSHIP AARP Membership — $12 for your first year when you sign up for Automatic Renewal Get instant access to members-only products, hundreds of discounts, a free second membership, and a subscription to AARP the Magazine. Join Now Renew Now 120x30-AARP-logo-red Join Renew Enroll Rejoin right_container Health Money Work & Jobs Social Security Medicare Caregiving Games Travel More... AARP en Español AARP en Español Membership & Benefits Members Edition AARP Rewards AARP en Español Membership & Benefits Members Edition AARP Rewards %{points}% Back Health Close Menu Wellness Conditions & Treatments Drugs & Supplements Health Care & Coverage Health Benefits AARP Hearing Center Advice on Tinnitus and Hearing Loss Your Health What to Know About Vaccines Brain Health Resources Tools and Explainers on Brain Health MEMBERS ONLY Fitness 25 Ways to Get a Flatter Stomach MEMBERS ONLY Back Money Close Menu Scams & Fraud Personal Finance Taxes Retirement Money Benefits Scams & Fraud View and Report Scams in Your Area AARP Foundation Tax-Aide Free Tax Preparation Assistance Retirement AARP Retirement Calculator MEMBERS ONLY Your Money 25 Ways to Save at the Grocery Store MEMBERS ONLY Back Work & Jobs Close Menu Job Search Careers Small Business Employers Age Discrimination Flexible Work Freelance Jobs You Can Do From Home AARP Skills Builder Online Courses to Boost Your Career MEMBERS ONLY Careers 31 Great Ways to Boost Your Career MEMBERS ONLY ON-DEMAND WEBINARS Tips to Enhance Your Job Search Back Social Security Close Menu Webinars Get More out of Your Benefits Enrollment When to Start Taking Social Security Basics 10 Top Social Security FAQs Tools Social Security Benefits Calculator Back Medicare Close Menu Medicare Made Easy Original vs. Medicare Advantage Enrollment Guide Step-by-Step Tool for First-Timers Prescription Drugs 9 Biggest Changes Under New Rx Law Medicare FAQs Quick Answers to Your Top Questions Back Caregiving Close Menu Basics Care at Home Medical Financial & Legal Life Balance Local LONG-TERM CARE ​Understanding Basics of LTC Insurance​ State Guides Assistance and Services in Your Area Prepare to Care Guides How to Develop a Caregiving Plan End of Life How to Cope With Grief, Loss Back Games Close Menu All Recently Played Word & Trivia Rewards Atari® & Retro Mahjongg Members Only Staying Sharp Solitare Strategy Arcade Puzzles Card Juegos Daily Game Shows More About Games Right Again! Trivia Right Again! Trivia – Sports Atari® Video Games Throwback Thursday Crossword Back Travel Close Menu Travel Tips Vacation Ideas Destinations Travel Benefits Camping and RV Ideas Fun Camping and RV Journeys MEMBERS ONLY Exploration 25 Great Ways to Explore MEMBERS ONLY Train Travel How to Find Great Train Deals AARP National Park Guide Travel to Pinnacles in California Entertainment & Style Family & Relationships Personal Tech Home & Living Auto Staying Sharp Podcasts Videos Back Entertainment & Style Close Menu Movies TV Music Celebrities Beauty & Style Books TV for Grownups Fall TV Preview Celebrities Samuel L. Jackson Keeps Keeping On MEMBERS ONLY Looking Back Get Jiggy With Our ’90s Music Quiz MEMBERS ONLY Back Family & Relationships Close Menu Sex & Dating 7 Dating Dos and 7 Don'ts Get Happier Creating Social Connections MEMBERS ONLY Friends & Family Veterinarians May Use AI to Treat Pets MEMBERS ONLY Back Personal Tech Close Menu Home Technology What's Inside Your Smartphone Get Happier Creating Social Connections Virtual Community Center Join Free Tech Help Events Back Home & Living Close Menu Your Home Creative Ways to Store Your Pets Gear Recipes Meals to Make in the Microwave MEMBERS ONLY Your Home Wearing Shoes Inside: Pros vs. Cons MEMBERS ONLY Back Auto Close Menu Car Buying Driver Safety Maintenance & Safety Trends & Technology MEMBERS ONLY AARP Smart Guide How to Clean Your Car MEMBERS ONLY We Need To Talk Assess Your Loved One's Driving Skills Driver Safety AARP Smart Driver Course Back Staying Sharp Close Menu Assessment Challenges Articles Videos Recipes Building Resilience in Difficult Times Tips for Finding Your Calm Weight Loss After 50 Challenge Back Podcasts Close Menu Cautionary Tales of Today's Biggest Scams 7 Top Podcasts for Armchair Travelers MEMBERS ONLY Jean Chatzky: ‘Closing the Savings Gap’ MEMBERS ONLY Back Videos Close Menu Quick Digest of Today's Top News AARP Top Tips for Navigating Life Get Moving With Our Workout Series Join Renew Enroll Rejoin What to Know About Vaccines After 50 View Series Brought to you by Leaving AARP.org Website You are now leaving AARP.org and going to a website that is not operated by AARP. A different privacy policy and terms of service will apply. Continue Cancel What to Know About Vaccines After 50 Go to Series Main Page Brought to you by Why Older Adults Need a Second COVID Shot CDC issues new vaccine recommendations These Are the 8 Vaccines You Need After 50 Are you up to date on all the recommended vaccines? Living With Long COVID and Its Debilitating Symptoms Plus, how to reduce your risk for the lingering condition Turning 50? Go Get A Shingles Vaccine It's extremely effective, preventing a super-unpleasant infection. So why don't more adults get it? Do You Need the RSV Vaccine This Fall? The shot could help to keep you out of the hospital Side Effects of COVID-19 Vaccines&nbsp; Symptoms are no surprise to people fully vaccinated 5 Reasons You Should Get a Pneumococcal Vaccine Updated recommendations call for adults 50 and older to get the shot Can Getting Vaccinated Lower Dementia Risk? There’s growing evidence that getting your shots can lower dementia risk What to Know About This Year's Flu Shot It's time to start thinking about your fall vaccines What to Know About the Updated COVID Vaccines New shots have been approved and will be available soon 5 Things to Know About the XEC Variant Health experts have their eyes on a new strain of the coronavirus Time for Your Tdap Booster With whooping cough (aka, pertussis) on the rise, make sure you’re up to date How to Get — and Pay for — the COVID Vaccine People without insurance will face additional hurdles Government Reopens Free At-Home COVID Testing Program Households can order four tests from the federal government Will Medicare Pay For My Flu Shot? No copayment, deductible needed for preventive benefit \ ﻿8 Medicine Cabinet Essentials for Cold and Flu Season ﻿Keep these items on hand to identify ﻿and treat troubling symptoms Health 8 Medicine Cabinet Essentials for Cold and Flu Season Keep these items on hand at home to identify and help treat troubling symptoms By Rachel Nania, AARP Comments En español Published December 02, 2022 / Updated October 18, 2024 Getty Images Facebook Twitter LinkedIn When the temperature begins﻿ to drop, respiratory illnesses like cold and flu start to rise. So now is the time of year to take inventory of what’s in your medicine cabinet and stock up on the essentials to avoid any last-minute trips to the store if you get sick. One thing to keep in mind: While a number of over-the-counter remedies can bring relief from the bothersome symptoms that accompany seasonal illnesses, it’s important to touch base with your health care provider when you start to feel sick, ﻿says Paul O’Rourke, M.D., associate professor of clinical medicine at ﻿the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. If it is the flu — and a simple test at home or at the doctor’s office can tell — a prescription antiviral medication can help ease symptoms and prevent the illness from getting worse. “But it does need to be started pretty soon with the onset of symptoms,” O’Rourke says. The same goes for COVID-19 treatments, if you test positive for a coronavirus infection. ﻿Here are eight indispensable items to stock in the medicine cabinet to prepare for cold and flu season. 1. Thermometer ​﻿ First on O’Rourke’s list of cold-and-flu-season essentials is a working thermometer — whether it’s one that goes in the mouth or hovers over the forehead. “It’s important to have one around so that you can objectively assess if you do have a fever, and to provide that information to your physician if you are sick﻿, because that can help with managing your symptoms,” he adds. A temperature higher than 101 degrees Fahrenheit is considered “a true fever” and warrants a call to your doctor, O’Rourke says. 2. Pulse oximeter Emergency warning signs of flu If you experience the following symptoms, seek medical care right away﻿. Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath Persistent pain or pressure in the chest or abdomen Persistent dizziness, confusion, inability to wake up Seizures Not urinating Severe muscle pain Severe weakness or unsteadiness Fever or cough that improve﻿s but then return﻿s or worsen﻿s Worsening of chronic medical conditions Source: U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Another﻿ helpful tool to have on hand is a pulse oximeter, which measures blood oxygen levels. People who develop serious complications from the flu and COVID can experience difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. So if you start having breathing issues or upper respiratory symptoms, “you would be able to assess the oxygen levels in your blood and be able to report that to your physician or medical team,” O’Rourke explains. ﻿The more familiar pulse oximeters ﻿attach to a finger, but some home models are designed to be used on the ears, nose or forehead.﻿ The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has information on how to take a reading at home and interpret the results. One thing to know: Research has found that pulse oximeters may be less accurate in individuals with darker skin pigmentation. The FDA says that people with COVID who are monitoring their symptoms at home “should pay attention to all signs and symptoms of their condition and communicate any concerns to their health care provider." AARP NEWSLETTERS %{ newsLetterPromoText }% %{ description }% Subscribe See All Newsletters Privacy Policy ARTICLE CONTINUES AFTER ADVERTISEMENT 3. A COVID-19 test The most common symptoms of cold, flu, COVID and RSV (or respiratory syncytial virus) overlap, making it difficult to pin down a diagnosis. That’s why having a rapid at-home ﻿COVID test stashed away can be especially helpful﻿. You can find these over-the-counter tests at pharmacies around the country, and all U.S. households can order four for free at covidtest.gov. Knowing whether you’re positive for COVID can impact the treatment course of your illness — especially if you are at higher risk ﻿for a more severe case, explains Robert Weber, administrator for pharmacy services at the Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center and assistant dean for medical center ﻿affairs at the Ohio State University College of Pharmacy. If you are 50 and older or have certain health conditions and test positive for COVID, your doctor may recommend a prescription antiviral pill to help ease the severity of your symptoms. The results will also tell you whether you need to isolate from others so that you don’t pass on ﻿the virus. Newer to retail pharmacy shelves are combination COVID and flu at-home tests. These work just like the at-home COVID tests, where you swab your nose and in “usually 15 to 30 minutes, it will give you a line that tells you whether you have COVID or whether you have influenza A or influenza B,” says Greg Martin, M.D., professor of medicine at Emory University School of Medicine. 4. Pain relievers ﻿Cold﻿s, the flu and other seasonal illnesses can come with headaches and muscle aches, which in many cases over-the-counter pain relievers can help alleviate.﻿ They also have the added benefit of temporarily reducing fevers. Acetaminophen (Tylenol is the brand name) is generally recommended for older adults, since nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) — which include ibuprofen (Advil) and naproxen (Aleve) — can raise bleeding risks in the gastrointestinal tract, a risk that increases with age. NSAIDs can also damage the kidneys and ﻿raise blood pressure, especially if used consistently, says Ashley Garling, a clinical assistant professor at the University of Texas at Austin’s College of Pharmacy. “If you have any ulcers or history of ulcers or are on blood thinners, then I would avoid them,” Garling adds. However, it’s important to talk to ﻿your doctor about the best option for you, since acetaminophen is not risk-free — especially for people with liver issues. What’s more, acetaminophen tends to hide in several combination medicines that are sold to treat cold and flu symptoms, like NyQuil and DayQuil, so be sure to read the label to avoid unintentionally double﻿ dosing. Taking too much can cause serious liver damage. “[It’s important to] make sure that you’re taking a minimum number of over-the-counter medicines that help with your symptoms, and definitely reporting to your physician or medical team what over-the-counter medicines you’re taking, so they can provide you advice and address with you if they have any concerns that maybe you’re taking too much of one thing,” O’Rourke says. AARP Membership — $12 for your first year when you sign up for Automatic Renewal Join AARP today for $16 per year. Get instant access to members-only products and hundreds of discounts, a free second membership, and a subscription to AARP The Magazine. Join AARP ARTICLE CONTINUES AFTER ADVERTISEMENT 5. Sore throat soothers Cough drops can settle a sore throat or nagging cough, so having a bag or two on hand isn’t a bad idea. That said, you don’t want to overdo it on the lozenges, especially if you are diabetic, since most contain sugar, Garling notes. (There are plenty of sugar-free options out there if you are watching your sugar intake.) Taking too many can also lead to a stomachache, “but generally they’re pretty safe and they can be very soothing,” she adds. Also﻿, ﻿be cautious about using anything that numbs the back of the throat, which can make it difficult to swallow, Weber says. And don’t forget about some of the more obvious remedies: ﻿A cup of hot tea or a glass of ice-cold water can bring relief to an irritated throat. 6. Cough calmers Here’s another area where you have to pay attention, since many cough medicines contain more than one ingredient — including some that older adults should avoid, like diphenhydramine (Benadryl), which can have a sedating effect and increase ﻿the risk ﻿of falls. Diphenhydramine has also been linked in studies to increased dementia risks. Another thing to be on the lookout for: packages with ﻿“DM﻿” on the label, which stands for dextromethorphan, which can change your blood pressure and suppress your respiratory system, Garling says. “Really using only one ingredient for the one thing that’s bothering you the most is typically our recommendation,” she adds. Weber suggests guaifenesin (Mucinex) to ﻿help thin and clear mucus-causing coughs. Be sure to drink plenty of water while taking it to help the process along, he says. Some antihistamines﻿, like cetirizine (Zyrtec) and loratadine (Claritin)﻿, can also help calm a dry, hacking cough from postnasal drip and are safer than other options, Garling adds. Don’t forget about honey: Research published in the medical journal BMJ shows that honey is an effective way to tame a cough. 7. Nasal sprays A saline nasal spray can help relieve nasal congestion brought on by a cold. If you’re considering another over-the-counter nasal spray, Weber ﻿recommends check﻿ing with the pharmacist first to make sure it won’t affect your blood pressure or worsen any other health conditions. 8. Humidifier Another cold﻿ weather must: a ﻿mini humidifier, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says can ease a sore throat and cough brought on by common cold viruses. Steaming up the bathroom with a hot shower will also do the trick in a pinch. ﻿ Do﻿’s and don’ts for cold and flu season Do clean out your medicine cabinet and get rid of any old or unused drugs. Check expiration dates — anything that’s beyond﻿ its date can lose effectiveness, according to the FDA﻿. “If there are things that are expired, get rid of those medicines and replace them with new medicines that will be more effective and safe,” O’Rourke says. Don’t reach for an old prescription to treat a new illness. Taking antibiotics when you don’t need them, for example, can contribute to antibiotic resistance and cause a number of side effects. Pain medications like Percocet contain acetaminophen, and if you’re taking that already as a fever reducer or pain reliever, you could be getting too much. “It’s just really a good idea not to take any prescription medicine unless you talk to your doctor,” Weber says. Do make sure you stay on top of refills for your other prescription medications so you don’t have to venture out and refill routine medicines when you are ill. “It’s always appropriate to ensure that you have an adequate supply of the prescription medications for your chronic conditions﻿, because I wouldn’t want you feeling even worse if there’s a medicine that you need and you’ve run out of﻿ it and you’re feeling too ill to go out and get it,” O’Rourke says. Editor’s note: This article, originally published Oct. 28, 2021, has been updated with new information. %{postComment}% Rachel Nania is an award-winning health editor and writer at AARP.org, who covers a range of topics including diseases and treatments. Unlock Access to AARP Members Edition Join AARP to Continue Already a Member? Login AARP NEWSLETTERS %{ newsLetterPromoText }% %{ description }% Subscribe See All Newsletters Privacy Policy AARP NEWSLETTERS %{ newsLetterPromoText }% %{ description }% Subscribe See All Newsletters Privacy Policy More From AARP FDA Approves At-Home Flu Vaccine Why ﻿older adults will﻿ benefit even though it’s only for people under 50 A Combo COVID-Flu Vaccine Could Be Here Soon A single shot could boost immune response and vaccination rates MEMBERS ONLY What It’s Like to Catch COVID Over and Over He’s had four bouts so far, and he says it has changed him MEMBERS ONLY { "maxItems":3, "itemsPerRow":"3", "rows":"4", "loadMore":"6", "adsNum":"0", "resultsLength":"3" } Recommended for You ARTICLE CONTINUES AFTER ADVERTISEMENT { "articlePagePath" :"/content/aarpe/en/home/health/drugs-supplements/info-2021/cold-and-flu-medicine", "aarpId" : "465e02c491b8ed5288a4cd1a04bcb3de" "customContainerId" : "" "limit" : "5" "paginationLimit" : "5" "replyLimit" : "2" "paginationReplyLimit" : "5" "sort" : "" "featuredTabActiveThreshold" : "5" } Benefits Recommended For You See All HOT DEALS SAVE MONEY WITH THESE LIMITED-TIME OFFERS See All Hot Deals AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization that empowers people to choose how they live as they age. About Us Donate Volunteer Membership AARP Rewards Advertise with AARP Contact Us Careers at AARP AARP Services Inc. Policy & Research Newsletters AARP In Your City AARP En Español AARP樂齡會 Press Center AARP Foundation Wish of a Lifetime Senior Planet | OATS AgeTech Collaborative™ Legal Counsel for the Elderly Sitemap Privacy Policy Terms of Service Accessibility Statement AARP Rewards Terms & Conditions Copyright Information Vulnerability Disclosure Program Ad Choices Your Privacy Choices Cobrowse Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedInBird flu confirmed at Worcestershire wild bird centre - BBC NewsBBC HomepageSkip to contentAccessibility HelpYour accountHomeNewsSportEarthReelWorklifeTravelMore menuMore menuSearch BBCHomeNewsSportEarthReelWorklifeTravelCultureFutureMusicTVWeatherSoundsClose menuBBC NewsMenuHomeIsrael-Gaza warWar in UkraineClimateVideoWorldAsiaUKBusinessTechMoreScienceEntertainment & ArtsHealthWorld News TVIn PicturesBBC VerifyNewsbeatEnglandRegionsHereford & WorcesterBird flu confirmed at Worcestershire wild bird centrePublished26 October 2021Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingImage source, Getty ImagesImage caption, The UK's chief veterinary officer confirmed the case of avian influenza at a wild bird rescue centre in Worcestershire on TuesdayBird flu has been confirmed at a wild bird rescue centre in Worcestershire.The premises does not supply poultry, meat or eggs to the commercial food chain, says the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), which has not named the site. A six-mile (10km) control zone has been put in place around the site to limit the risk of any spread of the disease.Birds there are to be humanely culled, it has been confirmed.Wild birds migrating to the UK from mainland Europe during the winter can carry the disease which can lead to cases in poultry and other captive birds.The risk to people is low, authorities say. Latest news and updates from the West MidlandsThe UK's chief veterinary officer Christine Middlemiss said: "H5N1 avian influenza has been confirmed at a wild bird rescue centre in Worcestershire. "We have taken swift action to limit the spread of the disease and any birds at risk of infection will now be humanely culled. "UK Health Security Agency has confirmed that the risk to public health is very low and the Food Standards Agency has said that bird flu poses a very low risk to food safety for UK consumers."As winter approached, bird keepers should be mindful of the disease and report any suspicions to their vets, she added.Follow BBC West Midlands on Facebook, external, Twitter, external and Instagram, external. Send your story ideas to: newsonline.westmidlands@bbc.co.uk, externalMore on this storyBird flu cases confirmed in dead swansPublished9 December 2020Bird flu killed wild birds in south west EnglandPublished11 November 2020Dutch and German farms cull flocks over bird fluPublished5 November 2020Related internet linksDepartment for Environment, Food & Rural AffairsThe BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.From other local news sitesBikers left without motorbikes after city business leaves workshopExternalWorcester NewsTraffic wardens will monitor 'horrendous' pump track parking after complaintsExternalWorcester NewsHereford shoplifter fined for stealing ice creamExternalHereford TimesHerefordshire homeowner CANNOT cut down tree just metres from homeExternalHereford TimesIN PICTURES - Wythall community turns out to pay its respects on Remembrance SundayExternalBromsgrove StandardFestive fun across Bromsgrove district as council announces Christmas lights switch-on timesExternalBromsgrove StandardInformation about BBC links to other news sitesTop storiesLive.Â Trump allies back Senate leader contender, while House control hangs in the balanceMoscow targeted as Ukraine and Russia trade huge drone attacksPublished1 hour agoEnergy smart meter issues creating north-south dividePublished58 minutes agoMore to exploreâI lost nine teeth filming Squid Gameâ: BBC on set with showâs directorThe Papers: Kate's 'solemn duty' and PM to hold talks with MacronEnergy smart meter issues creating north-south divideâCatfish killer used my photo to trap other girlsâMTV EMAs: Eight bits of gossip we uncovered on the nightPower in the Palms: Inside the pilgrimage to Mar-a-Lago'I was moderating hundreds of horrific and traumatising videos'Will new battery-powered trains replace diesel, and are they safe?'Dying of thirst' as climate-driven floods mix with oilElsewhere on the BBCThe rise and fall of KodakKodak made photography mainstream, so why did it falter in a digital age?A disappearance that has mystified police for 50 yearsIs the son of victim Sandra Rivett about to solve the case of the fugitive aristocrat, Lucan?What will come after the International Space Station?It will be decommissioned in 2030, ending more than three decades of international cooperationSteve Backshall attempts his most extreme challengeThe adventurer embarks on exploring Venezuela's ancient, sheer-sided mountainsMost read1Energy smart meter issues creating north-south divide2Mattel 'deeply regrets' porn site misprint on Wicked dolls3Kate's 'solemn duty' and PM to hold talks with Macron4Paddy McGuinness: Chris Hoy training pushed me to 'absolute limits'5Rita Ora is tearful in tribute to Liam Payne at MTV Awards6âCatfish killer used my photo to trap other girlsâ7âI lost nine teeth filming Squid Gameâ: BBC on set with showâs director8Moscow targeted as Ukraine and Russia trade huge drone attacks9'I was moderating hundreds of horrific and traumatising videos'10Jamie Oliver pulls 'offensive' children's book from saleBBC News ServicesOn your mobileOn smart speakersGet news alertsContact BBC NewsHomeNewsSportEarthReelWorklifeTravelCultureFutureMusicTVWeatherSoundsTerms of UseAbout the BBCPrivacy PolicyCookiesAccessibility HelpParental GuidanceContact the BBCGet Personalised NewslettersWhy you can trust the BBCAdvertise with usÂ© 2024 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Flu cases on the rise; doctors say wearing mask and washing hands are a must | Flu cases on the rise; doctors say wearing mask and washing hands are a must Top , e-PaperCorporate Insolvency Resolution Process HomeFact CheckSouthAndhra PradeshTelanganaTamil NaduKarnatakaKeralaNationArunachal PradeshAssamBiharChhatisgarhGoaGujaratHaryanaHimachal PradeshJammu and KashmirJharkhandMadhya PradeshMaharashtraManipurMeghalayaMizoramNagalandOdishaPunjabRajasthanSikkimTripuraUttar PradeshUttarakhandWest BengalWorldSportsCricketFootballTennisOthersEntertainmentTollywoodBollywoodSandalwoodKollywoodMollywoodHollywoodMovie ReviewsTelevisionMusicTheatreOTTGalleryVideosOpinion and EditorialsColumnsDC CommentsBusinessTechnologyEducationSunday ChronicleHyderabad ChronicleIn FocusLifestyleJobsSpecial StoryEditor PickFeaturedScienceAstroguide Fact CheckSouthAndhra PradeshTelanganaTamil NaduKarnatkaKeralaNationArunachal PradeshAssamBiharChhatisgarhGoaGujaratHaryanaHimachal PradeshJammu and KashmirJharkhandMadhya PradeshMaharashtraManipurMeghalayaMizoramNagalandOdishaPunjabRajasthanSikkimTripuraUttar PradeshUttarakhandWest BengalWorldSportsCricketFootballTennisOther NewsEntertainmentTollywoodBollywoodSandalwoodKollywoodMollywoodHollywoodMovie ReviewsTelevisionMusicTheatreOTTOpinion and EditorialsDC CommentsColumnsGalleryVideosBusinessTechnologyEducationSunday ChronicleHyderabad ChronicleLifestyleJobsEditor PickSpecial StoryFeaturedScienceHome » NationFlu cases on the rise; doctors say wearing mask and washing hands are a mustNation Kaniza Garari28 Oct 2021 2:12 AM IST Influenza viruses are transmitted from poultry to humans and different strains are being noticed from time to timexDoctors say that with the fall in temperatures, there is going to be an increase in influenza viruses and people must not guard against it by not giving up the safety protocols like the mask and hand-wash, as that will protect them from the flu too. Representational Image. (AFP)Hyderabad: Flu cases are on a rise. But, apart from swine flu or H1N1, other strains are difficult to recognize as they are not being tested. With clinics and hospitals reporting flu cases in increasing numbers, experts say this is because these people might not be wearing masks properly and not doing the regular hand-wash. Influenza viruses are transmitted from poultry to humans and different strains are being noticed from time to time. Two subtypes, H1N1 and H3N2, are prevalent in the city. Dr Aarathi Bellary, head of department of Internal Medicine, SLG Hospitals, says, "People are reporting symptoms of fever, cough, breathing difficulty etc. New strains are constantly emerging as there are 18 H-sub-types and 11 N-sub-types of the influenza virus." With RTPCR tests and throat swabs being done to detect Covid19 and swine flu, medical experts say there is a need to develop more testing models for different influenza viruses. Dr Shivaraju, head of internal medicine, KIMS, says, "Flu cases are Covid-19 negative. Flu is from influenza virus A or B. Many patients come and ask us how they can get the flu when they were already vaccinated for Covid19. The vaccine given for Covid19 protects against coronavirus and not against the flu virus. Those who are wearing masks properly and washing hands regularly are protected. Those who have given up masks, as also the hand-wash are vulnerable and at risk." Doctors say people caught with flu are getting angry as they believed that the vaccine for Covid19 protected them from all flus during the winter season. The new flu strain H5N8 has been identified in Russia in December 2020 and it spreads from birds to humans. The strain was first detected in 2006 and the infected people suffered from health complications. Dr Vijay Kumar, senior pulmonologist at Apollo says, "There is a lot of concern for Covid19 and once that is ruled out, attention turns to the influenza viruses. The tested cases are mostly of swine flu or H1N1. The present flu virus is not H5N8." Doctors say that with the fall in temperatures, there is going to be an increase in influenza viruses and people must not guard against it by not giving up the safety protocols like the mask and hand-wash, as that will protect them from the flu too. ( Source : Deccan Chronicle. )India Southern States Telangana Hyderabad About the AuthorKaniza GarariLatest News Next StoryXTracking human cases of H5N6 bird flu - BNO News Home U.S. News World Politics Legal Business Entertainment Menu Contact Us BNO News Wire Service ENS Alerts Editor’s Notes E-mail alerts Live feeds Connect with us BNO News Tracking human cases of H5N6 bird flu Home U.S. NewsTrump names former ICE director Tom Homan as border czarFormer U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm from New York paralyzed after horse riding accidentDonald Trump secures 312 electoral votes with victory in ArizonaTony Todd, star of ‘Candyman’ and ‘Final Destination’, dead at 69Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in Columbus WorldStrong 6.8-magnitude earthquake hits southeast CubaGunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10Canada reports first human case of H5 bird fluIsrael signs deal to buy 25 F-15 fighter jets from BoeingBomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state says PoliticsTrump names former ICE director Tom Homan as border czarFormer U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm from New York paralyzed after horse riding accidentDonald Trump secures 312 electoral votes with victory in ArizonaBomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state saysNearly 85 million Americans vote early in 2024 election LegalGunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in ColumbusTexas Amber Alert: Jordan Maceachran missing from Hunt CountyDrunk driver hits 2 police officers at Colorado crash site, killing 1Bomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state says BusinessMcDonald’s says E. coli outbreak contained, Quarter Pounder coming backWashington Post stops endorsing presidential candidatesCloud, AI, and Data: The Triple Threat Transforming Small Business Operations7 Benefits of Attending Business ConferencesCasino Companies Continue to Fund Missouri Campaigns For and Against Sports Betting Entertainment Menu Contact Us BNO News Wire Service ENS Alerts Editor’s Notes E-mail alerts Live feeds Advertisment1 World Tracking human cases of H5N6 bird flu Published on October 28, 2021 By BNO News Micrograph of avian influenza, also known as bird flu (Credit: CDC/F.A. Murphy) Advertisment17 Share Tweet This article is updated when new cases are reported. The table below shows confirmed cases of H5N6 bird flu in humans. The first confirmed case was reported in China’s Sichuan Province in May 2014 but cases remained low until a spike in late 2021. Only one human case has been reported outside China (in Laos in March 2021). H5N6 bird flu is known to cause severe illness in humans of all ages and has killed nearly half of those infected. There are no confirmed cases of human-to-human transmission but a 61-year-old woman who tested positive in July 2021 denied having contact with live poultry. Reporting on H5N6 bird flu is limited. If you believe we have missed a case, please let us know by sending us an email at [email protected]. You can also reach us on Twitter by sending a DM to @BNODesk. Article continues below the player Definitions Reported: The date on which the case is publicly reported. Due to lags in reporting, some cases may have occurred weeks or months earlier. Click the links for more information. Related Topics:bird fluChinaH5N6 bird fluinfluenza Advertisment15 Advertisment5 Latest Politics19 mins ago Trump names former ICE director Tom Homan as border czar Politics3 hours ago Former U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm from New York paralyzed after horse riding accident World12 hours ago Strong 6.8-magnitude earthquake hits southeast Cuba Legal1 day ago Gunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10 Advertisment4 Trending World1 day ago Canada reports first human case of H5 bird flu Legal1 week ago Texas Amber Alert: Connor Young missing from Heartland Legal2 days ago Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in Columbus Advertisment6 Most Viewed World1 day ago Canada reports first human case of H5 bird flu Legal1 week ago Texas Amber Alert: Connor Young missing from Heartland Legal2 days ago Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in Columbus US News1 week ago Surfer attacked by shark near Hawaii’s Maui island, loses part of leg Entertainment7 days ago Music legend Quincy Jones, who worked with Michael Jackson, dead at 91 Legal5 days ago Bomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state says Legal1 day ago Gunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10 World12 hours ago Strong 6.8-magnitude earthquake hits southeast Cuba Copyright © 2024 BNO News, B.V. All rights reserved. About Us | Privacy Policy | Terms | BNO en Español | Contact Us Advertisment18It's Never Just a Cold for My Son With Duchenne MD Skip to content Toggle navigation About Us About MD Toggle menu What is muscular dystrophy? Causes Types Symptoms Diagnosis Living with muscular dystrophy Treatments Approved treatments Experimental treatments Non-drug treatments News Columns Toggle menu Duchenne: Shalom’s Lifelong Partner-in-Crime — Shalom Lim Ern Rong Muscle Memoirs: LGMD Experiences — Patrick Moeschen Party of 9 — Betty Vertin Working Through the Process — Robin Stemple Archived columns Bloom – Prudence Jones Hawk’s-Eye View – Hawken Miller Hidden Truths – Adeel Rizvi Of Dragons and Dystrophin – Andy Rusch Caregiver’s guide Toggle menu Navigating school with DMD Caring for someone with DMD Navigating DMD as a family Raising a child with DMD Daily life with DMD Resources and support Exon-skipping therapies Gene therapy Self-care as a caregiver Transitioning to adulthood DMD and GI issues Service animals Adaptive living Toggle menu DMD care plan DMD myths and facts Managing osteoporosis Personal stories Assistive technology Home adaptations Love and relationships with DMD Forums Advocacy partners Search Close drawer What can we help you find today? Search for: Search Search Search for: Search Columns Party of 9 – a Column by Betty Vertin It’s Never Just a Cold It’s Never Just a Cold by Betty Vertin | October 29, 2021 I have shared many times in this column that I have three sons with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. People sometimes think I’m an expert on the subject. But the truth is that my boys are unique, and Duchenne has affected each of them differently. Their disease progression and weakening muscles have taken unique courses. So, instead of making me an expert, my experience has made me acutely aware of Duchenne’s vastly different expressions. Every time I think I’ve figured it out, one of my sons will experience something new that neither brother has experienced. I’m not an expert, but I’m constantly learning. A significant difference between my three sons with Duchenne is how they respond to illness. Max, my 15-year-old, and Charlie, my 10-year-old, both respond pretty typically to cold or flu symptoms, with just a slightly longer recovery time than the average kid. However, Rowen, my 12-year-old, gets very sick. The stress on his body as he tries to fight infection completely exhausts him. Healing happens very slowly when his body is so tired. Upon hearing the slightest sniffle out of him, my husband and I go into keep-him-out-of-the-hospital mode. We immediately start to prepare for the worst-case scenario — that his cold will turn into a breathing problem, and he will have to go to the hospital. Recommended Reading October 14, 2021 News by Yedida Y Bogachkov PhD Sustained Gains for DMD Boys Evident in SRP-9001 Trials: Sarepta We move his cough assist machine to the living room and begin diffusing certain essential oils that can help with respiratory illness in the rooms he frequents. We review care guidelines on the Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy website, and then we wait, because with Rowen, it’s never just a cold. Once the sniffle worsens, causing him to feel unwell, we start a stress dose of his already prescribed steroid, under the advice and guidance of a doctor, of course. Our boys’ neuromuscular clinic has an endocrinology office that trains parents of children taking corticosteroids on how and when to stress dose. Rowen will sometimes miss a week of school or more as we nurse him through a cold. He is on day six of a cold right now, thus prompting the idea for this column. Thanks to the weekend and a scheduled day off school, he has missed only four school days. He might have missed more if the sniffles had started on a Sunday night instead of a Wednesday. We took him to the doctor today, and they started him on a “Z-Pak” (azithromycin) in addition to the stress dose of corticosteroids. So, we hope he is back in school soon and stays the heck out of the hospital. Our fear that a cold will hospitalize Rowen is genuine. In January 2020, he started to feel much like he does this week. He had a sore throat, runny nose, and then a cough. At that point, we didn’t know how to stress dose at home, so he ended up in the hospital with influenza and pneumonia. Thank goodness it was only for about 24 hours, but it was still too much. Not to mention that being on the autism spectrum makes unplanned hospitalizations and IV needles, which remained inserted for the duration of his hospital stay, unbearable for Rowen. In the future, we decided we would ask our doctor to only keep an IV in while administering meds. Rowen would rather have the needle put in repeatedly than keep it in his vein for any longer than necessary. I’m not sure how my husband, Jason, feels, but I feel responsible, like we could’ve avoided the hospital entirely if I had a better grasp on what we should be doing for Rowen at home. But as I have learned and reminded myself often during our journey with Duchenne, you don’t know what you don’t know. I could write an entire column — a series of columns, actually — just by listing the things I didn’t know about caring for a child with Duchenne until they happened. Although I feel responsible, looking back at that experience and at all the knowledge I gained, I’m glad I learned what I did. Duchenne is progressive, and we will experience more significant medical crises as we continue down this road. The experience gained is packed away in my caregiver’s brain, and it will be there the next time I need it. *** Note: Muscular Dystrophy News is strictly a news and information website about the disease. It does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. This content is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Always seek the advice of your physician or another qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The opinions expressed in this column are not those of Muscular Dystrophy News or its parent company, Bionews, and are intended to spark discussion about issues pertaining to muscular dystrophy. Print This Page About the Author Betty Vertin Betty Vertin is a mother and writer living in rural Hastings, Nebraska, with her husband and seven children. Betty is a caregiver to three sons, Max, Rowen, and Charlie. Her oldest was diagnosed with Duchenne muscular dystrophy in 2010 at 4 years old. The other boys were diagnosed with the same in the following year. Although Duchenne occasionally crashes the party, it has not kept her large family from celebrating and enjoying life. She writes her column in hopes of sharing her family’s experiences with others on a similar journey. Tags autism, colds, corticosteroids, hospitalization, Influenza virus, knowledge, learning, Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy Comments cindy curr My son also used to get very ill with colds, we started giving him Lysine at even a hint of colds going around and he hasn't had a severe cold in years. Reply Betty Vertin Thank you for sharing that Cindy! Reply Betty Vertin Thank you for sharing this. Reply Leave a comment Fill in the required fields to post. Your email address will not be published. Your Name Your Email Your Comment Post Comment Recent Posts The missed milestones in the teenage years because of DMD Patients with certain mutations lose their walking ability earlier: Study I always try to pause to appreciate the small victories Supporting artists with disabilities through a new business venture Phase 1/2 trial of del-brax enrolling new, possibly pivotal FSHD group As a Duchenne mom, I know I can do hard things CureDuchenne partners on World of Warcraft research fundraiser My trip to the Idlewild amusement park was wild, but worth it FDA awards LAMA2-CMD therapy MDL-101 orphan drug status Duchenne affects my entire life, down to a DIY project Recommended reading November 7, 2024 News by Margarida Maia, PhD Patients with certain mutations lose their walking ability earlier: Study November 6, 2024 Columns by Robin Stemple I always try to pause to appreciate the small victories November 6, 2024 Columns by Shalom Lim Supporting artists with disabilities through a new business venture Envelope icon Subscribe to our newsletter Get regular updates to your inbox. Your Email SubscribeLeave this field empty if you're human: Bionews, Inc. 3 W Garden St Suite 700 Pensacola, FL 32502 Website: bionews.com Email: [email protected] Phone: 1-800-936-1363 About Us Leadership Our Culture Editorial Policy Advertising Policy Corrections Policy Terms of Service Privacy Policy Careers Contact Us Disclaimer This site is strictly a news and information website about the disease. It does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. This content is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. Copyright © 2013-2024 All rights reserved. We use cookies to enhance your experience on our website. Privacy PolicyAcceptEligible for a free flu vaccine this winter? Don’t wait, book it. – UK Health Security Agency Skip to main content GOV.UK Blog UK Health Security Agency Organisations: UK Health Security Agency Search blog https://ukhsa.blog.gov.uk/2021/10/29/eligible-for-a-free-flu-vaccine-this-winter-dont-wait-book-it/ Eligible for a free flu vaccine this winter? Don’t wait, book it. Posted by: Blog Editor, Posted on: 29 October 2021 - Categories: Coronavirus (COVID-19), flu, Winter With flu and COVID-19 expected to be in wide circulation together this winter, we are urging more people than ever to get their free flu vaccine, if they are eligible. In this blog we answer some common questions about this year’s flu season. Why are we expecting a difficult winter? This is the first winter when COVID-19 and seasonal flu will be circulating together without a nationwide lockdown which helped to stop the spread last year. Flu is unpredictable and levels of activity vary from year to year. However, health experts warn that this winter we could see a resurgence of flu following low levels last winter. Different strains of flu are present each year and we’ve got less population immunity after very little flu last year. At the same time, fewer people than last year are social distancing and wearing masks. We also know that people who are infected with both COVID-19 and flu are at a higher risk of dying – so if you are eligible it is critical that you get your flu jab as well as any COVID-19 vaccine doses that you are due to have. What can you do to protect yourself and others? The best way to protect yourself and others is to get vaccinated, ideally in the autumn or early winter before flu starts spreading. It is also important to stick to good habits, like wearing masks in crowded spaces and regularly washing your hands. If you do get ill, you need to avoid mixing with others to stop passing it on. Stay hydrated, stay warm, and call 111 if you are concerned, especially if you have underlying health conditions, are pregnant or are 65 years old and over. Taking measures such as staying at home if possible while unwell can reduce the spread of infection. There are some settings, for example care homes, where staff will need to stay off work if they are symptomatic in a flu outbreak and residents will be asked to isolate if they test positive for flu, as set out in guidance published by the UKHSA. Who is eligible for a vaccine? In England, more than 35 million people are now eligible for a free flu vaccine and so far 7.5 million people have been invited to take up an offer of a free COVID-19 booster jab. More than 80% of people aged 65 and over had their flu jab last year in the UK – exceeding a global target of 75% – and we have a target of reaching at least 85% of this group this flu season. We also strongly encourage other eligible groups to get their vaccines, including people with underlying health conditions, such as asthma and heart disease, pregnant women and eligible children (2 and 3 year olds; and schoolchildren aged up to year 11). Schoolchildren should receive their flu vaccine at school. If you are eligible for a free flu vaccine, you may get it either from your own GP practice or any pharmacy offering NHS flu vaccinations. Some people may receive an invitation to come forward for a vaccination from their GP surgery or by letter. However, you do not have to wait to be invited before booking an appointment at your GP practice or pharmacy. Frontline health and social care worker should be offered the flu vaccine through their employer. They may be able to get it at their workplace or through another local service. Health or social care workers employed by a registered residential care or nursing home, registered homecare organisation or hospice and anyone providing health or social care through direct payments or personal health budgets can also have it at a GP surgery or a pharmacy. Do pregnant women need a flu vaccination this year? All pregnant women should have the flu vaccine to protect themselves and their babies. Pregnancy alters how the body handles infections such as flu. Flu infection increases the chances of pregnant women and their babies needing intensive care. The flu vaccine can be given safely at any stage of pregnancy, from conception onwards. Pregnant women benefit from the flu vaccine because it can: reduce their risk of serious complications such as pneumonia, particularly in the later stages of pregnancy reduce the risk of miscarriage, the baby being stillborn or premature help protect their baby who will continue to have some immunity to flu during the first few months of their life reduce the chance of the mother passing infection to her new baby What flu vaccines are available in the UK? There are several types of flu vaccine. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) reviews the latest evidence on influenza vaccines every year and recommends the type of vaccine to be offered to patients. Recommended vaccines vary according to age. You will be offered one that is most effective for you. children aged 2 to 17 years old are offered a quick and painless nasal spray vaccine. adults aged 18 to 64 at greater risk from flu – there are different types including low egg and egg free vaccines. adults aged 65 years and over are usually offered a vaccine that contains an adjuvant that helps the immune system create a stronger response to the vaccine. It is offered to people in this age group because their immune systems tend to respond less well to vaccines. Some children cannot have the nasal spray so they will be offered an injected vaccine instead. And children under the age of 2 years who are in a high-risk group for flu will also be offered an injected flu vaccine as the nasal spray is not licensed for children under 2 years old. What should you do if you are unsure whether you’ve got flu or COVID-19? If you are unwell with cold and flu like symptoms, try to stay at home if you can, until you are better to stop passing it on to others. Some COVID-19 and flu symptoms overlap, so get a PCR test, if you experience: a high temperature a new, continuous cough a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste If you have any of the above symptoms, stay at home until you receive your result. If your PCR test result is negative but you still have symptoms, you should avoid mixing with others until you feel well. Is it safe to get the flu jab and COVID-19 jab close together? The flu programme will run alongside the COVID-19 booster programme. Mostly, the patients eligible for the COVID-19 booster are also eligible for a flu vaccine. In some areas, people may be offered the COVID-19 jab in one arm and the flu vaccine in the other on the same day, although this will not be available in every area. Doing them at the same time is generally fine. However, it is important that you do not delay either vaccine in the expectation that you can have them together. As is the case with any vaccination, it is not a good idea to be vaccinated whilst you are ill from something else. It’s advisable to wait until you recover before booking your appointment. Do people get tested for flu in the UK? Flu is usually diagnosed on clinical signs and symptoms rather than tests. These symptoms can include fever, cough, runny/blocked nose, sore throat, tummy or intestinal symptoms (more commonly in children), and generalised symptoms (headache, tiredness or muscle pain). Flu symptoms can come on quickly. Flu testing is mainly done as part of clinical care for inpatients, A&E patients or people with risk factors such as severely impaired immune systems. For suspected care home influenza outbreaks, testing can be done in regional public health laboratories. Further information The NHS website has more information on flu and the vaccination programme. Responding to the challenge of cold weather and winter Transparency and data – UKHSA’s vaccines report Sharing and comments Share this page Twitter Facebook LinkedIn Email Related content and links About this blogThe official blog of the UK Health Security Agency, providing expert insight on the organisation's work and all aspects of health security. Sign up and manage updates Email Atom Recent posts How we monitor flu and other respiratory viruses each winter 8 October 2024 Marburg virus disease: what you need to know 8 October 2024 Your guide to who’s eligible for the 2024 flu vaccine 23 September 2024 Useful links All GOV.UK blogs All GOV.UK blog posts GOV.UK All departments Accessibility statement Cookies All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated © Crown copyrightUK raises risk level for highly-pathogenic bird flu - FarmingUK News News Featured Shows Directory Magazines Farm Shops Courses Property Jobs Search Dashboard Edit Profile My Listings My Favourites Log Out X Login Register Coming Soon Login Register Popular Categories Agri-Courses Dairy Farm Attractions Farms & Land for Sale Featured News Holiday Rentals Housing and Storage Jobs Magazines Poultry Shows Politics × Home News Featured Shows Directory App Magazines Farm Shops Courses Property Jobs Advertise × Dashboard Edit Profile My Listings My Favourites Log Out UK raises risk level for highly-pathogenic bird flu 28 October 2021 | by FarmingUK Team | Animal Health, News, Poultry Defra has raised its official risk level for high path avian influenza in the UK following the outbreak The official risk level for highly pathogenic bird flu has been raised following the spread of the virus amongst wild birds on the migration route to the UK.Highly pathogenic H5N1 was discovered at a site near Droitwich Spa, Worcestershire. A three kilometre protection and a 10km surveillance zone are in force around the premises.UK chief veterinary officer Christine Middlemiss said: “H5N1 avian influenza has been confirmed at a wild bird rescue centre in Worcestershire. We have taken swift action to limit the spread of the disease and any birds at risk of infection will now be humanely culled.“UK Health Security Agency has confirmed that the risk to public health is very low and the Food Standards Agency has said that bird flu poses a very low risk to food safety for UK consumers.“As we move into the higher risk period over winter bird keepers should pay extra attention to the health of their birds. Anybody who suspects disease should report it to their vet or APHA immediately."The best way to tackle this disease is for poultry keepers to ensure that they have strong biosecurity measures in place.”The discovery coincided with Defra’s latest situation update on avian influenza. The department said that “while there have been no further HPAI H5N8 outbreaks in captive birds in north-east France, Belgium and Luxembourg since our last report, HPAI H5N1 is spreading in wild birds along the wildfowl migration flyway in northern Germany and Denmark.”It warned “there is evidence that there have been significant changes in the epidemiology of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5 in Europe.”As a result of the developments, Defra raised its official risk level for high path avian influenza. “There is evidence that there have been significant changes in HPAI H5 epidemiology in Europe to warrant increasing the risk of incursion of HPAI H5 via wild birds in GB from low to medium."“The risk of poultry and captive bird exposure to HPAI H5 across the whole GB is still low (with medium uncertainty) where biosecurity is sub-optimal, and low (with low uncertainty) where stringent biosecurity measures are applied. "We are in a period of rapid seasonal change with respect to these risks and will continue to closely monitor the situation. "This increase in wild bird risk incursion coincides with the proposed decrease in threshold of collecting reported dead wild birds from five to just one from the list of target species, thereby increasing the sensitivity of detection of the wild bird surveillance scheme.”They said that with ongoing detections in wild bird populations not only in central Asia and southern Russia, but also nearer to Britain in northern Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands, together with the imminent arrival of more migratory waterfowl, the risk level to Britain may well increase further through the autumn and into the winter.The UK’s chief veterinary officers had recently urged poultry keepers to take action to reduce the risk of avian flu over the winter. They said the risk of migratory wild birds infecting domestic poultry would rise and it was vital that poultry farmers and bird keepers took action to improve biosecurity standards.In its latest situation report, Defra said that species affected by spreading bird flu in northern Europe would be migrating further west into Britain. Many have already arrived, with high numbers of wigeon still expected across GB, peaking in December,” said Defra in its report.“Furthermore, this H5N1 strain in wild birds requires full characterisation to determine the genetic relationships in comparison to H5N1 viruses detected in spring/summer to establish if they have derived from local recrudescence or relate to new introductions to Europe of a related or identical virus,” it said.Defra said HPAI H5 infection in Europe over the autumn/winter season of 2020/2021 was unprecedented. There were numerous positive HPAI H5 incidents reported in domestic poultry and wild birds through spring and summer particularly in the low countries of north-west Europe and the Baltic Sea coast. "These events, said Defra, were most probably linked to “extensive infection pressure from the winter period and environmental survival of virus including near to poultry production premises. The UK reported 24 outbreaks in poultry and captive birds during autumn/winter 2020/2021.”In the autumn period of 2021 the first H5N1 reported cases were in barnacle geese in southern Finland in early September, perhaps representing the start of a new wave of HPAI spreading west in migratory waterbirds. Subsequently Germany reported H5N1 HPAI to OIE in unidentified wild geese species in Schleswig-Holstein on its north-west coast in mid-October. There have also been reports of further cases of H5N1 in wild ducks in north-west Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands.Outbreaks of H5N1 in poultry have also been reported in Europe. There has been an outbreak of H5N1 in turkeys in October in northern Italy. This involved a flock of nearly 13,000 turkeys in the province of Verona. Another case was in backyard birds in the Czech Republic at the end of September.Finland reported four events of H5N1 detected in late September in ring-necked pheasants, including three groups of several thousand birds released as game birds earlier this year. Elsewhere in Europe, H5N1 has been detected in a white-tailed eagle in Estonia in mid-October. Russia has reported 18 H5/H5N1 events in captive backyard/village birds and three H5 outbreaks in poultry farms starting late September/early October. Ukraine has reported an H5 outbreak in backyard birds detected in mid-October.The UK’s four chief veterinary officers published a joint statement, in which they said: “Avian flu is a continued threat to all poultry keepers, and as winter approaches we need to be ready for the increased risk of disease that migrating birds pose to our flocks.“We encourage keepers across the UK to implement strong biosecurity practices now, including regular shed maintenance checks, cleaning and disinfecting footwear and signing up for our email and text alerts. "Making these tasks a regular fixture of your disease control plans now will make a significant difference in the fight against avian flu this winter and for years to come.”A detailed investigation is in progress to determine the most likely source of the outbreak. × Popular 1 / 1 CONTACT THE AUTHOR Please contact the news editor Daniel Wild by emailing daniel.wild@farminguk.com or ringing 01484 400666 if you have a query regarding the content of this news article. Become a fan on Facebook CONNECT WITH US Follow us on Twitter CONNECT WITH US Follow us on Instagram CONNECT WITH US Subscribe to us on YouTube CONNECT WITH US Main News Featured Shows Jobs Farms & Land Courses Publications FarmingUK Magazine IT Farmer Land, Law & Finance Best of British Special Publications Directory Contact Get in Touch Advertise Cookies Policy Customer Service Site Info Privacy Policy RSS feeds Site Map Visitor Logs Follow FarmingUK App Facebook Twitter Instagram News Holiday Rentals Courses Featured Farms & Land Get in Touch Advertise App Attractions Shows Jobs Directory Twitter RSS feeds Visitor Logs Customer Service Farm Shops Map Magazines Land, Law & Finance Privacy Policy Facebook Cookies Policy Site Map Copyright © 2024 FARMINGUK. Owned by Agrios Ltd. Advertising Sales by Red Hen Promotions Ltd - 01484 4006665 common myths about colds and flu debunked | ArabiaWeather | ArabiaWeather English Choose Language العربية English French log in | New Account Home Weather 14 Day Forecast Hourly Weather Weather News Local Weather News Arabia Weather News Global Weather News Climate and environment climate change environment energy weather science Around The World events and disasters nature animals and insects your health and weather Travel & Tourism miscellaneous Scientific science and technology astronomy and space facts and curiosities Question & Answer Specialists & Amateurs موطني مُنبه الغُبار أضف خبراً Bader System Weather Stations Elevation of Your Area Earthquake Observatory المنتديات Satellite Q&A log in Home Weather News Satellite 14 Day Forecast Hourly Weather Advertising Blocker Detected We have detected that you are using an Adblock browser plugin to disable ads from loading on our website. The revenue earned from advertising enables us to provide the quality content you are trying to reach on this website. If you prefer to remove ads, you can support the site by subscribing to the premium package, which in turn will not only stop the ads from appearing on the site, but also enable you to get many other additional benefits. Subscribe Now Continue 5 common myths about colds and flu debunked 2021-10-28 2021-10-28T13:16:00Z رنا السيلاوي محرر أخبار - قسم التواصل الاجتماعي Share Share Weather of Arabia - colds and influenza are viral diseases that affect the respiratory system, and they are seasonal diseases that are commonly infected during the fall and winter, and although they are common diseases, there are many myths associated with them, and the following are the facts behind five common myths about Influenza and colds: Myth #1: Antibiotics treat the flu and colds As mentioned earlier, the flu and colds are caused by a viral infection. Antibiotics are only effective against bacteria, so taking antibiotics will not help at all in treating the flu or cold. Antiviral medications can be used to prevent and treat influenza, after consulting a doctor. Not everyone who gets the flu needs antiviral medication, as it is often used in people at risk of developing complications related to the flu. Myth 2: The flu is like a cold Influenza is actually one of the leading causes of death in the world, and infection may require hospitalization, especially among young children, the elderly and people with pre-existing health conditions, such as asthma, heart disease and diabetes, are more likely to develop serious and severe cases of influenza. But even in young, healthy adults, a flu infection is much more than a cold. People with the flu have additional symptoms that are different from those of the common cold, such as fever, while a severe cold may bother you for a few days, and most people with severe colds last While most people with the flu end up on the couch or bed for a few days with high fever, body aches and a cough, general weakness in the body may persist in some people for weeks afterward. Myth #3: Going out with wet hair will catch a cold or the flu That you catch a cold or the flu as soon as you go out with your hair wet is nothing but a myth, but there are some factors associated with wet hair that may put you at risk of infection. Exposing you to cold air and wet hair makes you feel cold, which weakens the immune system, and gives an opportunity for infectious germs to attack the body, so keep your body Warm, it is a good line of defense against the winter cold. Myth 4: Vitamin C supplements prevent the flu Unfortunately, there is no scientific evidence to support the idea that vitamin C prevents the flu or the common cold. To avoid the flu, try these steps: Wash your hands frequently Avoid touching the eyes, nose and mouth stay away from sick Myth 5: Eating dairy makes colds worse Drinking milk can make phlegm thicker when you have a cold, which makes you feel more congested, but it does not cause more phlegm to be produced, and doctors often recommend dairy products to patients because they are rich in calories, and they can compensate for the negative effects of losing appetite. This article was written originally in Arabic and is translated using a 3rd party automated service. ArabiaWeather is not responsible for any grammatical errors whatsoever. See More Related News Trends.. Saudi woman draws attention with eating challenge amid warning from nutrition experts 2024-11-10 Saudi Arabia | Celebrating the rainy season: White Matariyah meal in Hail 2024-11-10 Four active tropical systems in the Pacific Ocean, all threatening the Philippines Jordan | Chance of fog formation at dawn and Monday morning in the southern Badia regions and the desert road Arabia Weather App Download the app to receive weather notifications and more.. Android IOS Huawei Home صحتك والطقس 5 common myths about colds and flu debunked About US Advertise With Us Frequent Questions Question & Answer Contact Us Jobs Business Solutions Archive Rain Radar Terms of Use Privacy Policy Crowdsourcing Posts العربية English French Follow Us Facebook Twitter Instagram Youtube Linkedin Google Play Store App Store Huawei Store All Rights Reserved © 2024 ArabiaWeather Inc.