Offspring born to influenza A virus infected pregnant mice have increased susceptibility to viral and bacterial infections in early life | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Offspring born to influenza A virus infected pregnant mice have increased susceptibility to viral and bacterial infections in early life Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 16 August 2021 Offspring born to influenza A virus infected pregnant mice have increased susceptibility to viral and bacterial infections in early life Henning Jacobsen1, Kerstin Walendy-Gnirß1, Nilgün Tekin-Bubenheim1, Nancy Mounogou Kouassi1, Isabel Ben-Batalla2,3, Nikolaus Berenbrok2,3, Martin Wolff ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0035-87264, Vinicius Pinho dos Reis1, Martin Zickler1, Lucas Scholl1, Annette Gries1, Hanna Jania1, Andreas Kloetgen ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0991-44425, Arne Düsedau6, Gundula Pilnitz-Stolze7, Aicha Jeridi8,9, Ali Önder Yildirim ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1969-480X8,9, Helmut Fuchs ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-5143-267710, Valerie Gailus-Durner ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6076-011110, Claudia Stoeger10, Martin Hrabe de Angelis ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7898-235310,11,12, Tatjana Manuylova13, Karin Klingel13, Fiona J. Culley ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5208-425914, Jochen Behrends ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0648-891115, Sonja Loges2,16,17, Bianca Schneider18, Susanne Krauss-Etschmann4,19, Peter Openshaw ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7220-255514 & …Gülsah Gabriel ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0542-80331,20,21 Show authors Nature Communications volume 12, Article number: 4957 (2021) Cite this article 6755 Accesses 26 Citations 56 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Alveolar macrophagesImmunological surveillanceMucosal immunologyPathogensVirus–host interactions AbstractInfluenza during pregnancy can affect the health of offspring in later life, among which neurocognitive disorders are among the best described. Here, we investigate whether maternal influenza infection has adverse effects on immune responses in offspring. We establish a two-hit mouse model to study the effect of maternal influenza A virus infection (first hit) on vulnerability of offspring to heterologous infections (second hit) in later life. Offspring born to influenza A virus infected mothers are stunted in growth and more vulnerable to heterologous infections (influenza B virus and MRSA) than those born to PBS- or poly(I:C)-treated mothers. Enhanced vulnerability to infection in neonates is associated with reduced haematopoetic development and immune responses. In particular, alveolar macrophages of offspring exposed to maternal influenza have reduced capacity to clear second hit pathogens. This impaired pathogen clearance is partially reversed by adoptive transfer of alveolar macrophages from healthy offspring born to uninfected dams. These findings suggest that maternal influenza infection may impair immune ontogeny and increase susceptibility to early life infections of offspring. Similar content being viewed by others Prenatal immune activation in mice induces long-term alterations in brain mitochondrial function Article Open access 16 July 2024 Influenza A virus during pregnancy disrupts maternal intestinal immunity and fetal cortical development in a dose- and time-dependent manner Article Open access 03 July 2024 Behavioral, neuroanatomical, and molecular correlates of resilience and susceptibility to maternal immune activation Article Open access 23 November 2020 IntroductionInfluenza A viruses are some of the most prevalent viruses circulating during winter and causing annual epidemics with up to five million severe cases every year1. Although most healthy individuals will only experience mild to moderate disease upon influenza virus infection, pregnant women are at increased risk of developing severe complications2,3. Allogeneic pregnancy creates a unique immunological situation since the placenta expresses paternal antigens while being in direct contact to the maternal immune system. To tolerate the foreign tissue, the maternal immune system needs to mount many processes of immune adaptation and tolerance4,5.These changes collectively orchestrate an anti-inflammatory and tolerogenic environment that allows placental development and suppresses fetal rejection6. Importantly, this state of adapted immunity leads to increased vulnerability towards infection that can ultimately create a contradictory demand of maintaining fetal tolerance versus mounting an inflammatory immune response7. The interplay of maternal influenza A virus (IAV) infection and pregnancy-related immune adaptation in a mouse allogeneic pregnancy model that mimics clinical findings was reported recently8.Importantly, maternal influenza might also be harmful to the unborn child with unforeseeable consequences for offspring’s health. It is known that maternal immune activation (MIA) defined by elevated pro-inflammatory cytokine responses (e.g. IL-6, IL-17A) that might be induced by external stressors of various etiology is a major contributor to neurodevelopmental disorders in the offspring9,10,11,12,13. Epidemiological studies implicate an increased risk for schizophrenia or autism-like disorders in offspring born to prenatally infected mothers14,15. Thus, there is increasing knowledge that this phenomenon is likely not restricted to neurodevelopmental disease. The association of in utero environmental stress and disease outcome in later life is thought to affect later life through fetal programming.Recent studies strengthen the hypothesis that maternal infection may prime the developing immune system by mechanisms that go beyond the sole transfer of maternal antibodies16. In utero exposure to maternal inflammatory markers, such as cytokines and chemokines, has been reported to affect fetal immune cell activation. MIA seems to increase the concentration of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-2, IL-6, and TNF and to delay the development of innate immunity in the offspring17,18. There is also evidence that the maturation of the adaptive immune system might be influenced by the preferential development of Th17 cells in MIA offspring19. Notably, to induce MIA during pregnancy most studies utilize syngenically mated mice and artificial immune activators8,20. In most animal studies, polyriboinosinic-polyribocytidilic acid (poly(I:C)) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is used as a MIA inducing agent in order to mimic viral or bacterial infection, respectively. These models using artificial immunogens possess specific advantages and disadvantages but their representative character regarding actual infections remains unclear.Here, we show using a two-hit model, that offspring born to influenza A virus infected dams (first hit) are more vulnerable to secondary infections (second hit) in their early life. The underlying mechanisms are multi-factorial, including maternal immune activation upon first hit, low birthweight of the offspring, and the failure of alveolar macrophages from offspring to clear second hit pathogens in early life.ResultsMild influenza causes maternal immune activationTo study the impact of maternal immune activation (MIA), we intranasally infected BALB/c-mated allogeneic pregnant C57BL/6 females at early gestation (E5.5) with a dose of 103 plaque forming units (PFU) of the pH1N1 2009 influenza A virus (IAV) (Fig. 1a). The allogeneic pregnancy model was described previously to reflect clinical findings in humans8. Maternal influenza A virus infection at E5.5 resulted in moderate disease displayed by delayed weight gain and increased morbidity scores during pregnancy compared to PBS-treated dams (Fig. 1b; Supplementary Fig. 1a, and Supplementary Table 1). In parallel, intraperitoneal poly(I:C)-treated (4 mg/kg) dams showed weight loss that was restricted to day 1 post infection (d. p.i.) compared to PBS-treated dams (Fig. 1b). The IAV-infection dose used was also non-lethal in non-pregnant mice (Fig. 1c). However, mortality cannot be directly compared between both models due to different humane endpoints. Maternal IAV replication was detected in the bronchial and alveolar epithelium of the lung with infiltrated mononuclear cells and partially destructed alveolar epithelium on day 3 p.i. (Fig. 1d). Moreover, high virus titers at various time points after infection were detected in line with delayed virus clearance capacity during allogeneic pregnancy8 (Fig. 1e). Next, we measured a multiplex panel of cytokines and chemokines involved in MIA. In the lungs, only IAV-infected dams showed the most significant cytokine induction unlike PBS or poly(I:C) treated groups (Fig. 1f–h and Supplementary Fig. 1c–i). IL-6, TNF, MCP-1, and IL-1ß levels were significantly increased in the lungs of IAV-infected dams as compared to PBS or poly(I:C)-treated controls (Fig. 1f–h and Supplementary Fig. 1c–i). In the plasma of IAV-infected dams, only TNF levels were significantly increased compared to PBS-treated control dams (Fig. 1i–k and Supplementary Fig. 1j–p). In general, cytokine induction in dams treated intranasally with poly(I:C) was less potent with respect to cytokine levels in the lung and in the plasma compared to dams receiving poly(I:C) intraperitoneally (Supplementary Fig. 1). In all cases, MIA cytokine induction in the lung was highest in IAV-infected dams. Plasma corticosterone and progesterone levels were mostly unaffected in IAV-infected dams, albeit slight increases were detected compared to control dams (Fig. 1l, m). Overall, these results show that respiratory IAV infection mediates strong and prolonged MIA cytokine induction in the lung, particularly of IL-6, TNF, MCP-1, and IL-1ß.Fig. 1: 1st hit maternal influenza virus infection and immune activation.a The first hit was performed during early pregnancy by application of either poly(I:C) or infection with IAV. b Pregnant C57BL/6 mice were treated intraperitoneally (i.p.) with 4 mg/kg poly(I:C) (n = 24) or infected intranasally (i.n.) with 103 PFU of IAV (n = 24) on day 5.5 of gestation. Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)-treated (i.n.) dams were used as controls (n = 20). Weight development was monitored for 14 days post infection (d p.i.), p = 0.0003 (1 d p.i.), p < 0.0001 (3-12 d p.i.). c Weight of non-pregnant C57BL/6 mice treated with PBS, poly(I:C) or infected with IAV (n = 10), p = 0.0003 (1 d p.i.), p < 0.0001 (3–10 d p.i.), p = 0.0044 (13 d p.i.). d Representative immunohistology of IAV NP antigen in maternal lungs at 3 days post infection, Scale bar = 500 µm. e IAV titers as plaque forming units (PFU) per gram were measured in whole lung homogenates from pregnant dams treated with PBS (n = 4, 5, 6 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.], poly(I:C) (n = 6, 4, 6 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.] or infected with IAV (n = 6, 6, 4 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.] by plaque assay. f–h Lung cytokines IL-6, p < 0.0001 (3 d p.i.), p = 0.0010 (6 d p.i.) (f); TNF, p = 0.0001 (3 d p.i.), p = 0.0103 (6 d p.i.) (g); and MCP-1, p = 0.0195 (3 d p.i.), p = 0.0058 (6 d p.i.) (h) detected by Luminex assay in lungs of pregnant mice treated with PBS (IL-6, n = 10, 10, 7 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]); (TNF, n = 11, 10, 7 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]); (MCP-1, n = 6, 5, 7 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]), poly(I:C) (IL-6, n = 10, 8, 9 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]); (TNF, n = 10, 8, 9 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]) and (MCP-1, n = 11, 9, 10 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]) or infected with IAV (IL-6, n = 11, 9, 6 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]), (TNF, n = 10, 9, 6 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]); (MCP-1, n = 5, 5, 6 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]) at E5.5. i–k Plasma cytokines IL-6, p = 0.0343 (i); TNF, p = 0.0218 poly(I:C), p = 0.0429 (j) and MCP-1, p = 0.0329 poly(I:C) (k) measured by Luminex assay in plasma of pregnant mice treated with PBS (IL-6, n = 6, 4, 7 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]); (TNF, n = 6, 5, 7 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]; (MCP-1, n = 6, 5, 7 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]); poly(I:C) (IL-6, n = 9, 7, 9 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]); (TNF, n = 8, 7, 9 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]); (MCP-1, n = 9, 7, 9 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]) or infected with IAV (IL-6, n = 5, 6, 6 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]; (TNF, n = 6, 6, 6 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]); (MCP-1, n = 6, 6, 6 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]) at E5.5. Values are normalized to organ weight if applicable. l, m Hormones (corticosterone, p = 0.0456 (l) and progesterone, p = 0.0247 (1 d p.i.), p = 0.0254 (3 d p.i.) (m) measured by ELISA in plasma of pregnant mice treated with PBS (n = 9, 11, 3 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.]; poly(I:C) (n = 7, 7, 6 [1, 3, 6 d p.i.] or infected with IAV (n = 11, 11, 11 [corticosterone 1, 3, 6 d p.i.], n = 11, 10, 3 [progesterone, 1, 3, 6 d p.i.] at E5.5. All data are presented as mean and SD. Different groups are depicted in dark circles (PBS), medium squares (poly(I:C)) or light triangles (IAV) in violet colors. Cytokine levels that were below detection limit were set to the kit’s lower detection limit of 1 pg/g. The statistical significance was calculated by Welch’s t test (two-tailed) (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). PBS-treated groups were used as a reference and compared to IAV-infected groups in all statistical analyses unless stated otherwise. Non-significant comparisons are not depicted within the respective figures. n. d. not detectable. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageEarly gestational influenza causes low-birth-weight offspringTo understand how IAV-induced MIA affects pregnancy outcome, fetuses of IAV-infected or poly(I:C)-treated dams were assessed at gestational day 17.5 (E17.5) and at 2 weeks of age (Fig. 2a). Fetuses and offspring from PBS-treated dams were used as controls. Gestational length was unaffected by maternal IAV-infection or poly(I:C)-treatment when compared to control animals (Fig. 2b). Also, litter size as well as sex distribution within the litters did not significantly differ between dams that were infected with IAV or treated with poly(I:C) compared to PBS-treated dams (Fig. 2c, d). Dams that were treated with poly(I:C) or infected with IAV showed increased placental weight when compared to control dams (Fig. 2e). This phenotype has been previously correlated to compensatory mechanisms upon gestational stress21,22. In line with these findings, key nutrient genes were upregulated in placentas from MIA positive dams (Fig. 2f). Fetuses from both, poly(I:C)-treated, and IAV-infected dams presented significantly reduced body weight on E17.5 compared to fetuses from control dams (Fig. 2g). Being small for gestational age (SGA) is a well-known risk factor for later life disease of the offspring23,24. This reduced body weight phenotype was continuously present in male and female offspring born to IAV-infected dams but not in offspring born to poly(I:C)-treated dams until early adulthood (Fig. 2h, i). Exchange of litter born to IAV-infected mothers and born to PBS-treated mothers immediately after birth revealed, that this effect is not affected by maternal health and brood care in the first two weeks of life (Fig. 2j). No significant differences in lung function were detected in offspring born to IAV or control treated groups at 6 weeks and 20 weeks of age (Supplementary Fig. 2). However, a slight impairment in lung function was observed in IAV-infected male offspring, albeit statistically not significant, compared to male controls.Fig. 2: 1st hit maternal influenza and reproductive outcome.a Pregnancy outcome was assessed at embryonic day 17.5 (E17.5) or post partum (pp) with 2-week-old offspring. b Gestational length in days (d) of dams that were treated with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (n = 66), treated with 4 mg/kg poly(I:C) (n = 65), or infected with 103 PFU IAV (n = 61). c Litter size of PBS-treated dams at E17.5 (n = 14) and 2 w p.p. (n = 53), poly(I:C)-treated dams at E17.5 (n = 6) and 2 w p.p. (n = 48) and IAV-infected dams at E17.5 (n = 13) and 2 w p.p. (n = 43). Only viable fetuses were counted. d Percentage of male fetuses per litter for PBS-treated dams at E17.5 (n = 10) and 2 w p.p. (n = 53), poly(I:C)-treated dams at E17.5 (n = 6) and 2 w p.p. (n = 48) and IAV-infected dams at E17.5 (n = 13) and 2 w p.p. (n = 43). Only viable fetuses were counted. Fetal sex was determined by PCR, sex of 2-week-old offspring was determined by physiological examination. e Placenta weight in grams (g) from dams treated with PBS (n = 72), treated with poly(I:C) (n = 23, p < 0.0001) or infected with IAV (n = 43, p = 0.0062) at E17.5. f Relative mRNA expression of nutrient supply genes of growth inhibitory gene Grb10 (growth factor receptor bound protein 10); growth stimulatory gene Igf2 (insulin-like growth factor II), p = 0.0441 poly(I:C); Slc38a1 (solute carrier family 38, member 1), p = 0.049 and Slc38a2 (solute carrier family 38, member 2), p = 0.0059 (poly(I:C), p = 0.0148 (IAV) of placentas from fetuses from PBS (n = 5), poly(I:C) (n = 8) or IAV (n = 6) infected dams. The relative expression in the PBS group was set to 1 for each gene after normalization to the housekeeping gene Ywhaz. g Fetuses were weighed on E17.5 for PBS-treated dams (n = 29 males, 26 females), poly(I:C)-treated dams (n = 20 males, p < 0.0001, 29 females; p < 0.0001), and IAV-infected dams (n = 23 males, p < 0.0001, 35 females, p < 0.0001). Only viable fetuses were included. h Offspring weight at 2 weeks of age (2 weeks post partum; 2 wpp) born to mothers treated with PBS (n = 54 males; n = 56 females), poly(I:C) (n = 47 males, p = 0.8791; n = 49 females, p = 0.2665), and IAV (n = 59 males, p < 0.0001; n = 67 females, p < 0.0001). i Offspring weight at 6 weeks of age (6 wpp) born to mothers treated with PBS (n = 48 males, n = 57 females), poly(I:C) (n = 36 males, p = 0.9430; n = 46 females, p = 0.9831), and IAV (n = 69 males, p = 0.0064; n = 57 females, p = 0.039). j Offspring born to PBS-treated mothers was exchanged with offspring born to IAV-infected mothers immediately after birth and weight gain was observed for each animal individually during the first 2 weeks of life. Each group consisted of two litters with eight pups each. All data are presented as mean and SD. Different groups of mothers are depicted in dark circles (PBS), medium squares (Poly(I:C)), or light triangles (IAV) in violet colors. Different groups of male (♂) offspring are depicted in dark circles (PBS), medium squares (Poly(I:C)), or light triangles (IAV) in blue colors and female (♀) offspring in red colors. The statistical significance was calculated by two-tailed ANOVA (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < .001). PBS-treated groups were used as a reference in all statistical analyses. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageIncreased susceptibility of offspring towards early life infectionsChallenge experiments with 2- and 6-week-old offspring born to poly(I:C)-treated or IAV-infected dams as well as born to control dams were performed to evaluate functional immunity in this offspring (Fig. 3a). To validate the second hit model, homologous and semi-homologous second hits were performed on 2-week-old offspring. Thus, offspring born to PBS-treated or IAV- (H1N1) infected dams were infected with either the same H1N1 virus (homologous) or a H3N2 reassortant (WSN backbone, semi-homologous) at 2 weeks of age. As expected, juvenile offspring presented full protection against homologous challenge and partial protection against semi-homologous protection (Supplementary Fig. 3), likely due to perinatal transfer of protective antibodies confirming the validity of the preclinical two-hit animal model. Heterologous second hits were performed using influenza B virus (IBV) or Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) as a viral or bacterial hit, respectively. Upon infection with 105 PFU of IBV in 2-week-old offspring, male but not female offspring born to IAV-infected mothers present increased lethality compared to offspring born to poly(I:C)- or PBS-treated dams (Fig. 3b, c). In line, infection with 108 Colony Forming Units (CFU) of MRSA resulted in increased lethality in 2-week-old offspring born to IAV-infected dams (Fig. 3d). Because these animals died before sex determination was possible, we were not able to detect potential sex-specific effects for MRSA-infected, juvenile offspring. Cytokine response in offspring after second hit was comparable between males and females. Thus, data are shown without sex-stratification for clarity. In general, cytokine responses were also comparable across groups with the exception of increased IL-2 levels in IAV-offspring after IBV challenge (Fig. 3g). Infection of 6-week-old offspring did not reveal major differences in lethality, cytokine expression or lung histology across groups (Supplementary Figs. 4 and 5), suggesting a window of vulnerability particularly 2 weeks after birth. Viral and bacterial clearance was delayed in 2-week-old offspring born to IAV-infected dams compared to offspring born to PBS-treated dams (Fig. 3k, l and Supplementary Fig. 6). These data show that offspring born to IAV-infected dams are more vulnerable towards secondary viral and bacterial infections in early life.Fig. 3: 2nd hit susceptibility of offspring from influenza infected dams to early life infections.a Second-hit experiments were performed in 2-week-old offspring using influenza B virus (IBV) or Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) for a respiratory challenge. b Survival of 2-week-old male offspring born to IAV-infected dams (n = 11 [day 3], n = 9 [day 6], n = 7 [day 14]) or born to control treated dams with polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C))-treated (n = 11 [day 3], n = 9 [day 6], n = 7 [day 14]) or PBS (n = 9 [day 3], n = 7 [day 6], n = 5 [day 14]) after infection with 105 plaque forming units (PFU) of IBV; p = 0.0355. c Survival of 2-week-old female offspring born to IAV-infected dams (n = 13 [day 3], n = 11 [day 6], n = 9 [day 14]) or born to control treated dams with poly(I:C)-treated (n = 11 [day 3], n = 9 [day 6], n = 7 [day 14]) or PBS (n = 8 [day 3], n = 6 [day 6], n = 4 [day 14]) after infection with 105 PFU of IBV. Survival was monitored in three independent experiments. d 2-week-old offspring (both sexes) born to poly(I:C)-treated (n = 21 [day 1], 14 [day 3], 7 [day 6]) or IAV-infected (n = 55 [day 1], 34 [day 3], 16 [day 6]) dams were infected with 108 CFU of MRSA; p = 0.0167. Offspring born to PBS-treated dams (n = 38 [day 1], 25 [day 3], 12 [day 6]) were used as controls. Survival was monitored on day 1, 3 or 6 p.i. in three independent experiments. e–g Cytokines (TNF (e), IL-6 (f), and IL-2 (g)), p = 0.0034 poly(I:C), p = 0.0219 measured by Luminex assay in lungs of 2-week-old offspring (both sexes) born to PBS- or poly(I:C)-treated or IAV-infected offspring (n = 4) after infection with 105 PFU of IBV measured at 1, 3, or 6 d p.i. h–j Cytokines (TNF (h), IL-6 (i), and IL-2 (j)) measured by Luminex assay in lungs of 2-week-old offspring (both sexes) born to PBS- (n = 10) or poly(I:C)-treated (n = 7) or IAV-infected offspring (n = 11) after infection with 108 CFU of MRSA measured at 1, 3, or 6 d p.i. k IBV lung titer in 2-week-old offspring (both sexes) born to PBS-, poly(I:C)-treated, or IAV-infected (n = 4) dams, measured on day 1, 3 (p = 0.0270), and 6 p.i. is shown as fold-change in lung titers compared to the respective PBS group of the indicated time point. l MRSA lung titer in 2-week-old offspring (both sexes) born to PBS- (n = 10 [1 d p.i.], 10 [3 d p.i.], 7 [6 d p.i.]), poly(I:C)-treated (n = 7 [1 d p.i.], 7 [3 d p.i.], 4 [6 d p.i.]) or IAV-infected (n = 11 [1 d p.i.], 13 [3 d p.i., p = 0.0189], 9 [6 d p.i., p = 0.0223]) dams, measured on days 1, 3, and 6 p.i. is shown as fold-change in lung titers compared to the respective PBS group of the indicated time point. All n represent number of male and/or female offspring from respective groups. Groups were merged for clarity if no difference between males and females was observed. Data in (e–j) are presented as mean and SD. Different groups of male offspring are depicted in dark circles (PBS, medium squares (Poly(I:C)) or light triangles (IAV) in blue colors and female offspring in red colors. Different groups of offspring that were not stratified by sex are depicted in orange colors with the same icons. Cytokine levels that were below detection limit were set to the kit’s lower detection limit of 1 pg/g. The statistical significance was calculated by Welch’s t test (two-tailed) (e–j, k, l) without multiple comparison or Log Rank test (b–d) (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). PBS-treated groups were used as a reference and compared to IAV-infected groups in all statistical analyses unless stated otherwise. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageEarly gestational influenza affects offspring’s hematopoiesisAs we observed increased disease vulnerability in offspring born to IAV-infected mothers, we assessed the frequencies of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (Fig. 4a) in the bone marrow of male and female 2- and 6-week-old offspring born to early gestational PBS-treated, poly(I:C)-treated or IAV-infected dams by flow cytometry. Sex was not identified as a potential confounder for the measurement of relative cell population frequencies and therefore respective data sets are shown without sex-stratification for clarity. The frequencies of hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells show a tendency to be increased, particularly in 2-week-old offspring born to IAV-infected mice, compared to offspring born to PBS-treated mice (Fig. 4b, c and Supplementary Fig. 7b, c). Assessment of common myeloid progenitors (CMPs) and granulocyte/macrophage progenitors (GMPs) in juvenile offspring, showed a trend towards increased frequencies in offspring born to IAV-infected mothers, respectively (Fig. 4d, e). Increased CMP frequencies remained in 6-week-old offspring born to IAV-infected dams (Supplementary Fig. 7d). No difference was observed in the frequencies of myeloid/erythroid progenitors (MEPs) in 2-week and 6-week-old offspring (Fig. 4f; Supplementary Fig. 7f). To provide a first overview about potential consequences, we also analyzed a variety of major immune cell subtypes in the offspring’s spleens and lungs. Indeed, B cell frequencies were reduced in lungs but not spleens from offspring born to IAV-infected dams (Fig. 4g, j). Additionally, while NK cell frequencies were enhanced in spleens, they were decreased in lungs from offspring born to IAV-infected mice (Fig. 4h, k). On the other hand, regulatory T cell (Treg) frequencies showed an increase in those offspring’s lungs but not spleens (Fig. 4i, l). Because alveolar macrophages (AM) play a pivotal role during early stages of infection25, we also measured AM frequencies in the offspring’s lungs. A trend towards an increase of AM frequencies was observed in offspring born to IAV-infected mothers (Fig. 4m and Supplementary Fig. 7m). These data indicate that major immune cell populations important for the clearance of pathogens are altered in the lungs of offspring born to influenza virus infected dams.Fig. 4: Altered hematopoiesis of offspring from influenza infected dams.a Markers used to define respective stem (HSC) and progenitor cell populations by flow cytometry in this study. b–f Frequency of Lin- Sca+ cKit+ HSC, p = 0.0236 (b); Lin− Scalow cKit+ progenitor cells, p = 0.0121 (c); Lin− Scalow cKit+ CD16/32low CD34+ common myeloid progenitor (CMP) cells, p = 0.0035 (d); Lin− Scalow cKit+ CD16/32+ CD34+ granulocyte–monocyte progenitor (GMP) cells, p = 0.0518 (e); and Lin− Scalow cKit+ CD16/32− CD34− megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitor (MEP) cells (f) as percentage of Lin− DAPI− events in the bone marrow of 2-week-old offspring (n = 8) born to early gestational phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)-treated, polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C))-treated or influenza A virus (IAV)-infected dams, as assessed by flow cytometry. g–l Frequency of B220+ B cells (g and j, p = 0.114 poly(I:C), p < 0.0001), CD49b+ natural killer (NK) cells (h, p = 0.0008 poly(I:C), p < 0.0001 and k, p = 0.0167), CD3+ CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ regulatory T (TReg) cells (I, p = 0.0710 and l, p = 0.0059) as percentage of alive leukocytes in spleens (g–i) or lungs (j–l) of 2-week-old offspring (n = 8) born to early gestational PBS-treated, poly(I:C)-treated or IAV-infected dams, as assessed by flow cytometry. m Frequency of CD11b- CD11+ CD45+ SiglecF+ alveolar macrophages as percentage of CD45+ cells in lung of 2-week-old offspring born to early gestational PBS-treated (n = 18), poly(I:C)-treated (n = 16) or IAV-infected (n = 16, p = 0.0287) dams, as assessed by flow cytometry. All n represent number of male and/or female offspring from respective groups. Groups were merged for clarity as no difference between males and females was observed. All data are presented as mean and SD. Different groups of offspring are depicted in dark circles (PBS), medium squares (Poly(I:C)), or light triangles (IAV) in orange colors. The statistical significance was calculated by Welch’s t test (two-tailed) (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). PBS-treated groups were used as a reference and compared to IAV-infected groups in all statistical analyses unless stated otherwise. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageFunctionally impaired alveolar macrophages in offspringThe results described so far support the concept, that early gestational influenza virus infection affects offspring’s immune development at various levels. Although only subtle differences in AM frequencies were observed, we further investigated the functional capacity of these AMs since they are known to play a crucial role in innate immunity and pathogen clearance26. Thus, we performed an intranasal adoptive transfer of AMs between 2-week-old offspring born to control dams or 2-week-old offspring born to dams that were either treated with poly(I:C) or infected with IAV. Both, male and female offspring were subsequently infected with IBV to assess the role of transferred AMs in their respective immune response (Fig. 5a). Transfer of AMs from offspring born to poly(I:C)-treated or IAV-infected dams into offspring born to healthy mice did not affect male or female offspring’s weight development after infection (Fig. 5b, e). Also, transfer of AMs from offspring born to control dams into offspring born to poly(I:C)-treated dams did not affect immediate disease outcome in males or females (Fig. 5c, f). Importantly, when transferring AMs from offspring born to healthy mothers into offspring of the same sex born to IAV-infected dams, the offspring showed better recovery compared to pups that did not receive any AMs (Fig. 5d, g). Furthermore, we show that application of AMs derived from MIA offspring into control offspring does not affect viral titers after subsequent IBV challenge as compared to untreated controls (Fig. 5h). Also, the application of control AMs into offspring born to poly(I:C)-treated dams, did not affect virus titers (Fig. 5i, left). In contrast, offspring born to IAV-infected dams that had increased IBV-titers upon heterologous challenge, presented reduced IBV titers after application of AMs derived from PBS-offspring (Fig. 5i, right). These data indicate that early gestational influenza virus infection impairs the functionality of offspring’s AMs and this is rescued in part by the transfer of unaffected AMs prior to infection. Analysis of lung cytokine levels revealed that the application of AMs prior to infection with IBV generally increased the expression levels of TNF in uninfected and infected offspring (Supplementary Fig. 8a–d). IL-6 expression in control and infected offspring seems to be unaffected by AM-transfer (Supplementary Fig. 8e–h). Interestingly, transfer of PBS-macrophages into offspring born to MIA-mothers seem to reduce IL-2 expression that was previously shown to be increased in IAV-offspring upon IBV infection (Supplementary Fig. 8i–l and Fig. 3g). Collectively, these results suggest that early gestational influenza virus infection impairs respiratory pathogen clearance by AMs in the offspring.Fig. 5: Functionally impaired alveolar macrophages in offspring of influenza infected dams.a Adoptive transfer experiments were performed in 2-week-old offspring followed by influenza B virus (IBV) infection 16 h post transfer (h p.t.). b, e Alveolar macrophages (AM) of 2-week-old male, p = 0.0058 (b) and female (e) offspring born to polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C))-treated mothers (n = 10 males, 10 females) or influenza A virus (IAV)-infected mothers (n = 11 males, 14 females) were pooled, and 105 AMs were transferred intranasally into offspring of the same sex (n = 5 [male, poly(IC)], 6 [male, IAV], 8 [female, poly(I:C)], 7 [female, IAV]) born to phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)-treated mothers with subsequent infection of the sentinel-offspring 16 h post transfer with 105 plaque forming units (PFU) of IBV. c, d, f, g Alveolar macrophages of 2-week-old male (c, d) and female (f, g) offspring born to PBS-treated mothers (n = 22 males, 29 females) were pooled and 105 AMs were transferred intranasally into offspring of the same sex (n = 7 [male, poly(I:C)], 8 [female, poly(I:C)], 6 [male IAV, p = 0.0115 (1 dp.i.), p = 0.0050 (2d p.i.)], 6 [female IAV, p = 0.008 (1d p.i.), p = 0.0068 (2d p.i.), p = 0.0071 (3d p.i.)]) born to poly(I:C)-treated (c, f) or IAV-infected (d, g) mothers with subsequent infection of the sentinel-offspring 16 h post transfer with 105 PFU of IBV. Weight development was observed until 3 d p.i. h IBV lung titer from offspring born to PBS-treated dams and after transfer of AMs from poly(I:C)- or IAV-offspring with subsequent IBV challenge 12 h p.t. at 3 d p.i. (n = 10). Dotted lines indicate reference titers from IBV infected offspring without AM transfer (shown in Fig. 3). i IBV lung titer from offspring born to poly(I:C)-treated (n = 10) or IAV-infected, p = 0.089 (n = 9) dams and after transfer of AMs from PBS-offspring with subsequent IBV challenge 12 h p.t. at 3 d p.i. All experiments were also performed with PBS-treatment of the offspring post AM transfer but data are not shown to enhance clarity and all PBS-treated offspring were negative for reduced weight gain or virus titers, as expected. All data are presented as mean and SD. Different groups of male (♂) offspring are depicted in dark circles (PBS, medium squares (Poly(I:C)) or light triangles (IAV) in blue colors and female (♀) offspring in red colors. Different groups of offspring that were not stratified by sex are depicted in orange colors with the same icons. The statistical significance was calculated by two-tailed t-tests using the Bonferroni-Dunn multiple testing correction (b–g) or by Welch’s t test (two-tailed) (h, i) (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). Non-significant comparisons are not depicted within the respective figures. PBS-treated groups were used as a reference and compared to IAV-infected groups in all statistical analyses unless stated otherwise. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageDiscussionMaternal immune activation (MIA) is commonly defined as an increase of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-6, TNF, and MCP-1) during pregnancy13. In the present study, we used a semi-allogeneic mouse pregnancy model to show that a single-dose application of poly(I:C) on gestational day 5.5 results in a short-lived immune activation early after application. In contrast, infection with IAV results in a stronger and prolonged increase of MIA markers and has an adverse effect on resistance to infection in offspring. As previously shown in this allogeneic pregnancy model, no virus transfer occurs from mother-to-fetus8; therefore, the adverse effects observed in offspring are associated with MIA during early gestation.In our study, we chose doses of IAV and poly(I:C) that lead to mild-to-moderate disease with pronounced MIA. Higher doses of virus or poly(I:C) applied at E 5.5 resulted in maternal death or abortion, the latter especially upon poly(I:C)-treatment at 20 mg/kg. Although MIA is more severe in dams infected with IAV compared to poly(I:C), both show comparably small for gestational age phenotypes in the fetuses. Since low birth weight is a major risk factor for poor health in later life, a comparison of both models in this regard is reasonable and important to evaluate findings from other studies restricted to the use of poly(I:C) or other artificial immunogens23,24. Most previously published models use single-dose application of artificial immunogens, hence we followed this scheme to accurately reflect potential mechanistical differences27. We speculate that repetitive rather than single-dose stimulation with poly(I:C) might be a suitable method by which to mimic infection.We focused our studies on the effects of MIA during early pregnancy because evidence from human clinical studies show that early gestational events are more likely to cause long-term health deficits in the offspring, while stressors during late pregnancy are more likely to cause abortion or maternal death28,29. It should be noted that most studies on MIA in mice are carried out in mid or late gestation20. This may be because early gestational challenge is technically difficult to achieve since early pregnancy is hard to reliably identify in mice. Common assessment of a copulation plug goes in line with high false-positive pregnancy rates as well as difficulties in reliable palpation before gestational day 10 30. Additionally, measurement of pregnancy hormones requires invasive sampling that might influence subsequent experiments. While some work has been done on the effects of timing of MIA on the offspring’s neurocognitive development, a detailed understanding on the effects of timing on the offspring’s immune system remains elusive11,28. In this study, we show that early gestation represents a critical phase of fetal development and that gestational stress results in increased vulnerability of the offspring in the early postnatal period.Mild maternal influenza or poly(I:C)-application during early gestation did not affect gestational length, litter size, and sex distribution of the offspring. However, increased placental weight and a dysregulation of genes related to transplacental nutrition transfer and metabolism indicated disruption of pregnancy homeostasis, which presents a potential link to runted offspring21,22,31. This further highlights the importance of birth weight as a marker for MIA-related effects on the offspring. Importantly, offspring born to poly(I:C)-treated mice recovered the phenotype of relatively reduced body weight within the first 2 weeks of life, whereas offspring born to IAV-infected dams continued to show reduced body weight until early adulthood.Restricted fetal growth is a significant risk factor for reduced lung function in children32, especially if postnatal growth is reduced33. In our model, 6-week-old male offspring born to IAV-infected mothers displayed a slight reduction in lung function, albeit statistically not significant. However, potential delays in lung development were outgrown in all assessed groups at 20 weeks of age.Infection of juvenile, 2-week-old offspring revealed increased vulnerability towards respiratory infection with both viral and bacterial secondary hits. Notably, upon challenge with IBV, increased vulnerability was restricted to male offspring. This parallels epidemiological observations in infants born small for gestational age and showing increased vulnerability in later life34. Due to ethical and regulatory restrictions, we were not able to detect sex-specificity in the offspring’s vulnerability against MRSA. Nevertheless, like the infection with IBV, offspring born to IAV-infected dams showed increased lethality upon MRSA infection, compared to offspring born to PBS- or poly(I:C)-treated dams. These data clearly show that early gestational influenza, but not poly(I:C)-induced MIA, affects functional immunity towards respiratory infection in juvenile offspring.We also show that early gestational influenza affects hematopoiesis in offspring. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that frequencies of myeloid progenitor cells were increased in the bone marrow of offspring born to IAV-infected mice. Notably, these mice were fully naïve when sacrificed for analysis showing that the effects were due to in utero exposure. In addition, we observed abnormal frequencies of various functional immune cells in the offspring’s lung and spleen. We speculate that reduced NK and B cell frequencies in the lungs from offspring born to IAV-infected dams might also contribute to increased vulnerability to a respiratory second hit but additional studies are required to examine these effects beyond the scope of the current study.In contrast to chronic viral infections known to infect and replicate at immunological sites, acute infections such as influenza A virus infections are thought to perturb hematopoiesis indirectly through the action of cytokines as mediators (e.g. TNF)35,36. This appears to be the case with influenza-induced MIA in our model of early gestational influenza infection, being evident in both the lung and in plasma samples. In addition, we note the induction of TNF upon adoptive AM transfer that promoted viral clearance. Recent evidence suggests that blood monocytes can differentiate and migrate into distinct populations of human lung macrophages37. We speculate that altered hematopoiesis resulting from first hit may lead to impaired AM function and thus the ability to respond to postnatal second hits.During fetal development, alveolar macrophages (AM) seed into the lung and remain long-lived therein mainly by self-renewal26,38. Although only subtle differences in AM frequencies were observed in the offspring of all groups, functional experiments in vivo and in vitro revealed that the functionality of alveolar macrophages is affected by maternal influenza. Improving the offspring’s recovery after infection with IBV was possible by transferring AMs from control animals to offspring born to IAV-infected dams, prior to infection. These data suggest that alveolar macrophage function can be rescued by adding unaffected cells into the system. On the other hand, transfer of AMs from offspring born to MIA dams, did not affect disease outcome in control animals. It is important to highlight that we decided not to deplete host macrophages to avoid further disturbance of the AM niche and subsequent recruitment of new cells from the bone marrow into the lungs, prior to the experiment. Thus, we cannot exclude the possibility that some protective effects of healthy macrophages in offspring born to infected mothers might be due to an overall increase of alveolar macrophages in the lung. Nevertheless, our results provide strong evidence in favor of functional impairments in the macrophages of offspring caused by MIA, reflected by decreased viral clearance capacity in vitro and in vivo.In summary, we provide evidence that early gestational influenza (first hit) increases offspring´s vulnerability towards other respiratory pathogens (second hits) particularly in early life. The underlying mechanisms seem to be multi-factorial. First, later life consequences of MIA correlate with increased IL-6, TNF, MCP-1, and IL-1ß levels in the lungs of IAV-infected dams. Second, increased early life vulnerability to second hits correlates with low birthweight. Third, alveolar macrophages of offspring exposed to maternal influenza show a reduced capacity to clear second hit pathogens. Our findings highlight the potential effects of infections in early pregnancy on the offspring to respiratory infections and emphasize the importance of measures that prevent maternal influenza.MethodsCellsCell lines of Madin-Darby Caine kidney cells II (MDCK II) were grown in modified Eagle’s medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin/streptomycin [0.1 mg/ml], and l-Glutamine [2 mM] and were cultivated at 5% CO2, 96% rH, and 37 °C.VirusesThe pH1N1 2009 influenza strain A/Hamburg/NY1580/09 was grown on MDCK II cells at 37 °C using a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.2. Virus was harvested after 36 h. Virus titration was performed 72 h post infection on MDCK II cells by plaque assay. The influenza B virus B/Lee/40 was grown in embryonated SPF eggs at 33 °C for 3 days. In all, 100 μl of virus containing 200 PFU were injected into the allantoic fluid of eggs. The virus was harvested by aspirating the allantoic fluid after euthanizing the embryo at 4 °C for 4 h. All subsequent steps were performed on ice or at 4 °C. The allantoic fluid of individual eggs was tested for the presence of virus by hemagglutination assay and positive aliquots were pooled. The virus was purified by centrifugation of the allantoic fluid at 5000 × g and 4 °C for 10 min and isolation of the supernatant. Virus aliquots were stored at −80 °C. All experiments of this study were performed using the same batch of the respective virus.Bacterial strainsMethicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) were grown from a CryoBank stem conservation system JB1 for S. aureus strain USA300. A stem plate was prepared by plating one unit from the stem conservation system onto a TS-agar plate and overnight incubation at 37 °C. Stem plates were kept for further use at 4 °C for up to 3 months. Pre cultures were prepared by transferring one colony from a stem plate into 2 ml of trypticase soy broth medium and incubation overnight at 37 °C while shaking at 180 rpm. Main cultures for infection were started by preparing a 1:100 dilution of the pre culture in TSB medium. The main culture was incubated at 37 °C and 180 rpm until the bacteria concentration reached 1.42 × 108 colony-forming units (CFU)/ml. Bacterial concentration was measured by optical density (OD600) that was found to correlate to the desired concentration by previous experiments. For infection, the bacteria were concentrated and subsequently diluted in PBS to a final dose of 1 × 108 CFU per animal. The final concentration was confirmed by re-titration.MiceIn this study female C57BL/6J mice and male BALB/c mice were used for allogeneic breeding. All mice were bred in the in-house facility of the Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology following standard protocols. All mice were kept in open cages (Type II long) at 22 °C (±0.3 °C) room temperature and a relative humidity of 45% (±10%) with a constant 12 h light–dark cycle. Food and water were available ad libitum all times. At the German Mouse Clinic mice were maintained in IVC cages (Type GM500) with water and standard mouse chow according to the directive 2010/63/EU, German laws and GMC housing conditions (www.mouseclinic.de). All mice that were not pregnant and older than 3 weeks received full maintenance food and pregnant mice as well as offspring until weaning received full breeding food. Specified pathogen-free (SPF) status of the facility and all animals was continuously confirmed every 3 months. All mice were kept for an acclimatization period of 14 days before start of breeding or experiments. All non-pregnant mice were kept in groups of 3–5, except for males that were used for breeding who were kept single-housed for the duration of breeding. In all, 8- to 10-week-old females were mated with 8- to 12-week-old males overnight and pregnancy was confirmed by plug-check after 16 h. Pregnant females were kept single-housed in open cages. Non-pregnant mice were continuously used for breeding. Females with a false-positive or false-negative pregnancy status were excluded from the experiments immediately. Offspring were kept with their mother until weaning and were separated by sex after weaning at 21 days post-partum (d p.p.). For offspring experiments, pups from at least 2 mothers were matched into the same experimental group for each condition. Additionally, all offspring experiments were performed and analyzed with respect to the offspring’s sex.All animal experiments were performed in compliance to relevant ethical considerations. Protocols were approved by the relevant German authorities (Behörde für Gesundheit und Verbraucherschutz Hamburg, approval number 124/12, 75/17, 97/19 and Behörde für Gesundheit, Verbraucherschutz und Pharmazie, Regierung von Oberbayern, approval number 46–16).Animal experimentsIn all, 8- to 10-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were mated with 8- to 12-week-old male BALB/c mice. Using standard protocols, pregnant or non-pregnant females were intranasally infected at gestational day 5.5 (E5.5) with 103 PFU of the 2009 pH1N1 virus strain A/Hamburg/NY1580/09 or applied 4 mg/kg polyriboinosinic-polyribocytidilic acid (poly(I:C), Sigma) intraperitoneally or intranasally. Mice receiving Dulbecco’s PBS (PBS, Sigma) intranasally were used as control group. Humane endpoints were defined according to the approved animal project license. In detail, animals were euthanized upon 25% reduction of relative weight gain compared to PBS-treated dams for pregnant animals and a 25% reduction of body weight compared to initial weight for non-pregnant animals. Some mice were monitored for weight loss and signs of disease until 14 d p.i. Additional groups of mice were euthanized on 1, 3, 6 d p.i. for organ harvest or at E17.5 (12 d p.i.) for assessment of pregnancy outcome and morphology of the fetuses. Pregnant mice that were not euthanized during pregnancy were kept single-housed in open cages and gave birth. The offspring was kept with the mother until weaning (21 d p.p.). For experiments with foster mothers, whole litters of neonates were exchanged between mothers with matching litter size (8 neonates) within 12 h after birth. Neonates were marked via tail tip painting and individually weighed every day until 14 days post-partum. For second-hit experiments, 2- and 6-week-old offspring of both sexes were infected with 105 PFU of the influenza B virus (IBV) strain B/Lee/40 or 108 CFU of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA, USA 300), intranasally. Mice receiving PBS were used as control group. Second-hit experiments for homologous and semi-homologous challenge were performed by applying 103 PFU of the 2009 pH1N1 virus strain A/Hamburg/NY1580/09 or 102 PFU of a H3N2 Aichi 6+2 reassortant (WSN backbone) intranasally. Mice receiving PBS were used as control group. Some mice infected with IBV were monitored for weight loss and signs of disease until 14 d p.i. Additional groups of these mice were euthanized on 1, 3, and 6 d p.i. for organ harvest. Mice that received MRSA were euthanized on 1, 3, and 6 d p.i. for organ harvest and were monitored for weight loss and survival until humane endpoints were reached. For flow cytometric analysis of immune cells, 2- and 6-week-old offspring born to treated and control mice were euthanized for organ explants without further treatment. For the adoptive transfer of alveolar macrophages, 2-week-old offspring born to prenatally infected or control treated mice were euthanized on day 14 d p.p. for isolation of alveolar macrophages (AMs) by FACS. Purified AMs (105 cells in 20 µl) were applied to 2-week-old mice intranasally. Offspring born to PBS-treated mothers received AMs either from offspring born to poly(I:C)- or IAV-treated mothers. Offspring born to poly(I:C)- or IAV-treated mice received AMs from PBS-treated mice. AMs were exchanged between offspring of the same sex. In total, 16 h after transfer of AMs, one cohort per group and sex was infected with 105 PFU of IBV following standard protocols. Another cohort of each group and sex received PBS as control. All mice were monitored for signs of disease and were euthanized on day 3 p.i. for organ explants. Blood taken during animal experiments was centrifuged for 15 min at 3000×g and 4 °C, and the respective plasma was stored at −80 °C. Organs were stored in 4% formalin solution at 4 °C or dry at −80 °C for subsequent homogenization. Sex of mice were determined by PCR (fetuses and neonates only) or by visual identification.Assessment of morbidity was based on scoring criteria defined within the respective animal license approval as described in Supplementary Table 1.Lung functionMice were anesthetized with ketamine-xylazine, tracheostomized, and the lung function analyzed. In brief, respiratory function was measured using a FlexiVent system (Scireq). Mice were ventilated with a tidal volume of 10 ml/kg at a frequency of 150 breaths/min to reach a mean lung volume similar to that of spontaneous breathing. Testing of lung mechanical properties including dynamic lung compliance was carried out by a software-generated script that took four readings per animal.Virus titrationViral titers were measured by plaque assay. Six-well cell culture plates were seeded with 3 ml of MEM containing 2.0 × 105 MDCK II cells and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The virus was 10-fold serially diluted in PBS. After removing the media from the cells and washing them once with PBS, the cells were infected with 333 μl virus dilution or diluted organ homogenate per well and incubated at 33 °C (B/Lee/40) or 37 °C (pH1N1 2009) for 1 h. The plates were agitated every 10 min to ensure even distribution of the virus. After incubation, the virus supernatant was removed and overlay medium containing 1.25% Avicel and 0.1% TPCK-Trypsin in MEM was added to the plates. The cells were incubated 3 days at 37 °C or 4 days at 33 °C for pH1N1 2009 or B/Lee/40 respectively. After incubation, the cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution at 4 °C for 30 min to 24 h. Plaques were visualized by either counterstaining with crystal violet solution (B/Lee/40) or by using IAV nucleoprotein-specific antibody staining and development via a horseradish conjugated secondary antibody and peroxidase substrate.For IBV NP quantification via quantitative real-time PCR, vRNA was isolated from lung homogenates using the InnuPrep RNA MiniKit (Analytik Jena, Germany; catalog number: 845-KS-2040250) following the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was generated using random nonamere primers (pd(N)9, Gene Link) and the SuperScript III kit (Thermo Fisher; catalog number: 18080051). qRT-PCR was performed at 95 °C (600 s), 95 °C (15 s), 55 °C (10 s), and 72 °C (20 s) with 45 cycles. For IBV NP primers used, see key resource table. cT values were correlated to cT values of input IBV titers defined by plaque test. Unites were defined as genome equivalents. Primers used are shown in Supplementary Table 2.Bacterial titrationThe bacterial load in mouse lung tissue was measured by plating tissue homogenates onto mannitol salt phenol red (MS) agar plates. Organ homogenates were prepared fresh by homogenizing the lung tissue in 1 ml of PBS in a bead mill (Mixer mill MM400,Retsch) at 30 Hz and 4 °C for 10 min. In all, 10-fold serial dilutions of the homogenates were prepared in ice-cold PBS. The dilutions were plated onto 10 cm Petri dishes in hot MS agar (65 °C). All measurements were performed in technical duplicates. MS agar plates were incubated at 37 °C for 2 days before MRSA colonies were identified by shape and color change of the agar.Immunohistology and histopathologyLungs of infected animals were processed for histopathological examination and immunohistochemistry according to established protocols. Deparaffinized tissue sections were treated with 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 6.0) and a rabbit anti-H7N1 serum. The primary antibody (anti-IAV NP) was detected by a biotin-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch) followed by the application of the Zytochem-Plus HPR kit (Zytomed; catalog number: ZUC031-006). Tissues were counterstained with hematoxylin for pathological analysis.Flow cytometry and fluorescence activated cell sortingLung tissue was minced on ice and incubated in lysis buffer (2.5 mg/ml Collagenase D, 0.01 mg/ml DNase I in RPMI) at 37 °C for 30 min with constant agitation. Bone marrow was isolated by centrifugation from mouse tibia and femur at 1000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C. Single cell solutions were prepared using a 70-µm cell strainer (Corning) in FACS buffer (2% FCS in PBS). Red blood cells were lysed using RBC lysis buffer (BioLegend) for 5 min on ice. Life/dead staining was performed using Zombie Nir Fixable Viability Kit (BioLegend; catalog number: 423105) for alveolar macrophages or DAPI for other populations following the manufacturer’s instructions. Antibody staining was performed for 30 min at RT in the dark with an antibody concentration of 6 µl/ml. For antibody details see key resource table. Stained cells were resuspended in FACS buffer containing 2% BSA for subsequent analysis or sorts. Flow cytometric analysis as well as FACS was performed using a FACSAria II Fusion SORP (BD), analysis was performed on a FACSCantoII and data analysis was done using FACSDiva software v 8.0 as well as FCS Express 6 (DeNovo Software, USA). A representative example gating strategy that was used for sorting AMs and the confirmed purity of the sort (re-analysis) is shown in Supplementary Fig. 9. Representative gating strategies used for the data shown in Fig. 4 are shown in Supplementary Fig. 10.Cytokine and hormone measurementCytokines were measured in supernatants of homogenized lungs or plasma, collected from mice at 1, 3, or 6 d p.i. Therefore, lung tissue (~100 mg) was homogenized in 1 ml of PBS in a bead mill (Mixer mill MM400, Retsch) at 30 hz for 10 min at 4 °C. The cytokines (MCP-1, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, IL-17A, and TNF) were then detected using a custom-made Bio-Plex Pro Mouse Cytokine 17-plex assay (Bio-Rad; catalog number: #M5000031YV) following the manufacturer’s instructions in a Bio-Plex 200 System with high-throughput fluidics (HTF; Bio-Rad). All measurements were run in duplicate. Progesterone (Cayman Chemical; catalog number: 582601) and corticosterone (ARBOR ASSAYS; catalog number: K014-H1) levels in maternal serum were evaluated by ELISA following the manufacturer’s instructions. For progesterone analysis, serum was diluted 1:100 or 1:200 and measured after 70 min of substrate incubation. All ELISAs were measured on a Saphire2 ELISA microplate reader (Tecan) and evaluated using a four-parameter logistic regression (MyAssays). To measure serum testosterone levels, a chemiluminescence immunoassay (ADVIA Centaur Testosterone II assay; Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics; catalog number: 10696862) was employed. Measurement was performed with the ADVIA Centaur XP (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics).Antibodies and reagentsAll antibodies and reagents used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table 2.Nutrient gene RT-qPCRNutrient gene expression was measured from RNA of homogenized placental tissue taken at E17.5. RNA was isolated using the Analytik Jena kit Innuprep 2.0 following the manufacturer’s instructions with additional on-column DNase I-treatment (Roche). cDNA was generated using the Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase kit (Invitrogen) using random nonamere primers d(N)9 (Gene Link). RT-qPCR was performed to analyze placental gene expression levels of two labyrinthine-specific, growth stimulatory genes, the growth inhibitory Grb10 (growth factor receptor bound protein 10) and the growth stimulatory gene Igf2 (insulin-like growth factor II) and two isoforms of the system A family of amino acid transporters, Slc38a1 (solute carrier family 38, member 1) and Slc38a2 (solute carrier family 38, member 2), which are responsible for transplacental transport of neutral amino acids31. DNA oligonucleotides for amplification of the target genes as well as the housekeeping gene Ywhaz (Tyrosine 3-Monooxygenase/ tryptophan 5-monooxygenase activation protein, zeta polypeptide) were designed using Primer-BLAST (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govools/primer-blast/index.cgi). Singleplex reactions (20 µl) were set up in H2O PCR grade (Roche) and FastStart Essential DNA Green Master (2x, Roche) with 300 nM of forward and reverse primer each, and 2 µl cDNA template. RT-qPCR runs were conducted on the LightCycler 96 with endpoint fluorescence detection for SYBR Green: 10 min at 95 °C, 50 amplification cycles (15 s at 95 °C, 10 s at 65 °C, and 20 s at 72 °C). Subsequently, melting curve analysis was performed (15 s at 95°C, 15 s at 60 °C, and 1 s at 95 °C). Analysis was performed in triplicate for each GOI in each sample. Data were subsequently analyzed using LinReg PCR software and GOI expression for PBS sample of each gene were set as 1. The relative N0(GOI)/N0 (Ywhaz)-expression values of the biological replicates are presented. Primers used are shown in Supplementary Table 2.Sex determination by PCRThe sex of mouse fetuses was determined by PCR using SX primers39. Primers used are shown in Supplementary Table 2.Quantification and statistical analysisAll data were analyzed using Graph Pad Prism v.8.4.2. Statistical details of all experiments are indicated in the respective figure legends. Level of statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05 (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001). Data points that were defined as outliers by Grubb’s test were excluded from further analysis. Datapoints that were designated technical failures (e.g., no reads by the machine or if pipetting problems occured) were removed. Groups of biological replicates in this study were defined as being sampled from a Gaussian distribution by biological consideration of the respective experiments. No tests were performed to check for Gaussian distribution.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability All relevant data are available within the paper or its Supplementary Information files or from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesIuliano, A. D. et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet 391, 1285–1300 (2018).Article Google Scholar Jamieson, D. J. et al. H1N1 2009 influenza virus infection during pregnancy in the USA. Lancet 374, 451–458 (2009).Article Google Scholar van Riel, D. et al. Influenza pathogenicity during pregnancy in women and animal models. Semin. Immunopathol. 38, 719–726 (2016).Article Google Scholar Aluvihare, V. R., Kallikourdis, M. & Betz, A. G. Regulatory T cells mediate maternal tolerance to the fetus. Nat. Immunol. 5, 266–271 (2004).Article CAS Google Scholar Tagliani, E. & Erlebacher, A. Dendritic cell function at the maternal-fetal interface. Expert Rev. Clin. Immunol. 7, 593–602 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Arck, P. C. & Hecher, K. Fetomaternal immune cross-talk and its consequences for maternal and offspring’s health. Nat. Med. 19, 548–556 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Gabriel, G. & Arck, P. C. Sex, immunity and influenza. J. Infect. Dis. 209, S93–S99 (2014).Article Google Scholar Engels, G. et al. Pregnancy-related immune adaptation promotes the emergence of highly virulent H1N1 influenza virus strains in allogeneically pregnant mice. Cell Host Microbe 21, 321–333 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Boulanger-Bertolus, J., Pancaro, C. & Mashour, G. A. Increasing role of maternal immune activation in neurodevelopmental disorders. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 12, 230 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Graham, A. M. et al. Maternal systemic interleukin-6 during pregnancy is associated with newborn amygdala phenotypes and subsequent behavior at 2 years of age. Biol. Psychiatry 83, 109–119 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Meyer, U. et al. The time of prenatal immune challenge determines the specificity of inflammation-mediated brain and behavioral pathology. J. Neurosci. 26, 4752–4762 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Choi, G. B. et al. The maternal interleukin-17a pathway in mice promotes autism-like phenotypes in offspring. Science 351, 933–939 (2016).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Estes, M. L. & McAllister, A. K. Maternal immune activation: Implications for neuropsychiatric disorders. Science 353, 772–777 (2016).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Fortier, M. E., Luheshi, G. N. & Boksa, P. Effects of prenatal infection on prepulse inhibition in the rat depend on the nature of the infectious agent and the stage of pregnancy. Behav. Brain Res. 181, 270–277 (2007).Article Google Scholar Miller, V. M. et al. Gestational flu exposure induces changes in neurochemicals, affiliative hormones and brainstem inflammation, in addition to autism-like behaviors in mice. Brain Behav. Immun. 33, 153–163 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Wilcox, C. R. & Jones, C. E. Beyond passive immunity: is there priming of the fetal immune system following vaccination in pregnancy and what are the potential clinical implications? Front. Immunol. 9, 1548 (2018).Article Google Scholar Hodyl, N. A., Krivanek, K. M., Lawrence, E., Clifton, V. L. & Hodgson, D. M. Prenatal exposure to a pro-inflammatory stimulus causes delays in the development of the innate immune response to LPS in the offspring. J. Neuroimmunol. 190, 61–71 (2007).Article CAS Google Scholar Kay, G., Tarcic, N., Poltyrev, T. & Weinstock, M. Prenatal stress depresses immune function in rats. Physiol. Behav. 63, 397–402 (1998).Article CAS Google Scholar Mandal, M., Marzouk, A. C., Donnelly, R. & Ponzio, N. M. Preferential development of Th17 cells in offspring of immunostimulated pregnant mice. J. Reprod. Immunol. 87, 97–100 (2010).Article CAS Google Scholar Weber-Stadlbauer, U. & Meyer, U. Challenges and opportunities of a-priori and a-posteriori variability in maternal immune activation models. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 28, 119–128 (2019).Article Google Scholar Eskild, A., Haavaldsen, C. & Vatten, L. J. Placental weight and placental weight to birthweight ratio in relation to Apgar score at birth: a population study of 522 360 singleton pregnancies. Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 93, 1302–1308 (2014).Article Google Scholar Fowden, A. L., Forhead, A. J., Coan, P. M. & Burton, G. J. The placenta and intrauterine programming. J. Neuroendocrinol. 20, 439–450 (2008).Article CAS Google Scholar Nomura, Y. et al. Low birth weight and risk of affective disorders and selected medical illness in offspring at high and low risk for depression. Compr. Psychiatry 48, 470–478 (2007).Article Google Scholar Schlaudecker, E. P. et al. Small for gestational age: Case definition & guidelines for data collection, analysis, and presentation of maternal immunisation safety data. Vaccine 35, 6518–6528 (2017).Article Google Scholar Coates, B. M. et al. Inflammatory monocytes drive influenza A virus-mediated lung injury in juvenile mice. J. Immunol. 200, 2391–2404 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Hussell, T. & Bell, T. J. Alveolar macrophages: plasticity in a tissue-specific context. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 81–93 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Meyer, U. Prenatal poly(i:C) exposure and other developmental immune activation models in rodent systems. Biol. Psychiatry 75, 307–315 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Meyer, U., Yee, B. K. & Feldon, J. The neurodevelopmental impact of prenatal infections at different times of pregnancy: the earlier the worse? Neuroscientist 13, 241–256 (2007).Article CAS Google Scholar O’Hare, T. & Creed, F. Life events and miscarriage. Br. J. Psychiatry 167, 799–805 (1995).Article Google Scholar Heyne, G. W. et al. A simple and reliable method for early pregnancy detection in inbred mice. J. Am. Assoc. Lab Anim. Sci. 54, 368–371 (2015).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Coan, P. M. et al. Adaptations in placental nutrient transfer capacity to meet fetal growth demands depend on placental size in mice. J. Physiol. 586, 4567–4576 (2008).Article CAS Google Scholar den Dekker, H. T. et al. Early growth characteristics and the risk of reduced lung function and asthma: a meta-analysis of 25,000 children. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 137, 1026–1035 (2016).Article Google Scholar den Dekker, H. T., Jaddoe, V. W. V., Reiss, I. K., de Jongste, J. C. & Duijts, L. Fetal and infant growth patterns and risk of lower lung function and asthma. The Generation R Study. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 197, 183–192 (2018).Article Google Scholar Vom Steeg, L. G. & Klein, S. L. Sex and sex steroids impact influenza pathogenesis across the life course. Semin. Immunopathol. 41, 189–194 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Pascutti, M. F., Erkelens, M. N. & Nolte, M. A. Impact of viral infections on hematopoiesis: from beneficial to detrimental effects on bone marrow output. Front. Immunol. 7, 364 (2016).Article Google Scholar Sedger, L. M. et al. Bone marrow B cell apoptosis during in vivo influenza virus infection requires TNF-alpha and lymphotoxin-alpha. J. Immunol. 169, 6193–6201 (2002).Article CAS Google Scholar Evren, E. et al. Distinct developmental pathways from blood monocytes generate human lung macrophage diversity. Immunity 54, 259–275 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Evren, E., Ringqvist, E. & Willinger, T. Origin and ontogeny of lung macrophages: from mice to humans. Immunology 160, 126–138 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar McFarlane, L., Truong, V., Palmer, J. S. & Wilhelm, D. Novel PCR assay for determining the genetic sex of mice. Sex. Dev. 7, 207–211 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Oliver Strauch and Ursula Müller from the technology platform small animal models at the Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, for their excellent support. This study was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG.; GA 1575/3-2 to G.G.), the German Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg (to G.G.), and the German Ministry of Health (to G.G.). S.L. is funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (Grant Agreement No. 758713) and by the Hector Stiftung II. P.O. receives support from an NIHR Senior Investigator Award NIHR201385 (Award: WHRR P84026); the NIHR Imperial Biomedical Research Centre (BRC) IS-BRC-1215-20013 and EU FP7 PREPARE project 602525.FundingOpen Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Viral Zoonoses – One Health, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, GermanyHenning Jacobsen, Kerstin Walendy-Gnirß, Nilgün Tekin-Bubenheim, Nancy Mounogou Kouassi, Vinicius Pinho dos Reis, Martin Zickler, Lucas Scholl, Annette Gries, Hanna Jania & Gülsah GabrielDepartment of Oncology, Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation with Section Pneumology, Hubertus Wald Comprehensive Cancer Center Hamburg, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, GermanyIsabel Ben-Batalla, Nikolaus Berenbrok & Sonja LogesDepartment of Tumor Biology, Center of Experimental Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, GermanyIsabel Ben-Batalla & Nikolaus BerenbrokEarly Life Origins of Chronic Lung Disease, Research Center Borstel, Leibniz Lung Center, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Borstel, GermanyMartin Wolff & Susanne Krauss-EtschmannDepartment of Computational Biology of Infection Research, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, GermanyAndreas KloetgenFlow Cytometry/FACS Unit, Leibniz-Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, GermanyArne DüsedauMicroscopy and Image Analysis Unit, Leibniz-Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, GermanyGundula Pilnitz-StolzeComprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC), Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, GermanyAicha Jeridi & Ali Önder YildirimMember of The German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Borstel, GermanyAicha Jeridi & Ali Önder YildirimGerman Mouse Clinic, Institute of Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, GermanyHelmut Fuchs, Valerie Gailus-Durner, Claudia Stoeger & Martin Hrabe de AngelisChair of Experimental Genetics, School of Life Science Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, Freising, GermanyMartin Hrabe de AngelisGerman Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Neuherberg, GermanyMartin Hrabe de AngelisInstitute for Pathology and Neuropathology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, GermanyTatjana Manuylova & Karin KlingelNational Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UKFiona J. Culley & Peter OpenshawCore Facility Fluorescence Cytometry, Research Center Borstel, Leibniz Lung Center, Borstel, GermanyJochen BehrendsDivision of Personalized Medical Oncology (A420), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanySonja LogesDepartment of Personalized Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, GermanySonja LogesJunior Research Group Coinfection, Priority Research Area Infections, Research Center Borstel, Leibniz Lung Center, Borstel, GermanyBianca SchneiderInstitute of Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, GermanySusanne Krauss-EtschmannInstitute for Virology, University for Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover, GermanyGülsah GabrielGerman Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Braunschweig, GermanyGülsah GabrielAuthorsHenning JacobsenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKerstin Walendy-GnirßView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNilgün Tekin-BubenheimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNancy Mounogou KouassiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIsabel Ben-BatallaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNikolaus BerenbrokView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMartin WolffView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarVinicius Pinho dos ReisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMartin ZicklerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLucas SchollView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnnette GriesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHanna JaniaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndreas KloetgenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarArne DüsedauView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGundula Pilnitz-StolzeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAicha JeridiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAli Önder YildirimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHelmut FuchsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarValerie Gailus-DurnerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarClaudia StoegerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMartin Hrabe de AngelisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTatjana ManuylovaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKarin KlingelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFiona J. CulleyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJochen BehrendsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSonja LogesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBianca SchneiderView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSusanne Krauss-EtschmannView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPeter OpenshawView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGülsah GabrielView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsG.G. and H.J. designed the study and all experiments. H.J., K.W.G., N.T.B., L.S., V.P.R., A.G., and H.J. performed animal experiments. I.B.B., N.B., J.B., A.D., S.L., and B.S. performed and analyzed FACS assays. G.P.S. performed immunohistochemical analysis. N.M.K. performed PCR assays. A.J., A.Ö.Y., H.F., V.G.D., C.S., M.H.A., N.M.K., M.Z., M.W., and S.K.E. assessed lung functions and analyzed data. K.K. and T.M. performed histopathological analyses. F.C. and P.O. designed experiments with alveolar macrophages. A.K. performed statistical analysis. H.J. and G.G. analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. All authors revised the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Gülsah Gabriel.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPeer review information Nature Communications thanks Alison Carey, Jie Sun and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationPeer Review FileReporting SummarySource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleJacobsen, H., Walendy-Gnirß, K., Tekin-Bubenheim, N. et al. Offspring born to influenza A virus infected pregnant mice have increased susceptibility to viral and bacterial infections in early life. Nat Commun 12, 4957 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25220-3Download citationReceived: 19 August 2020Accepted: 21 July 2021Published: 16 August 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25220-3Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Interaction of the pre- and postnatal environment in the maternal immune activation model Anna GundackerLaura Cuenca RicoDaniela D. Pollak Discover Mental Health (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyThe 1918 Influenza Won't Help Us Navigate This Pandemic - The AtlanticSkip to contentSite NavigationThe AtlanticPopularLatestNewslettersSectionsPoliticsIdeasFictionTechnologySciencePhotoBusinessCulturePlanetGlobalBooksAudioHealthEducationProjectsFeaturesFamilyEventsWashington WeekProgressNewslettersExplore The Atlantic ArchivePlay The Atlantic crosswordListen to Podcasts and ArticlesThe Print EditionLatest IssuePast IssuesGive a GiftSearch The AtlanticQuick LinksDear TherapistCrossword PuzzleMagazine ArchiveYour SubscriptionPopularLatestNewslettersSign InSubscribeIdeasHistory Won’t Help Us NowWe have no historical precedent for this moment.By Howard MarkelGL Archive / Alamy; RGB Ventures / SuperStock / Alamy; Paul Thompson / FPG / Getty; Vintage_Space / Alamy; The AtlanticAugust 19, 2021 ShareSave As a medical historian, I have never been busier. Over the past 20 months, journalists and policy makers have reached out in an effort to understand what past infectious diseases might teach us about this one. These exchanges almost always end with questions about how this pandemic is similar to the influenza pandemic of 1918–19, which, until COVID-19, was the worst pandemic in human history.The truth is we have no historical precedent for the moment we’re in now. We need to stop thinking back to 1918 as a guide for how to act in the present and to start thinking forward from 2021 as a guide to how to act in the future. This is the pandemic I will be studying and teaching to the next generation of doctors and public-health students.Read: A clue to why the 1918 pandemic came back stronger than beforeSome similarities exist between now and 1918—the economic costs of quarantine and the fears that each virus inspired worldwide, for example. And before the Delta variant came along, when everyone was looking forward to a “hot vax summer,” traveling again, and returning to the office, I’d hoped that we might be heading to normalcy, and perhaps even to a boom similar to that of the 1920s. The influenza epidemic (along with the close of World War I) contributed to Warren G. Harding’s 1920 presidential-campaign slogan, “normal times and a return to normalcy.” Harding presided over what F. Scott Fitzgerald famously named the Jazz Age, a time when, as Fitzgerald wrote in The Crack-Up, “the uncertainties of 1919 were over—there seemed to be little doubt about what was going to happen—America was going on the greatest, gaudiest spree in history and there was going to be plenty to tell about it.”But the past few weeks have robbed me of that thought. I cannot seriously believe that, in our socially damaged and ideologically splintered world, we have a chance at a new Roaring ’20s, a renaissance of culture and lucre.The differences between the pandemics outweigh the similarities. In terms of raw numbers, COVID-19 has sickened more people than the 1918–19 influenza pandemic did, even though demographic purists might object and ask to account for the smaller global population in 1918 and the relative youth of many of the influenza’s victims. Influenza appears to have killed approximately 500,000 to 650,000 Americans; the estimates of deaths worldwide begin at about 20 million but go as high as 100 million. As of August 18, 2021, the recorded global caseload of COVID-19 was more than 208 million, the recorded death rate in the U.S. was more than 623,000, and at least 4.3 million worldwide have died.Such startling statistics come as the more contagious Delta variant continues to fan an inferno that has never stopped consuming oxygen. In other words, this pandemic is far from over. In all of recorded history, the world hasn’t really halted as abruptly as it did for most of us during the past year or so. In 1918, social-distancing orders were adopted for far shorter periods of time (on average, about 10 weeks), compared with our year-and-a-half-long coronavirus endurance test. And finally, our distrust of one another seems unparalleled, as masks and vaccines have become more about political choices than public-health concerns.Over the past two decades, I have written several books and hundreds of scholarly papers on how pandemics create fear of the unknown. I’ve studied this fear, and yet even I have fallen prey to it during the pandemic. Recently, I took a walk around my neighborhood. I made sure to wear a face mask, even though I was immunized with the Pfizer vaccine in January. I slowed my gait to stay six feet away from other pedestrians, many of whom I knew and who were trying to do the same for me. Looking at people headed in my direction, I could sense their fear of invisible virions that I may or may not have expelled from my lungs. And then I was alarmed to realize that I was thinking ill of them. What if they were those people who refused to be vaccinated but, nonetheless, refused to wear a face mask? For the past 75 years, the wealthier nations of the world have enjoyed a reprieve from most infectious diseases—largely thanks to robust mass-vaccination and public-health programs. But in this century alone, we have already experienced six contagious crises (SARS in 2003; H1N5 avian influenza in 2005–06; H1N1 influenza in 2009; MERS in 2012; Ebola in 2014; and COVID-19). Our post-COVID-19 world—if we ever get there—will likely feature successive, emerging, and reemerging infectious threats. Extreme climate change may bring about a whole new microbial world rife with threats to the human population. Rapid international jet travel, a growing anti-vaxxer movement, antibiotic resistance, and zoonotic jumps of viruses from one species to another only accelerate this danger.To manage that future, I won’t look to our past; I’ll look to how we handle our present. We must learn to innovate, plan, and test evidence-based pandemic protocols; develop and resupply stockpiles of protective gear, intensive-care devices, medications, and vaccines; and fund basic infectious-disease research. We must also insist that our leaders demand transparent communication and disease surveillance among all nations as new threats develop around the world.Read: How the pandemic now endsCitizens, too, have a responsibility to tell their leaders they want sound, science-based public-health policies to protect them. Most of us are happy to pay taxes supporting our local fire department even if the odds of our own home burning down are small. In the event of such a disaster, we have confidence that the firefighters will come to extinguish the blaze before it is too late. The same federal financial support must be applied to funding our public-health agencies and for our citizens who are experiencing food, housing, or income insecurity.What keeps me awake at night is the real risk that our flummoxed leaders will forget about the very issues that got us into this mess in the first place. They will move on to other projects and plans. Such purposeful amnesia only helps to set us up for another pandemic—a tragedy of Himalayan proportions, not to mention a definite threat to our collective health. The coronavirus pandemic is setting a new benchmark, one we’ll be studying to help us navigate the next one.About the AuthorHoward Markel, a professor at the University of Michigan, is the author of the forthcoming book, The Secret of Life: Rosalind Franklin, James Watson, Francis Crick, and the Discovery of DNA’s Double Helix. More StoriesThe Heart of the MatterAntiviral activity of diallyl trisulfide against H9N2 avian influenza virus infection in vitro and in vivo | Virology Journal | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search Virology Journal Home About Articles Sections Submission Guidelines Submit manuscript Antiviral activity of diallyl trisulfide against H9N2 avian influenza virus infection in vitro and in vivo Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 19 August 2021 Antiviral activity of diallyl trisulfide against H9N2 avian influenza virus infection in vitro and in vivo Le Ming1, Zhihui Li1, Xiaofang Li1, Ling Tang1 & …Guimei He1,2 Show authors Virology Journal volume 18, Article number: 171 (2021) Cite this article 5748 Accesses 7 Citations 2 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundDiallyl trisulfide (DATS) is a garlic-derived organosulfur compound. As it has been shown to have anti-viral activity, we hypothesized that it may alleviate infections caused by H9N2 avian influenza virus (AIV), which is prevalent in poultry with pandemic potential.MethodsHuman lung A549 epithelial cells were treated with three different concentrations of DATS 24 h before (pre-treatment) or one hour after (post-treatment) H9N2 AIV infection. Culture supernatants were collected 24 h and 48 h post-infection and analyzed for viral titers and levels of inflammatory and anti-viral immune responses. For in vivo experiments, BABL/c mice were administered daily by intraperitoneal injection with DATS (30 mg/kg) for 2 weeks starting 1 day after H9N2 AIV infection. Clinical signs, lung pathology, and inflammatory and anti-viral immune responses were assessed 2, 4, and 6 days after infection.ResultsBoth pre-treatment and post-treatment of A549 cells with DATS resulted in reduced viral loads, increased expression of anti-viral genes (RIG-I, IRF-3, and interferon-β), and decreased expression of inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α and IL-6). These effects were also observed in H9N2 AIV-infected mice treated with DATS. Such treatment also reduced lung edema and inflammation in mice.ConclusionsResults suggest that DATS has anti-viral activity against H9N2 AIV and may be used as an alternative treatment for influenza virus infection. BackgroundInfluenza is a severe infectious disease of the respiratory tract and contributes to substantial morbidity and mortality. It has been estimated that 290,000–650,000 influenza-associated deaths occur annually [1]. Currently, two classes of anti-influenza virus drugs, M2 channel blockers and neuraminidase inhibitors, are available. Unfortunately, increasing viral resistance, cumulative neurotoxicity, and time-dependent effectiveness of these drugs limit their clinical use [2, 3]. Therefore, novel and more effective anti-influenza drugs are urgently needed.The anti-viral activity of plant extracts and their derivatives is increasingly being recognized in recent years [4, 5]. More than 40% of modern medicines are derived from plants [6]. Several small molecules extracted from plants have been shown to possess anti-influenza virus activity. For instance, catechins in green tea have significant inhibitory effect on both influenza A and B viruses in vitro [7]. The main active ingredients extracted from dendrobium orchids also have been shown to possess activity against H1N1 and H3N2 influenza viruses in vitro [8].Garlic has a wide range of biological activities, including anti-fungus, anti-virus, anti-cancer, anti-oxidation, and anti-inflammation [9]. Fresh garlic extracts has been shown to inhibit influenza virus replication [10, 11] and modulate immune and inflammatory responses [12]. In dengue virus infection, an active substance of garlic was shown to reduce inflammatory and oxidative stress responses [13]. Organosulfur compounds are the main effective components of garlic. Among which, diallyl trisulfide (DATS) is much more easily synthesized and stable than others [14]. It has been shown that DATS diminishes NF-κB and TNF-α activity in mice with LPS-induced acute lung injury [15]. However, the role of DATS in immune response against influenza virus infection is not clear.H9N2 avian influenza virus (AIV) was initially identified in chickens in Guangdong province, China in 1994 [16]. It has widely spread and caused enormous economic loss to poultry industry in China [17, 18]. H9N2 AIV can cross species barriers and have been shown to infect humans [19] and contribute internal genes to H7N9, H5N1, H5N6, and H10N8 influenza viruses that infect humans [19,20,21,22]. Therefore, H9N2 AIV has the potential to cause pandemic infections. We hypothesized that DATS can enhance innate immunity against H9N2 AIV infection and tested its anti-viral activity in vitro and in vivo in this study.Materials and methodsVirusThe H9N2 avian influenza virus (A/mallard/Jiangxi/39/2011) stored in our laboratory was isolated from wild duck in Jiangxi Province, China in 2011. The complete sequences of all 8 genomic segments (JQ901621, JQ901632, JQ901643, JQ901654, JQ901665, JQ901676, JQ901687, and JQ901698) of the virus are available from the GenBank. The H9N2 AIV used in this study has been shown to infect and induce acute lung injury in mice [23]. The virus was propagated in 10-day old pathogen free chicken embryos (Ingelheim Vital Biotechnology Co, Ltd, Beijing, China) at 37 °C for 72 h (h). The 50% tissue culture infection dose (TCID50) was determined in human alveolar epithelial cell line A549 cells, and the titer of viral stock was 106.9 TCID50/100 μl.Cell culture and reagentsA549 cells were purchased from the Cell Bank Academy of Science (China) and grown in Dulbecco's Minimum Essential Medium (DMEM) (Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS at 37 °C with 5% CO2. MTT (3-[4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) (purity > 98%), amantadine hydrochloride (AMT) (purity > 99%), and DATS (purity > 97%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. DATS was dissolved in 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Sigma-Aldrich) at 3 mM as stock solution and stored at − 20 °C before use. AMT was dissolved in 0.1% DMSO at 4 mM and used as positive anti-virus control drug. MTT (5 mg/ml) was dissolved in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and filtered through a 0.2-µm microporous membrane (Millipore).Cytotoxicity assayThe cytotoxicity of DATS and AMT for A549 cells was determined using the MTT assay. A549 cells were seeded at a concentration of 1 × 105 cells/well in a 96-well plate (Corning) and incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator for 24 h. When the cells reached 75% confluency, they were replenished with 0.1 ml of maintenance medium (with 2% FBS) containing various concentrations of DATS (75–3000 µM) or AMT (125–4000 µM). Five wells of cell were used for each concentration and incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator for 48 h. Cells in wells with 0.1 mL maintenance medium without drugs were used as negative controls. After removal of culture medium in each well, MTT (5 mg/ml, 20 µl) was added and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by addition of 100 µl of DMSO, and the absorbance (Abs) of the purple formazan formed due to MTT reduction by NAD(P)H-dependent cellular oxidoreductase in live cells was read at 570 nm using a microplate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific,USA). The percentage of cell viability after drug treatment was calculated as follows: % Cell viability = [Abs of treatment group/Abs of control group] × 100%.DATS treatment in A549 cellsThe effect of DATS on H9N2 AIV infection was investigated with two different conditions, pre-treatment and post-treatment. A549 cells were seeded in 96-well plates or T-25 culture flasks and grown to 75–90% confluency. For pre-treatment experiments, A549 cells were treated with three different concentrations (375 µM, 187.5 µM and 93.75 µM) of DATS for 24 h, washed twice with PBS, and then infected with H9N2 AIV. For post-treatment experiments, the cells were infected with H9N2 AIV for 1 h, washed twice with PBS, and then incubated in maintenance medium containing three different concentrations (375 µM, 187.5 µM, and 93.75 µM) of DATS. Cells treated with 500 µM AMT were used as positive drug control. To test the effect of DATS on virus adsorption, the cells were inoculated with H9N2 AIV at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 After 1 h of incubation at 37 °C, the cells in wells of a 96-well plate were washed twice with PBS and then incubated in maintenance medium for 48 h. The inhibitory activity of DATS on cytopathic effect (CPE) induced by H9N2 AIV was determined by MTT assay. The cells in T-25 culture flasks were incubated at 37 °C under 5% CO2 with a small amount of maintenance medium, and the supernatants were harvested at 24 h and 48 h after drug treatment and assayed for TCID50 on MDCK cells.Quantitative RT-PCRQuantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed to determine the expression levels of IL-6, TNF-α, RIG-I, IRF-3, IFN-β, and H9N2 AIV M gene. All qRT-PCR primers (Table 1) were designed using the software Primer Premier 5.0 (Premier, Canada). Total RNA was extracted from culture supernatants and cells using the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN). Synthesis of the first-strand complementary DNA was conducted using the Invitrogen Transcription SuperScript™III RT Kit (Invitrogen, US). Each qRT-PCR reaction contained 10 μL SYBR Premix Ex Taq (2 ×), 0.4 μL forward primer, 0.4 μL reverse primer, 0.4 μL ROX reference dye (50 ×), 2 μL cDNA, 6.8 μL H2O (total volume 20 μL), and SYBR Premix Ex Taq RR420A-Tli RNase H Plus (Takara Clontech, Dalian). PCR was performed as follows: 95 °C for 30 s followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 5 s and 60 °C for 31 s. Expression levels of various genes were normalized to that of the housekeeping gene GAPDH as its expression level was stable in A549 cells. Four independent PCRs were performed for each sample. All data were analyzed using the Sequence Detector Systems software (Applied Biosystems, USA). Fold change in gene expression was calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method.Table 1 Primers used in this studyFull size tableIn vivo experimentsPathogen free BALB/c female mice (aged 6–8 weeks) were purchased from Shanghai Slake Co, Ltd. (China). To evaluate the effect of DATS on H9N2 AIV-induced lung injury, the mice were randomly divided into infected group, DATS-treated infected group, DATS control group, and uninfected control group (n = 26 mice/group). Mice in infected group and DATS-treated infected group were lightly anaesthetized with diethyl ether and inoculated intranasally with 80 μL of H9N2 AIV in allantois fluid (1 × 106 50% egg infection dose per 0.1 ml, EID50). Mice in uninfected control group were inoculated with the same dilution and volume of sterile allantois fluid intranasally. One day after virus inoculation, mice were intraperitoneally injected with DATS (30 mg/kg body weight) or 0.9% saline daily for 2 weeks. Five mice from each group were euthanized at days 2, 4, and 6 post-infection to obtain whole lungs, kidneys, spleens, and intestines. The pulmonary index was calculated according to the following formula: Pulmonary index = [Lung weight (g)/Body weight (g)] × 100. A portion of each lung was fixed in formalin and processed for histological examinations as described previously [24]. The other part of each lung was used for viral titration on MDCK cells and expression assessments of inflammatory cytokine genes and H9N2 AIV M gene by qRT-PCR. The viral loads in other organs of infected mice were also determined on MDCK cells at days 2, 4, and 6 post-infection. The remaining mice were monitored daily for clinical signs and body weight for 14 days after infection.Statistical analysesAll data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS for Windows, version 19.0 (SPSS Inc, USA) and GraphPad Prism 8.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). The one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post-hoc Tukey test or unpaired two-tailed t-test was used to determine the significance of difference between two groups. In all statistical analyses, p < 0.05 or p < 0.01 was considered significant.ResultsCytotoxicity of DATSThe cytotoxicity of DATS and AMT on A549 cells was examined using the MTT-based cell viability assay. Results showed that 375 µM of DATS and 500 µM of AMT had little or no cytotoxicity to A549 cells (Fig. 1). Therefore, 93.75–375 µM of DATS and 500 µM of AMT were used for subsequent experiments.Fig. 1Cytotoxicity of diallyl trisulfide (DATS). A549 cells were incubated with various concentrations of DATS or AMT for 48 h. The percentage of cell viability was calculated. Values are presented as means ± SD of five repeatsFull size imageAnti-viral activity of DATSTo investigate anti-H9N2 AIV activity of DATS, its effect on different stages of infection was examined. DATS was added to A549 cell cultures to a final concentration of 93.75, 187.5, or 375 µM 24 h before (pre-treatment), or 1 h after (post-treatment) H9N2 AIV infection. H9N2 AIV-infected A549 cells were treated with 500 µM AMT as positive anti-viral control in the same manner. As AMT was dissolved in 0.1% DMSO, cells in untreated control groups were treated with 0.1% DMSO before or after infection to serve as negative controls.In the pre-treatment experiment, the viability of untreated H9N2 AIV infected- cells was 33.6%, and that of AMT-treated infected group was 47.8%. The viability of H9N2-infected cells treated with 93.75, 187.5, or 375 µM of DATS was 36.7%, 44.8%, and 44.9%, respectively (Fig. 2a), suggesting that pre-treatment of A549 cells with DATS for 24 h rendered them less susceptible to H9N2 AIV infection. In the post-treatment experiment, the viability of untreated H9N2 AIV infected-cells was 53.5%, and that of AMT-treated infected cells was 82.2%. The viability of infected cells treated with 93.75, 187.5, or 375 µM of DATS 1 h after H9N2 AIV infection was 67.7%, 72.7%, and 79.3%, respectively. The anti-viral activity of DATS was dose dependent and was more effective in the post-treatment experiment.Fig. 2Effect of DATS on H9N2 AIV replication in A549 cells. A549 cells were treated with three different concentrations (375 µM, 187.5 µM, and 93.75 µM) of DATS 24 h before or 1 h after H9N2 AIV infection and then cultured in maintenance medium for 48 h. AMT (500 µM) was used as the positive drug control. a Viability of A549 cells was measured by MTT assay. b Culture supernatants were collected at 24 h and 48 h after infection and assayed for TCID50 on MDCK cells. c RNA was isolated from cell lysates and assayed for expression levels H9N2 AIV M gene by real-time RT-PCR. Abbreviations: control, uninfected cells; H9N2, H9N2 AIV-infected; AMT + H9N2, H9N2 AIV-infected cells treated with 500 μM AMT; DATS + H9N2, H9N2 AIV-infected cells treated with DATS. Values are averages of three independent examinations. Significant difference was determined by comparing the data to those of H9N2 AIV-infected group (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01)Full size imageCulture supernatants of H9N2 AIV-infected cells were assayed at 24 h and 48 h after infection for TCID50 on MDCK cells. Results showed that DATS effectively inhibited virus proliferation in both pre-treatment and post-treatment experiments at 24 h and 48 h (Fig. 2b). To further assess the effect of DATS on H9N2 AIV replication, the expression levels of the M gene of H9N2 AIV in both pre-treatment and post-treatment experiments were examined by qRT-PCR 48 h after infection. Results showed that M gene expression level in AMT pre-treatment experiment was 0.71 fold and that in AMT post-treatment experiment was 0.54 fold of the level of untreated H9N2 AIV-infected cells (Fig. 2c). H9N2 AIV M gene expression in A549 cells in DATS pre-treatment experiment was 0.6 fold (40% decrease) that of untreated H9N2-infected cells for all 3 DATS doses. The inhibitory effect of DATS on H9N2 AIV replication was more profound in the post-treatment experiment as M gene expression in A549 cells treated with 93.75, 187.5, or 375 µM of DATS after infection was 0.27, 0.18, and 0.16 fold that of untreated cells, indicating that DATS at 93.75, 187.5, and 375 µM inhibited H9N2 AIV replication by 73, 82, and 84% when it was added to the cells 1 h after infection. Taken together, these results indicated that DATS was inhibitory to H9N2 AIV replication and was more effective when it was added 1 h after infection. Accordingly, 375 µM of DATS added 1 h post-infection was used for subsequent experiments.DATS diminishes H9N2 AIV induced inflammationTo investigate the effect of DATS on H9N2 AIV-induced inflammation, the expression levels of inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 in cells of post-treatment experiment were measured by qRT-PCR at 24 h and 48 h after infection. The level of TNF-α and IL-6 mRNAs thus determined was then compared to that of uninfected control, which was set as 1.0. For IL-6, H9N2 AIV infection increased its expression by 15.8 fold at 24 h and 9.6 fold at 48 h (Fig. 3a). Treatment of H9N2 infected cells with 500 µM AMT decreased IL-6 expression by 5.6 fold at 24 h and 2.5 fold at 48 h (Fig. 3a). Treatment of H9N2 infected cells with 375 µM of DATS reduced IL-6 expression by 9.0 fold at 24 h and 2.3 fold at 48 h. For TNF-α, H9N2 AIV infection increased its expression by 11.3 fold at 24 h and 23.7 fold at 48 h (Fig. 3b). Treatment of H9N2 infected cells with 500 µM AMT decreased TNF-α expression by 2.9 fold at 24 h and 2.3 fold at 48 h. Treatment of H9N2 infected cells with DATS decreased TNF-α expression by 11.3 fold at 24 h and 4.8 fold at 48 h. These results showed that DATS decreased proinflammatory response induced by H9N2 AIV infection.Fig. 3Effect of DATS on the expression of inflammatory and antiviral cytokines. A549 cells were treated with DATS and cultured in maintenance medium. At 24 h and 48 h after DATS treatment, total RNA was extracted and analyzed for expression levels of inflammatory and antiviral cytokines by real-time PCR assay. GAPDH was used as an internal control. Fold change in gene expression was calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method. AMT (500 µM) was used as the positive drug control. Abbreviations are the same as those in Fig. 2. Values are averages of three independent examinations. Significant difference was determined by comparing the data to those of H9N2 AIV-infected group (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01)Full size imageDATS increases anti-viral responses during H9N2 AIV infectionThe effect of DATS on the expression of anti-viral factors RIG-I, IRF-3, and IFN-β in A549 cells were also investigated by qRT-PCR. The level of RIG-I, IRF-3, and IFN-β mRNAs thus determined was then compared to that of uninfected control, which was set as 1.0. H9N2 AIV infection was found to increase RIG-1 expression by 14.8 fold at 24 h and 12.9 fold at 48 h post-infection (Fig. 3c). Treatment of A549 cells with 500 µM AMT 1 h after H9N2 AIV infection resulted in a further increase in RIG-1 expression, 29.8 fold at 24 h and 17.9 fold at 48 h. Treatment of cells 1 h after infection with 375 µM of DATS increased RIG-1 expression 26.9 fold at 24 h and 15.3 fold at 48 h (Fig. 3c). For IRF3, H9N2 AIV infection increased its expression by 19.8 fold at 24 h and 3.3 fold at 48 h (Fig. 3d). Treatment of A549 cells 1 h after H9N2 AIV infection with 500 µM AMT increased IRF3 expression 62.8 fold at 24 h and 24.4 fold at 48 h. Treatment of cells with 375 µM of DATS 1 h after infection increased its expression 51.8 fold at 24 h and 34.2 fold at 48 h (Fig. 3d). For IFN-β, H9N2 AIV infection increased its expression by 6.1 fold at 24 h and 4.7 fold at 48 h (Fig. 3e). Treatment of A549 cells 1 h after H9N2 AIV infection with 500 µM AMT increased its expression 13.6 fold at 24 h and 9.7 fold at 48 h. Treatment of cells with DATS 1 h after H9N2 AIV infection increased its expression 9.2 fold at 24 h and 8.2 fold at 48 h (Fig. 3e). These results suggest that DATS exerts its anti-H9N2 AIV by enhancing innate immune responses.DATS protects mice from H9N2 AIV infectionBased on results of in vitro experiments, we hypothesized that DATS can attenuate the symptoms of H9N2 AIV infection in mice. It has been shown that H9N2 AIV-infected mice exhibit marked inactivity, emaciation, ruffled fur, lack of appetite, labored breathing, respiratory distress, and decreased body weight [24]. In this study, the decrease in body weight caused by H9N2 AIV infection was most profound (12.8% loss) 3 days after infection. Treatment of infected mice with DATS (30 mg/kg/day), starting 1 day after infection, diminished such loss (8.2% loss) 3 days after infection. The body weight of mice in DATS-treated group and uninfected control group was not significantly changed (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Effect of DATS on body weight of H9N2 AIV-infected mice. BALB/c female mice were inoculated intranasally with 80 μL of allantois fluid containing H9N2 AIV (1 × 106 50% egg infection dose). One day after virus inoculation, mice were injected with 30 mg/kg of DATS intraperitoneally or 0.9% saline every day and monitored for weight loss daily for 14 days. Abbreviations: Control, uninfected and untreated; DATS, DATS treated uninfected control; H9N2, H9N2 AIV-infected control; DATS + H9N2, mice infected with H9N2 AIV and then treated with DATS. Data are presented as mean ± SD of 6 mice per groupFull size imageTo investigate pulmonary edema caused by H9N2 virus infection, lung index (weight lung to body weight ratio) was determined at different time points during infection. Results showed that lung index was increased in mice of infected groups at days 2–6 after H9N2 AIV infection, but it was lower in mice of DATS-treated group (Fig. 5a). At day 6, DATS effect was not significant. These results indicated that H9N2 AIV infection caused edema in the lungs, thus increasing lung index, and DATS treatment reduced the severity of lung edema. Similar patterns of DATS effect were observed in viral loads in the lungs. A significant decrease in viral loads was observed in DATS treatment for 2 and 4 days (Fig. 5b). Since the levels of influenza M protein reflect the levels of virus replication, mRNA levels of the M gene were determined. Results showed significantly reduced levels of M gene mRNA after treatment with DATS for 2 or 4 days (Fig. 5c).To examine lung lesion, HE staining of lung sections was carried out. Results showed that the lungs of H9N2 AIV-infected mice exhibited collapsed alveolar spaces, infiltration of inflammatory cells, interstitial and alveolar edema, and hemorrhage (Fig. 6). These pathological changes were relatively mild in mice with DATS treatment. These results suggest that DATS treatment reduced the severity of edema and viral loads in the lungs.Fig. 5Effect of DATS on lung injury in of mice. Five mice from each group were euthanized at days 2, 4, and 6 post-infection, and their lungs were harvested and weighed. Abbreviations are the same as those in Fig. 4. Significant difference was determined by comparing the data to those of H9N2 AIV-infected group (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). a Wet lung weight to body weight ratios. b Viral loads in the lungs determined by TCID50 assay on MDCK cells. c Expression levels of H9N2 AIV M gene determined by real-time PCR. Fold change was calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt methodFull size imageFig. 6Effect of DATS on lung histology. Five mice from each group were euthanized at days 2, 4, and 6 post-infection, and their lungs were harvested for histological examinations. Abbreviations are the same as those in Fig. 4. DATS + H9N2 (a–c), H9N2 (d–f), DATS (g–i), and Control (j–l). Images shown are of 100 × magnification (10 × objectives, 10 × eyepiece lens)Full size imageThe expression levels of inflammatory cytokines (IL-6 and TNF-α) and anti-viral cytokines (RIG-1 and IFN-β) induce by H9N2 AIV infection in lungs were then determined. The mRNA level of these cytokines was then compared to that of uninfected control, which was set as 1.0. Results showed that the effects of H9N2 AIV infection and DATS treatment on the expression of TNF-α and IL-6 were most profound at 6 days post infection (Fig. 7). At that time, H9N2 AIV infection increased TNF-α expression by 6.5 fold, and DATS treatment reduced it to 3.9 fold. For IL-6, H9N2 AIV infection increased its expression by 20 fold, and DATS treatment reduced it to 18 fold. The effect on RIG-I expression was most profound (16.9 fold increase) at day 6 post-infection. DATS treatment further increased it to 29 fold (Fig. 7). The effect on IFN-β expression was most profound (tenfold increase) at 2 days post-infection. DATS treatment increased IFN-β expression 12 fold. These results showed that H9N2 AIV infection caused a profound increase in the expression of inflammatory and anti-viral cytokines. DATS treatment reduced the expression of TNF-α and IL-6, but increased the expression of RIG-1 and IFN-β.Fig. 7Effect of DATS on the expression of inflammatory and anti-viral cytokines in mice. Five mice from each group were euthanized at days 2, 4, and 6 post-infection, and their lungs were harvested for determination of expression levels of inflammatory and anti-viral cytokines by real-time PCR assay. GAPDH was used as an internal control. Fold change in gene expression was calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method. Abbreviations are the same as those in Fig. 4. Values are averages of three independent examinations. Significant difference was determined by comparing the data to those of H9N2 AIV-infected group (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01)Full size imageDiscussionInfluenza viruses infect 3–5 million people every year [1]. Treatment with conventional anti-influenza drugs is usually met with drug resistance. Therefore, alternative anti-viral agents are urgently needed. As garlic and garlic-derived organosulfur compounds have long been used to treat infectious diseases including viral infections [25, 26], we examined the anti-viral effect of DATS on H9N2 AIV infection in vitro and in vivo.In A549 cells, a strong anti-H9N2 AIV effect was observed when DATS was applied 1 h post-infection (Fig. 2). In the mouse model, DATS was shown to reduce viral loads in the lungs and the severity of lung edema (Figs. 5, 6). This anti-influenza virus activity of DATS is similar to that of fresh garlic extract [10, 11]. It has been shown that over expression of cytokines is a hallmark of severe influenza virus infection [27]. Several reports have demonstrated that the severity and higher mortality of influenza A viral infections were correlated with the excessive inflammation in the lungs attributed to IL-6 and TNF-a [28]. H9N2 viruses are known to elicit a higher expression of inflammatory chemokines and cytokines which might enhance their pathogenicity to the hosts [29]. Garlic has been shown to be effective to several diseases, and which largely due to the reduction of inflammation, and DATS has also been shown to have immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory effects in several types of cancer [30]. Our data showed that DATS treatment decreased the expression of inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 induced by H9N2 AIV infection both in vitro and in vivo.It has been demonstrated that cytosolic RNAs derived from viral genome are mainly recognized by RNA helicases RIG-I and MDA5 encoded by retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5). RIG-I and MDA5 recruit virus-induced signaling adaptor (VISA) (also known as MAVS, IPS-1, and Cardif) [31]. VISA then forms a large prion-like complex and serves as a platform for the assembly of a signalosome, which contains multiple components including TRAF proteins (TRAF2/3/5/6), TBK1, and IKKs kinases. TBK1 and IKKs phosphorylate IRF3 and NF-B, respectively, leading to induction of type I interferons (IFNs) and pro-inflammatory cytokines [32]. RIG-I is expressed in many types of cells, such as lung epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts and plays a vital role in innate immunity against influenza virus infection. In this study, we showed that DATS up-regulated the expression of RIG-I in H9N2 AIV infected cells, thus promoting the expression of its downstream genes, IRF-3 and IFN-β (Fig. 3).Results of our in vivo experiments showed that treatment of infected mice with DATS resulted in reduced weight loss, lung damage, and pulmonary inflammation and edema. Pathological examinations revealed that DATS decreased the infiltration of inflammatory cells such as polymorphonuclear neutrophils and macrophages that are important sources of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [33]. Excessive ROS is known to cause oxidative stress, which aggravates the symptoms of viral infections [34]. Whether DATS can diminish H9N2 AIV-induced oxidative stress remains to be investigated. Our results revealed that DATS significantly reduced the expression of IL-6 and TNF-α in H9N2 AIV-infected cells and enhanced the expression of RIG-I and IFN-β in the lungs to defend H9N2 AIV infection in mice. These observations suggest that DATS has the potential to become an alternative therapy for respiratory viral infections.ConclusionWe found that DATS inhibited H9N2 AIV infection, increased the expression of anti-viral genes, and decreased the production of inflammation cytokines during H9N2 AIV infection in vitro and in vivo. These results suggest that DATS is a promising antiviral agent against influenza viruses. Availability of data materials The datasets used in this are available from the corresponding author upon request. AbbreviationsDATS: Diallyl trisulfide AIV: Avian influenza virus TCID50: 50% Tissue culture infection dose DMEM: Dulbecco's minimum essential medium DMSO: Dimethyl sulfoxide AMT: Amantadine hydrochloride PBS: Phosphate buffered saline Abs: Absorbance SD: Standard deviation ANOVA: One-way analysis of variance RIG-I: Retinoic acid-inducible gene I MDA5: Melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 VISA: Virus-induced signaling adaptor ReferencesIuliano AD, Roguski KM, Chang HH, Muscatello DJ, Palekar R, Tempia S, Cohen C, Gran JM, Schanzer D, Cowling BJ, Wu P, Kyncl J, Ang LW, Park M, Redlberger-Fritz M, Yu H, Espenhain L, Krishnan A. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. The Lancet. 2018;391:1285–300.Article Google Scholar Le QM, Kiso M, Someya K, Sakai YT, Nguyen TH, Nguyen KHL, Pham ND, Ngyen HH, Yamada S, Muramoto Y, Horimoto T, Takada A, Goto H, Suzuki T, Suzuki Y, Kawaoka Y. Avian flu: isolation of drug-resistant H5N1 virus. Nature. 2005;437:1108.Article CAS Google Scholar Bright RA, Medina MJ, Xu X, Perezoronoz G, Wallis TR, Davis XM, Povinelli L, Cox NJ, Klimov A. Incidence of adamantane resistance among influenza A (H3N2) viruses isolated worldwide from 1994 to 2005: a cause for concern. Lancet. 2005;366:1175–81.Article CAS Google Scholar Sharma SB, Gupta R. Drug development from natural resource: a systematic approach. Mini-Rev Med Chem. 2015;15:52–7.Article CAS Google Scholar Fang J, Liu C, Wang Q, Lin P, Cheng F. In silico polypharmacology of natural products. Brief Bioinform. 2018;19:1153–71.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rajasekaran D, Palombo EA, ChiaYeo T, LimSiokLey D, LeeTu C, Malherbe F, Grollo L. Identification of traditional medicinal plant extracts with novel anti-influenza activity. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:79293.Article Google Scholar Jae-Min S, Kwang-Hee L, Baik-Lin S. Antiviral effect of catechins in green tea on influenza virus. Antiviral Res. 2005;68:66–74.Article Google Scholar Li R, Liu T, Liu M, Chen F, Liu S, Yang J. Anti-influenza A virus activity of dendrobine and its mechanism of action. J Agric Food Chem. 2017;65:3665–74.Article CAS Google Scholar Rouf R, Uddin SJ, Sarker DK, Islam MT, Ali ES, Shilpi JA, Nahar L, Tiralongo E, Sarker SD. Anti-viral potential of garlic (Allium sativum) and it’s organosulfur compounds: a systematic update of pre-clinical and clinical data. Trends Food Sci Technol. 2020;104:219–34.Article CAS Google Scholar Mehrbod P, Aini I, Amini E, Eslami M, Bande F. Assessment of direct immunofluorescence assay in detection of antiviral effect of garlic extract on influenza virus. Afr J Microbiol Res. 2013;72:2608–16.Article Google Scholar Mehrbod P, Amini E, Tavassotikheiri M. Antiviral activity of garlic extract on influenza virus. Iran J Virol. 2009;3:19–23.Article Google Scholar Arreola R, Quintero-Fabián S, López-Roa RI, Flores-Gutiérrez EO, Reyes-Grajeda JP, Carrera-Quintanar L, Ortuño-Sahagún D. Immunomodulation and anti-Inflammatory effects of garlic compounds. J Immunol Res. 2015. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/401630.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hall A, Troupin A, Londono-Renteria B, Colpitts TM. Garlic organosulfur compounds reduce inflammation and oxidative stress during dengue virus infection. Viruses. 2017;9:159.Article Google Scholar Corzo-Martínez M, Corzo N, Villamiel M. Biological properties of onions and garlic. Trends Food Sci Technol. 2007;8:609–25.Article Google Scholar Yewdell JW, Bennink JR, Smith GL, Moss B. Influenza A virus nucleoprotein is a major target antigen for cross-reactive anti-influenza A virus cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1985;82:1785–9.Article CAS Google Scholar Chen B, Zhang ZJ, Chen WB. Isolation and identification of avian influenza virus. Chin J Vet Med. 1994;20:3–5. Google Scholar Li C, Yu K, Tian G, Yu D, Liu L, Jing B, Ping J, Chen H. Evolution of H9N2 influenza viruses from domestic poultry in Mainland China. Virology. 2005;340:70–83.Article CAS Google Scholar Li KS, Xu KM, Peiris JS, Poon LL, Yu KZ, Yuen KY, Shortridge KF, Webster RG, Guan Y. Characterization of H9 subtype influenza viruses from the ducks of southern China: a candidate for the next influenza pandemic in humans? J Virol. 2003;77:6988–94.Article CAS Google Scholar Li X, Shi J, Guo J, Deng G, Zhang Q, Wang J, He X, Wang K, Chen J, Li Y, Fan J, Kong H, Gu C, Guan Y, Suzuki Y, Kawaoka Y, Liu L, Jiang Y, Tian G, Li Y, Bu Z, Chen H. Genetics, receptor binding property, and transmissibility in mammals of naturally isolated H9N2 avian influenza viruses. PLoS Pathog. 2014;10:e1004508.Article Google Scholar Pu J, Wang S, Yin Y, Zhang G, Carter RA, Wang J, Xu G, Sun H, Wen C, Wang D, Zhu B, Lemmon G, Jia Y, Duan S, Wang Q, Du Q, Sun M, Bao J, Sin Y, Zhao J, Zhang H, Wu G, Liu J, Webster RG. Evolution of the H9N2 influenza genotype that facilitated the genesis of the novel H7N9 virus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015;112:548–53.Article CAS Google Scholar Guan Y, Shortridge KF, Krauss S, Chin PS, Dyrting KC, Ellis TM, Webster RG. Peiris M (2000) H9N2 influenza viruses possessing H5N1-like internal genomes continue to circulate in poultry in Southeastern China. J Virol. 2000;74:9372–80.Article CAS Google Scholar Chen H, Yuan H, Gao R, Zhang J, Wang D, Xiong Y, Fan G, Yang F, Li X, Zhou J, Zou S, Yang L, Chen T, Dong L, Bo H, Zhao X, Zhang Y, Lan Y, Bai T, Dong J, Li Q, Wang S, Zhang Y, Li H, Gong T, Shi Y, Ni X, Li J, Zhou J, Fan J, Wu J, Zhou X, Hu M, Wan J, Yang W, Li D, Wu G, Feng Z, Gao GF, Wang Y, Jin Q, Liu M, Shu Y. Clinical and epidemiological characteristics of a fatal case of avian influenza A H10N8 virus infection: a descriptive study. Lancet. 2014;383:714–21.Article Google Scholar Zhu G, Wang R, Xuan F, Daszak P, Anthony SJ, Zhang S, Zhang L, He G. Characterization of recombinant H9N2 influenza viruses isolated from wild ducks in China. Vet microbial. 2013;166:327–36.Article CAS Google Scholar Gui B, Chen Q, Hu C, Zhu C, He G. Effects ofcalcitriol (1, 25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3) on the inflammatory response induced by H9N2 influenza virus infection in human lung A549 epithelial cells and in mice. Virol J. 2017;14:10.Article Google Scholar Ayaz E, Alpsoy HC. Garlic (Allium sativum) and traditional medicine. Turkiye Parazitol Derg. 2007;31:145–9.PubMed Google Scholar Rehman R, Saif S, Hanif MA, Riaz M. Medicinal plants of South Asia. Amsterdam: Elsevier B. V; 2019. p. 768. Google Scholar Peeling P, Dawson B, Goodman C, Landers G, Trinder D. Athletic induced iron deficiency: new insights into the role of inflammation, cytokines and hormones. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2008;103:381.Article CAS Google Scholar McGill J, Heusel JW, Legge KL. Innate immune control and regulation of influenza virus infections. J Leukoc Biol. 2009;86:803–12.Article CAS Google Scholar Huang R, Liu J, Liang W, Wang A, Liu Z, Yang Y, Lv J, Bao Y, Gao Y, Miao Z. Response profiles of cytokines and chemokines against avian H9N2 influenza virus within the mouse lung. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2014;203:109–14.Article CAS Google Scholar Thomson M, Ali M. Garlic [Allium sativum]: a review of its potential use as an anti-cancer agent. Curr Cancer Drug Tar. 2003;3:67–81.Article CAS Google Scholar Pichlmair A, Schulz O, Tan CP, Näslund TI, Liljeström P, Weber F, Sousa CR. RIG-I-mediated antiviral responses to single-stranded RNA bearing 5’-phosphates. Science. 2006;314:997–1001.Article CAS Google Scholar Hornung V, Ellegast J, Kim S, Brzózka K, Jung A, Kato H, Poeck H, Akira S, Conzelmann KK, Schlee M, Endres S, Hartmann G. 5’-Triphosphate RNA is the ligand for RIG-I. Science. 2006;314:994–7.Article Google Scholar Oda T, Akaike T, Hamamoto T, Suzuki F, Hirano T, Meada H. Oxygen radicals in influenzainduced pathogenesis and treatment with pyran polymer-conjugated SOD. Science. 1989;244:974–6.Article CAS Google Scholar Washington AT, Singh G, Aiyar A. Diametrically opposed effects of hypoxia and oxidative stress on two viral transactivators. Virol J. 2010;7:93.Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe sincerely acknowledge the support of Yangtze Delta Estuarine Wetland Ecosystem Observation and Research Station and Ministry of Education & Shanghai Science and Technology Committee in this study.FundingThe work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Number: 31402163) and the Shanghai Municipal Committee of Science and Technology (Grant Number: 18DZ2293800).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsLaboratory of Wildlife Epidemic Diseases, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, No. 3663, North Zhongshan Rd, Shanghai, ChinaLe Ming, Zhihui Li, Xiaofang Li, Ling Tang & Guimei HeInstitute of Eco-Chongming (IEC), East China Normal University, Shanghai, ChinaGuimei HeAuthorsLe MingView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZhihui LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXiaofang LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLing TangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGuimei HeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsGH conceived the idea and designed the study. ML, ZL, and XL performed the experiments. ML, CH, XL, WT, and LT analyzed the data. ZL and GH wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Guimei He.Ethics declarations Ethical approval and consent to participate All experiments were conducted under biosafety level 2 conditions. Animals were maintained according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines for the Care and Use of Experimental Animals. All animal experiments were performed according to established safety protocols and were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the East China Normal University. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleMing, L., Li, Z., Li, X. et al. Antiviral activity of diallyl trisulfide against H9N2 avian influenza virus infection in vitro and in vivo. Virol J 18, 171 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-021-01641-wDownload citationReceived: 08 March 2021Accepted: 10 August 2021Published: 19 August 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-021-01641-wShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsDiallyl trisulfideAntiviral activityH9N2 AIVInflammation Download PDF Associated content Section Influenza viruses Advertisement Virology Journal ISSN: 1743-422X Contact us Submission enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.Patient Awareness of the Importance of Immunizations | AAFP Search search close Raising Patient Awareness of the Importance of Immunizations Dozens of Academy Resources Available for Members August 16, 2021, 1:35 p.m. News Staff — August is National Immunization Awareness Month, and as the delta variant of SARS-CoV-2 spreads across the country, it’s a reminder of how important vaccines are to protecting community health. To support members on this critical issue, the Academy offers extensive immunization-related resources at AAFP.org. Patient Care The Academy’s Immunizations & Vaccines webpage provides members with the latest information on vaccines and vaccine-preventable diseases, and gives updates on how FPs are addressing questions and concerns around vaccines in their communities. It currently offers the 2021 immunization schedules, recommendations from the Academy on influenza vaccine administration, toolkits and much more. The AAFP’s COVID-19 Vaccine webpage keeps members apprised of the latest developments related to COVID-19 vaccines, and links to resources from the CDC and the FDA. The page contains several family-medicine specific resources, including a list of vaccine FAQs and information to address vaccine myths, and is updated routinely with the newest information. While COVID-19 has grabbed much of the spotlight, it’s important to remember that influenza remains a significant public health concern. With influenza season approaching, members are invited to visit the AAFP’s Seasonal Influenza Prevention & Control webpage, which features the latest clinical recommendations on influenza vaccination, along with new information from the CDC. The CDC has advised that co-administration of the COVID-19 vaccine with other vaccines is allowed, which may provide additional opportunities for patients to get vaccinated against influenza and COVID-19. And as the start of the new school year approaches, members should make sure to check out the Academy’s Caring for School-Aged Patients webpage to help these patients stay safe and healthy. Ensuring that patients are up to date with their immunizations is especially important this year, as data show that the pandemic has caused many people to avoid or delay preventive care. Story Highlights Education In July, the Academy (through a cooperative agreement with the CDC) debuted an extensive CME program designed to increase adult immunization rates in African American communities. The program is available to family physicians and other clinicians free of charge, and allows participants to earn up to 21 CME credits. Throughout the year, the AAFP has also hosted a series of virtual town halls and webinars on COVID-19, many of which have discussed the use of COVID-19 vaccines. These products are available on the Academy’s Coronavirus CME webpage. Policies and Advocacy The Academy has reached out to the federal government numerous times in 2021, often by submitting letters or providing written testimony on immunization-related issues to congressional leaders. In March, for example, the Academy sent a letter to Sens. Patty Murray, D-Wash., and Richard Burr, R-N.C., the chair and ranking members of the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, asking, among other things, that Congress support and recognize the efforts of primary care physicians in ensuring equitable COVID-19 vaccine distribution and reducing disparities in vaccination rates. The AAFP has also published several statements this year that recognize the importance of the COVID-19 vaccine being authorized for children ages 12 to 15, promote the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccination in preventing severe illness, support COVID-19 vaccine mandates for health care and long-term care employees, and encourage discussion of COVID-19 vaccination as part of an annual sports physical. The Academy’s longstanding Immunizations policy also details the AAFP’s stances on a number of related issues, including access, cost, coverage and payment. Recent News Stories In February, the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (along with the AAFP and several other medical organizations) released the 2021 adult and childhood immunization schedules. At the end of April, thanks to a grant from Merck & Co. Inc., the Academy began mailing laminated, full-color copies of the schedules to members. Those who haven’t received their copies by now should email the Academy or call (800) 274-2237 for assistance. Downloadable copies of the adult, childhood and catch-up schedules also are available on the Academy’s Immunizations Schedules webpage. Members can also access the schedules via the AAFP mobile app or the Shots Immunizations app, which was developed by vaccine experts from the Academy and the Society of Teachers of Family Medicine. Patient Resources Finally, the Academy offers articles that FPs can refer patients to at familydoctor.org. These resources cover the latest immunization schedules, explain the importance of childhood vaccines, and discuss the role of immunizations within the larger framework of preventive care. There are also several COVID-19 vaccine articles that can be helpful in conversations with patients, including “Debunking Common COVID-19 Vaccine Myths.” More information is available at familydoctor.org’s Immunizations and Vaccines webpages. Copyright © 2024 American Academy of Family Physicians. All Rights Reserved.Influenza pandemic of 1918-1919 in Columbus was not unlike nowSkip to main content HomeElection 2024Voter GuideLocalCrimeEducationStateNation & WorldPoliticsEnvironmentColumnistsWeatherCoronavirus Remember When, Columbus: In 1918, a calm before the pandemic stormLinda Deitch | Special to The DispatchAs World War I was winding down, a particularly infectious strain of influenza spread around the globe, infecting a third of the population. When the pandemic was over, at least 50 million people had lost their lives.But that flu, known then as “la grippe” and often inaccurately labeled “Spanish flu,” hadn’t yet reached Columbus in September 1918. During that month, a salute to President Woodrow Wilson was staged in a formation of 21,000 men at Camp Sherman, a sprawling military training camp near Chillicothe. The first influenza case was reported there just a week later. In the end, 1,777 soldiers would die there.Theodore Decker: COVID events mirror those of a pandemic long pastAfter infection spread through the ranks at Camp Sherman, Columbus authorities were wary of the crisis marching its way here. Schools, theaters, movie houses and church services closed in mid-October 1918. The state health department implored Ohioans to avoid crowds and to get sunshine and fresh air.By the next month, people were gathering again. A throng of thousands celebrated the war’s end by congregating Downtown on Armistice Day, Nov. 11.The white arch shown had been erected earlier that year as a temporary memorial to honor Columbus' fallen soldiers.The influenza epidemic continued through the winter and into the spring of 1919. It claimed 1,236 lives in Columbus and about 675,000 Americans. Comparatively, the COVID-19 pandemic has claimed at least 1,500 lives in Franklin County and 620,178 in the United States so far.Contributor Linda Deitch was a Dispatch librarian for 25 years. Facebook Twitter EmailHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices© Copyright Gannett 2024Antiviral agents such as zanamivir and baloxavir are associated with improved time to symptom alleviation for seasonal influenza | 2 Minute Medicine About Masthead License Content Advertise Submit Press Release RSS/Email List 2MM Podcast Write for us Contact Us No Result View All Result No products in the cart. SUBSCRIBE Specialties All Specialties, All Recent Reports Cardiology Chronic Disease Dermatology Emergency Endocrinology Gastroenterology Imaging and Intervention Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Obstetrics Oncology Ophthalmology Pediatrics Pharma Preclinical Psychiatry Public Health Pulmonology Rheumatology Surgery The Scan+ Wellness Classics™+ 2MM+ Online Access Paperback and Ebook Rewinds Visual Career Podcasts Partners License Content Submit Press Release Advertise with Us Account Subscribe Sign-in My account Specialties All Specialties, All Recent Reports Cardiology Chronic Disease Dermatology Emergency Endocrinology Gastroenterology Imaging and Intervention Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Obstetrics Oncology Ophthalmology Pediatrics Pharma Preclinical Psychiatry Public Health Pulmonology Rheumatology Surgery The Scan+ Wellness Classics™+ 2MM+ Online Access Paperback and Ebook Rewinds Visual Career Podcasts Partners License Content Submit Press Release Advertise with Us Account Subscribe Sign-in My account SUBSCRIBE Subscribe Home All Specialties Emergency Antiviral agents such as zanamivir and baloxavir are associated with improved time to symptom alleviation for seasonal influenza byGursharan SohiandMichael Pratte August 16, 2021 in Emergency, Infectious Disease Reading Time: 3 mins read 0 Share on FacebookShare on Twitter 1. This network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) concluded that four antiviral medications successfully reduce the duration of influenza symptoms, of which zanamivir was associated with the shortest time to alleviation of influenza symptoms (TTAS). 2. Baloxavir was associated with the lowest overall risk of influenza-related complications of the antivirals included. Evidence Rating Level: 1 (Excellent) Study Rundown: Seasonal influenza is a common and potentially deadly illness in many parts of the world. Recently, Influenza A or B coinfection with the COVID-19 virus has increased the risk that each of these illnesses pose to individuals and healthcare systems globally. This systematic review and meta-analysis summarized high-quality evidence from RCTs evaluating antiviral medications recommended for influenza treatment: oseltamivir, oral baloxavir, inhaled zanamivir and intravenous peramivir. 26 studies were included with 11,897 participants in total. 15 trials were included in the analysis of antiviral efficacy for reduced symptom duration; 10mg zanamivir was associated with the shortest TTAS compared to placebo. Baloxavir reduced TTAS compared to placebo, but was the least effective of the evaluated antivirals at doing so. However, baloxavir was associated with the lowest risk of overall influenza-related complications as assessed through 21 trials, while zanamivir was associated with the highest complication rate. Finally, drug safety outcomes were assessed: Liu et al concluded that baloxavir was significantly associated with the lowest rate of treatment-related adverse events and peramivir with the highest. Sensitivity analysis was performed to remove studies with high risk of bias; this did not change the conclusions with regards to estimates of TTAS. Liu et al’s analysis of antiviral medications for the treatment of seasonal influenza provides thorough evidence for the advantages and disadvantages of several common agents. These findings are plausible given the known properties of the antiviral agents used in this study; this work strengthens the argument for early empiric treatment of influenza-like illnesses with antivirals to reduce symptom duration and complication rates with relatively few adverse events. The findings reported here are strengthened by the relatively large sample size and thorough statistical analysis. The authors conducted a rigorous evaluation of study quality & concluded that low quality studies had not introduced bias to their results. Interestingly, median TTAS durations were not reported in order to reduce bias due to missing data. Instead, hazard ratios were calculated for the relative differences in TTAS between drugs. A primary drawback of the study is the subjectivity of patient-reported data in defining influenza-like symptoms. Click to read this study in JAMA Network Open Related Reading: Combining antivirals and immunomodulators to fight COVID-19 RELATED REPORTS AstraZeneca’s FluMist first and only self-administered flu vaccine Oseltamivir and peramivir may reduce length-of-hospital-stay in patients with severe influenza #VisualAbstract: High-Dose Recombinant Influenza Vaccine is More Effective than Standard-Dose Vaccine in Adults Aged 50 to 64 Years In-depth [systematic review & meta-analysis]: Eligible studies were RCTs comparing neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir, peramivir, laninamivir) or endonuclease inhibitors (baloxavir) to each other and/or to placebo in otherwise healthy adults and children. Most trials included otherwise-healthy patients of all ages, with 12 (36%) focussing on only adults and 5 (15%) assessing only children. TTAS was defined as the time from the start of antiviral treatment to patient-reported relief of all influenza-like symptoms. Three databases were searched from their inception point until January, 2020, and data was extracted independently by two reviewers. The Cochrane Risk of Bias tool was used to assess study quality; a multivariate random effects model was used for the statistical analysis using R software. Study drugs are ranked according to shortest to longest TTAS compared with placebo, as follows: 10mg zanamivir (Hazard Ratio [HR] 0.67, 95% Confidence Interval [95CI] 0.58-0.77), 600mg peramivir (HR 0.69; 95CI, 0.54-0.88), 75mg oseltamivir (HR 0.74; 95CI, 0.70-0.79), 150 mg oseltamivir (HR 0.75; 95CI, 0.65-0.86), 300mg peramivir (HR 0.75; 95CI, 0.62-0.91), 40mg or 80mg baloxavir (HR 0.79; 95CI, 0.73-0.86). Influenza complication rates were assessed using the relative risk (RR) compared to placebo. Baloxavir (40mg or 80mg dose) was associated with a RR of 0.51 (95CI 0.32-0.80) for influenza-related complications. The RR for influenza complications amongst patients treated with zanamivir was 0.82 (95CI 0.72-0.92). An Egger test and funnel plot to assess for publication bias concluded that positive studies may have been more likely to be published. Image: PD ©2021 2 Minute Medicine, Inc. All rights reserved. No works may be reproduced without expressed written consent from 2 Minute Medicine, Inc. Inquire about licensing here. No article should be construed as medical advice and is not intended as such by the authors or by 2 Minute Medicine, Inc. Tags: antiviral medicationsantiviralsFlu (Influenza)influenza Previous Post Non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants associated with superior stroke prevention over warfarin among patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation Next Post Pain and sleep may have a bidirectional causal relationship RelatedReports Pharma AstraZeneca’s FluMist first and only self-administered flu vaccine October 15, 2024 Infectious Disease Oseltamivir and peramivir may reduce length-of-hospital-stay in patients with severe influenza September 4, 2024 StudyGraphics #VisualAbstract: High-Dose Recombinant Influenza Vaccine is More Effective than Standard-Dose Vaccine in Adults Aged 50 to 64 Years December 21, 2023 Infectious Disease Aerobic physical activity and muscle-strengthening may help reduce mortality from influenza and pneumonia August 2, 2023 Next Post Pain and sleep may have a bidirectional causal relationship Milrinone and dobutamine show no difference for cardiogenic shock treatment Differences in national strategies for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis significantly associated with disability outcomes during follow-up License Our Award-Winning Physician-Written Medical News and Visual Abstracts 2 Minute Medicine is the leading authoritative medical news licensing service, and the only with reports written by practicing doctors. LICENSE CONTENT 2MM+ Premium Access No ads & unlimited access to all current reports, over 9000 searchable archived reports, visual abstracts, Weekly Rewinds, and the online edition of The Classics Series™ textbook. Subscription Options 2 Minute Medicine® is an award winning, physician-run, expert medical media company. Our content is curated, written and edited by practicing health professionals who have clinical and scientific expertise in their field of reporting. Our editorial management team is comprised of highly-trained MD physicians. Join numerous brands, companies, and hospitals who trust our licensed content. Recent Reports Suboptimal glycemic index management is negatively associated with male fertility Various biomarkers remain intact in delayed sample processing Beneficial effects of hydroxychloroquine on blood lipids and glycated haemoglobin License Content Terms of Use | Disclaimer Cookie Policy Privacy Statement (EU) Disclaimer © 2021 2 Minute Medicine, Inc. - Physician-written medical news. Specialties All Specialties, All Recent Reports Cardiology Chronic Disease Dermatology Emergency Endocrinology Gastroenterology Imaging and Intervention Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Obstetrics Oncology Ophthalmology Pediatrics Pharma Preclinical Psychiatry Public Health Pulmonology Rheumatology Surgery The Scan Wellness Classics™ 2MM+ Online Access Paperback and Ebook Rewinds Visual Career Podcasts Partners License Content Submit Press Release Advertise with Us Account Subscribe Sign-in My account No Result View All Result © 2021 2 Minute Medicine, Inc. - Physician-written medical news. Want more physician-written medical news? Join over 10 million yearly readers and numerous companies. For healthcare professionalsand the public.Subscribe for free today! Subscription optionsRACGP - Flu-zero: More than a year since Australia’s last flu death Home About Clinical Authors Most read this year GP Opinion Videos & Podcasts Professional Comments policy RACGP poll Menu Search for: Advertising newsGP > Clinical Jolyon Attwooll 16 Aug 2021 News Flu-zero: More than a year since Australia’s last flu death Jolyon Attwooll 16/08/2021 5:18:36 PM The absence of influenza in the community has been described as ‘amazing’, but it is also making planning for next year difficult. Laboratory-confirmed influenza deaths recorded by the National Notifiable Disease Surveillance System over the past five years. Influenza experts never thought they would see the scenario currently unfolding in Australia. In a month when flu cases are normally rising to a peak, no deaths have been reported anywhere in the country for the year to date. And according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the last Australian death officially attributed to influenza was recorded in July 2020. Professor Ian Barr is the Deputy Director of the World Health Organisation Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza at the Doherty Institute. He is frank when asked if he ever imagined the current situation; just 435 cases notified to the Australian Influenza Surveillance Report so far this year and no hospital admissions. ‘No. It’s amazing. Never,’ he told newsGP. While there have been cases of influenza in quarantine, almost none have been in the community either in Australia or New Zealand. Data from the Australia Influenza Surveillance Report suggests the historically low levels observed last year have declined further still in 2021, notwithstanding a rise between January and May. For context, there were 21,005 notifications of laboratory-confirmed influenza by this time in 2020 and 36 deaths. In 2019, there had been 214,377 and 486 deaths. Professor Barr says the absence of influenza is a positive, although he also points to a number of other respiratory illnesses – beyond the rising number of COVID-19 cases – still present in the community. ‘I think fighting one virus at a time is quite enough for the general public,’ he said. ‘I don’t think we should get too complacent. There are other viruses circulating and depending on which state you’re in, those viruses are circulating at different levels. ‘We have seen a resurgence of other viruses already – RSV [respiratory syncytial virus] is a very good example of that.’ Dr Kerry Hancock, Chair of RACGP Specific Interests Respiratory Medicine, reports a similar trend – although qualifies that by saying she does not believe there is a higher rate of RSV than before the pandemic. ‘Because we’re swabbing for COVID, we’re actually seeing what those viruses are: adenovirus, parainfluenza, RSV, rhinovirus,’ Dr Hancock told newsGP. ‘This time last year, we weren’t seeing as much as there was a lot more social distancing – and a lot of the young children were kept home from childcare.’ The negligible presence of influenza in Australia is likely to continue for some time to come, Professor Barr believes, with the re-opening of international borders the biggest factor. ‘Things will start to happen pretty quickly as borders are relaxed,’ he said. ‘It will take a while for the numbers to build up to feed into the surveillance systems. ‘I would think within 12–18 months we’ll have a good idea of where the human seasonal influenza viruses are hitting.’ From a biological point of view, Professor Barr describes it as a ‘very interesting’ moment for those tracking influenza, with the unprecedented situation making it hard to map out what happens next. ‘We’re a little unsure about which way the virus might go; whether or not we might lose some of these influenza viruses, or whether something new might emerge or go back and reset where we were,’ he said. ‘What we’re seeing makes it difficult for updating vaccines … if you look at it from the virus’s point of view, it’s never been under these sort of pressures before. ‘It does make our predictions even more difficult than normal.’ As well as reducing the presence of the virus in the country for the time being, the health measures adopted during the pandemic could allow for greater scope to tackle influenza in the future, Professor Barr believes. With schools having to shut down due to COVID-19 concerns, and mask wearing now prevalent, he hopes the community will be more likely to use such preventive measures if influenza is circulating. ‘I think some of those things will certainly be introduced,’ Professor Barr said. ‘Will they stop influenza completely? It’s very unlikely. Can they impact on the severity of the seasons? I would like to think so.’ There are concerns, however, that the virus’s absence now could be the precursor to a significant outbreak when it returns. ‘There is a real possibility that we will have a big rebound in the next one or two years – if not 2022 it may well be 2023,’ he said. ‘With lower levels of vaccination and virus circulating, the herd immunity levels will be going down by the month. If we don’t see any influenza for another two years, then we will have a highly susceptible population and that usually means a big year for influenza.’ While Professor Barr hopes combining COVID-19 vaccine boosters with influenza vaccination may be possible, he predicts it may be hard to get the program back on track. ‘Once you disrupt people’s regular routines, inevitably, it’s more difficult to get them back again in the future,’ he said. It is a concern the Dr Hancock shares. ‘Because there has been no influenza around, there’s not been the uptake in the vaccination,’ she said. ‘It does concern me that people have got complacent about influenza vaccination. Not so much the elderly, who are in the habit, but even [they] have not been as enthusiastic. ‘When the quarantining stops, do we risk having a horrendous influenza season?’ Dr Hancock is also worried that uptake may only increase if influenza outbreaks are seen again, in a similar pattern to the current surge in interest in COVID-19 vaccination as case numbers increase. ‘The behaviour is the same. It’s very frustrating, it’s not understanding what vaccination is about,’ Dr Hancock said. ‘You don’t wait until you are exposed to it.’ Log in below to join the conversation. COVID-19 flu influenza vaccination records newsGP weekly poll Which of the RACGP GP24 conference’s key themes are you most interested in? Technology and AI 50%Environmental health 0%GP wellbeing 0%Future of the GP workforce 50% Related Influenza remains at record low levels to start 2021 Is Australia at risk of a rebound flu season? Reminder text messages can increase influenza vaccination rates ATAGI urges co-administration of flu vaccine to avoid ‘resurgence’ Chance of early flu season in 2023 First cell-based flu vaccine added to National Immunisation Program newsGP weekly poll Which of the RACGP GP24 conference’s key themes are you most interested in? Technology and AIEnvironmental healthGP wellbeingFuture of the GP workforce Advertising Advertising Login to comment Dr Edgard Arslan 7/09/2021 9:22:52 PM It is interesting how the Influenza has gone by more 95% world wide , since COVID emerged in 2020. Maybe the restrictions , social distancing and wearing masks has played a big role in the disappearance of influenza ,but it didn't work for COVID ???.what kind of flu vaccine are we going to give next year (2022) ?. what strain is it going to be covered ??.are we covered with the same vaccine from 2021? is influenza going to disappear for good ??all those questions with out answers so far . we just have to wait and see. Dr Adaure Osuji 25/09/2021 12:00:23 PM Isn't this because we stopped testing for Influenza in the community?Every patient with URTI symptoms was told not to come and in instead to get tested for COVID and the results either said COVID +ve or -ve. Nothing about Influenza is reported back to the GP so we do not input the diagnosis. All the patients who'd have had mild moderate bouts of it in the community were managed at home and not tested.While I agree that masking and increased hand washing compliance did a lot to reduce the incidence of Influenza, I do not think it is as low as "Zero".Also, those who are traditionally more susceptible to Influenza would also be more susceptible to COVID and would likely succumb to it first, not giving Influenza a chance to get to them. newsGP Terms and conditions | Privacy statement | RACGP | recruitGP | AJGP © 2018 The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) ABN 34 000 223 807Text message nudges reaped higher rates of patient flu vaccinations | National Institute on Aging Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) National Institutes of Health (NIH) The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Menu Search Search Health Information A-Z Health Topics Alzheimer’s & Dementia Brain Health Caregiving End of Life Exercise and Physical Activity Healthy Eating Español Get Print Publications Infographics Resources for Health Care Professionals Research & Funding All Research & Funding Blog - Inside NIA Clinical Trials Training & Career Development Grants & Funding Health Disparities Research Research Resources Labs at NIA Division of Aging Biology Division of Behavioral and Social Research Division of Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Division of Neuroscience Division of Extramural Activities Quick Links NIA-Specific Funding Policies Scientific Review Small Business Program Training Programs to Enhance Diversity Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias Funding Announcements Data Sharing Resources for Researchers News & Events All News & Events News Releases Announcements Events Research Highlights Multimedia Quick Links Media Inquiries Alzheimer’s & Related Dementias Press Kit About NIA All About NIA Budget & Testimony Strategic Directions National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA) Advances in Aging and Alzheimer's Research Scientific Workforce Diversity Staff Directory Careers Student Resources Connect with NIA Contact NIA Español Search Search Home News & Events Text message nudges reaped higher rates of patient flu vaccinations Share: Print page Facebook share Linkedin share X social media share All News & Events News Releases Events Research Highlights Announcements Research Highlights Text message nudges reaped higher rates of patient flu vaccinations August 19, 2021 Behavioral & Social ResearchCOVID-19DemographyEconomicsHealth Care Research Text messages sent from a health care provider that encouraged patients to get the influenza (flu) vaccine at their upcoming primary care visit may be a simple, low-cost, and timely way to increase vaccination uptake on a large scale. The findings were recently published as a brief report in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Researchers from the University of Pennsylvania, as well as collaborators from many other academic institutions, partnered with Penn Medicine and Geisinger health systems to test 19 different text messaging interventions designed by behavioral scientists with the aim of increasing flu vaccine uptake. Patients with a routine primary care appointment, scheduled between late September 2020 and the end of 2020 at either of the two hospital systems, were automatically enrolled in the study if 1) their electronic health records included a cell phone number, 2) they had no previous reactions to the flu vaccine, and 3) they had not previously received a flu shot that year. These 47,306 patients were randomly assigned to one of the 19 text message groups, receiving up to two sets of prompts about the flu shot in the three days before their scheduled appointment, or to the standard appointment reminder only group (usual care). In addition, a separate group of more than 2,000 people completed a survey to rate subjective characteristics, such as casualness, of the text messages being delivered. The objective characteristics, such as whether a message was interactive, were coded by the study team. Using electronic health records, the researchers looked at whether patients received a flu shot at or within three days before their scheduled appointment. All 19 nudges increased vaccination rates. Six of the nudges produced a statistically significant boost in vaccinations compared to the usual care group. The most effective nudge, which consisted of two texts sent 72 and 24 hours before appointment, produced a 4.6 percentage point boost in vaccination (11% increase over 42% baseline vaccination rate in usual care). Nudges that used language similar to that in typical provider-patient communications and that were framed as a reminder to patients who already had an upcoming appointment were most effective. The least effective nudges were those designed to be more noticeable and attention-getting with a joke or “artful” language. Importantly, all of the text-based nudge interventions were implemented at close to zero marginal cost, making the potential gains in vaccination rates essentially free. This study demonstrated that simple, low-cost, behavioral nudges sent via text to patients with appointments scheduled can significantly increase vaccination uptake compared to usual care. The average age of patients in the intervention was about 52 years, with effects similar for both patients older and younger than 65. Although there are factors that differentially influence uptake of flu versus COVID-19 vaccines, the nudges found to be most effective in this study could be tested and repurposed. This research was supported in part by NIA grant P30AG034532. Reference: Milkman KL, et al. A megastudy of text-based nudges encouraging patients to get vaccinated at an upcoming doctor's appointment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021;118(20):e2101165118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2101165118. Return to top Quick links About NIA A-Z health topics Clinical trials Careers at NIA Research divisions & contacts Staff directory Workforce diversity NIA Policies and Notices Contact NIA niaic@nia.nih.gov 800-222-2225 Contact us Follow us Facebook X Linkedin YouTube Newsletters Sign up to receive updates and resources delivered to your inbox. Sign up nia.nih.gov An official website of the National Institutes of Health Accessibility support FOIA requests No FEAR Act data Office of the Inspector General Performance reports Vulnerability disclosure policy Privacy Policy USA.govInterferons and COVID-19: It's complicated - Boston Children's Answers ☰ Request an Appointment Get a Second Opinion Share Your Story Donate Close Home Research Patient Stories Parenting Clinical Care Our Community Request an Appointment Get a Second Opinion Share Your Story Donate Answers Your destination for kids' health Unpacking the body’s interferon response to COVID-19 Posted on August 19, 2021 by Nancy Fliesler | Basic/Translational, ResearchTags: cellular and molecular medicine, coronavirus, immunology, infectious diseases COVID-19 severity depends on which interferons are produced in the upper and lower respiratory tract, findings that could inform future treatment. (Images: AdobeStock/Illustration: Sebastian Stankiewicz, Boston Children's Hospital) Interferons are potent natural antivirals, rallying other parts of the immune system to defend against viruses. Some clinical trials have tested interferons as a treatment for COVID-19, but results have been mixed. And the science has been unclear about whether interferons are helpful or harmful. Key takeawayAn early, protective interferon response in the upper respiratory tract is associated with mild COVID-19. Without such a response, SARS-CoV-2 can spread to the lungs, where a different, harmful interferon response contributes to severe inflammation and tissue damage. New research in the journal Cell, led by Ivan Zanoni, PhD, an immunologist at Boston Children’s Hospital, provides a more complete picture of interferons’ role in mild versus severe COVID-19, informing future research and, potentially, treatment. “We think what we’ve found could change the view of interferons in COVID-19, and may be useful for designing more defined therapeutic interventions,” says Zanoni, who is co-senior author on the paper. The importance of location and timing The general scientific view has been that severe COVID-19 results from a delayed, weakened interferon response to SARS-CoV-2. Building on a study published last year, Zanoni and colleagues show a more complex picture: Interferons play differing, even opposite roles in the upper and lower respiratory tract, and different types of interferons have different effects. “We show how the production of specific interferons determines the severity of COVID-19,” says Zanoni. “Disease severity also depends on when and where they are produced.” Zanoni, with co-senior author Nicasio Mancini, MD, of San Raffaele Hospital (Milan, Italy) and first authors Benedetta Sposito and Achille Broggi, PhD, in the Zanoni Lab, analyzed nasopharyngeal swab samples from 170 patients in Italy with mild COVID-19 and 31 controls who tested negative for the virus. They also studied bronchoalveolar lavage samples from the lungs of 56 patients with severe COVID-19, nine patients with severe lung disease from other infections such as influenza, and 56 patients with severe lung disease of non-infectious causes. Using RNA sequencing and protein analysis, the team identified the specific types of interferon being produced in different parts of the respiratory tract and what kinds of genes turned on in response. Interferons in the upper respiratory tract Analysis of swabs from the nose, throat, and mouth showed that: Interferon is produced only when the viral load, or amount of virus present, exceeds a certain threshold. But high viral load itself did not correlate with disease severity. People with mild COVID-19 produce more interferons in response to high viral loads than people with severe disease, and younger people produce more interferons than people 70 or older. “The correlation between viral load and interferon production in the upper airways disappears in older people, and likely helps explain why older people get sicker,” says Zanoni. People with mild vs. severe COVID-19 produced different types of interferon in the upper airways. Those with mild COVID-19 produced high levels of two Type 3 interferons — lambda 1 and lambda 3 — which have a protective effect. “If you have lambda 1 and 3, you upregulate about 50 genes that restrict SARS-CoV-2,” says Zanoni. In contrast, patients with more severe COVID-19 produced predominantly Type 1 interferons and the Type 3 lambda 2 interferon. These appear not to be protective. “These patients did not show stimulation of genes that protect against the virus,” Zanoni notes. Consistent with findings earlier this year at Boston Children’s, the protective interferons were made by epithelial cells in the nasopharynx. Interferons in the lower respiratory tract Bronchioalveolar lavage samples from people with severe COVID-19 revealed high levels of interferons in the bronchi and lungs as compared to patients with other forms of severe lung disease. But these were mostly Type 1 interferons and the Type 3 interferon lambda 2, which, again, are not protective. “There was no signature of antiviral genes,” says Zanoni. “Instead, there was a signature associated with cell death (apoptosis) and decreased cell proliferation. We believe these interferons are part of the detrimental pro-inflammatory response seen in severe COVID-19.” The study also looked at interferons in patients’ blood, but found no correlation with interferon production in the lung. Overall, the study supports the view that an early, protective interferon response in the upper respiratory tract is associated with mild COVID-19. Without such a response, SARS-CoV-2 can spread to the lungs, where a different, harmful interferon response contributes to the severe inflammation and tissue damage typical of severe COVID-19. “Our findings reconcile a large portion of the literature on interferons, and further stress the key role played by interferon 3, compared to interferon 1, during life-threatening viral infections,” the researchers write. Treatment implications? The study observations suggest that patients could benefit from Type 3 interferons given locally, as in a nasal spray, early in the course of SARS-CoV-2 infection. This, however, raises logistical questions. While Type 3 interferons are clinically available, they are expensive drugs with potential side effects and would need to be prescribed by a medical professional. By the time a patient feels sick enough to see a doctor, the treatment window may have closed. “I think vaccines are still the best way to protect people,” Zanoni says. But at the other end of the spectrum, the study supports the idea of using drugs to block harmful interferon signaling later in the lungs, he adds. The study was funded by the National Institutes of Health, the Lloyd J. Old STAR Program, the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, and the Wellcome Trust. Zanoni reports compensation for consulting services with Implicit Biosciences. Explore COVID-19 research at Boston Children’s Hospital Share this:Related Posts : Why do some children get MIS-C after COVID-19? Some early clues Several months into the COVID-19 pandemic, a small number of children began to develop a cluster of mysterious symptoms. These ... Rapid saliva test detects COVID-19 variants, at home or point of care COVID-19 tests are now widely available, including FDA-approved tests like BinaxNOW that people can do at home. But none of ... Why do some people get severe COVID-19? The nose may know The body’s first encounter with SARS-CoV-2, the virus behind COVID-19, happens in the nose and throat, or nasopharynx. A ... Sturdier spikes may explain SARS-CoV-2 variants' faster spread The fast-spreading U.K., South Africa, and Brazil variants are raising concerns and questions about whether current COVID-19 vaccines will ... Tagged: cellular and molecular medicine, coronavirus, immunology, infectious diseases Stay connected! Sign up for our weekly email newsletter for the latest parenting tips, patient stories, and news for your family from Boston Children's Subscribe now Connect With Boston Children’s Hospital 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115 617-355-6000 800-355-7944 How Can We HelpInternational Visitors Centers and Services Conditions + Treatments Find a Doctor Get a Second Opinion Locations AboutAbout Us Giving to Boston Children’s Newsroom Quality & Patient Safety LegalHIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices Patient & Family Rights Terms of Use Public PolicyFlu shots now available at CVS, Walmart, Walgreens and Rite-Aid - pennlive.com Skip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseQuick Look-Change your current location »Current -Mostly SunnyTonightLow -Mostly SunnyTomorrowHigh -Mostly SunnyView full weather reportSubscribeLife & CultureFlu shots now available at CVS, Walmart, Walgreens and Rite-AidPublished: Aug. 19, 2021, 7:32 a.m.In this Thursday, Jan. 23, 2020 file photo, a patient receives an influenza vaccine in Mesquite, Texas. Walmart, CVS, Rite Aid and Walgreens have started administering the flu shot for 2021. (AP Photo/LM Otero)APBy Deb Kiner | dkiner@pennlive.comWhile Americans are being highly encouraged to get a COVID-19 vaccine, pharmacies are looking ahead to the 2021 flu season.CVS, Walmart, Walgreens and Rite Aid have announced they are accepting appointments for people to get a flu shot.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that people age 6 months and older receive a flu shot before the end of October and that getting it is even more important during the pandemic. “During the COVID-19 pandemic, reducing the overall burden of respiratory illnesses is important to protect vulnerable populations at risk for severe illness, the healthcare system, and other critical infrastructure. Thus, healthcare personnel should use every opportunity during the influenza season to administer influenza vaccines to all eligible persons,” the CDC said.Rite Aid is offering the flu vaccine via walk-in appointments and online scheduling. Rite Aid began administering the flu shot on Aug. 12.Walmart said it is offering a low-cost flu vaccine and a free COVID-19 vaccine that people can get at the same time.“It’s important we don’t let our guard down with our health this fall. Between COVID-19 vaccines and the annual flu shot, we know people may be experiencing ‘vaccine fatigue,’ but these preventative measures have never been more vital to keeping our communities healthy,” Del Sloneker, senior vice president and chief operating officer, Health and Wellness said. Walmart said it is launching a digital scheduler so people can make an appointment to get a flu shot at any of Walmart’s pharmacies. The retailer also will hold in-store clinics on Tuesday and Thursday afternoons beginning on Sept. 10. A flu shot Wellness Day will be held 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Sept. 26. Walmart said it also will continue to take precautions to prevent the spread of COVID-19 while administering vaccines.“Stores nationwide have enacted safety precautions including a mask mandate, single-direction aisles to promote social distancing in-stores and health screenings for pharmacists and associates. Additionally, Walmart is offering a special pharmacy hour for seniors and at-risk customers from 6 a.m. to 7 a.m. on Tuesday mornings with flu shots available during this timeframe.”CVS said it has flu shots available at all CVS Pharmacy and MinuteClinic locations.“Both CVS Pharmacy and MinuteClinic, the retail health clinic of CVS Health inside select CVS Pharmacy and Target stores, offer convenient options for people of all ages to get their flu shot, seven days a week with expanded evening and weekend hours.”RECOMMENDED•pennlive.comAs pharmacies shutter, Pa. experts wonder about the impact on accessNov. 10, 2024, 5:03 p.m.If Trump ends vaccine mandates for schools, thousands of Americans will die | PennLive lettersNov. 8, 2024, 11:04 a.m.Walk-in appointments are available or people can make an appointment through the CVS website, the app or by texting FLU to 287898. Patients may also schedule an immunization appointment with a MinuteClinic provider at MinuteClinic.com. CVS also will host clinics at businesses, senior living facilities, schools, municipalities and other groups. To schedule a clinic, click here.Walgreens also offers walk-in service for a flu shot or you can schedule an appointment.If you purchase a product or register for an account through a link on our site, we may receive compensation. By using this site, you consent to our User Agreement and agree that your clicks, interactions, and personal information may be collected, recorded, and/or stored by us and social media and other third-party partners in accordance with our Privacy Policy.Footer NavigationAbout UsContact UsSend Us a News TipPA Media GroupThe Patriot-NewsAdvertise with UsCareer OpportunitiesPennLiveCommunity RulesAccessibility StatementSubscriptionsPennLiveThe Patriot-NewsNewslettersAlready a SubscriberManage your SubscriptionPlace a Vacation HoldMake a PaymentDelivery FeedbackPennLive SectionsBusinessObituariesJobsAutosReal EstateRentalsClassifiedsHomeNewsSportsPSU FootballHigh School SportsBettingEntertainmentPa. Life & CulturePa. Food & DiningOpinionMobile AppsiPhone, Android AppsTablet AppsMore on PennLiveWeather NewsArchivesPost a JobPost a Classified AdSell your CarSell/Rent your HomeSponsor ContentFollow UsTwitterFacebookInstagramRSSCookie Settings|Privacy Policy|User Agreement|Ad ChoicesDisclaimerUse of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement, (updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights (updated 7/1/2024).© 2024 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.Ad ChoicesWhere to Get the Flu Shot for the 2021-2022 Season, Per DoctorsSearchSubscribeMy BookmarksShopPrevention PremiumHealthCondition CentersWeight LossFitnessSexFood &amp; NutritionBeautyLifeNewsletterFollowAbout Prevention.comMedical Review BoardPrevention AwardsWinPrivacy NoticeTerms Of UseSkip to ContentHealthBeautyFitnessNutritionLifeShoppingSubscribesign inSearchPURPLE HARMONY REVIEWBROOKS GHOST REVIEWBEST LEGGINGS ON AMAZONNEW EDITOR-FAVORITE PICKSWINTER RUNNING JACKETSHealthCold & Flu SeasonWhere to Get the Flu Shot for the 2021-2022 Season, According to DoctorsWhere to Get the Flu Shot for the 2021-2022 Season, According to DoctorsYour doctor’s office, local pharmacy, or urgent care center has you covered for vaccinations.By Korin MillerUpdated: Aug 19, 2021Save ArticleThis article was medically reviewed by Raj Dasgupta, M.D., an assistant professor of clinical medicine and a member of the Prevention Medical Review Board.While temperatures are still in the 90s in many parts of the country, flu season isn’t all that far away. That’s why now is the time to at least start thinking about when (and where) you’re going to get your flu shot.That’s especially true this year, when we’re still deep in the COVID-19 pandemic. Even though we experienced a mild flu season last year—thanks to all of the diligent hand washing and mask wearing people did—the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says that getting a flu vaccine is more important than ever to help reduce the strain on healthcare systems that are responding to COVID-19 surges. Plus, it’s possible to get both the flu and COVID-19 at the same time, the agency says, which is a situation you definitely won’t want to find yourself in. You can technically get the flu any time of year, but flu season really starts to ramp up in October and peaks between December and February, according to the CDC. The vaccine takes a few weeks to give you protection, which is why you start hearing reminders to get your flu shot in early fall—and it’s really important that you do so.Related StoryFlu Shot Side Effects You Should Know“The flu vaccine is the only means we have of protecting ourselves against influenza,” says infectious disease expert Amesh A. Adalja, M.D., senior scholar at the John’s Hopkins Center for Health Security. “The flu vaccine is only moderately protective against getting the flu, but it is protective against having flu complications and being hospitalized. It really can decrease the impact of flu season if we have as high a proportion of the population vaccinated as possible.”The flu shot won’t protect you from getting COVID-19, says Richard Watkins, M.D., an infectious disease and professor of internal medicine at Northeast Ohio Medical University. However, getting your COVID-19 vaccine will—which is why it’s crucial to receive both immunizations before cold weather arrives. What’s new with the flu vaccine this year? The flu vaccine changes every year to try to protect against the strains researchers think will dominate this season (which is why you have to get a new shot every year). This year’s vaccine will target the following strains: A/Victoria/2570/2019 (H1N1) pdm09-like virus;A/Cambodia/e0826360/2020 (H3N2)-like virus;B/Washington/02/2019- like virus (B/Victoria lineage);B/Phuket/3073/2013-like virus (B/Yamagata lineage)When should I get a flu shot?The CDC generally recommends that people get vaccinated by the end of October, and definitely before the flu starts spreading in your area. But, if you can only get your flu vaccine earlier or later than that, you should do it. “We want people to get the flu vaccine no matter what during the flu season,” Dr. Adalja says. “It’s important to get it when you can get it.” Where to get a flu shot for the 2020-2021 seasonYou actually have a lot of options, and some of them are free as long as you have health insurance. Here are some places to consider:At your doctor’s officeIf you have health insurance, most doctors will cover the total cost of getting the flu shot. That means you won’t have to shell out for a copay either. (Just call ahead to make sure your primary care physician has the flu vaccine in stock before you go.)At an urgent care centerMany urgent care offices will offer up flu vaccines and will even provide them for free if you can’t make it to your primary care physician to get your shot. At your officeSome jobs actually offer this on-site, while others may hand out vouchers that you can take to a local pharmacy. Ask your boss or HR rep about it if you’re not sure. Ditto if you’re working remotely—some offices are offering vaccinations outdoors to help minimize the spread of COVID-19. At your schoolIn college? Many schools will give out free flu vaccinations to students at the campus health center.At your local hospitalMany hospitals will offer up select days when they give free flu shots to the public. You can either check out the website of your nearest hospital or call to find out more. At your local pharmacy chainWalgreens, CVS Pharmacy, and Rite Aid offer up flu shots to the public, and it’s usually at no cost to you with health insurance. Some prefer that you schedule an appointment in advance, so call the store you’re interested in visiting in advance to find out.At Target, Walmart, and KmartThese chain stores offer up a free flu shot with most health insurance plans. At your local grocery storeSome larger chain grocery stores, like Giant, have pharmacies on the premises that give free vaccines with health insurance. Contact your local store to find out more.If you’re unsure of where to get vaccinated near you, the CDC recommends using VaccineFinder.org to find a location in your area. For those without insurance, prices may fluctuate between $20 and $40, depending on the location. Advertisement - Continue Reading BelowCold & Flu Season7 Ways to Get Over the Flu Faster16 Best Foods to Eat When You Feel SickSigns Your Cold Might Be Getting BetterHow to Check for a Fever Without a ThermomerAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowCan Mucinex Help You Get Pregnant?FDA Approves New Home Flu VaccineCDC Warns About Flu Deaths in KidsSo, When Is the Best Time for a Flu Shot?Natural Ways to Ease NauseaHow to Get Rid of a Lingering CoughGenius Home Remedies to Soothe a Sore Throat ASAPHow to Break a Fever ASAPAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowAbout Prevention.comNewsletterPress RoomGive A GiftCommunity GuidelinesSubscribeMedia KitAdvertise OnlineOther Hearst SubscriptionsCustomer ServiceA Part of Hearst Digital MediaWe may earn commission from links on this page, but we only recommend products we back.©2024 Hearst Magazines, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Privacy NoticeCA Notice at CollectionYour CA Privacy Rights/Shine the LightDAA Industry Opt OutTerms of UseSite MapCookies ChoicesCOVID-19 or Swine Flu: Comparing the Symptoms, Diagnosis and treatment Become a MemberDark ModeBecome a MemberMembers OnlyWebQoof#PrideAndProgressMyReportTrendingNEONBrandStudioChew on ThisRecipesVideosCoronavirusHer HealthMind ItFIT WebqoofCancerMoreDiabetesHeartSexolveDark ModeBecome a MemberHomeNaukri CrisisUncovering HateMaharashtra ElectionAbout UsT&CPrivacy PolicyBECOME A MEMBERCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019FOLLOW US ONAbout UsContact UsPrivacy Policy ADVERTISEMENTREMOVE ADCOVID, Swine Flu, Or a Seasonal Flu? How To Tell Them ApartAnoushka RajeshPublished: 20 Aug 2021, 5:47 PM ISTCoronavirusiAaAaSmallAaMediumAaLargeHospitals in parts of India–where the COVID-19 caseload has only just started to ebb–are seeing a sudden surge in cases of swine flu, and flu-like symptoms.A recent survey conducted in the capital found that 41 percent of households in Delhi reported at least one member who is down with flu-like symptoms.The same survey found that 80 percent of these cases turned out to be seasonal flu and 20 percent were swine flu, with less than 0.1 percent testing positive for COVID.How do you tell the three apart? FIT breaks it down.For a quick rundown, start with our symptom tracker below.Symptom tracker: Is it COVID, Swine flu or seasonal flu?(Photo: FIT)COVID, Swine Flu, Or a Seasonal Flu? How To Tell Them Apart1. Swine Flu vs Seasonal Flu vs COVIDFirst, a quick look at the basics.All three illness are caused by different viruses that behave similarly and primarily attack your respiratory system. Swine Flu was first broke out in the US in 2009 where the viral infection jumped from pigs to humans. According to Mayo Clinic, it is caused by the H1N1 strain of the flu (influenza) virus.Swine flu was declared a pandemic by the WHO on 11 June 2009, and declared its end on 10 August 2010.COVID-19 on the other, was first identified in China, is caused by the SARS CoV-2 virus and is thought to have dumped from bats to humans.It was declared a global pandemic by the WHO on 11 March 2020.Infectiousness COVID-19 is far more infectious than swine flu and common seasonal flu. According to Johns Hopkins University, an estimated 209.9 million cases of COVID have been reported globally so far.But, it is hard to compare the COVID caseload to that of the flu as, for one there is no reliable data on the global caseload of swine flu, and secondly, cases of the flu aren't always reported or recorded.DeathsAccording to the US CDC's estimates between 1,51,700 to 5,75,400 people worldwide have died from swine flu. Compare that to the devastating death toll of COVID-19 where around 4.4 Million people worldwide have succumbed to the illness so far.Swine flu is now an endemic and clubbed with seasonal flu that comes around cyclically.'We see that cases of swine flu usually spike every alternate year. It happened in 2019, and it's happening now, so it's not unexpected," says Dr Ravi Shekhar Jha, Additional Director and Head of Department, Pulmonology, Fortis Escorts Hospital Faridabad.Expand2. SymptomsThough all three infections are caused by entirely different viruses, their symptoms can be eerily similar, making it difficult to diagnose them just on the basis of these.The most common symptoms that occurs in those infected by either are,FeverBody acheFatigueHeadacheRunny noseCoughSore throatChillsBut there are some subtle differences in the way the symptoms present."In the case of flu, and even swine flu, people will typically experience sudden and high fever. In the case of COVID, the fever is usually steady and doesn't go beyond 101 or 102 degrees at the most."Dr Ravi Shekhar Jha, Head of Department, Pulmonology, Fortis Escorts Hospital, FaridabadA few distinguishing symptoms of COVID-19 that are rare in cases of flu include Loss of smell and tasteBreathlessnessRashes on the bodyVomiting, nausea and diarrhoea too are very common in COVID, although they can also occur in some severe cases of the flu (particularly in adults)On the other hand, "While sneezing is quite common in seasonal flu and swine flu, it is very rare in COVID-19," says Dr Jha.COVID-19 can also lead to long term and late onset symptoms called 'long covid', risk of blood clots and even multiple organ damage, all of which are not associated with flus including swine flu.How long does it take for the illness to show up?According to the US CDC (Centre for Disease Control and Prevention) person infected with an influenza virus, including that of swine flu will typically start showing symptoms within 1- 4 days.In the case of COVID-19, it could take anywhere between 5 -14 days after infection for the symptoms to show up.Expand3. Diagnosing the InfectionBecause of the significant overlap in symptoms, only specific tests can confirm the illness.For all three viral infections, the test conducted are pretty much the same. Dr Jha explains this, saying, "The tests are done using throat and nose swabs which are analysed using genomic sequencing. What differs is what the tests look for."Given the low risk associated with general seasonal flu, your doctor will not ask you to take a test unless you have severe complications, have been hospitalised or at a high risk of flu-related complications.Expand4. Treatments and VaccinesOne of the reasons why COVID has been more damaging is that we didn't and still don't have a sure shot treatment and were left pulling at straws. Symptom management is the most common route of treatment for all three infections.Influenza & Swine Flu: The flu, in most cases resolves itself within a few days. Sometimes, however, the infection can become severe and cause other complications including pneumonia.According to the US CDC, people under the age of 5 and over the age of 60, and those with chronic illnesses have a higher chance of developing serious illness.Most flu, including the swine flu can be treated using antiviral flu drugs like oseltamivir phosphate."Oseltamivir is highly effective in treating influenza and even swine flu when taken within 5 days of being infected."Dr Ravi Shekhar Jha, Head of Department, Pulmonology, Fortis Escorts Hospital, FaridabadCOVID-19: Although some treatments like certain monoclonal antibody cocktails are available, they have only found to be effective in very limited cases.There are vaccines available for both the flu and COVID-19. "Annual influenza vaccines have been found to be just as effective in preventing swine flu," adds Dr Jha.(At The Quint, we question everything. Play an active role in shaping our journalism by becoming a member today.)ExpandSwine Flu vs Seasonal Flu vs COVIDFirst, a quick look at the basics.All three illness are caused by different viruses that behave similarly and primarily attack your respiratory system. Swine Flu was first broke out in the US in 2009 where the viral infection jumped from pigs to humans. According to Mayo Clinic, it is caused by the H1N1 strain of the flu (influenza) virus.Swine flu was declared a pandemic by the WHO on 11 June 2009, and declared its end on 10 August 2010.COVID-19 on the other, was first identified in China, is caused by the SARS CoV-2 virus and is thought to have dumped from bats to humans.It was declared a global pandemic by the WHO on 11 March 2020.Infectiousness COVID-19 is far more infectious than swine flu and common seasonal flu. According to Johns Hopkins University, an estimated 209.9 million cases of COVID have been reported globally so far.But, it is hard to compare the COVID caseload to that of the flu as, for one there is no reliable data on the global caseload of swine flu, and secondly, cases of the flu aren't always reported or recorded.DeathsAccording to the US CDC's estimates between 1,51,700 to 5,75,400 people worldwide have died from swine flu. Compare that to the devastating death toll of COVID-19 where around 4.4 Million people worldwide have succumbed to the illness so far.Swine flu is now an endemic and clubbed with seasonal flu that comes around cyclically.'We see that cases of swine flu usually spike every alternate year. It happened in 2019, and it's happening now, so it's not unexpected," says Dr Ravi Shekhar Jha, Additional Director and Head of Department, Pulmonology, Fortis Escorts Hospital Faridabad.ADVERTISEMENTREMOVE ADSymptomsThough all three infections are caused by entirely different viruses, their symptoms can be eerily similar, making it difficult to diagnose them just on the basis of these.The most common symptoms that occurs in those infected by either are,FeverBody acheFatigueHeadacheRunny noseCoughSore throatChillsBut there are some subtle differences in the way the symptoms present."In the case of flu, and even swine flu, people will typically experience sudden and high fever. In the case of COVID, the fever is usually steady and doesn't go beyond 101 or 102 degrees at the most."Dr Ravi Shekhar Jha, Head of Department, Pulmonology, Fortis Escorts Hospital, FaridabadA few distinguishing symptoms of COVID-19 that are rare in cases of flu include Loss of smell and tasteBreathlessnessRashes on the bodyVomiting, nausea and diarrhoea too are very common in COVID, although they can also occur in some severe cases of the flu (particularly in adults)On the other hand, "While sneezing is quite common in seasonal flu and swine flu, it is very rare in COVID-19," says Dr Jha.COVID-19 can also lead to long term and late onset symptoms called 'long covid', risk of blood clots and even multiple organ damage, all of which are not associated with flus including swine flu.How long does it take for the illness to show up?According to the US CDC (Centre for Disease Control and Prevention) person infected with an influenza virus, including that of swine flu will typically start showing symptoms within 1- 4 days.In the case of COVID-19, it could take anywhere between 5 -14 days after infection for the symptoms to show up.Diagnosing the InfectionBecause of the significant overlap in symptoms, only specific tests can confirm the illness.For all three viral infections, the test conducted are pretty much the same. Dr Jha explains this, saying, "The tests are done using throat and nose swabs which are analysed using genomic sequencing. What differs is what the tests look for."Given the low risk associated with general seasonal flu, your doctor will not ask you to take a test unless you have severe complications, have been hospitalised or at a high risk of flu-related complications.ADVERTISEMENTREMOVE ADTreatments and VaccinesOne of the reasons why COVID has been more damaging is that we didn't and still don't have a sure shot treatment and were left pulling at straws. Symptom management is the most common route of treatment for all three infections.Influenza & Swine Flu: The flu, in most cases resolves itself within a few days. Sometimes, however, the infection can become severe and cause other complications including pneumonia.According to the US CDC, people under the age of 5 and over the age of 60, and those with chronic illnesses have a higher chance of developing serious illness.Most flu, including the swine flu can be treated using antiviral flu drugs like oseltamivir phosphate."Oseltamivir is highly effective in treating influenza and even swine flu when taken within 5 days of being infected."Dr Ravi Shekhar Jha, Head of Department, Pulmonology, Fortis Escorts Hospital, FaridabadCOVID-19: Although some treatments like certain monoclonal antibody cocktails are available, they have only found to be effective in very limited cases.There are vaccines available for both the flu and COVID-19. "Annual influenza vaccines have been found to be just as effective in preventing swine flu," adds Dr Jha.(At The Quint, we question everything. Play an active role in shaping our journalism by becoming a member today.)Read Latest News and Breaking News at The Quint, browse for more from fit and coronavirus Topics: Swine Flu COVID-19 Read Full ArticleSpeaking truth to power requires allies like you.Become a MemberCheck Member BenefitsRead MoreLoading Comments...ADVERTISEMENTREMOVE ADStay UpdatedADVERTISEMENTREMOVE AD×× SECTIONSFITGenderOpinionVideosEntertainmentSportsWorldExplainersPodcastsPoliticsThe Quint LabGraphic NovelsLawEducationMembers' OpinionSouth AsiansNEONTRENDING TOPICSAnti-Cheating LawRasika Dugal InterviewArundhati RoyEuro 2024T20 World CupKohli, Rohit & Jadeja RetireClimate Change NewsElectoral Bonds NewsRahul Gandhi‘Kill’ ReviewPM ModiRobert F Kennedy JrRahul DravidFOLLOW US ONQuint HindiFITAbout UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyT&CÏ Turkmen doctors familiarized themselves with the guidelines for sentinel epidemiological surveillance of influenza altynasyr.newspaper@sanly.tm EN RU TK Home Sections In the spotlight Official To the 300th anniversary of Magtymguly Fragi Cooperation Economy People Culture Science Sport Comments Archive EN RU TK Home People Turkmen doctors familiarized themselves with the guidelines for sentinel epidemiological surveillance of influenza Turkmen doctors familiarized themselves with the guidelines for sentinel epidemiological surveillance of influenza 19.08.2021 3366 In Ashgabat, a training seminar was held in the field of epidemiological surveillance of influenza, as well as the use in Turkmenistan of the updated pan-European electronic program TESSy on epidemiological surveillance of influenza and acute respiratory infection (ARI). The course, organized by the WHO Country Office in Turkmenistan, brought together experts from the WHO Regional Office for Europe, the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry of Turkmenistan, representatives of the State Sanitary and Epidemiological Service, the Directorate of Centers for the Prevention of Infectious Diseases, as well as the velayat Health Directorates and SES responsible for the supervision and management of electronic influenza and ARI surveillance program. Over the course of two days, the participants familiarized themselves with the updated guidelines on sentinel surveillance of influenza and ARI in Turkmenistan, reviewed aspects of laboratory surveillance, and discussed issues of reporting and data management. In this regard, WHO/Europe experts shared with the audience the changes in the electronic influenza surveillance program, taking into account the new guidelines, and provided information on the pan-European platform for influenza surveillance TESSy. National medical experts had the opportunity to practice in the TESSy system and learn about the technical aspects of data entry and processing. It should be noted that the training was conducted within the framework of the Action Plan of the Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Mechanism in Turkmenistan. Strengthening influenza surveillance has been identified as a priority in a number of international initiatives. In particular, the WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Control Agenda, launched in 2002, has identified several priority activities, including strengthening clinical and virological surveillance, increasing knowledge of the burden of influenza, and expanding the use of influenza vaccine globally. Ayjahan Ataballyeva Category's latest posts 09.11.2024 "Harvest is the Foundation of Abundance" 09.11.2024 A young SDG Ambassador from Turkmenistan participated in an event in Montenegro 08.11.2024 Inclusive festival titled "We Are Different, We Are Equal" will be held in Ashgabat When copying materials, a link to the site «Turkmenistan: Golden age» is required! FOUNDER: State news agency of Turkmenistan © Copyright 2024. All rights reserved. Electronic newspaper «Golden age»Coronavirus Vs Flu: How to differentiate between COVID-19 and the flu? | Times of IndiaAug 18, 2021How to differentiate between COVID-19 and the flu?TIMESOFINDIA.COMWhile COVID-19 cases ebb, seasonal flu and viral ailments are suddenly on the riseWeather changes, the emergence of the influenza virus could be factors to blame.CanvaCOVID-19 has symptoms in common with flu and other respiratory illnessesNot only can feeling ill draw panic, it can be confusing to make out the difference. Here's how you can check:CanvaWhat are the common symptoms of the infections?Respiratory infections like the flu and COVID-19 can cause symptoms like low or high fever, chills, sore throat, cough, runny nose, body pain.The severity and time these symptoms last are, however, different.CanvaWhat causes the flu or viral illness?The change in weather and seasonal influenza, a type of virus can cause respiratory infection or the flu.The infection onset time, unlike COVID-19, is shorter and causes respiratory symptoms.CanvaHow to know if you have COVID-19?Some common symptoms of coronavirus could be high fever, sore throat, myalgia, fatigue, gastrointestinal symptoms, skin rashes.Even as the positivity rate remains low, if you have come in contact with someone, it can cause symptoms.CanvaHow to distinguish if your symptoms are of COVID or the flu?While a COVID test might offer reassurance, watch for these signs:-Gastrointestinal symptoms, breathing difficulties may be present with COVID-19, but not the flu.-Not everybody who is exposed will develop symptoms-The severity, and intensity of symptoms is higher with COVID (fever is mostly above 100.5-degree Celcius)CanvaYou may also likeEndurance vs Stamina: What's the differe...Mask shaming: How to respond to itShould you follow preventive measures?Using a mask can be helpful in limiting infection spread, even with viral ailments.However, if you test negative for COVID-19, there may not be a need for isolation and proper quarantine.Staying away from crowded places might be helpfulCanvaHow can you recover from a flu-like illness?If you are suffering from a viral ailment, the recovery time can be 5-7 days.The illness can be treated symptomatically. However, avoid stressing your body further, and get the neccessary restCanvaWhen to seek medical help?With COVID or the flu, if the severity of symptoms do not come down, or you develop complications, seek care at the earliestA fever above 102 degrees, shortness of breath or other such symptoms can be concerning.CanvaThanks For Reading!Next: Endurance vs Stamina: What's the difference and how to improveRead NextFACTSHEET: Is it safe to eat chicken and eggs as Ghana confronts a bird flu outbreak? - Ghana Fact Skip to content Facebook-f Twitter Youtube Instagram Search Search Close this search box. Home Governance Politics Election 2020 Economy Health COVID-19 Environment Other Checks Deepfakes Menu Home Governance Politics Election 2020 Economy Health COVID-19 Environment Other Checks Deepfakes Search Search Close this search box. Home Who We Are About Us Partners Press Releases Principles How we work Submit a claim to check GhanaFact Team Funding Corrections Factsheets Governance Politics Election 2020 Economy Health COVID-19 Environment Other Checks Deepfakes Contact Us X Home Governance Politics Election 2020 Economy Health COVID-19 Environment Other Checks Deepfakes Menu Home Governance Politics Election 2020 Economy Health COVID-19 Environment Other Checks Deepfakes FACTSHEET: Is it safe to eat chicken and eggs as Ghana confronts a bird flu outbreak? August 18, 2021 7:14 pm Is it safe to eat chicken and eggs as Ghana confronts a bird flu outbreak? The Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza disease (H5N1) has already killed thousands of birds since the government confirmed the outbreak on July 16, with the country losing 12,000 birds in the last week. According to the Veterinary Services Directorate, 36 poultry farms and 58,349 birds have been impacted as a result of the H5N1 virus across four regions of the country – Volta, Central, Ashanti and the Greater Accra regions. “Out of this, 23,719 birds died naturally while 34,630 birds were destroyed for containment,” a Risk Communicator at the Veterinary Services Directorate, Dr Benjamin Sasu told GhanaFact. Bird flu is a type of influenza virus (H5N1 virus) that causes severe respiratory diseases in birds and can spread to humans, according to the World Health Organization(WHO). The followings are the regional breakdown of the outbreak in Ghana In the Greater Accra region, 5 farms with 26, 371 birds have been affected. In the Central region, 4 farms have been affected leading to the death of 14,707 birds. Meanwhile, in the Volta region, only 2 farms have been affected with 2,894 deaths. The Ashanti region has 4 farms affected with 14,377 deaths. WHO recommendation Yes, it is safe to eat poultry meat and eggs. “There is no epidemiological evidence to indicate that people have been infected with the H5N1 virus following consumption of properly cooked poultry or eggs,” the World Health Organization (WHO) has stated. Conventional cooking (temperatures at or above 70°C in all parts of a food item) will inactivate the H5N1 virus, so properly cooked poultry meat is therefore safe to consume. “It’s still safe to continue to eat our eggs and chicken. Let’s cook them well and don’t eat already dead birds. They are unwholesome even during times with no bird flu outbreak,” Dr Benjamin Sasu said. The primary risk factor for human infection appears to be direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments, such as live bird markets. “Slaughtering, defeathering, handling carcasses of infected poultry, and preparing poultry for consumption, especially in household settings, are also likely to be risk factors.” the WHO further stated. The H5N1 virus, if present in poultry meat, is not killed by refrigeration or freezing. No human infection in Ghana Meanwhile, the Veterinary Services Directorate has confirmed that all samples taken from people directly working with the affected birds in Ghana didn’t yield a positive result for the virus. To ensure public safety, citizens are advised to: Report any unusual death of domestic poultry and wild birds to the nearest veterinary office and public authorities. Avoid the handling of dead birds with bare hands at all cost. Consume only well-cooked poultry meat and poultry products. By: Gifty Tracy Aminu PrevPreviousThe J&J COVID-19 vaccine – What you need to know about any possible side effects NextFALSE: Constant sex does NOT kill coronavirusNext Have a claim you want us to fact-check? WhatsApp us on: +233 244 49 9971 GhanaFact is a project by FactSpace West Africa aimed at curbing the spread of disinformation on traditional and social media. © 2022 All rights reserved Facebook-f Twitter Youtube InstagramBird Flu kills 6,046 poultry birds in Tema West Skip to content +233 (0) 20 495 2367 info@gbcghanaonline.com Search Search Close this search box. News World Sports Entertainment Technology Education More Newsletter | Reports Research | Discovery Speeches | Lectures Youth | Children Photography Commentary Travel | Tour Editorials Features Menu News World Sports Entertainment Technology Education More Newsletter | Reports Research | Discovery Speeches | Lectures Youth | Children Photography Commentary Travel | Tour Editorials Features GHANA WEATHER General Bird Flu kills 6,046 poultry birds in Tema West August 19, 2021 No Comments Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Pinterest A total of 6,046 poultry birds have died as a result of Avian Influenza (A-H5N1) – a highly pathogenic zoonotic avian influenza strain – in the Tema West Municipality. Out of the total stock of 10,576 birds in eight affected farms, some 6,046 of the birds died and 4,530 were destroyed; Dr Emmanuel Kwao Pecku, Tema West Municipal Veterinary Officer, disclosed to the Ghana News Agency in Tema on Thursday. He said in Lashibi and Klagon, where the first cases were recorded on July 8, 2021, some 1,290 died, and 300 were destroyed in Klogon. Also, in Sakumono, 60 birds died while at the Klagon Water Works, where 650 birds were in stock, had 40 of them dying and 610 of them destroyed as at July 29, 2021. “At the Lashibi DRC Swimming Pool, 606 birds died and 29 of them were destroyed,” he said, adding that, at the Livestock Farm, where the highest deaths of 3,539 birds were recorded, 3,461 of them were destroyed to prevent further spread of the disease. “As at August 4, 2021, the Sakumono Community 16 had recorded 190 deaths and 10 of such birds had been destroyed, while in Tema Community 19 – Lashibi had recorded 320 deaths with 120 of them also destroyed,” he disclosed. He said upon laboratory investigation, it was confirmed that the affected farms were infected with Avian Influenza (A-H5N1), a zoonotic avian influenza strain that is highly pathogenic. He said the possible common source of the infection had been traced to a feed mill around Ashaiman Timber Market, adding that, it came at a time when there was an upsurge in Influenza-like illness in the Municipality. He advised owners of farms to use the services of Veterinarians and Environmental Health Personnel to assist them in destroying and burying birds properly to prevent the spread of the flu. Mr Isaac Takyi Abrefa, Tema West Municipal Disease Control Officer told the Ghana News Agency that, after an epidemiological study on the situation including data collection, some 18 suspected human cases had been identified. According to him, all the cases were negative to AH5N1 but three had tested positive to COVID-19, and said a team of Epidemiologists had visited and surveillance was still ongoing. He said as part of the epidemiological study, data from persons, places and time had been collected and laboratory investigations had also been conducted, adding that burial of birds and fumigation of affected farms had been carried out. He said all sources of infection would be confirmed and outbreak investigation among humans would continue unabated as resources and social mobilization for possible human outbreaks, rapid response assessment, training, and case management would also continue. Related Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * Email * Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Current ye@r * Leave this field empty We are ready to ensure peaceful elections- Police Inaki Williams to miss AFCON qualifier games against Angola and Niger due to injury 28-year-old unemployed jailed for robbery, stealing Prof Agyeman-Duah expresses concern over Ghana’s democracy Alan Kyerematen to promote Ghana United Farmers Association Rocky Dawuni bags fourth Grammy nomination with ‘Rise’ single ADVERTISEMENT Recent News President Akufo-Addo to commission Flower Pot Interchange on November 19 November 10, 2024 We are ready to ensure peaceful elections- Police November 10, 2024 Inaki Williams to miss AFCON qualifier games against Angola and Niger due to injury November 10, 2024 28-year-old unemployed jailed for robbery, stealing November 10, 2024 Prof Agyeman-Duah expresses concern over Ghana’s democracy November 10, 2024 Alan Kyerematen to promote Ghana United Farmers Association November 10, 2024 Rocky Dawuni bags fourth Grammy nomination with ‘Rise’ single November 10, 2024 Citizens must have access to information at every stage of electoral process – Parliamentary Network Africa November 10, 2024 Coco Gauff secures comeback win at WTA Finals in Riyadh November 10, 2024 Narcotics Control Commission destroys over 150,000kg of illicit drugs November 10, 2024 Ashanti Region’s Nana Owusu Achiaw crowned National Best Farmer November 9, 2024 Taptap Send: BoG suspends popular remittance platform over regulatory violations November 9, 2024 World Africa Americas Asia Middle East United Kingdom Ghana Politics NPP Government The Opposition Propaganda Ghana vs IMF Election 2024 Health Vaccination Prevention Food Healthy Living Health Workers Entertainment Celebrity News Music News Movies Video Stories Awards/Honours Business Finance Economy Exchange Rate Startups Private Sector Technology Innovation Tech Future Security Gadgets/Devices New Technologies Bringing you the Right News at the Right Moment The Nation's Broadcaster. We are the Number one Authentic Television and Radio Broadcasting Network in Ghana. President Akufo-Addo to commission Flower Pot Interchange on November 19 November 10, 2024 We are ready to ensure peaceful elections- Police November 10, 2024 Inaki Williams to miss AFCON qualifier games against Angola and Niger due to injury November 10, 2024 28-year-old unemployed jailed for robbery, stealing November 10, 2024 FOLLOW GBC Facebook Instagram Youtube Log In Term of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Newsletters Advertise with us Corporate Website Ministry of Information Ads Centre Contact Us Menu Term of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Newsletters Advertise with us Corporate Website Ministry of Information Ads Centre Contact Us © Ghana Broadcasting Corporation 2024 | All rights reserved. Go to mobile version