Flu Has Disappeared for More Than a Year | Scientific American Skip to main contentScientific AmericanApril 29, 20212 min readFlu Has Disappeared for More Than a YearMask wearing, social distancing and other steps to stop COVID-19 have also curtailed influenzaBy Katie Peek Katie PeekJoin Our Community of Science Lovers!Sign Up for Our Free Daily NewsletterEmail AddressI agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Scientific American and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.Sign UpSince the novel coronavirus began its global spread, influenza cases reported to the World Health Organization from the Northern and Southern Hemispheres have dropped to minute levels. The reason, epidemiologists think, is that the public health measures taken to keep the coronavirus from spreading—notably mask wearing and social distancing—also stop the flu. Influenza viruses are transmitted in much the same way as SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, and they are less effective at jumping from person to person.As Scientific American reported in November 2020, the drop-off in flu numbers following COVID’s arrival was swift and global. Since then, cases have stayed remarkably low. “There’s just no flu circulating,” says Greg Poland, who has studied the disease at the Mayo Clinic for decades. The U.S. saw about 700 deaths from influenza during the 2020–2021 season. In comparison, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates there were approximately 22,000 U.S. deaths in the prior season and 34,000 deaths two seasons ago. Credit: Katie Peek; Source: FluNet/Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System at the World Health Organization (data) Because each year’s flu vaccine is based on strains that have been circulating around the world during the past 12 months, it is unclear how the upcoming 2021–2022 vaccine will fare should the typical patterns of infection return. The WHO made its flu strain recommendations in late February as usual, but they were based on far fewer cases than normal. Yet with less virus circulating, there is a reduced chance of mutation, so the upcoming vaccine could be especially effective.Public health experts are grateful for the reprieve in cases. If the future includes more hand washing, face covering and temporary social distancing when people become sick, perhaps flu seasons can be less severe, even as health restrictions lift and groups gather together again. Credit: Katie Peek; Source: FluNet/Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System at the World Health Organization (data) Rights & PermissionsKatie Peek is a science journalist and data-visualization designer with degrees in astrophysics and journalism. She is a contributing artist for Scientific American.More by Katie PeekThis article was originally published with the title “Flu Has Disappeared Worldwide during the COVID Pandemic” in Scientific American Magazine Vol. 325 No. 2 (August 2021)doi:10.1038/scientificamerican082021-1VswJ7jrwuw5rR6vdzFdO3View This IssueExpand Your World with ScienceLearn and share the most exciting discoveries, innovations and ideas shaping our world today.SubscribeSign up for our newslettersSee the latest storiesRead the latest issueGive a Gift SubscriptionFollow Us:Return & Refund PolicyAboutPress RoomFAQsContact UsInternational EditionsAdvertiseAccessibility StatementTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyCalifornia Consumer Privacy StatementUse of cookies/Do not sell my dataScientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.© 2024 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, A DIVISION OF SPRINGER NATURE AMERICA, INC.ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.Enhanced generation of influenza-specific tissue resident memory CD8 T cells in NK-depleted mice | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Enhanced generation of influenza-specific tissue resident memory CD8 T cells in NK-depleted mice Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 26 April 2021 Enhanced generation of influenza-specific tissue resident memory CD8 T cells in NK-depleted mice David L. Rose1 na1, Katie L. Reagin2 na1, Kimberly E. Oliva3, S. Mark Tompkins4,5 & …Kimberly D. Klonowski3 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 11, Article number: 8969 (2021) Cite this article 2200 Accesses 2 Citations 2 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Immunological memoryImmunology AbstractNatural Killer (NK) cells are among the first effectors to directly contact influenza and influenza-infected cells and their activation affects not only their intrinsic functions, but also subsequent CD8+ T cell responses. We utilized a NK cell depletion model to interrogate the contribution of NK cells to the development of anti-influenza CD8+ T cell memory. NK cell ablation increased the number of influenza-specific memory CD8+ T cells in the respiratory tract and lung-draining lymph node. Interestingly, animals depleted of NK cells during primary influenza infection were protected as well as their NK-intact counterparts despite significantly fewer reactivated CD8+ T cells infiltrating the respiratory tract after lethal, heterosubtypic challenge. Instead, protection in NK-deficient animals seems to be conferred by rapid reactivation of an enlarged pool of lung tissue-resident (TRM) memory cells within two days post challenge. Further interrogation of how NK cell ablation enhances respiratory TRM indicated that TRM development is independent of global and NK cell derived IFN-γ. These data suggest that reduction in NK cell activation after vaccination with live, non-lethal influenza virus increases compartmentalized, broadly protective memory CD8+ T cell generation and decreases the risk of CD8+ T cell-mediated pathology following subsequent influenza infections. Similar content being viewed by others Clonotypic analysis of protective influenza M2e-specific lung resident Th17 memory cells reveals extensive functional diversity Article Open access 08 March 2022 Prevention of respiratory virus transmission by resident memory CD8+ T cells Article 12 December 2023 Influenza- and MCMV-induced memory CD8 T cells control respiratory vaccinia virus infection despite residence in distinct anatomical niches Article Open access 21 January 2021 IntroductionSeasonal influenza A viruses cause significant morbidity worldwide, resulting in high rates of influenza-associated hospitalization1,2. Current influenza vaccines target humoral responses to strain-specific hemagglutinin (HA) but weakly elicit cross-protective immunity against divergent and mutated viruses3. However, anti-influenza CD8+ T cells recognize conserved, internal viral proteins and clear the virus infection. Therefore, targeting the generation of anti-viral CD8+ memory T cells (Tmem) may provide a better alternative to combat evolving influenza strains4. The presence of tissue resident memory cells (TRM) within the respiratory tract has been correlated with increased protection against heterologous influenza infection5. However, respiratory TRM wane with time, coordinate with protection against secondary influenza infection5. Thus, further understanding the factors which contribute to the generation of long-lived TRM in the respiratory tract may provide an exploitative mechanism to enhance protection against seasonal influenza infections.While the signals required for the generation of Tmem cells in the respiratory tract are not fully understood, CD8+ T cell fate determination is linked strength of TCR signaling, duration of T cell-APC interactions, co-stimulation, and CD4 help6. Moreover, integration of these signals and cytokines in the priming environment tune PI3K and mTOR signaling pathways towards either an effector or Tmem cell differentiation program6. Additionally, circumstances surrounding the activation of an individual T cell can be unique, with different clones of a single specificity and progeny of a single naïve T cell capable of generating effector and diverse Tmem lineages7. All of the factors driving the Tmem differentiation process are contextual, with the pathogen and specific priming microenvironment dictating Tmem potential. Importantly, strong inflammation promotes terminal differentiation at the expense of memory formation in part via the cytokines IL-12 and IFN-γ8,9,10 via differential regulation the transcription factors T-bet11 and Eomesodermin12. Knowledge of how immune cells supporting the inflammatory response contribute to the CD8+ T cell priming environment and resultant Tmem development could be used to improve influenza vaccine design.NK cells precede CD8+ T cells in the respiratory tract after influenza infection and can influence anti-viral adaptive immunity13. Indeed, NK cells can directly suppress the proliferation of recently activated CD8+ T cells14,15, eliminate CD8+ T cells either infected or not protected by the anti-viral state13,16,17,18 and affect the overall magnitude of CD8+ T cell priming through direct elimination of virus19. Moreover, NK cells can recognize and lyse activated CD4+ helper T cells, subsequently limiting the CD8+ T cell response to viral infection20. It is therefore likely that NK cells could directly or indirectly influence the formation of CD8+ Tmem, making them an important variable to consider for elicitation of cross-protective CD8+ T cell immunity.Here, we demonstrate that systemic depletion of NK cells during primary influenza A infection results in a numerically larger pool of influenza-specific CD8+ Tmem in the lung and lung-draining lymph nodes. Importantly, the former pool is enriched for TRM positioned within the lung parenchyma and outside of the associated vasculature. NK-depleted and intact animals were equally protected from a heterosubtypic viral challenge; however, significantly fewer peripherally reactivated CD8+ Tmem were observed in the lungs of NK-depleted animals. Instead, viral titers were likely controlled by the rapid reactivation of an enriched TRM population pre-positioned in the lungs. Upon ex vivo peptide stimulation memory CD8+ T Cells from both NK-sufficient and deficient animals produced similar amounts of anti-viral cytokines, including IFN-γ, on a per cell basis, however the enlarged TRM pool in the NK-deficient mice allows for greater overall production of anti-viral cytokines early after viral challenge. Elimination of global IFN-γ did not enhance TRM formation, suggesting NK cell-derived IFN-γ does not mediate this effect. In summary, our studies suggest that tuning NK cell activation and function may present a mechanism to elicit optimal CD8+ TRM during vaccination.ResultsSystemic depletion of NK cells results in numerically increased CD8+ Tmem Innate immune cells are first responders, decreasing antigen load and producing cytokines, which can modulate subsequent adaptive immune response19,21. Indeed, NK cells have been shown to impact the magnitude and longevity of subsequent anti-viral T cell responses19,20,22,23. However, it is unclear how NK cells modulate anti-influenza CD8+ T cell responses, specifically their differentiation into memory subsets and resultant recall responses in vivo. We administered the monoclonal antibody PK136 (anti-NK1.1), an isotype control (IgG), or PBS control to deplete NK cells 1 day prior to, and ending 3 days post, sub-lethal infection with the low pathogenicity influenza A virus x31. This protocol depletes NK cells in the blood, lung, and secondary lymphoid organs > 90% through 5 days post infection (dpi) (Supplementary Fig. S2 and data not shown), the time over which NK cells accumulate and become activated within the lung (Supplementary Fig. S1), with no effect on viral load (Supplementary Fig. S2). While we observe restoration of NK cells in the blood and secondary lymphoid organs by 35dpi (Supplementary Fig. S2 and data not shown), NK cells numbers are still significantly reduced in the lung as far out as 35dpi, suggesting this depletion protocol results in a protracted depletion of lung NK cells. While the anti-NK1.1 mAb can deplete both NK1.1+ NKT cells24 and NK1.1+ ILC-1s25, we determined that NKT cells were neither significantly expanded nor activated in our model of influenza infection (Supplementary Fig. S1).To determine whether NK depletion affects the magnitude of the anti-influenza CD8+ T cell response, we monitored the accumulation of the immunodominant anti-influenza nucleoprotein (NP)-specific CD8+ T cells in the lung, lung airways (via bronchial alveolar lavage (BAL)), and lung-draining mediastinal lymph nodes (MdLN) after infection in the presence or absence of NK cells. Depletion of NK cells increased the numbers of NP-specific CD8+ T cells recovered from all respiratory-associated tissues at 10 dpi (Fig. 1A,B), the peak of the proliferative CD8+ T cell response, albeit not to a statistically significant level. However, this disparity increased over time in the lung where more than double the number of NP-specific CD8+ T cells were isolated from the respiratory tract of NK-depleted mice 45 dpi. In the MdLN we observed a similar trend, albeit slightly delayed, with nearly double the number of NP-specific CD8+ T cells recovered from NK-depleted mice 90 dpi (Fig. 1A,B). While the number of antigen (Ag)-specific CD8+ T cells isolated from the BAL of NK-depleted mice was elevated over NK-sufficient mice at all times examined, the difference between the two groups was not statistically significant. Nonetheless, these data demonstrate that depletion of NK cells numerically increased the pool of anti-influenza CD8+ Tmem in both the lung parenchyma and lung-draining MdLN after influenza infection. As demonstrated previously19, this suggests that NK cells limit the accumulation of CD8+ Tmem; however, it’s unclear whether NK cell ablation affects the development (and/or survival) and quality of the resultant CD8+ Tmem.Figure 1Anti-influenza CD8+ T cells are numerically increased following NK cell depletion. C57BL/6 mice were infected with 103 PFU x31 and administered PBS or the NK depleting antibody at −1, 1, and 3 dpi. (A) Representative flow of activated (CD44hi), NP-tet+ cells recovered from the BAL, lung, and MdLN of animals after gating on single cells, lymphocytes and CD8+ cells. (B) The kinetics of the CD8+ T cell response based on the total number ± SEM of activated (CD44hi), NP-tet+ CD8+ T cells recovered from the BAL, lung, and MdLN of animals that were treated with PBS (black) or depleting antibody (grey) is depicted. (C) Representative flow of CD127 and KLRG1 expression by NP-tet+CD44+CD8+ T cells from the lung and MdLN of NK sufficient or depleted mice 10 and 45dpi. (D) The total number of CD127+KLRG1- (MPECs) and CD127-KLRG1- (EECs) cells in the lung and MdLN of animals treated with PBS (black) or PK136 (gray), previously gated on CD8+CD44hiNP-tet+ cells. Graphs represent pooled data from 3 or more independent experiments using n ≥ 3 mice/groupime point (total of 9 mice per groupime point). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; unpaired Student’s t-test with Holm–Sidak multiple comparisons correction.Full size imageNK cell depletion increases the pool of CD127 expressing memory cells following influenza infectionTmem cells develop from effectors which survive the contraction phase of the immune response via IL-7 signalling26,27. Thus, cells with memory potential are identified by increased IL-7Rα (CD127) expression and are termed memory precursor effector cells (MPECs). Conversely, effector cells lacking CD127 expression will not survive contraction, and are thus termed short-lived effector cells (SLECs) due to their limited longevity and expression of terminal differentiation marker killer cell lectin-like receptor G1 (KLRG1)6. Effector cells devoid of both CD127 and KLRG1 are termed early effector cells (EECs) and have demonstrated a plasticity in their ability to transition into either SLECs or MPECs depending on the inflammatory milieu7,28. While it has been demonstrated that influenza infection favors development of a large EEC pool29, it is unknown whether NK depletion alters Tmem development, even at this early stage.To determine whether NK cells affect the memory potential of Ag-specific CD8+ T cells, we tracked the kinetics of CD127 and KLRG1 expression on influenza-specific CD8+ T cells in the lung and MdLN 10 and 45 dpi. The frequency and total number of KLRG1hi (both CD127hi (DPECs) and CD127lo (SLECs)) recovered from the lung and MdLN was equivalent regardless of NK-depletion (Fig. 1C and data not shown). However, the total number of EECs (CD127loKLRG1lo) recovered from the lungs was elevated in NK-depleted mice at both 10 and 45 dpi (Fig. 1D). Interestingly, almost 2 × as many MPECs were recovered from the lungs of NK-depleted mice compared to NK-sufficient controls 45 dpi despite no difference at 10 dpi (Fig. 1D). Within the MdLN, although not statistically significant, both MPECs and EECs were elevated 10 dpi in NK-depleted mice, and while the EECs dropped off to equivalent levels by 45dpi, MPECs remained elevated in NK-depleted mice compared to NK-sufficient controls (Fig. 1D). Since CD127hi expressing CD8+ T cells undergo contraction at a slower rate than their CD127lo counterparts30, CD127hi NP-specific CD8+ T cells isolated from NK-depleted mice would have a greater chance of surviving to memory. Indeed, comparing the total number of lung MPECs between 10 and 45 dpi suggests that MPECs may have contracted at a slower rate in NK-depleted animals (Fig. 1D). Together, these data show that NK cell depletion increases the number of MdLN and lung Tmem generated after influenza infection which may be attributed to a reduced contraction of lung MPECs.NK Cell depletion increases the number of Ag-specific CD8+ TRM Memory cells are broadly categorized as central (TCM) or effector (TEM) memory based on distinct cell surface marker expression which influences localization31. While TEM patrol peripheral tissues, tissue resident memory cells (TRM), a subset of TEM, have limited migratory potential. It has long been appreciated that anti-influenza CD8+ T cells positioned at the infection site are crucial for heterosubtypic immunity and waning of this immunity correlates with loss of respiratory CD8+ T cells over time32,33. Recent studies have indeed attributed protective immunity against secondary viral challenge to the presence of TRM whereas infiltrating memory CD8+ T cells are associated with immunopathology5.As NK-depleted mice have enhanced Tmem in the lung following influenza infection, we wanted to determine whether lung TRM specifically were enhanced. Thus, we differentiated circulating from resident CD8+ Tmem in NK-depleted and sufficient mice 50 dpi using an established intravenous staining protocol34, which differentiates between circulating and tissue-embedded NP-specific CD8+ Tmem at a given time (Fig. 2A)34. We observed no difference in the frequency of CD8+ TEM (data not shown) or TRM between NK-sufficient or NK-deficient mice (Fig. 2A,B). However, due to the numerical increase in CD8+ T cells in the lungs of NK-depleted animals, there was an increase in the total number of TEM (data not shown), and the total number of TRM was coordinately increased by twofold compared to NK-sufficient animals (Fig. 2C). Additionally, we do not observe any increase in the total number of lung TRM following PBS treatment or treatment with 200ug isotype control IgG (Fig S3), suggesting this enhancement in TRM is in fact due to NK depletion. Despite this numerical increase in TRM, we observed no difference in expression of canonical TRM markers CD69 or CD103 (Fig. 2D,E).Figure 2NK depletion enhances the development of lung TRM following influenza infection. (A) C57BL/6 mice were infected with 103 PFU x31, administered anti-NK depleting antibody at −1, 1, and 3 dpi and rested for 45 days. TRM were identified as cells which did not positively stain with an anti-CD45 administered i.v. 3 min prior to euthanasia, previously gated on single cells, lymphocytes, CD8+CD44+NP-tet+ cells. The frequency (B), and number (C) of NP-tet+ TRM CD8+ T cells ± SEM recovered from the lung of NK depleted (grey) and sufficient (black) mice are depicted. (D) Representative expression of CD103 and CD69 by lung TRM cells. (E) Frequency of cells expressing CD103 or CD69 in NK-depleted (grey) or sufficient (black) mice. Graphs represent pooled data from 2 independent experiments using n ≥ 3 mice/groupime point (total of 6 mice per groupime point). *p < 0.05; unpaired Student’s t-test with Holm-Sidak multiple comparisons correction.Full size imageAs our NK depletion model removes circulating NK cells for approximately 35 days (Supplementary Fig. S2), NK cell alteration of TRM cell numbers could be early (programmatic) or later (via enhanced survival during contraction). Therefore, we depleted NK cells at −1 or 10 dpi (Fig. 3A), where NK cells are retained during CD8+ T cell priming, expansion and migration and depleted only during contraction. Regardless of depletion protocol, the frequency of NP-specific CD8+ TRM was equivalent between NK-depleted and sufficient animals (Fig. 3B,C). However, only the mice depleted of NK cells during priming, expansion and migration into tissues (at d-1) had an increase in the total number of CD8+ TRM (Fig. 3D), indicating that the NK cells exert an early effect on CD8+ T cells at a time when these cells are receiving key programmatic signals, ultimately limiting the expansion of the TRM pool.Figure 3Removal of NK cells during CD8+ T cell priming enhances the development of lung TRM. (A) C57BL/6 mice were infected with 103 PFU x31, administered anti-NK depleting antibody at −1 or 10 dpi, and sacrificed 35 dpi. TRM were identified by lack of staining with an anti-CD45 antibody administered i.v. 3 min prior to euthanasia. (B) Representative flow of circulating (i.v.-) or resident (i.v.+) memory cells within the lung 35dpi following treatment with PBS or PK-136 on the indicated days. Previously gated on single cells, lymphocytes, CD8+CD44+NP-tet+ cells. The frequency (C) and number (D) of NP-tet+ TRM CD8+ T cells + /-SEM recovered from the lung of NK depleted (grey; depletion protocol as indicated and described in (A)) vs PBS (black) are depicted. All graphs represent pooled data from 2 independent experiments with n = 5 mice/groupime point (total of 10 mice per groupime point). *p < 0.05; unpaired Student’s t-test with Holm-Sidak multiple comparisons correction.Full size imageNK cell ablation during primary influenza infection leads to numerically smaller but equally protective CD8+ T cell recall responsePositioning of TRM cells within the respiratory tract mediates protective recall responses upon secondary influenza infection5,35. Since NK-depletion enhances the numbers of Tmem, and specifically TRM, in the respiratory tract, we wanted to determine whether this translated into a more robust recall response following secondary influenza infection. We generated x31-immune animals in the presence or absence of NK cells and challenged the mice at memory (45–50 dpi) with the PR8 heterosubtypic strain of influenza which shares the internal x31 NP epitope but expresses distinct external epitopes/antibody targets. We hypothesized that having more Ag-specific memory cells positioned in the lung prior to challenge would result in a larger recall response in the animals depleted of NK cells in the primary response, resulting in enhanced protection and reduced viral titers after challenge.Prior to challenge, we recovered nearly double the number of NP-specific CD8+ T cells from the lungs of NK-depleted mice. As we monitored the accumulation of the NP-specific memory CD8+ T cells in the BAL and lung at 8 and 15 days post-challenge (dpc), we recovered fewer NP-specific CD8+ T cells from these tissues in NK-depleted mice (nearly 1/3 and 1/2, respectively) at the proliferative peak of the recall response at 8 dpc (Fig. 4A). Despite a numerically reduced recall response, NK-depleted mice were equally protected after challenge as they demonstrated similar weight loss (Fig. 4B) and survival to NK-sufficient animals. While no immune mice succumbed to infection, naïve animals reached the humane endpoint of 30% weight loss by 7dpc (data not shown). While this enhanced recovery observed in NK-depleted animals could be attributed to the elevated levels of Ag-specific CD8+ TRM cells in the lung at the time of viral challenge, it is possible that reduced NK-derived inflammation from the protracted depletion of NK cells from the lung in NK-depleted mice (Supplementary Fig. S2) could also curtail infiltration and expansion of Ag-specific CD8+ T cells following viral re-challenge. Nonetheless, viral titers were decreased in NK-depleted animals at 2, 4 and 6 dpc, albeit not statistically significant (Fig. 4C). Moreover, there was no observed difference between the groups regarding time to viral clearance. Therefore, our data suggest that CD8+ Tmem generated in the absence of NK cells may be functionally superior upon recall when compared to their NK-sufficient counterparts, as they do not require either in situ proliferation or tissue recruitment to amass a large number of new CD8+ T effectors to reduce viral load.Figure 4NK depleted animals are equally protected from heterosubtypic challenge by a numerically smaller CD8+ recall response compared to NK sufficient animals. C57BL/6 mice were infected with 103 PFU x31 and administered anti-NK depleting antibody on −1, 1, 3 dpi to develop x31 immune mice. (A) The x31 immune mice were subsequently challenged with 105 PFU PR8 50 dpi. The total number of CD44hiNP-tet+CD8+ cells ± SEM recovered from the BAL (left) and lung (right) of NK sufficient (black) and NK depleted (grey) mice was determined at 0 (45 dpi), 8, and 15 dpc. (B) The percent of body weight lost ± SEM by x31 immune mice generated in the presence (solid black) or absence (dashed, dark grey) of NK cells after a 105 PFU PR8 challenge was compared to naïve mice (dash-dot, light grey) after a primary 500 PFU PR8 infection. Horizontal dashed line represents weight loss of 20%; the humane endpoint of 30% was reached by naïve controls on 7dpc. (C) The viral titer of lung homogenate recovered from NK sufficient (black) or depleted (grey) immune animals was measured 2, 4, 6 and 8 dpc (N.D. = not detectable). Horizontal dashed line represents the limit of assay detection. Graphs represent pooled data from 2 independent experiments using n = 5 mice/groupime point (total of 10 mice per groupime point). *p < 0.05; unpaired Student’s t-test with Holm-Sidak multiple comparisons correction.Full size imageTo assess the functionality of CD8+ Tmem developed in the absence of NK cells, we generated × 31 immune mice in the presence or absence of NK cells and challenged with PR8 as previously described. CD8+ T cells were subsequently recovered from the lung at 2, 4, 6, and 8 dpc, re-stimulated ex vivo with the influenza NP366-374 peptide or irrelevant peptide and assessed for production of IFN-γ and TNF-α, as airway resident CD8+ T cells are capable of curtailing viral replication through production of these cytokines35. CD8+ Tmem recovered from the lung of NK-depleted and sufficient mice harbored equivalent proportions of IFN-γ and TNF-α producing cells (Fig. 5A) and equivalent production of these cytokines on a per cell basis (data not shown). However, when comparing the kinetics of the overall total number of cytokine producing cells, the total number of IFN-γ+ cells in NK-depleted animals peaked earlier and with less overall cellular accumulation, resulting in ~ 1/2 the number of IFN-γ+ CD8+ T cells in the lung at 8 dpc compared to NK-sufficient animals. There was no difference in the total number of IFN-γ+ cells between PBS or isotype treated controls (data not shown). Interestingly nearly 2 × more IFN-γ+ CD8+ T cells were recovered from the lung of NK-depleted vs PBS or isotype control treated animals (Fig. 5B, and data not shown) at 2dpc. Studies by Wu et al. demonstrated that infiltration of reactivated peripheral CD8+ Tmem does not occur before 3 dpc5, therefore the IFN-γ+ CD8+ T cells are likely TRM reactivated rapidly in situ. Together, these data suggest that ablation of NK cells during primary immune response to influenza allows for an equally functional, protective recall response with fewer Ag-specific CD8+ T cells entering the lung and lung airways after challenge. We postulate that this could be attributed to the increased number of lung TRM (Fig. 2B) which are quickly activated and converted to secondary effector cells producing significant levels of local IFN-γ; however, we cannot completely rule out possible contributions from the protracted depletion of lung specific NK cells (Supplementary Fig. S2) in our depletion model.Figure 5CD8+ Tmem generated in the presence and absence of NK cells produce equivalent percentages but different overall amounts of IFN-γ over time x31 immune mice generated in NK-sufficient or deficient conditions were challenged with 105 pfu PR8 and lymphocytes were recovered from the lung at the indicated dpc. (A) Following re-stimulation with the indicated peptide, TNF-α and IFN-γ was detected by intracellular staining as depicted in the representative dot plots. (B) Absolute number of IFN-γ+ CD8+ T cells recovered from lung of NK-deficient (grey) or sufficient (black) mice on indicated dpc. Graphs represent pooled data from 2 independent experiments using n = 5 mice/groupime point (total of 10 mice/ time point*p < 0.05; unpaired Student’s t-test with Holm-Sidak multiple comparisons correction.Full size imageCD8+ Tmem formation in the lung is independent of NK-cell derived IFN-γSince NK cell depletion increases the number of NP-specific CD8+ TRM, we next sought to determine the mechanism by which NK cells impair anti-viral CD8+ TRM development. Previous studies demonstrated that NK cells can influence T cells directly via lysis, inhibiting their proliferation, and controlling viral load16,19,20. However, NK cells are also potent producers of IFN-γ which can contribute to CD8+ T cell activation or promote contraction by increasing pro-apoptotic factors36,37,38,39. Additionally, IFN-γ can block the development of CD127 expressing memory precursor CD8+ T cells if induced during or shortly after T cell priming in a DC immunization model9. Thus, loss of NK-derived IFN-γ could explain the numeric differences in the anti-viral CD8+ T cells observed in NK-depleted versus sufficient mice.To determine the contribution of NK-derived IFN-γ to our influenza model, we measured IFN-γ transcripts in the lung and MdLN of NK-depleted and sufficient mice prior to the activation (48–72 h) and arrival (72–96 h) of T cells in the lung40,41. As expected, NK-depleted mice expressed IFN-γ transcript at lower levels, approximately one half and one quarter of that observed in the lung of NK-sufficient mice at 24 and 72 h post infection, respectively (Fig. 6A). Similarly, NK-depleted mice expressed approximately one half and one tenth IFN-γ transcript levels of NK-sufficient mice in the MdLN at 24 and 72 h post infection, respectively (Fig. 6A). We next examined the development of NP-specific memory precursors and Tmem at 10 and 45dpi in both WT and IFN-γ−/− mice (Fig. 6B). While we observed no significant difference in the total number of NP-specific CD8+ T cells in the lung or MdLN of WT or IFN-γ−/− mice 10dpi (Fig. 6C, left), IFN-γ−/− mice harbored an increased frequency of CD127+ MPECs (Fig. 6B), which translated into an increase in total number of lung MPECs (Fig. 6D, left). By 45dpi this numerical advantage in MPECs was lost, and equivalent levels of NP-specific CD8+ T cells were recovered from both the lung and mdLN of WT and IFN-γ−/− mice (Fig. 6C), with comparable expression of CD127 (Fig. 6B,D). This indicates that while IFN-γ may play a role in the development of memory precursors through suppressing CD127 expression on influenza-specific CD8+ T cells, it does not alter the number of NP-specific CD8+ T cells in the memory pool. Thus, NK cell-derived IFN-γ may be one of multiple mechanisms by which NK cells regulate memory CD8+ T cell development in the lung.Figure 6IFN-γ deficiency enhances the total number of memory precursors, but not Tmem following viral respiratory infection. C57BL/6 mice were infected with 103 PFU x31 and administered the NK depleting antibody on −1, 1, and 3 dpi. (A) The relative expression of IFN-γ transcript recovered from bulk lung tissue and MdLN of NK-sufficient (black) and depleted (grey) mice 24 and 72 h post infection. (B) C57/BL6 WT and IFN-γ−/− mice were infected with 103pfu x31, sacrificed 10 and 45dpi and frequency of CD8+CD44+NP-tet+ cells as well as subsequent CD127 and KLRG1 expression assessed. (C) Total number ± SEM of activated CD44+ NP-tet+ CD8+ cells in WT (black bar) and IFN-γ−/− (grey bar) mice. (D) Total number of CD127+KLRG1- MPECs in the lung and MdLN of WT (black) and IFN-γ−/− (grey) mice 10 and 45dpi is depicted. Graphs are representative of data from 2 independent experiments using n ≥ 3 mice/groupime point (total 6 animals per groupime point). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; unpaired Student’s t-test with Welch’s correction (for mRNA analysis).Full size imageTo further explore whether NK cell-derived IFN-γ contributes the development of CD8+ TRM after influenza infection, we examined the NP-specific TRM cells present in the lung 35 dpi in NK-sufficient or deficient WT and IFN-γ−/− mice. We observed an increase in the frequency and total number of NP-specific CD8+ T cells recovered from the lungs of NK-depleted WT mice, which was not observed in IFN-γ−/− mice irrespective of NK-depletion (Fig. 7A,B). While more NP-specific TRM cells were recovered from the lungs of NK-deficient WT mice (although not statistically significant) compared to NK-sufficient WT controls (Fig. 7C), elevated TRM numbers were again not observed in the lungs of IFN-γ−/− mice, regardless of NK depletion (Fig. 7C), indicating that TRM formation in the lung following influenza infection occurs independent of both global and NK cell-derived IFN-γ. Together, these data suggest that NK cells regulate TRM development in the respiratory tract, albeit independent of IFN-γ production. While the mechanism by which NK cells regulate TRM formation within the lung is still unknown, reducing NK cell activation during CD8 T cell priming may provide a mechanism to enhance regional CD8+ T cell protection with a reduced potential for immunopathology.Figure 7Enhanced respiratory TRM development in NK-deficient mice is independent of IFN-γ. (A) C57/BL6 WT and IFN-γ−/− mice were administered 200ug of PK136 or 200ul PBS 1 day prior to infection with 103pfu x31. Mice were sacrificed 35 days later and frequency of CD8+CD44+NP-tet+ cells, as well as NP-tet+ TRM cells (identified by lack of staining with an anti-CD45 antibody administered i.v. 3 min prior to euthanasia) in the lung assessed. Frequency and total number ± SEM of (B) CD8+CD44+NP-tet+ cells and (C) NP-tet+ TRM cells in the lung 35 days post infection in WT or IFN-γ−/− NK-depleted (grey bar) and PBS treated (black bar) mice. Graphs are representative of pooled data from 2 independent experiments using n ≥ 3 mice/group (total WT/PBS: n = 7, WT/NKdep: n = 11, IFN-γ−/−/PBS: n = 6, IFN-γ−/−/PK-136: n = 8 depicted). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; One-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons correction.Full size imageDiscussionDiversity in the CD8+ Tmem lineage is imprinted by direct cellular encounters and soluble stimuli, beginning as early as the initial priming event in a regional draining lymph node and continuing within the infected tissue where residency may be established. While many signaling pathways have been identified which bias antigen-specific CD8+ T cells towards an effector or Tmem fate42, less is known about the signals responsible for imprinting the TRM program. In this study, we examined the net contribution of NK cells to the subsequent generation of anti-influenza CD8+ Tmem subsets. We found that NK cell depletion during influenza infection results in numerically increased CD8+ Tmem (Fig. 1B) akin to what has been reported after systemic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection15. NK depletion enhanced the numbers of NP-specific Tmem in the lung 45 days following influenza infection, which remained elevated in both the lung and lung draining MdLN out to 90 days post infection (Fig. 1A). Moreover, similar to LCMV infection15, NK depletion resulted in NP-specific cells had enhanced expression of the IL-7R alpha subunit (CD127), which is known to bolster CD8+ T memory formation by promoting survival through the contraction phase of the immune response26,27. In fact, increased expression of CD127 in NK-depleted mice was correlated elevated numbers of lung MPECs 45dpi (Fig. 1D), suggesting that NK depletion may enhance the survival of lung Tmem following respiratory infection.Subsequent analysis of the NP-specific cells in the lung revealed that while all Tmem populations including TEM were numerically enhanced (data not shown), NK-depleted animals harbored 2 × more tissue-embedded TRM compared to their NK-sufficient counterparts (Fig. 2C), implicating NK cells as regulators of the TRM program. Additionally, the CD8+ Tmem pool in the respiratory tract of animals depleted of NK cells in the primary infection was equally protective against heterosubtypic challenge compared to control animals (Fig. 4B). While the proportion of reactivated CD8+ Tmem recovered from the lung of NK-depleted or sufficient animals producing IFN-γ and TNF-α on days 2, 4, 6 and 8 post challenge (Fig. 5A) was equivalent, the overall number of lung CD8+ T cells producing IFN-γ significantly increased 2 dpc in the animals depleted of NK cells in the primary (Fig. 5B). Given that TRM cells produce significant IFN-γ in the lung prior to the recruitment of reactivated peripheral Tmem and the known contribution of CD8+ TRM cells in protection against heterosubtypic influenza infection5, our data suggests that positioning more CD8+ TRM cells at the site of infection can control viral titers without the need for reactivation of peripheral Tmem cells. Indeed, animals depleted of NK cells in the primary infection possessed lower challenge viral titers compared to NK-intact animals at all times examined (2, 4, and 6 dpc) (Fig. 4C), albeit not to statistically significant levels. Therefore, a threshold pool of TRM was reached in NK-depleted animals which sufficiently reduced antigen/inflammation to levels bypassing the need for reactivation and proliferation (Fig. 4A) of peripheral Tmem upon viral challenge. This is relevant considering that CD8+ T cell-mediated tissue damage during clearance of influenza infection may contribute to secondary bacterial infection and increased mortality. Therefore, limiting T cell proliferation after reactivation could ameliorate these undesirable consequences.Studies have shown that adoptive transfer of in vitro-derived memory CD4+ T cells into NK-depleted BALB/c mice curtailed influenza-induced morbidity via reduced NK-driven inflammation43. In our studies, NK cells remained dramatically reduced in the lung at the time of viral re-challenge (Supplementary Fig. S2). It is therefore possible that the improved animal recovery observed in the adoptive transfer study may be partially due to the protracted depletion of lung NK cells. Unlike McKinstry et al43, we did not observe a significant difference in weight loss or recovery between NK-sufficient and NK-deficient animals following viral challenge (Fig. 4B). Instead, we observed an early increase in the total number of Ag-specific, IFN-γ producing CD8+ T cells and reduced recruitment of secondary CD8+ effector T cells at later time points (Fig. 5) in NK-depleted mice, the latter which could also be attributed to reduced inflammation. Thus, while differences in experimental methodology may account for some of the observed discrepancies between these studies, cumulatively both sets of data suggest that NK cell depletion during influenza challenge likely alters the host environment and response to infection.NK cells can modulate the anti-influenza CD8+ T cell response in a variety of ways, through suppression of recently activated CD8+ T cells14,15, direct elimination of infected CD8+ T cells13,16,17,18,44, or through elimination of viral reservoirs, impacting the overall magnitude of CD8+ T cell priming. Additionally, NK cell-mediated culling of activated CD4+ helper T cells limited effector CD8+ T cell proliferation, resulting in numerically reduced memory15. However, we did not observe significantly more CD8+ T cells in NK-depleted mice at the proliferative peak following influenza infection (Fig. 1B), suggesting an alternate NK cell-mediated mechanism was responsible for the increased number of CD8+ Tmem. NK-DC crosstalk45,46 is not likely affected in our model as the number of DCs and their surface expression of MHC-I, MHC-II and CD80 at 1–5 dpi was equivalent in NK-depleted and sufficient mice (data not shown). Thus, the increased number of CD8+ TRM we observed in NK-depleted mice cannot be ascribed to bystander regulation of DCs known to impact CD8+ TRM, suggesting that NK cells directly regulate CD8+ TRM development. Recent studies demonstrated that NK cells can directly eliminate activated, virus-specific, CD8+ T cells via their natural cytotoxicity receptor (NCR1) during acute LCMV infection47. Absence of NCR1 results in a more robust CD8+ T cell response, accompanied by increased immunopathology47, suggesting that not only can NK cells directly control the virus-specific CD8+ T cell pool, but this regulation may be critical for preserving tissue integrity, which would be of particular importance in vital organs such as the lung.In our system, a single injection of PK136 mAb depletes NK cells for 4 wks. It is of note that CD8+ T cells can upregulate NK1.1 during influenza virus infection48,49 and may be depleted during anti-NK1.1 treatment. However, we did not observe differences in influenza-specific CD8+ T cell numbers between NK-depleted or control depleted at day 10 or 36 post-infection (data not shown). While virus-specific CD8+ T cells did express low levels of NK1.1, expression was almost tenfold lower than that of NK cells (data not shown) potentially preventing NK1.1-mediated depletion. Furthermore this depletion scheme has the potential to deplete both NK1.1+ NKT cells24 and ILC-1s25. We determined that NKT cells (which do not largely expand or become activated in our model of influenza infection (Supplementary Fig. S1)) likely do not play a large role in respiratory TRM formation. However, due to their phenotypic similarities to NK cells, we were unable to directly assess the presence of type I ILC following influenza infection and thus cannot eliminate their potential contribution to our study. However, functionally NK cells would be quite relevant in modulating CD8+ T cell responses if their activation or inhibition signals are perturbed. While the NK inhibitory signaling via MHC I expression is not compromised by influenza infection50, expression of the NKp46 ligand hemagglutinin (HA) and other stress ligands would be limited to 10 dpi (by which point the x31 virus is cleared51). Additionally, presence of NK cell activating cytokines IL-15, type I IFN and IL-12 also cease with inflammation by 15 dpi42,52,53,54, limiting the effects of NK cells on CD8+ T cell immunity to within this time frame. Depletion of NK cells during CD8+ T cell contraction had no effect on Tmem formation; however, NK depletion during CD8+ T cell activation/proliferation and migration enhances Tmem development (Fig. 3D). It is also during this early time frame (< 10 dpi) where the highest levels of NK cell activation is observed, indicating that NK cell regulation of Tmem formation occurs coordinate with high levels of NK cell activation.To elucidate the mechanism by which NK cells regulate respiratory TRM formation, we focused our attention on IFN-γ, as activated NK cells are potent producers of IFN-γ which can antagonize CD8+ Tmem development when present during or shortly after priming9,55. In fact, CD127 expression, which is induced via an IL-10/mTOR pathway56 downstream of STAT3, can be modulated by IFN-γ-mediated suppression of IL-10 or dephosphorylation of STAT357. Moreover, anti-influenza CD8+ Tmem are enhanced in both IFN-γ−/− and IFN-γR1−/− mice and this is directly attributed to modified CD127 and Bcl-2 expression58. We also observed an increased number of CD127hi NP-specific CD8+ T cells in the lungs of NK-depleted mice 45 dpi (Fig. 1D), suggesting that NK-derived IFN-γ could regulate CD127 responsiveness and subsequent development and survival of Tmem. If loss of IFN-γ alone was responsible for the elevated CD8+ TRM observed within the lung of NK-depleted mice, then this observation should be replicated in IFN-γ−/− mice. However, we observed no difference in the total number of NP-specific Tmem generated in the lung or dLN at 45 dpi in IFN-γ−/− animals (Fig. 6C) as well as no difference in the total number of lung TRM 35dpi (Fig. 7B,C), indicating that Tmem (and furthermore TRM) generation in the lung following influenza infection may be in part IFN-γ independent. However, surprisingly, IFN-γ−/− mice depleted of NK cells do not display enhanced numbers of lung TRM observed in wild-type NK-depleted mice (Fig. 7), which would suggest an IFN-γ dependent mechanism is involved. Thus, there appears to be an additional NK-independent, IFN-γ-dependent pathway present to regulate TRM formation within the lung. This could be attributed to the mechanism of TRM regulation by IFN-γ, through either STAT3 (or IL-10/mTOR) dependent or independent pathways; however, we observed no difference in IL-10 transcripts between NK-depleted and sufficient animals (data not shown). However, we cannot eliminate the possibility that there is another IFN-γ producing population (possibly CD4+ T cells, DCs, or alveolar macrophages) which contributes to TRM formation within the lung. While the specific mechanism by which NK cells regulate TRM formation remains elusive, future studies will attempt to dissociate the specific interactions and/or soluble mediators responsible for modulating TRM programming including IFN-γ independent regulation of STAT3 and the TRM associated transcription factor Hobit.In summary, our data suggest that curtailing NK activation during initial infection or vaccination could generate sufficient, cross-protective CD8+ TRM with limited need for proliferation after reinfection. While ablation of NK cells during vaccination is impractical, influenza viruses can stimulate NK cells via interaction between the viral hemagglutinin and the NK cell activating receptor NKp4659. Thus, it may be possible to limit or differentially modulate NKp46 receptor ligation and resultant NK cell activation during vaccination with live attenuated viruses in order to enhance protective CD8+ TRM development, limiting respiratory immunopathology and susceptibility to secondary bacterial infection after re-challenge.MethodsMice, viruses, infections and NK cell depletionAll experiments involving infectious virus were performed under animal biosafety level 2 (ABSL2) conditions. Age and sex matched C57BL/6 WT (Charles River (Wilmington, MA)) and IFN-γ−/− mice (generously provided by Dr. Rick Tarleton) were anesthetized using 2, 2, 2-Tribromoethanol and infected intranasally (i.n.) with 103 pfu influenza A/HK- x31 (x31, H3N2), 500 pfu A/PR8 (PR8, H1N1) or 105 pfu PR8 in 50 μl PBS. Where noted, NK cells were depleted via intravenous (i.v.) injection of 200 µg of anti-NK1.1 antibody (clone PK136; BioXcell, West Lebanon, NH) or Isotype control (IgG2a clone C1.18.4; BioXcell) in 200µL sterile PBS every other day for 5 days starting 1 day prior to infection, unless otherwise specified. All animal work and experimental procedures presented here were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of University of Georgia (AUP A2018 05–004-Y2-A2), and conducted in compliance to the relevant regulations and guidelines, including those in the ARRIVE checklist.Quantitative RT-PCRSample collection and preparation for quantitative PCR was conducted as previously described52. Lungs were collected and RNA purified from the samples using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Reverse transcriptions were performed using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). Quantitative PCR assays were prepared using the ABI TaqMan Gene Expression Master Mix from ABI 7500 Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Grand Island, NY). Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was performed using TaqMan technology using Ifn-γ-FAM (Mm01168134_m1) and 18 s-VIC (#4319413E) assays from Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY) in single-plex reactions and assessed on a 7500 Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Grand Island, NY). Thermal cycling conditions were 2 min at 50 °C, 10 min at 95 °C, and 45 cycles of denaturation (95 °C for 15 s) and annealing (60 °C for 60 s).Plaque assaysPlaque assays were performed as previously described60. Briefly, whole lungs were extracted and homogenized using a Tissue Lyser (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Serial dilutions of 10% homogenate were incubated atop confluent monolayers of Madin-Darby canine kidney cells grown in 12 well plates at 37 °C. One hour later, cell layers were washed and overlaid with MEM containing 1.2% Avicel microcrystalline cellulose (FMC BioPolymer, Philadelphia, PA). After 72 h, the overlay was removed and the cells were washed, fixed with cold methanol/acetone (60:40%) and stained with crystal violet. Plaques were counted and plaque-forming units per mL of lung homogenate determined.Tissue preparation and flow cytometrySingle cell suspensions from tissues were obtained as previously described52. Lung airway cells were obtained by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) whereby 1 ml of PBS is introduced and recovered from the lung airway 3 × after tracheal intubation. Subsequently, perfused lungs were excised, minced and incubated with 1.25 mM EDTA at 37 °C for 30 min followed by incubation with 150 units/mL of collagenase (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) for 1 h. After passage through cell strainers, lymphocytes were resuspended in 44% Percoll underlaid with 67% Percoll, centrifuged, and the cellular interface collected. Lymph nodes and spleen were mechanically disrupted, passed through cell strainers, and erythrocyte depleted using Tris-buffered ammonium chloride. Cells were enumerated using a Z2 Coulter Particle Counter (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA). Intravascular staining was performed by injecting mice with 3 µg FITC-conjugated anti-CD45.2 (104) i.v. three minutes prior to euthanasia. Influenza nucleoprotein (NP) MHC class I [H-2D(b)/ASNENMETM] tetramers were generated at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Tetramer Facility (Emory University, Atlanta, GA) and used for surface staining at RT for 1 h with a combination of other mAbs (clones): PerCP-Cy5.5-conjugated anti-CD8α (53–6.7), anti-NKp46 (9E2), or anti-CD69 (H1.2F3), FITC-conjugated anti-CD44 (IM7) oranti-NKp46 (29A1.4), PE-conjugated anti-CD127 (A7R34), anti-NKp46 (29A1.4), anti-NK1.1 (PK136), or anti-CD103 (2E7), APC/Cy7-conjugated anti-CD62L (MEL-14), anti-CD8α (53–6.7), or anti-CD127 (A7R34), PE/Cy7-conjugated anti-KLRG1 (2F1), or anti-CD8α (53–6.7), APC-conjugated anti-CD3 (145-2C11), for 20 min at 4 °C without tetramer. All antibodies in this study were purchased from eBioscience or Tonbo Biosciences (both San Diego, CA). Data was acquired using a LSR II with FacsDiva software (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star INC, Ashland, OR).CD8 T cell re-stimulation assayLymphocytes were incubated at 37 °C for 5 h in the presence of influenza NP366-374 (ASNENMETM) or irrelevant ovalbumin (OVA)257–264 (SIINFEKL) peptide in the presence of GolgiStop (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA). Subsequently, cells were stained with anti-CD8α (53–6.7) and anti-CD44 (IM7) mAbs for 20 min at 4 °C and fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde overnight. The next day, samples were permeabilized with Perm/Wash (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA), stained with FITC-conjugated anti-IFN-γ and PerCP5.5-conjugated anti-TNFα for 30 min at 4 °C and analyzed by flow cytometry.StatisticsStatistical analysis was carried out using GraphPad Prism software (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA) and reviewed by a biostatistician. Significance was determined using Student’s two-tailed t-test (and Holm–Sidak multiple comparisons correction or Welch’s correction when appropriate) where the p-value was p < 0.05. All statistically significant results are reported. ReferencesGrohskopf, L. A. et al. Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with vaccines: Recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices—United States, 2017–18 Influenza Season. MMWR Recomm. Rep. 66, 1–20 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhou, H. et al. Hospitalizations associated with influenza and respiratory syncytial virus in the United States, 1993–2008. Clin. Infect. Dis. 54, 1427–1436 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Doherty, P. C. & Kelso, A. Toward a broadly protective influenza vaccine. J. Clin. Invest. 118, 3273–3275 (2008).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Brown, L. E. & Kelso, A. Prospects for an influenza vaccine that induces cross-protective cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Immunol. Cell Biol. 87, 300–308 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wu, T. et al. Lung-resident memory CD8 T cells (TRM) are indispensable for optimal cross-protection against pulmonary virus infection. J. Leukoc. Biol. 95, 215–224 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Obar, J. J. & Lefrançois, L. Early events governing memory CD8 + T-cell differentiation. Int. Immunol. 22, 619–625 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Plumlee, C. R., Sheridan, B. S., Cicek, B. B. & Lefrançois, L. Environmental cues dictate the fate of individual CD8+ T cells responding to infection. Immunity 39, 347–356 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Obar, J. J. et al. Pathogen induced inflammatory environment controls effector and memory CD8+ T cell differentiation. J. Exp. Med. Med. 187, 4967–4978 (2011).CAS Google Scholar Badovinac, V. P., Messingham, K. A. N., Jabbari, A., Haring, J. S. & Harty, J. T. Accelerated CD8+T-cell memory and prime-boost response after dendritic-cell vaccination. Nat. Med. 11, 748–756 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Foulds, K. E., Rotte, M. J. & Seder, R. A. IL-10 Is Required for Optimal CD8 T Cell Memory following Listeria monocytogenes Infection. J. Immunol. 177, 2565–2574 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Joshi, N. S. et al. Inflammation directs memory precursor and short-lived effector CD8+ T cell fates via the graded expression of T-bet transcription factor. Immunity 27, 281–295 (2007).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Banerjee, A. et al. Cutting edge: The transcription factor eomesodermin enables CD8+ T cells to compete for the memory cell niche. J. Immunol. 185, 4988–4992 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Cook, K. D., Waggoner, S. N. & Whitmire, J. K. NK cells and their ability to modulate T cells during virus infections. Crit. Rev. Immunol. 34, 359–388 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lang, P. A. et al. Natural killer cell activation enhances immune pathology and promotes chronic infection by limiting CD8 + T-cell immunity. PNAS https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1118834109 (2011).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rydyznski, C. et al. Generation of cellular immune memory and B-cell immunity is impaired by natural killer cells. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–14 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Ludigs, K. et al. NLRC5 shields T lymphocytes from NK-cell-mediated elimination under inflammatory conditions. Nat. Commun. 7, (2016).Crouse, J. et al. Type I interferons protect T cells against NK cell attack mediated by the activating receptor NCR1. Immunity 40, 961–973 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Xu, H. C. et al. Type I interferon protects antiviral CD8+T cells from NK cell cytotoxicity. Immunity 40, 949–960 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Soderquest, K. et al. Cutting edge: CD8+ T cell priming in the absence of NK cells leads to enhanced memory responses. J. Immunol. 186, 3304–3308 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Waggoner, S. N., Cornberg, M., Selin, L. K. & Welsh, R. M. Natural killer cells act as rheostats modulating antiviral T cells. Nature 481, 394–398 (2012).Article CAS ADS Google Scholar Wang, J. et al. Lung natural killer cells in mice: Phenotype and response to respiratory infection. Immunology 137, 37–47 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Andrews, D. M. et al. Innate immunity defines the capacity of antiviral T cells to limit persistent infection. J. Exp. Med. 207, 1333–1343 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kos, F. J. & Engleman, E. G. Role of natural killer cells in the generation of influenza virus-specific cytotoxic T cells. Cell Immunol 173, 1–6 (1996).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kuboki, S. et al. Distinct contributions of CD4 T cell subsets in hepatic ischemiaeperfusion injury. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol 296, 1054–1059 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Ng, S. S. et al. Rapid loss of group 1 innate lymphoid cells during blood stage Plasmodium infection. Clin. Transl. Immunol. 7, 1–14 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Kaech, S. M. et al. Selective expression of the interleukin 7 receptor identifies effector CD8 T cells that give rise to long-lived memory cells. Nat. Immunol. 4, 1191–1198 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schluns, K. S., Kieper, W. C., Jameson, S. C. & Lefrançois, L. Interleukin-7 mediates the homeostasis of naive and memory CD8 T cells in vivo. Nat. Immunol. 1, 426–432 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Plumlee, C. R. et al. Early effector CD8 T cells display plasticity in populating the short-lived effector and memory-precursor pools following bacterial or viral infection. Sci. Rep. 5, 12264 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Shane, H. L., Reagin, K. L. & Klonowski, K. D. The respiratory environment diverts the development of antiviral memory CD8 T cells. J. Immunol. 200, ji1701268 (2018).Garrod, K. R. et al. Dissecting T cell contraction in vivo using a genetically encoded reporter of apoptosis. Cell Rep. 2, 1438–1447 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sallusto, F., Lenig, D., Förster, R., Lipp, M. & Lanzavecchia, A. Two subsets of memory T lymphocytes with distinct homing potentials and effector functions. Nature 401, 708–712 (1999).Article CAS ADS PubMed Google Scholar Woodland, D. L., Hogan, R. J. & Zhong, W. Cellular immunity and memory to respiratory virus infections. Immunol. Res. 24, 53–67 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hogan, R. J. et al. Activated antigen-specific CD8+ T cells persist in the lungs following recovery from respiratory virus infections. J. Immunol. 166, 1813–1822 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Anderson, K. G. et al. Cutting edge: Intravascular staining redefines lung CD8 T cell responses. J. Immunol. 189, 2702–2706 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar McMaster, S. R., Wilson, J. J., Wang, H. & Kohlmeier, J. E. Airway-resident memory CD8 T cells provide antigen-specific protection against respiratory virus challenge through rapid IFN-γ production. J. Immunol. 195, 203–209 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ronni, T., Sareneva, T., Pirhonen, J. & Julkunen, I. Activation of IFN-alpha, IFN-gamma, MxA, and IFN regulatory factor 1 genes in influenza A virus-infected human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J. Immunol. 154, 2764–2774 (1995).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Whitmire, J. K., Tan, J. T. & Whitton, J. L. Interferon-γ acts directly on CD8+ T cells to increase their abundance during virus infection. J. Exp. Med. 201, 1053–1059 (2005).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Badovinac, V. P., Tvinnereim, A. R. & Harty, J. T. Regulation of antigen-specific CD8+ T cell homeostasis by perforin and interferon-gamma. Science 290, 1354–1358 (2000).Article CAS PubMed ADS Google Scholar Tewari, K., Nakayama, Y. & Suresh, M. Role of direct effects of IFN- on T cells in the regulation of CD8 T cell homeostasis. J. Immunol. 179, 2115–2125 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lawrence, C. W. & Braciale, T. J. Activation, differentiation, and migration of naive virus-specific CD8+ T cells during pulmonary influenza virus infection. J. Immunol. 173, 1209–1218 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Román, E. et al. CD4 effector T cell subsets in the response to influenza. J. Exp. Med. 196, 957–968 (2002).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Monteiro, J. M., Harvey, C. & Trinchieri, G. Role of interleukin-12 in primary influenza virus infection. J. Virol. 72, 4825–4831 (1998).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McKinstry, K. K. et al. Memory CD4 T cell-derived IL-2 synergizes with viral infection to exacerbate lung inflammation. PLoS Pathog. 15, 1–24 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Agata, Y. et al. Expression of the PD-1 antigen on the surface of stimulated mouse T and B lymphocytes. Int. Immunol. 8, 765–772 (1996).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Siren, J. et al. Cytokine and contact-dependent activation of natural killer cells by influenza A or Sendai virus-infected macrophages. J. Gen. Virol. 85, 2357–2364 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gerosa, F. et al. The reciprocal interaction of NK cells with plasmacytoid or myeloid dendritic cells profoundly affects innate resistance functions. J. Immunol. 174, 727–734 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pallmer, K. et al. NK cells negatively regulate CD8 T cells via natural cytotoxicity receptor (NCR) 1 during LCMV infection. PLOS Pathog. 15, e1007725 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kambayashi, T. et al. Emergence of CD8 + T cells expressing NK cell receptors in Influenza A virus-infected mice. J. Immunol. 165, 4964–4969 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Assarsson, E. et al. CD8 + T cells rapidly acquire NK1.1 and NK cell-associated molecules upon stimulation in vitro and in vivo. J. Immunol. 165, 3673–3679 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Achdout, H., Manaster, I. & Mandelboim, O. Influenza virus infection augments NK cell inhibition through reorganization of major histocompatibility complex class I proteins. J. Virol. 82, 8030–8037 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Miao, H. et al. Quantifying the early immune response and adaptive immune response kinetics in mice infected with influenza A virus. J. Virol. 84, 6687–6698 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Verbist, K. C., Cole, C. J., Field, M. B. & Klonowski, K. D. A novel role for IL-15 in the migration of effector CD8 T cells to the lung airways following influenza infection. J. Immunol. 186, 174–182 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Horowitz, A., Stegmann, K. A. & Riley, E. M. Activation of natural killer cells during microbial infections. Front. Immunol. 2, 1–13 (2012).Article Google Scholar Jewell, N. A. et al. Differential Type I interferon induction by respiratory syncytial virus and influenza A virus in vivo. J. Virol. 81, 9790–9800 (2007).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Harty, J. T. & Badovinac, V. P. Shaping and reshaping CD8+ T-cell memory. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8, 107–119 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Cui, W., Liu, Y., Weinstein, J. S., Craft, J. & Kaech, S. M. An interleukin-21 - interleukin-10 - STAT3 pathway is critical for functional maturation of memory CD8+ T cells. Immunity 35, 792–805 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fang, P., Hwa, V. & Rosenfeld, R. G. Interferon-gamma-induced dephosphorylation of STAT3 and apoptosis are dependent on the mTOR pathway. Exp. Cell Res. 312, 1229–1239 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Prabhu, N. et al. Gamma interferon regulates contraction of the influenza virus-specific CD8 T cell response and limits the size of the memory population. J. Virol. 87, 12510–12522 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mandelboim, O. et al. Recognition of haemagglutinins on virus-infected cells by NKp46 activates lysis by human NK cells. Nature 409, 1055–1060 (2001).Article CAS PubMed ADS Google Scholar Matrosovich, M., Matrosovich, T., Garten, W. & Klenk, H. D. New low-viscosity overlay medium for viral plaque assays. Virol. J. 3, 1–7 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Dr. Hillary Shane for critical reading of the manuscript and Jamie Barber for technical assistance with the flow cytometry. We would also like to thank Dr. Deborah Keys for providing consultation on statistical analysis conducted in the manuscript. Funding: This project was supported with funds from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, by grant number AI081800 (KDK) and under the Center of Excellence of Influenza Research and Surveillance (CEIRS) under contract number HHSN272201400004C (SMT), as well as the University of Georgia, Department of Cellular Biology and Offices of the Vice President of Research (KDK), and the American Association of Immunologists (AAI) Careers in Immunology Fellowship (DLR).Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: David L. Rose and Katie L. Reagin.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment of Shared Resources, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, CA, 91010, USADavid L. RoseDepartment of Biology, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, 28223, USAKatie L. ReaginDepartment of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USAKimberly E. Oliva & Kimberly D. KlonowskiDepartment of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USAS. Mark TompkinsCenter for Vaccines and Immunology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USAS. Mark TompkinsAuthorsDavid L. RoseView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKatie L. ReaginView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKimberly E. OlivaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarS. Mark TompkinsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKimberly D. KlonowskiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsD.L.R., K.L.R., S.M.T., and K.D.K. conceived the experiments. D.L.R., K.L.R., and K.E.O. conducted the experiments. D.L.R., K.L.R., S.M.T. and K.D.K. analyzed the results. All authors reviewed the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Kimberly D. Klonowski.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary InformationRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleRose, D.L., Reagin, K.L., Oliva, K.E. et al. Enhanced generation of influenza-specific tissue resident memory CD8 T cells in NK-depleted mice. Sci Rep 11, 8969 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-88268-7Download citationReceived: 15 November 2019Accepted: 05 April 2021Published: 26 April 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-88268-7Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingPandemics and Social Cohesion: 1918–1920 Influenza Pandemic and the Reduction in US Suicide Rates | Psychiatrist.com Advertisement Register for Free Sign In My account Orders Downloads Address Payment methods Account details SUBSCRIBE About About Psychiatrist.com About JCP About PCC About CME Institute SEARCH MY ACCOUNT Register for Free Sign In My account Orders Downloads Address Payment methods Account details SUBSCRIBE About About Psychiatrist.com About JCP About PCC About CME Institute SEARCH Error: Search field were incomplete. Search (required): menu JOURNALS Journals The Journal of Clinical PsychiatryJCP Current IssueJCP Weekly JCP Archives ASCP The Primary Care Companion for CNS Disorders PCC Current Issue PCC Weekly PCC Archives News COLLECTIONS 5 Minute Pearls Academic Highlights Alzheimer Disease ASCP Corner Auvelity: Information from Industry Banner Alzheimer’s Institute Childhood and Adolescent Mental Health Clinical and Practical Psychopharmacology Difficult to Treat Depression Early Career Psychiatrists Emerging Approaches in Schizophrenia Focus on Geriatric Psychiatry Focus on Psychosis Focus on Psychotherapy Focus on Suicide InfoPacks Insights Videos LGBTQ PTSD and Trauma Rounds in the General Hospital Sleep Disturbance and Suicide Women’s Mental Health TOPICS Topics Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Bipolar Disorder Depression (MDD) Difficult to Treat Depression Eating Disorders Neurology Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Trauma Psychopharmacology Schizophrenia/Schizoaffective Disorders Sleep Tardive Dyskinesia See all Topics For Authors JCP: Submit Your Manuscript JCP: Info for Authors JCP: Info for Reviewers PCC: Submit Your Manuscript PCC: Info for Authors PCC: Info for Reviewers Error: Search field were incomplete. Search (required): Back To Top Share Facebook Tweet Linked In Email pdf Reprints Sections This work may not be copied, distributed, displayed, published, reproduced, transmitted, modified, posted, sold, licensed, or used for commercial purposes. By downloading this file, you are agreeing to the publisher’s Terms & Conditions.Commentary Pandemics and Social Cohesion: 1918–1920 Influenza Pandemic and the Reduction in US Suicide Rates Tarun Bastiampillai, MBBS, FRANZCPa,b,*; Stephen Allison, MBBS, FRANZCPb; Jonathan Brailey, MBBSc; Mandy Ma, BPsychb; Sherry Kit Wa Chan, MBBS, MRCPsychd; and Jeffrey C. L. Looi, MBBS, MD, DMedSc, FRANZCPe Published: April 29, 2021 Prim Care Companion CNS Disord 2021;23(3):20com02882 To cite: Bastiampillai T, Allison S, Brailey J, et al. Pandemics and social cohesion: 1918–1920 influenza pandemic and the reduction in US suicide rates. Prim Care Companion CNS Disord. 2021;23(3):20com02882. To share: https://doi.org/10.4088/PCC.20com02882 © Copyright 2021 Physicians Postgraduate Press, Inc. aDepartment of Psychiatry, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia bCollege of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia cDepartment of Psychiatry, Southern Adelaide Local Health Network, Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia dDepartment of Psychiatry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong, China eAcademic Unit of Psychiatry and Addiction Medicine, Australian National University Medical School, Canberra Hospital, Canberra, Australia *Corresponding author: Tarun Bastiampillai, MBBS, FRANZCP, Department of Psychiatry, Monash University, Wellington Rd, Clayton 3800, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia ([email protected]). The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic may increase US suicide rates due to the combined impact of high COVID-19–related mortality, acute recession, income shock, bankruptcy, decline in asset values, loss of savings, rising unemployment, job stress and insecurity, social isolation, barriers to accessing treatment, increased population distress and anxiety, and increased alcohol misuse.1,2 There is some suggestion that previous epidemics may have increased suicide rates in Hong Kong (severe acute respiratory syndrome epidemic) and in the United States (influenza pandemic: 1918–1920).3,4 However, increased social cohesion through shared experience in disasters (ie, a “pulling-together effect”) may mitigate the negative impact of COVID-19 on suicide rates.2 Durkheim5 hypothesized that greater social integration protects against suicide, and these protective effects may become evident during the community-wide responses to COVID-19. Findings from the last influenza pandemic between 1918 and 1920 suggest that Durkheim’s hypothesis could be correct for pandemics: US suicide rates fell during this influenza pandemic, only increasing during a subsequent economic downturn. The 1918–1920 influenza pandemic killed 1%–2.7% of the world’s population, reducing US life expectancy by 13%, with 0.51% of the US population dying due to the Spanish flu.6,7 Analysis of the health and economic effects of the 1918–1920 influenza pandemic and impact on US suicide rates may help predict these corresponding effects of COVID-19. US age-standardized suicide rates (Figure 1) during the pandemic (1918–1920) averaged 14.7 per 100,000, which were 24% lower than suicide rates between 1909 and 1917 (19.3 per 100,000).8,9 Male and female suicide rates declined by 26% and 12%, respectively, during this period.8,9 Following the pandemic (1921–1929), suicide rates increased by 12%, with male suicide rates increasing by 16% and female suicide rates declining slightly by 3%.8,9 Our results differ from those of Wasserman,3 which suggested an increase in US suicide rates during the first influenza wave (1918) followed by a decrease in suicide rates during the second influenza wave (1919–1920). However our data obtained from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) showed a reduction of US suicide rates throughout each year of the pandemic compared to the baseline period.8,9 Durkheim’s5 hypothesis about the protective effects of social integration was specifically related to times of war when suicide rates decline due to increasing levels of social integration. The combined effects of the 2 major US crises of 1918 related to World War 1 and the Spanish flu outbreak were collective adversities, which may have increased social cohesion and contributed to a reduction in US suicide rates. However, there is a well-established link between rising unemployment rates and higher suicide rates, especially among males.1 In contrast to COVID-19, the 1918–1920 influenza pandemic was associated with lower unemployment rates and an improved economy. The reduced suicide rate during the pandemic coincided with reduced unemployment levels, which averaged 2.6% compared to the unemployment level of 6% between 1909 and 1917 (see Figure 1) and an increase in gross domestic product per capita (Table 1) by 7% to $8,604 (in 1918–1920 compared with 1917).10,11 Temporally distant and compared with the 1918–1920 pandemic, US suicide rates increased by 11% during the 1921 recession (unemployment rate reached 11.9%).8–10 Our analysis of the health and economic effects of the Spanish flu pandemic and the ensuing 1921 recession indicates that US suicide rates are more likely to be influenced by significant economic recession and higher unemployment due to economic effects of COVID-19 public health measures (eg, social distancing) rather than the direct health and psychological impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, a COVID-19–induced economic recession may increase US suicide rates. In contrast to the United States, in Taiwan, there was a small and short-lived, statistically significant increase in suicide rates during a second wave of infection of the influenza pandemic between 1918 and 1920.12 With the current ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in the United States,13 it is possible that similar later effects may emerge. US suicide rates may increase during further waves of COVID-19, as observed in the Taiwanese influenza (1918–1920) second wave, possibly influenced by increased fearfulness primed by the first wave, as well as social isolation, unemployment, and economic effects.12 Early suicide research during the current COVID-19 pandemic from high-income countries shows either no rise in suicide rates (Massachussets, United States; Victoria and Queensland, Australia; England) or a decline in suicide rates (Japan, Norway).14,15 Whether the negative economic effects of COVID-19, or effects of further waves of infection, will surpass any potential beneficial effects of increased social cohesion during the immediate crisis remains unknown. Accordingly, US public health authorities should undertake contemporaneous population mental health monitoring, including suicide rates, enabling timely evidence-based policy responses appropriately targeted to high-risk populations and regions during the current pandemic. Received: November 27, 2020. Published online: April 29, 2021. Potential conflicts of interest: None. Funding/support: None. Volume: 23 Quick Links: View This PDF > Buy Now $40.00 Buy this Article as a PDF References DOWNLOAD CHECKED REFERENCES CHECK ALL UNCHECK ALL 1. Bastiampillai T, Allison S, Looi JCL, et al. The COVID-19 pandemic and epidemiologic insights from recession-related suicide mortality. Mol Psychiatry. 2020;25(12):3445–3447. PubMed CrossRef Show Abstract Hide Abstract 2. Reger MA, Stanley IH, Joiner TE. Suicide mortality and coronavirus disease 2019—a perfect storm? JAMA Psychiatry. 2020;77(11):1093–1094. PubMed CrossRef Show Abstract Hide Abstract 3. Wasserman IM. The impact of epidemic, war, prohibition and media on suicide: United States, 1910–1920. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 1992;22(2):240–254. PubMed Show Abstract Hide Abstract 4. Cheung YT, Chau PH, Yip PS. A revisit on older adults suicides and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) epidemic in Hong Kong. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2008;23(12):1231–1238. PubMed CrossRef Show Abstract Hide Abstract 5. Durkheim E. Suicide: A Study in Sociology. New York, NY: Free Press; 1897. Hide Abstract 6. Roser M. The Spanish flu (1918–20): The global impact of the largest influenza pandemic in history. Our World in Data. March 2020. Accessed November 21, 2020. https://ourworldindata.org/spanish-flu-largest-influenza-pandemic-in-history Hide Abstract 7. Barro RJ, Ursúa JF, Weng J. The coronavirus and the great influenza pandemic: Lessons from the “spanish flu” for the coronavirus’s potential effects on mortality and economic activity. Working Paper 26866. National Bureau of Economic Research. 2020. Accessed November 21, 2020. https://www.nber.org/papers/w26866 Hide Abstract 8. National Center for Health Statistics. HIST 293. Age-Adjusted Death Rates for Select Causes by Race and Sex Using Year 2000 Standard Population: Death Registration States, 1900–32 and United States 1933–49. Centere for Disease Control and Prevention. Accessed November 21, 2020. https://www.cdc.govchs/data/dvs/hist293_1900_49.pdf Hide Abstract 9. Long-term trends in deaths of despair. United States Congress Committee. September 2019. Accessed November 21, 2020. https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/index.cfmepublicans/2019/9/long-term-trends-in-deaths-of-despair Hide Abstract 10. Lebergott S. Annual estimates of unemployment in the United States, 1900–1954. National Bureau of Economic Research. 1957. Accessed November 21, 2020. https://www.nber.org/chapters/c2644 Hide Abstract 11. Roser M. Economic Growth. Our World in Data. 2013. Accessed November 21, 2020. https://ourworldindata.org/economic-growth Hide Abstract 12. Chang Y-H, Chang S-S, Hsu C-Y, et al. Impact of pandemic on suicide: excess suicides in Taiwan during the 1918–1920 influenza pandemic. J Clin Psychiatry. 2020;81(6):20l13454. PubMed CrossRef Show Abstract Hide Abstract 13. Coronavirus Resource Centre. John Hopkins University. 2020. Accessed November 21, 2020. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html Hide Abstract 14. John A, Pirkis J, Gunnell D, et al. Trends in suicide during the COVID-19 pandemic. BMJ. 2020;371:m4352. PubMed CrossRef Show Abstract Hide Abstract 15. Leske S, Kõlves K, Crompton D, et al. Real-time suicide mortality data from police reports in Queensland, Australia, during the COVID-19 pandemic: an interrupted time-series analysis. Lancet Psychiatry. 2021;8(1):58–63. PubMed CrossRef Show Abstract Hide Abstract Advertisement RECENT ARTICLES ORIGINAL RESEARCH Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy for Combat-Associated PTSD Hyperbaric oxygen therapy demonstrated significant improvements on measures of depression ... Keren Doenyas-Barak and others INFORMATION FROM INDUSTRY Auvelity: A Rapid-Acting Antidepressant With Multimodal Activity AUVELITY is an FDA-approved treatment for adults with MDD. Auvelity, is a rapid-acting antidepressant with a multimodal mechanism, targeting both glutamatergic and monoaminergic pathways. Learn more about how AUVELITY is thought to work and side effects. Please see Important Safety Information within this document and the full Prescribing Information. ACADEMIC HIGHLIGHTS Dysregulation of Noradrenergic Activity Dysregulation of noradrenergic activity plays a key role in symptom presentation in major ... Rakesh Jain and others Advertisement CASE REPORT Ototoxicity Associated With Mirtazapine A 57-year-old woman experienced hearing loss, tinnitus, and musical hallucinations followi... Vincent Zhang and others ORIGINAL RESEARCH Psychiatric Comorbidities in Adolescents With Polycystic Ovary Syndrome PCOS symptoms extend beyond reproductive issues, with noted correlations to anxiety, depre... Chintan Trivedi and others Advertisement Advertisement © Copyright 2024 Physicians Postgraduate Press, Inc. Lifelong Learning for Clinicians JCP ISSN: Online 1555-2101, Print 0160-6689 PCC ISSN: Online 2155-7780, Print 2155-7772 MedFair.com US Patent No. 684794 About Psychiatrist.com About The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry​ About The Primary Care Companion for CNS Disorders About CME Institute Advertisers Media Relations Contact Us Customer Service Reprints and Permissions FAQs Privacy Policy Terms of Use Error: Search field were incomplete. Search Articles × Search (required): Close Search click Hello Pop Baclofen, a French Exception, Seriously Harms Alcohol Use Disorder Patients Without Benefit To the Editor: Dr Andrade’s analysis of the Bacloville trial in a recent Clinical and Practical Psychopharmacology column, in which he concluded that “individualized treatment with high-dose baclofen (30-300 mg/d) may be a useful second-line approach in heavy drinkers” and that “baclofen may be particularly useful in patients with liver disease,” deserves comment.1 First, Andrade failed to recall that the first pivotal trial of baclofen, ALPADIR (NCT01738282; 320 patients, as with Bacloville), was negative (see Braillon et al2). Second, Dr Andrade should have warned readers that Bacloville’s results are most questionable, lacking robustness. Although he cited us,3 he overlooked the evidence we provided indicating that the Bacloville article4 was published without acknowledging major changes to the initial protocol, affecting the primary outcome. Coincidentally (although as skeptics, we do not believe in coincidence), the initial statistical team was changed when data were sold to the French pharmaceutical company applying for the marketing authorization in France. As Ronald H. Coase warned, “If you torture the data long enough, it will confess.” Related Articles × Close Table Of Contents × CloseWhy Do We Forget Pandemics? | The Nation Log In Email * Password * Remember Me Forgot Your Password? Log In New to The Nation? SubscribePrint subscriber? Activate your online access Skip to content Skip to footer Why Do We Forget Pandemics? Magazine Newsletters Subscribe Log In Search Subscribe Donate Magazine Latest Archive Podcasts Newsletters Sections Politics World Economy Culture Books & the Arts The Nation About Events Contact Us Advertise Current Issue SocietyApril 26, 2021Why Do We Forget Pandemics?Why Do We Forget Pandemics?Until the Covid-19 pandemic, the catastrophe of the Spanish flu had been dropped from American memory. Nina Burleigh Share Facebook Twitter Email Flipboard Pocket April 26, 2021 Medical men wearing masks at a US Army hospital in Fort Porter, N.Y., during the 1918-19 “Spanish” Influenza pandemic. (Everett Collection) EDITOR’S NOTE: This article originally appeared at TomDispatch.com. To stay on top of important articles like these, sign up to receive the latest updates from TomDispatch. Subscribe to The Nation Subscribe now for as little as $2 a month! Get The Nation’s Weekly Newsletter Fridays. The best of the week. Email By signing up, you confirm that you are over the age of 16 and agree to receive occasional promotional offers for programs that support The Nation’s journalism. You can read our Privacy Policy here. Thank you for signing up for The Nation’s weekly newsletter. Repro Nation A monthly newsletter on the global fight for reproductive freedom. Email By signing up, you confirm that you are over the age of 16 and agree to receive occasional promotional offers for programs that support The Nation’s journalism. You can read our Privacy Policy here. Thank you for signing up. For more from The Nation, check out our latest issue. Subscribe to The Nation Subscribe now for as little as $2 a month! Support Progressive Journalism The Nation is reader supported: Chip in $10 or more to help us continue to write about the issues that matter. Sign up for our Wine Club today. Did you know you can support The Nation by drinking wine? The second Moderna shot made me sick—as predicted. A 24-hour touch of what an alarmed immune system feels like left me all the more grateful for my good fortune in avoiding the real thing and for being alive at a time when science had devised a 95 percent effective vaccine in record time. To distract myself from the fever as I tried to sleep, I visualized strands of synthetic messenger RNA floating into my cells to produce the alien spike protein that attracted my warrior T-cells. I drifted off envisioning an epic micro-battle underway in my blood and had a series of weird nightmares. At about 2 am, I woke up sweating, disoriented, and fixated on a grim image from one of the studies I had consulted while writing my own upcoming book, Virus: Vaccinations, the CDC, and the Hijacking of America’s Response to the Pandemic, on the Covid-19 chaos of our moment. In his Vaccine: The Controversial Story of Medicine’s Greatest Lifesaver, Arthur Allen described how, in the days of ignorance—not so very long ago—doctors prescribed “hot air baths” for the feverish victims of deadly epidemics of smallpox or yellow fever, clamping them under woolen covers in closed rooms with the windows shut. Mildly claustrophobic in the best of times, my mind then scrabbled to other forms of medical persecution I’d recently learned about. In the American colonies of the early eighteenth century, for example, whether or not to take the Jenner cowpox vaccine was a matter of religious concern. Puritans were taught that they would interfere with God’s will if they altered disease outcomes. To expiate that sin, or more likely out of sheer ignorance, medical doctors of the day decreed that the vaccine would only work after weeks of purging, including ingesting mercury, which besides making people drool and have diarrhea, also loosened their teeth. “Inoculation meant three weeks of daily vomiting, purges, sweats, fevers,” Allen wrote. To clear my thoughts, to forget, I opened my window, let in the winter air, and breathed deep. I then leaned out into the clean black sky of the pandemic months, the starlight brighter since the jets stopped flying and we ceased driving, as well as burning so much coal. Silence. An inkling of what the world might be like without us. Chilled, I lay back down and wondered: What will the future think of us in this time? Will people recoil in horror as I had just done in recalling, in feverish technicolor, the medically ignorant generations that came before us? The Glorious Dead When America reached the half-million-dead mark from Covid-19 at the end of February, reports compared the number to our war dead. The pandemic had by then killed more Americans than had died in World War I, World War II, and the Vietnam War combined—and it wasn’t done with us yet. But the Covid dead had not marched into battle. They had gone off to their jobs as bus drivers and nurses and store clerks, or hugged a grandchild, or been too close to a health-care worker who arrived at a nursing home via the subway. Popular "swipe left below to view more authors"Swipe → There’s No Denying It Anymore: Trump Is Not a Fluke—He’s America There’s No Denying It Anymore: Trump Is Not a Fluke—He’s America Elie Mystal Western States Are Still Counting Ballots. Here’s Why That Matters. Western States Are Still Counting Ballots. Here’s Why That Matters. Sasha Abramsky This Time We Have to Hold the Democratic Party Elite Responsible for This Catastrophe This Time We Have to Hold the Democratic Party Elite Responsible for This Catastrophe Jeet Heer Executive Actions Biden Could Take Executive Actions Biden Could Take Katrina vanden Heuvel Popular "swipe left below to view more authors"Swipe → There’s No Denying It Anymore: Trump Is Not a Fluke—He’s America There’s No Denying It Anymore: Trump Is Not a Fluke—He’s America Elie Mystal Western States Are Still Counting Ballots. Here’s Why That Matters. Western States Are Still Counting Ballots. Here’s Why That Matters. Sasha Abramsky This Time We Have to Hold the Democratic Party Elite Responsible for This Catastrophe This Time We Have to Hold the Democratic Party Elite Responsible for This Catastrophe Jeet Heer Executive Actions Biden Could Take Executive Actions Biden Could Take Katrina vanden Heuvel Current Issue View our current issue Every November 11th, on Veterans Day, our world still remembers and celebrates the moment World War I officially ended. But the last great pandemic, the influenza epidemic of 1918-1920 that became known as “the Spanish flu” (though it wasn’t faintly Spain’s fault, since it probably began in the United States), which infected half a billion people on a far less populated planet, killing an estimated 50 million to 100 million of them—including more soldiers than were slaughtered in that monumental war—fell into a collective memory hole. When it was over, our grandparents and great-grandparents turned away and didn’t look back. They simply dropped it from memory. Donald Trump’s grandfather’s death from the Spanish flu in 1919 changed the fortunes of his family forever, yet Trump never spoke of it—even while confronting a similar natural disaster. Such a forgetting wasn’t just Trumpian aberrance; it was a cultural phenomenon. That virus, unlike Covid-19, mainly killed young healthy people. But there are eerie, even uncanny, similarities between the American experience of that pandemic and this one. In the summer of 1919, just after the third deadly wave, American cities erupted in race riots. As with the summer of 2020, the 1919 riots were sparked by an incident in the Midwest: a Chicago mob stoned a black teenager who dared to swim off a Lake Michigan beach whites had unofficially declared whites-only. The boy drowned and, in the ensuing week of rioting, 23 blacks and 15 whites died. The riots spread across the country to Washington, D.C., and cities in Nebraska, Tennessee, Arkansas, and Texas, with Black veterans who had served in World War I returning home to second-class treatment and an increase in Ku Klux Klan lynchings. As today, there were similar controversies then over the wearing of masks and not gathering in significant numbers to celebrate Thanksgiving. As in 2020-2021, so in 1918-1919, frontline medics were traumatized. The virus killed within hours or a few days in a particularly lurid way. People bled from their noses, mouths, and ears, then drowned in the fluid that so copiously built up in their lungs. The mattresses on which they perished were soaked in blood and other bodily fluids. Doctors and nurses could do nothing but bear witness to the suffering, much like the front-liners in Wuhan and then New York City in the coronavirus pandemic’s early days. Unlike today, perhaps because it was wartime and any display of weakness was considered bad, the newspapers of the time also barely covered the suffering of individuals, according to Alex Navarro, editor in chief of the University of Michigan’s Influenza Encyclopedia about the 1918 pandemic. Strangely enough, even medical books in the following years barely covered the virus. Medical anthropologist Martha Louise Lincoln believes the tendency to look forward—and away from disaster—is also an American trait. “Collectively, we obviously wrongly shared a feeling that Americans would be fine,” Lincoln said of the early days of the Covid-19 pandemic. “I think that’s in part because of the way we’re conditioned to remember history.… Even though American history is full of painful losses, we don’t take them in.” Guardian columnist Jonathan Freedland argues that pandemic forgetting is a human response to seemingly pointless loss, as opposed to a soldier’s death. “A mass illness does not invite that kind of remembering,” he wrote. “The bereaved cannot console themselves that the dead made a sacrifice for some higher cause, or even that they were victims of an epic moral event, because they did not and were not.” Instead, to die of Covid-19 is just rotten luck, something for all of us to forget. Who Will Ask Rich Men to Sacrifice? Given the absence of dead heroes and a certain all-American resistance to pointless tragedy, there are other reasons we, as Americans, might not look back to 2020 and this year as well. For one thing, pandemic profiteering was so gross and widespread that to consider it closely, even in retrospect, might lead to demands for wholesale change that no one in authority, no one in this (or possibly any other recent US government) would be prepared or motivated to undertake. In just the pandemic year 2020, this country’s billionaires managed to add at least a trillion dollars to their already sizeble wealth in a land of ever more grotesque inequality. Amazon’s Jeff Bezos alone packed in another $70 billion that year, while so many other Americans were locked down and draining savings or unemployment funds. The CEOs of the companies that produced the medical milestone mRNA vaccines reaped hundreds of millions of dollars in profits by timing stock moves to press releases about vaccine efficacy. No one today dares ask such rich men to sacrifice for the rest of us or for the rest of the world. The pandemic might, of course, have offered an opportunity for the government and corporate leaders to reconsider the shareholder model of for-profit medicine. Instead, taxpayer money continued to flow in staggering quantities to a small group of capitalists with almost no strings attached and little transparency. A nation brought to its knees may not have the resources, let alone the will, to accurately remember how it all happened. Congress is now investigating some of the Trump administration’s pandemic deals. The House Select Committee on the Coronavirus Crisis has uncovered clear evidence of its attempts to cook and politicize data. And Senator Elizabeth Warren led somewhat fruitful efforts to expose deals between the Trump administration and a small number of health-care companies. But sorting through the chaos of capitalist mischief as the pandemic hit, all those no-bid contracts cut without agency oversight, with nothing more than a White House stamp of approval affixed to them, will undoubtedly prove an Augean stables of a task. In addition, looking too closely at the tsunami of money poured into Big Pharma that ultimately did produce effective vaccines could well seem churlish in retrospect. The very success of the vaccines may blunt the memory of that other overwhelming effect of the pandemic, which was to blow a hole in America’s already faded reputation as a health-care leader and as a society in which equality (financial or otherwise) meant anything at all. Forgetting might prove all too comfortable, even if remembering could prompt a rebalancing of priorities from, for instance, the military-industrial complex, which has received somewhere between 40 percent and 70 percent of the US discretionary budget over the last half century, to public health, which got 3 percent to 6 percent of that budget in those same years. The Most Medically Protected Generation For most Americans, the history of the 1918 flu shares space in that ever-larger tomb of oblivion with the history of other diseases of our great-grandparents’ time that vaccines have now eradicated. Until the twentieth century, very few people survived childhood without either witnessing or actually suffering from the agonies inflicted by infectious diseases. Parents routinely lost children to disease; people regularly died at home. Survivors—our great-grandparents—were intimately acquainted with the sights, smells, and sounds associated with the stages of death. Viewed from above, vaccines are a massive success story. They’ve been helping us live longer and in states of safety that would have been unimaginable little more than a century ago. In 1900, US life expectancy was 46 years for men and 48 for women. Someone born in 2019 can expect to live to between 75 and 80 years old, although due to health inequities, lifespans vary depending on race, ethnicity, and gender. The scale of change has been dramatic, but it can be hard to see. We belong to the most medically protected generation in human history and that protection has made us both complacent and risk averse. The history of twentieth-century vaccine developments has long seesawed between remarkable advances in medical science and conspiracy theories and distrust engendered by its accidents or failures. Almost every new vaccine has been accompanied by reports of risks, side effects, and sometimes terrible accidents, at least one involving tens of thousands of sickened people. Children, however, are now successfully jabbed with serums that create antibodies to hepatitis B, measles, mumps, rubella, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis—all diseases that well into the twentieth century spread through communities, killing babies or permanently damaging health. A number of those are diseases that today’s parents can barely pronounce, let alone remember. Remembering Is the Way Forward The catastrophe of the Spanish flu globally and in this country (where perhaps 675,000 Americans were estimated to have died from it) had, until Covid-19 came along, been dropped in a remarkable manner from American memory and history. It lacked memorial plaques or a day of remembrance, though it did leave a modest mark on literature. Pale Horse, Pale Rider, Katherine Anne Porter’s elegiac short story, for instance, focused on how the flu extinguished a brief wartime love affair between two young people in New York City. We are very likely to overcome the virus at some point in the not-too-distant future. As hard as it might be to imagine right now, the menace that shut down the world will, in the coming years, undoubtedly be brought to heel by vaccines on a planetary scale. And in this, we’ve been very, very lucky. Covid-19 is relatively benign compared with an emergent virus with the death rates of a MERS or Ebola or even, it seems, that 1918 flu. As a species, we will survive this one. It’s been bad—it still is, with cases and hospitalizations remaining on the rise in parts of this country—but it could have been so much worse. Sociologist and writer Zeynep Tufekci has termed it “a starter pandemic.” There’s probably worse ahead in a planet that’s under incredible stress in so many different ways. Under the circumstances, it’s important that we not drop this pandemic from memory as we did the 1918 one. We should remember this moment and what it feels like because the number of pathogens waiting to jump from mammals to us is believed to be alarmingly large. Worse yet, modern human activity has made us potentially more, not less, vulnerable to another pandemic. A University of Liverpool study published in February 2021 found at least 40 times more mammal species could be infected with coronavirus strains than were previously known. Such a virus could easily recombine with any of them and then be passed on to humanity, a fact researchers deemed an immediate public health threat. In reality, we may be entering a new “era of pandemics.” So suggests a study produced during an “urgent virtual workshop” convened in October 2020 by the United Nations Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (ISPBES) to investigate the links between the risk of pandemics and the degradation of nature. Due to climate change, intense agriculture, unsustainable trade, the misuse of land, and nature-disrupting production and consumption habits, more than five new infectious diseases emerge in people every year, any one of which could potentially spark a pandemic. That ISPBES study predicted that “future pandemics will emerge more often, spread more rapidly, do more damage to the world economy, and kill more people than Covid-19, unless there is a transformative change in the global approach to dealing with infectious diseases.” Is our species capable of such a change? My inner misanthrope says no, but certainly the odds improve if we don’t delete this pandemic from history like the last one. This, after all, is the first pandemic in which the Internet enabled us to bear witness not only to the panic, illness, and deaths around us, but to the suffering of our entire species in every part of the globe in real time. Because of that alone, it will be difficult to evade the memory of this collective experience and, with it, the reminder that we are all made of the same vulnerable stuff. Submit a correction Send a letter to the editor Reprints & permissions We cannot back down We now confront a second Trump presidency. There’s not a moment to lose. We must harness our fears, our grief, and yes, our anger, to resist the dangerous policies Donald Trump will unleash on our country. We rededicate ourselves to our role as journalists and writers of principle and conscience. Today, we also steel ourselves for the fight ahead. It will demand a fearless spirit, an informed mind, wise analysis, and humane resistance. We face the enactment of Project 2025, a far-right supreme court, political authoritarianism, increasing inequality and record homelessness, a looming climate crisis, and conflicts abroad. The Nation will expose and propose, nurture investigative reporting, and stand together as a community to keep hope and possibility alive. The Nation’s work will continue—as it has in good and not-so-good times—to develop alternative ideas and visions, to deepen our mission of truth-telling and deep reporting, and to further solidarity in a nation divided. Armed with a remarkable 160 years of bold, independent journalism, our mandate today remains the same as when abolitionists first founded The Nation—to uphold the principles of democracy and freedom, serve as a beacon through the darkest days of resistance, and to envision and struggle for a brighter future. The day is dark, the forces arrayed are tenacious, but as the late Nation editorial board member Toni Morrison wrote “No! This is precisely the time when artists go to work. There is no time for despair, no place for self-pity, no need for silence, no room for fear. We speak, we write, we do language. That is how civilizations heal.” I urge you to stand with The Nation and donate today. Onwards, Katrina vanden HeuvelEditorial Director and Publisher, The Nation Nina BurleighNina Burleigh is a journalist who has covered stories in most of the contiguous states, Italy, Africa, and the Middle East, as well as the author of seven books, most recently Virus: Vaccinations, the CDC, and the Hijacking of America’s Response to the Pandemic. Keep Reading Ad Policy Sections Politics World Economy Culture Books & the Arts OppArt Poetry Letters Magazine Current Issue Masthead Archive Subscription Services Reprints More About Us Contact Us Advertise Nation Events Nation Shop Nation Travels Nation Podcasts Newsletters Follow Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube RSS Founded by abolitionists in 1865, The Nation has long believed that independent journalism has the capacity to bring about a more democratic and equitable world. Donate Privacy Policy Terms of Use Accessibility Statement Help Careers Nation Fund Privacy Manager x Latest from the nation November 8, 2024 The Election Depleted Us. Storytelling Can Revive Us. Adrianne Wright November 8, 2024 Abortion Wins at the Ballot Box, Again—but Republicans Do Too Danielle Campoamor November 8, 2024Democrats Democrats “Lose When They Fail to Prioritize a Strong, Working-Class Message” John Nichols November 8, 2024 Reshaping the Direction of the USA Brian Stauffer November 8, 2024 Western States Are Still Counting Ballots. Here’s Why That Matters. Sasha Abramsky editor's picks VIDEO: People in Denmark Are a Lot Happier Than People in the United States. Here’s Why. The Nation Historical Amnesia About Slavery Is a Tool of White Supremacy Mychal Denzel SmithTamiflu - Oseltamivir Clinical Usage Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Tamiflu - Oseltamivir Clinical Usage Download PDF Copy By Dr. Tomislav Meštrović, MD, Ph.D.Reviewed by Benedette Cuffari, M.Sc. The timely detection of influenza in at-risk patients is important to prevent hospital-based transmission and influenza-associated morbidity and mortality. Guidelines issued by professional associations and public health agencies need to be translated into everyday clinical practice; therefore, antiviral therapy should be initiated early and monitored closely. The effectiveness of oseltamivir, which is more commonly known under the brand name Tamiflu, in the treatment of influenza infections has been demonstrated in a range of clinical studies. The key benefits of the therapy include earlier resolution of illness, as well as an earlier return to the usual health and the ability to carry out everyday activities. Tamiflu is also used for prophylaxis of influenza in patients older than one year. Image Credit: Stuart Monk / Shutterstock.com Use for treatment When administered to healthy adults with naturally acquired influenza infection, oseltamivir, which is given in a dose of 75 milligrams (mg) twice daily for five days, can reduce the duration of the disease by up to 1-2 days. Additionally, Tamiflu can also reduce the severity of illness in these patients by up to 40% if the treatment is initiated within 36 hours of the onset of symptoms. Earlier administration of this drug has been shown to reduce the symptom severity, fever duration, and the time to return to baseline activity. Notably, the initiation of therapy within the first 12-24 hours after the onset of fever markedly reduces the median duration of illness as compared to when therapy is initiated at 48 hours. Despite the lack of convincing data regarding the efficacy of oseltamivir in preventing complications of influenza, medical literature suggests that this therapy may be useful for unvaccinated individuals who are at high risk of infection and severe complications. Clear evidence has demonstrated that oseltamivir treatment leads to a reduction in secondary lower respiratory tract complications, such as bronchitis and pneumonia. Use for prophylaxis Oseltamivir can be used in the short-term prophylaxis of vulnerable persons when the risk of contracting influenza virus infection is high. Prophylactic use of oseltamivir results in a reduced risk of developing influenza by up to 90%, whereas the number of infections and infection-related respiratory illnesses is also lower. The use of oseltamivir post-exposure prophylaxis is more cost-effective than amantadine prophylaxis or no prophylaxis at all. Although this drug is registered as prophylaxis for up to 42 days, certain studies have demonstrated good tolerability of supervised oseltamivir administration for 16 weeks. Furthermore, targeted prophylaxis of oseltamivir is useful in containing an outbreak of influenza at mass gatherings. A combination of case treatments and ring prophylaxis of contacts seems to be a viable and economically sustainable strategy. Further research needs to be directed to certain doubts over oseltamivir’s place in this form of influenza control; more specifically, it must be determined how, when, and for whom oseltamivir should be used. Does Tamiflu work? We asked a scientistPlay Use in children, elderly, and pregnant women Studies in children have shown that oseltamivir treatment reduces the median duration of illness by 36 hours, but also decreases the incidence of associated otitis media. Its use has been associated with reduced risks of influenza-related complications and hospitalizations in high-risk children and adolescents. In addition, the drug is well-tolerated among asthmatic children. Oseltamivir usage is associated with a 92% reduction in the incidence of laboratory-confirmed clinical influenza in frail, elderly people living in nursing homes. Simultaneous treatment and prophylaxis with oseltamivir have been successfully used to control influenza A and B outbreaks in elderly nursing home populations. Even though oseltamivir is classified as a category C drug in pregnancy, the transplacental transfer of metabolites appears to be low, and the incidence of adverse maternal or fetal outcomes has not been shown to be higher than background rates. Nevertheless, clinicians who use oseltamivir in pregnant women should consider that the pharmacokinetics of the active metabolite of oseltamivir is affected by pregnancy. References http://www.actabp.pl/pdf/3_2014/495.pdf http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/irv.12046/pdf http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3566665/ http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3111757/ http://fampra.oxfordjournals.org/content/30/2/125.long Ebadi M. Desk Reference of Clinical Pharmacology, Second Edition. CRC Press, 2007; pp. 526-528 Last Updated: Apr 30, 2021 Written byDr. Tomislav MeštrovićDr. Tomislav Meštrović is a medical doctor (MD) with a Ph.D. in biomedical and health sciences, specialist in the field of clinical microbiology, and an Assistant Professor at Croatia's youngest university - University North. In addition to his interest in clinical, research and lecturing activities, his immense passion for medical writing and scientific communication goes back to his student days. He enjoys contributing back to the community. In his spare time, Tomislav is a movie buff and an avid traveler. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APAMeštrović, Tomislav. (2021, April 30). Tamiflu - Oseltamivir Clinical Usage. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.net/health/Tamiflu-Oseltamivir-Clinical-Usage.aspx.MLAMeštrović, Tomislav. "Tamiflu - Oseltamivir Clinical Usage". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.net/health/Tamiflu-Oseltamivir-Clinical-Usage.aspx>.ChicagoMeštrović, Tomislav. "Tamiflu - Oseltamivir Clinical Usage". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.net/health/Tamiflu-Oseltamivir-Clinical-Usage.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardMeštrović, Tomislav. 2021. Tamiflu - Oseltamivir Clinical Usage. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.net/health/Tamiflu-Oseltamivir-Clinical-Usage.aspx. Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in Pregnancy / Maternal Health (Subscribe or Preview) Pharmacy / Pharmacology (Subscribe or Preview) Nursing (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit CancelResearchers are closing in on long covidThe EconomistThe Economist/>Skip to contentMenuWeekly editionThe world in briefSearchLog inOpinionLeadersLetters to the editorBy InvitationCurrent topicsUS elections 2024War in UkraineWar in the Middle EastThe World Ahead 2024Climate changeCoronavirusThe world economyArtificial intelligenceCurrent topicsUS elections 2024War in UkraineWar in the Middle EastThe World Ahead 2024Climate changeCoronavirusThe world economyArtificial intelligenceWorldThe world this weekChinaUnited StatesEuropeBritainMiddle East & AfricaAsiaThe AmericasInternationalA-Z of international relationsA-Z of military termsA-Z of US politicsUS election poll trackerIn depthScience & technologyBriefingGraphic detailThe Economist explainsSpecial reportsTechnology QuarterlyEssaySchools briefBusiness & economicsFinance & economicsBusinessBig Mac indexA-Z of economicsEconomic & financial indicatorsCulture & society1843 magazineCultureObituaryThe Economist readsChristmas SpecialsMorePodcastsNewslettersFilmsThe Economist appSecureDropSubscriber eventsEconomist Education coursesEconomist EnterpriseMy EconomistSaved storiesLog outSaved storiesAccountLog outSearchSearchTry AI-powered searchScience & technology | Post-covid syndromeResearchers are closing in on long covidThe results are alarming Apr 29th 2021ShareIN THE 1890s one of the biggest pandemics in history, known at the time as “Russian flu”, swept the world. It left 1m people dead. Russian flu is now thought to have been misnamed. It was probably not influenza, but rather a coronavirus ancestral to one that now just causes symptoms described by sufferers as “a cold”. When it was new, however, few people had immunity to it, so it was often lethal. And not only that. For, as the pandemic receded, it left in its wake a wave of nervous disorders. A similar wave followed the next big pandemic, the “Spanish” flu of 1918 (which, though nothing much to do with Spain, really was influenza). One common symptom was lethargy so bad that in Tanganyika (modern-day Tanzania) it helped cause a famine because so many people were too debilitated to pick the harvest.This article appeared in the Science & technology section of the print edition under the headline “The sting in the tail”Science & technology May 1st 2021Researchers are closing in on long covidFrom the May 1st 2021 editionDiscover stories from this section and more in the list of contentsExplore the editionShareReuse this contentDiscover moreA battle is raging over the definition of open-source AICompanies that bet on the right one could win bigAs wellness trends take off, iodine deficiency makes a quiet comebackLevels of the vital nutrient are falling rapidly in AmericaHow blood-sucking vampire bats get their energyThey pull off a trick previously thought unique to a few insects China plans to crash a spacecraft into a distant asteroidIt will be only the second country to conduct such a planetary defence experimentResearchers are questioning if ADHD should be seen as a disorderIt should, instead, be seen as a different way of being normalAirships may finally prove useful for transporting cargoThe problem of variable buoyancy is being overcomeSubscribeEconomist EnterpriseReuse our contentHelp and contact usKeep updatedLinkedInFacebookXInstagramThreadsTikTokYouTubeRSSPublished since September 1843 to take part in “a severe contest between intelligence, which presses forward, and an unworthy, timid ignorance obstructing our progress.” The EconomistAboutAdvertisePress centreSecureDropThe Economist GroupThe Economist GroupEconomist IntelligenceEconomist ImpactEconomist Impact EventsWorking hereEconomist Education CoursesExecutive JobsTo enhance your experience and ensure our website runs smoothly, we use cookies and similar technologies.Manage CookiesTerms of UsePrivacyCookie PolicyAccessibilityModern Slavery StatementSitemapYour Data RightsCopyright © The Economist Newspaper Limited 2024. All rights reserved.The Avian Influenza Prevention Zone continues About Us Our structure Corporate partnerships Our events Work for BVA Awards BVA Strategic Plan Venue Hire Shop Contact Us LOGIN JOIN US Membership Join us Member benefits Partner services Student membership Graduates Young vet membership Photo competition Young Vet of the Year Award Wellbeing Awards Journals Our journals In Practice Vet Record Vet Record Case reports Vet Record Open Latest News and Blog Latest News Our Blog Events Take Action Take action Policy positions Voice survey Consultations Lobbying activity Policy priorities Good Veterinary Workplaces Your Career Your career Careers advice Becoming a vet Young Vet Network Working in the UK CPD partners Carpool Cases Resources & Support Resources & support Ethical guidance Graduate guide Practice management Medicines BVA menopause hub BVA employment hub Client guides Veterinary certification Webinar recordings Avian Influenza guidance Brucella canis advice CMA investigation XL Bully ban: guidance for vets Great Workplaces by BVA Great Workplaces by BVA Good Veterinary Workplaces Canine Health Schemes Canine Health Schemes Hip Scheme Elbow Scheme Eye Scheme Find an eye panellist CM/SM Scheme Submission fees Appeals process Online submission portal Help centre Join us Member benefits Partner services Student membership Graduates Young vet membership Photo competition Young Vet of the Year Award Wellbeing Awards Contact our team on [email protected] Our journals In Practice Vet Record Vet Record Case reports Vet Record Open BVA members receive free access to our award winning journals News and Blog Latest News Our Blog Events The latest news and opinion from the veterinary profession Take action Policy positions Voice survey Consultations Lobbying activity Policy priorities Good Veterinary Workplaces Making sure your expertise plays a part in shaping the veterinary profession Your career Careers advice Becoming a vet Young Vet Network Working in the UK CPD partners Carpool Cases Making sure you’re empowered to grow and thrive in your career Resources & support Ethical guidance Graduate guide Practice management Medicines BVA menopause hub BVA employment hub Client guides Veterinary certification Webinar recordings Avian Influenza guidance Brucella canis advice CMA investigation XL Bully ban: guidance for vets Members have access to a range of free guides and resources Great Workplaces by BVA Good Veterinary Workplaces Canine Health Schemes Hip Scheme Elbow Scheme Eye Scheme Find an eye panellist CM/SM Scheme Submission fees Appeals process Online submission portal Help centre Screen your dog for a range of inherited diseases Back to blog list The Avian Influenza Prevention Zone continues 26 Apr 2021 Share: The British Veterinary Poultry Association (BVPA) and Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) explain the latest on Avian Influenza and Avian Influenza Prevention Zones. The 2020/21 autumn and winter season has seen the largest ever number of outbreaks of avian influenza across the UK. There have been 26 poultry and captive bird positive cases in total UK-wide. Prior to this, the largest number was 13 cases in 2016/17. In addition, it is the first time a case of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) has occurred in poultry in Northern Ireland (NI). However, with the risk levels now falling, the mandatory avian influenza housing measures imposed in Great Britain (GB) on 14 December 2020 were lifted at 23:59 on 31 March 2021. NI also revoked their housing order introduced on 23 December 2020 at midnight on 13 April 2021. Importantly the Avian Influenza Prevention Zone, with its mandatory biosecurity measures, remains in place across the UK as there is still a heightened risk of avian influenza. If scrupulous biosecurity measures are practised the risk of avian influenza to poultry and captive birds is ‘low’ (rare but does occur), but if biosecurity measures are suboptimal, the risk is ‘medium’ (occurs regularly). The risk of avian influenza in wild birds is also currently assessed as ‘low’. The fact that the risk to poultry and captive birds is only ‘low’ if biosecurity standards are high is a very important point to remind bird keepers of. Keepers should not interpret a low risk to mean a negligible risk. The reduction in the risk level is based on several factors: Most migratory wild water birds have departed the UK; Infection in wild birds is now limited to resident sedentary species, such as mute swans and raptors; Contact between poultry and captive birds and resident wild birds decreases at this time of year as wild birds disperse to their breeding sites within the UK; Transmission through environmental contamination is further reduced at this time of year because of warmer temperatures and longer periods of higher intensity sunlight causing increased inactivation of the virus in the environment. However, the poultry risk always lags behind the wild bird risk because decay of the virus in the environment is slower than clearance from infected birds. Initial indications are that this season’s H5N8 strain can survive in the environment up to 50% longer than the 2016/17 strain and especially with the cold spring weather we’ve had, the virus could remain in the environment for several weeks. This means it is vital that all poultry and captive bird keepers, whether they keep just a few pet chickens, keep chickens, ducks and geese on a small holding, or they farm commercially, implement the very highest standards of biosecurity. Some of the key measures are: Keeping their birds in a penned off area. Placing their birds’ food and water undercover where wild birds can’t access it. Deterring wild birds by using bird scarers, foils or streamers. Removing wild bird contamination such as feathers or faeces from their birds’ outdoor areas. Keeping ducks and geese separate from other poultry species. Fencing off ponds, streams, boggy areas or standing water and draining them where possible Netting or covering ponds. Cleansing and disinfecting hard surfaces regularly with a government approved disinfectant. Using disinfectant foot dips when entering and exiting enclosures or houses. Limiting the number of people who come onto the site. Full details of the Avian Influenza Prevention Zone requirements are in the declarations for England, Scotland, Wales and NI. It is reasonable to expect that the risk to poultry will reduce further in April and May as seasonal increases in temperature and day length further decrease environmental contamination. However, as was seen in the epizootic of 2016/17, there may be a long tail of a small number of outbreaks over the coming months, even as the risk of exposure to poultry is reducing. Birds of prey There have been two cases of avian influenza in captive birds of prey, the latest being two peregrine falcons in Skelmersdale, Lancashire. There have also been cases confirmed in several species of wild birds of prey. Vets should advise clients who keep birds of prey against feeding their birds any wild birds, and in particular, any wild shot or hunted wildfowl due to the avian influenza risk. This includes birds that may have been shot or hunted earlier in the autumn/winter and frozen since the virus can survive in frozen carcases for at least 12 months. The latest situation: To date in 2020/21, avian influenza has been confirmed in poultry or other captive birds at 26 premises in the UK. The first cases of avian influenza in the UK in 2020/21 were confirmed in England on 2 November 2020 (low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) H5N2 in Kent and HPAI H5N8 in Cheshire). Of the cases to date in 2020/2021 in the UK: 21 are in England including: one case of LPAI H5N2, one case of HPAI H5N1, one case of LPAI H5N3 and 18 cases of HPAI H5N8; 2 are in Scotland including one case of HPAI H5N8 (Orkney Islands) and one case of HPAI H5N1 (Leven); 1 is in Wales: a case of HPAI H5N8 on the Isle of Anglesey; and 2 are in Northern Ireland: both cases of HPAI H5N8. Wild bird cases The total number of positive wild birds detected is unparalleled in the UK. 317 have tested positive for HPAI H5N1, H5N5, H5N8 and H5Nx as at mid-April 2021. HPAI H5N8 virus has been identified in a range of wild bird species (both migratory and resident birds), with mute swans, greylag geese and Canada geese representing the majority of detections. Bird gatherings From 21 April 2021, certain bird gatherings can take place in the UK provided that the requirements of the relevant General Licence are complied with. This includes markets, shows, sales, exhibitions of pigeons, budgerigars, canaries, parrots, cockatiels and birds of prey. Some low risk pigeon racing is also permitted. The organiser of these gatherings must also notify the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) at least 7 days before the event or in Northern Ireland, the Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) must be notified 3 days in advance. Gatherings of ducks, geese, chickens, turkeys or game birds whether kept commercially as poultry, as pets or for other purposes remain banned. For a full list of what is permitted see our guidance for bird gatherings. Achieving avian influenza free status – the importance of poultry registration The earliest date the UK can regain country-wide avian influenza disease free status following an outbreak is 3 months after a stamping out policy has been completed. This includes culling the birds and secondary cleansing and disinfection (C&D) of all infected premises. The Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) also need to undertake surveillance to demonstrate there is no undisclosed disease in the UK. In addition to our current risk-based surveillance, now we have left the EU there is an additional requirement, in GB, to undertake surveillance for disease in the 10 km restricted zone for 90 days after effective C&D to allow trade to resume from these areas. To enable this, all poultry keepers within the Protection Zone and Surveillance Zone need to be identified so that random sampling of poultry can be undertaken. This requirement makes it even more important for poultry keepers to register their poultry with APHA. It is mandatory for keepers of 50 or more birds, but if keepers of less than 50 birds register it will make it much easier to undertake the necessary sampling to achieve avian influenza disease free status. Poultry keepers benefit from registering as they will be kept up to date by APHA on any notifiable avian disease in their area. If vets can encourage clients to register, this will help towards identifying as many poultry keepers as possible. Poultry registration forms for keepers in Great Britain can be found on the Government website. Poultry registration forms for keepers in Northern Ireland are available on the Daera NI website. Guidance on how to prepare for the safe release of birds is available online. You can keep up to date with the latest situation and obtain the latest biosecurity requirements and guidance at: England Scotland Wales Northern Ireland Risk assessments for avian influenza in Europe, the UK and Russia can be found on the UK Government website. Share: Most read articles Standing up for the veterinary profession 08 Aug 2024 Is it safe to feed my dog a plant-based diet? 24 Jul 2024 Brucella canis: what vets need to know 14 Feb 2024 More from our blog Contact our media office (for press enquiries only) 020 7908 6340 (phone line open 9-5pm Monday-Friday) 07503 190 247 (Out of hours) [email protected] Want to join BVA? Get tailored news in your inbox and online, plus access to our journals, resources and support services, join the BVA. Join Us Today Want the latest updates from BVA? For tailored content in your inbox, access to world-class veterinary journals, member-only resources and support, join BVA today. Be part of our veterinary community of over 19,000 members. JOIN NOW About us Who we are Our structure Corporate partnerships Work at BVA Our events Pet owners & breeders Advice for pet owners Caring for animals in hot weather Choosing a vet Choosing a pet Canine health schemes Useful links Contact us Venue hire Shop Terms & conditions Privacy policy Social media guidelines Follow us British Veterinary Association is registered in England No 206456 at 7 Mansfield Street, London, W1G 9NQ. VAT registration number GB 232 7441 80 Copyright © 11/11/2024 05:58:08 British Veterinary Association. Website designed in the UK by dpc.agencyWill the end of the COVID-19 pandemic usher in a second Roaring ’20s? Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair In the wake of COVID-19, the 2020s may be a time when we reconsider how we work, run governments and have fun, just as the 1920s were. This illustration of a flapper girl, created by artist Russell Patterson in the 1920s, captures the style of that era. (Library of Congress) Will the end of the COVID-19 pandemic usher in a second Roaring ’20s? Published: April 29, 2021 9.51pm BST Agnes Arnold-Forster, McGill University Author Agnes Arnold-Forster Researcher, History of Medicine and Healthcare, McGill University Disclosure statement Agnes Arnold-Forster is a co-PI on the Wellcome Trust funded project Healthy Scepticism. Partners McGill University provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA.McGill University provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR. View all partners Languages Français English Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger While some places remain mired in the third wave of the pandemic, others are taking their first tentative steps towards normality. Since April 21, Denmark has allowed indoor service at restaurants and cafes, and football fans are returning to the stands. In countries that have forged ahead with the rollout of vaccines, there is a palpable sense of optimism. And yet, with all this looking forward, there is plenty of uncertainty over what the future holds. Articles on what the world will look like post-pandemic have proliferated and nations worldwide are considering how to recover financially from this year-long economic disaster. Almost exactly a hundred years ago, similar conversations and preparations were taking place. In 1918, an influenza pandemic swept the globe. It infected an estimated 500 million people — around a third of the world’s population at the time — in four successive waves. While the end of that pandemic was protracted and uneven, it was eventually followed by a period of dramatic social and economic change. The Roaring ‘20s — or “années folles” (“crazy years”) in France — was a period of economic prosperity, cultural flourishing and social change in North America and Europe. The decade witnessed a rapid acceleration in the development and use of cars, planes, telephones and films. In many democratic nations, some women won the right to vote and their ability to participate in the public sphere and labour market expanded. Parallels and differences As a historian of health care, I see some striking similarities between then and now, and as we enter our very own '20s it is tempting to use this history as a way of predicting the future. Vaccine rollouts have raised hope for an end to the COVID-19 pandemic. But they’ve also raised questions about how the world might bounce back, and whether this tragic period could be the start of something new and exciting. Much like in the 1920s, this disease could prompt us to reconsider how we work, run governments and have fun. However, there are some crucial differences between the two pandemics that could alter the trajectory of the upcoming decade. For one, the age-profile of the victims of the influenza pandemic was unlike that of COVID-19. Walter Reed Hospital flu ward during the Spanish Flu epidemic of 1918-19, in Washington D.C. That pandemic primarily affected younger people, posing an immediate risk of death to those in their 20s and 30s. (Shutterstock) The 1918 flu — also called the Spanish flu — predominantly affected the young, whereas COVID-19 has mostly killed older people. As a result, fear probably refracted through the two societies in different ways. Young people have certainly been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic: the virus has posed a threat to those with underlying health conditions or disabilities of all ages, and some of the variants have been more likely to affect younger people. A year of lockdowns and shelter-in-place orders has had a damaging effect on mental and emotional health, and young people have experienced increased anxiety. Read more: COVID-19’s parallel pandemic: Why we need a mental health 'vaccine' However, the relief of surviving the COVID-19 pandemic might not feel quite the same as that experienced by those who made it through the 1918 influenza pandemic, which posed an immediate risk of death to those in their 20s and 30s. 1918 vs. 2020 Crucially, the 1918 flu came immediately after the First World War, which produced its own radical reconstitution of the social order. Despite the drama and tragedy of 2020, the changes we are living through now might be insufficient to produce the kind of social transformation witnessed in the 1920s. One of the key features of the Roaring '20s was an upending of traditional values, a shift in gender dynamics and the flourishing of gay culture. Josephine Baker’s verve, performance style and daring outfits made her a star in 1920s Paris. (National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution 1926), CC BY While the prospect of similar things happening in the 2020s might seem promising, the pandemic has reinforced, rather than challenged, traditional gender roles. There is evidence for this all over the world, but in the United States research suggests that the risk of mothers leaving the labour force to take up caring responsibilities at home amounts to around US$64.5 billion per year in lost wages and economic activity. When most people think of the Roaring '20s they probably call to mind images of nightclubs, jazz performers and flappers — people having fun. But fun costs money. No doubt, there will be plenty of celebration and relief when things return to a version of normality, but hedonism will probably be out of reach for most. Young people in particular have been hard hit by the financial pressures of COVID-19. Workers aged 16-24 face high unemployment and an uncertain future. While some have managed to weather the economic storm of this past year, the gap between rich and poor has widened. Inequality and isolationism Of course, the 1920s was not a period of unadulterated joy for everyone. Economic inequality was a problem then just as it is now. And while society became more liberal in some ways, governments also enacted harsher and more punitive policies, particularly when it came to immigration — specifically from Asian countries. The Immigration Act of 1924 limited immigration to the U.S. and targeted Asians. Australia and New Zealand also restricted or ended Asian immigration and in Canada, the Chinese Immigration Act of 1923 imposed similar limitations. There are troubling signs that this might be the main point of similarity between then and now. Anti-Asian sentiment has increased and many countries are using COVID-19 as a way of justifying harsh border restrictions and isolationist policies. In our optimism for the future, we must remain alert to all the different kinds of damage the pandemic could cause. Just as disease can be a mechanism for positive social change, it can also entrench inequalities and further divide nations and communities. Pandemic World War I Coronavirus 1918 flu pandemic 1920s COVID-19 Post-COVID world Post-pandemic Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationLow-Dose Intradermal Flu Vaccine as Effective as Standard Intramuscular Dose - Infectious Disease Advisor Menu SECTIONS News Features CME Conferences Clinical Tools Special Collections Multimedia Diagnosis & Disease Info Topics Abdominal Infections Bone and Joint Infections Cardiovascular Infections Central Nervous System Infections Covid 19 News & Insights Eye Infections Gastrointestinal Infections General Infectious Disease General Medicine Hepatitis HIV/AIDS Infection Control and Prevention Nosocomial Infections Pleuropulmonary and Bronchial Infections Practice Management Reproductive Organ Infections and Sexually Transmitted Infections Sepsis Skin and Soft Tissue Infection Upper Respiratory Tract Infections Urinary Tract Infection Vector-Borne Illnesses Haymarket Medical Network Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMedical BagMPRNeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Search for: COVID-19 News CME Drugs Calculators Charts Resources Multimedia Meetings Jobs Part of the News and Features CME Conferences Clinical Tools Special Collections Multimedia Share this article Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Share by Email Print Pleuropulmonary and Bronchial Infections Low-Dose Intradermal Flu Vaccine as Effective as Standard Intramuscular Dose Sweta Gupta | April 29, 2021 flu vaccine Investigators compared the immunogenicity and safety of the influenza vaccine of different intradermal vaccine doses with a standard intramuscular dose. Immunogenicity from reduced dose influenza vaccine, administered via intradermal injection, was not significantly different from the standard-dose intramuscular injection across all age groups, according to a meta-analysis published in JAMA Network Open. The findings suggested that low-dose intradermal influenza vaccine might be an effective alternative to standard intramuscular dose and could inform policy in case of shortages. In this systematic review and meta-analysis of 30 studies published from 2010 until June 5, 2020, a team of investigators compared the immunogenicity and safety of influenza vaccine at different intradermal vaccine doses (3, 6, 7.5, 9, and 15 µg) with a standard intramuscular dose (15 µg) for each of the H1N1, H3N2, and B strains. Outcomes included seroconversion, seroprotection, geometric mean titer (GMT), and adverse events that were stratified by dose. Of the studies included, 29 were randomized clinical trials that comprised of 13,759 total participants, and 1 was a cohort study comprised of 164,021 participants. Across all the viral strains, there was no statistical difference in seroconversion rates between the 3-μg, 6-μg, 7.5-μg, and 9-μg intradermal doses compared with standard intramuscular dose. However, seroconversion rate was significantly higher with the 15-μg intradermal dose compared with the intramuscular dose for the H1N1 strain (rate ratio [RR], 1.10; 95% CI, 1.01%-1.20%) and the B strain (RR, 1.40; 95% CI, 1.13%-1.73%). Seroprotection rates for the 9-μg and 15-μg intradermal doses were not statistically significant compared with the standard intramuscular dose for all 3 strains, aside from the 15-μg intradermal dose being statistically higher for the H1N1 strain (RR, 1.05; 95% CI, 1.01%-1.09%). GMTs were not statistically significant for the 3-μg and 6-μg intradermal dose vs intramuscular dose for the 3 strains, with the exception of a significant decrease for H1N1 with the 6-μg dose (RR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.85%-0.90%). When comparing 9-μg intradermal dose with the intramuscular dose, GMT was only significant for the H3N2 strain (RR, 1.08; 95% CI, 1.05%-1.12%). When each of the 15-μg doses were compared, there was no difference in GMTs for the H1N1 and H3N2 strains, but GMT was higher for the B strain (RR, 1.21; 95%CI, 1.11%-1.32%). Rates of erythema and swelling were higher across the different intradermal vaccine doses. Compared with the intramuscular dose, only the 9-μg intradermal dose was associated with greater risk of fever and chills. A subgroup analysis that included adults aged 60 years and older showed no difference in seroconversion, seroprotection, and GMT between the 9-μg intradermal dose and the intramuscular dose for each of the 3 strains. When comparing each of the 15-μg doses, seroprotection was similar for the 3 strains, however, seroconversion and GMT was higher with the intradermal dose for the B strain. Key limitation of this meta-analysis was the high heterogeneity among the included studies, which persisted even after stratification by age group. “The 15-μg intradermal vaccine showed significantly better immunogenicity for some of the outcomes and strains, suggesting that the immunological response may be dose-related,” noted the investigators. “It will be important to determine if this dose-sparing finding holds true across age groups and for newer vaccines, particularly when recent high-dose formulations have demonstrated improved immunogenicity in older adults in whom immune responses have historically struggled,” they concluded. Reference Egunsola O, Clement F, Taplin J, et al. Immunogenicity and safety of reduced-dose intradermal vs intramuscular influenza vaccines: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4(2):e2035693. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.35693 Picked For You While UK Influenza Levels Rebounded 2022/23, Vaccine Effectiveness Was Moderate FDA Approves Yimmugo for Primary Humoral Immunodeficiency Pregnant Patients With Pulmonary Hypertension Have Higher Rate of Adverse Events Latest News HIV Mortality Trends 1999-2020: Rates Drop, Then Stabilize Pivmecillinam Viable First-Line Treatment Option for Uncomplicated UTI CDC Recommends RSV Vaccine for Older Adults Aged 75 Years and Older Cookie Settings ABOUT ADVERTISE CONNECT Remarkable healthcare content Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMcKnight’s Home CareMcKnight’s Long-term CareMcKnight’s Senior LivingMedical BagMPRmyCMENACENeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Copyright © 2024 Haymarket Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in any form without prior authorization. Your use of this website constitutes acceptance of Haymarket Media’s Privacy Policy and Terms & Conditions. Close more info about Low-Dose Intradermal Flu Vaccine as Effective as Standard Intramuscular Dose Loading... Close more info about Low-Dose Intradermal Flu Vaccine as Effective as Standard Intramuscular Dose Loading...Catching Up With... Rick Bright Subscribe to Newsletter Business & Regulation COVID-19, Clinical Trials, Trends & Forecasts Catching Up With... Rick Bright What does the future hold for biopharma? We ask the Senior Vice President, Pandemic Prevention & Response, Health Initiative, at The Rockefeller Foundation. Stephanie Vine | 04/28/2021 | Interview Rick Bright leads the development of The Rockefeller Foundation’s pandemic data and action platform, which aims to prevent future pandemics by identifying and responding to the earliest alerts of a disease outbreak – and stopping it in the first 100 days.Bright was named as a top influencer on The Medicine Maker 2021 Power List. Here, we get his views on the future of the industry. What topics will dominate industry conversation post-COVID19 – and why?During the COVID-19 response, the industry has shown tremendous innovation in technologies developed for rapid diagnostics and vaccines, and also in new ways of partnering for surge capacity, both domestically and globally. We have also learned a lot about the global nature of supply chains.I think many post-COVID-19 discussions in industry will center around sustainability of newly established capacity, ways to integrate technologies – particularly new diagnostics – into daily life, and a split discussion about strengthening global partnering and supply chains versus how much domestic capacity a company may plan to build within a few countries. How can we accelerate the drug development projects of the future?It will be critical to leverage the regulatory and clinical trial efficiency we have observed in evaluating drugs and vaccines for the COVID-19 response. There are many examples around the world of significant improvements to reduce the development time using novel clinical trial designs, and by improving efficiency in the regulatory review process. There is also ability to incorporate artificial intelligence into in silico processes that can reduce the time for new molecule discovery or synthesis. This can reduce risk of candidate failure – again regaining valuable time in the development timeline. In your view, what are the most exciting technologies that will drive the future of pharma?The field is ripe for improved manufacturing efficiency, including continuous manufacturing processes to reduce time, facility footprint, environmental contamination, and human error. As the trend for more national, regional, and even local production of medicines expands, innovation in the production process will bring more medicines within reach for more people. This movement will support many nations wanting to gain more control over their production capacity. It will also drive innovation towards a capability to produce some small molecule drugs on demand… even in a kiosk-sized unit that can be placed in every state, or even in community drug stores. This will greatly improve access which, when coupled with home or wearable diagnostics, could lead to earlier treatment and save many lives.When it comes to diagnostics, I believe we are entering an era of personal diagnostics. Technologies for both rapid screening tests and personal diagnostics for infectious diseases have made great strides (though painfully slow in some areas) during the COVID-19 response. Diagnostics and screening tests will be recognized for their lifesaving and public health value, as they have become part of our regular routine. There is no reason for most people to leave their home for a SARS-CoV-2 or influenza diagnostic, or to receive a therapeutic based on that diagnostic. The next big leap will be to reduce the footprint for next-generation sequencing technologies to open the world for awareness and early detection of newly emerging pathogens. In addition to aiding in public health response at local, national, regional levels, diagnostics, screening tests, and sequencing technology will empower individuals with information, enabling them to play a greater role in their health, leading to earlier (more effective) treatment and guiding behavior to reduce transmission of a pathogen within their home or community. Bright has extensive experience in global public health, working with the US Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), PATH, and the private sector, making key advancements in vaccine and therapeutic developments for influenza viruses with pandemic potential and new vaccine, treatment, and testing technologies.For several decades, Bright has been instrumental in work to address international response plans and innovation to address emerging infectious diseases.He has served as a key advisor in a number of roles, including in the development of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), the WHO Research and Development Blueprint for Action to Prevent Epidemics, the WHO Global Action Plan for Influenza vaccines, and the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering & Medicine Forum on Microbial Threats.Bright led and coordinated the US and global medical countermeasure development for the 2014 MERS outbreak and served as Incident Commander for medical countermeasure response against the Zika virus in 2016.Most recently, Bright served the US Department of Health and Human Services as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response and Director of the esteemed Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA). Bright resigned from government service in protest over the Trump administration’s approach to handling the COVID-19 pandemic, specifically over the level of political interference in science and the spread of inaccurate information that he said was “dangerous, reckless and causing lives to be lost.” Receive content, products, events as well as relevant industry updates from The Medicine Maker and its sponsors. Email* Choose a password* I have read and understand the Privacy Notice * Stay up to date with our other newsletters and sponsors information, tailored specifically to the fields you are interested in I want to stay up to date with the "Small Molecule" field I want to stay up to date with the Cell and Gene field I want to stay up to date with the Bioprocessing field When you click “Subscribe” we will email you a link, which you must click to verify the email address above and activate your subscription. If you do not receive this email, please contact us at [email protected]. If you wish to unsubscribe, you can update your preferences at any point. Business & Regulation COVID-19, Clinical Trials, Trends & Forecasts About the Author Stephanie Vine Making great scientific magazines isn’t just about delivering knowledge and high quality content; it’s also about packaging these in the right words to ensure that someone is truly inspired by a topic. My passion is ensuring that our authors’ expertise is presented as a seamless and enjoyable reading experience, whether in print, in digital or on social media. I’ve spent fourteen years writing and editing features for scientific and manufacturing publications, and in making this content engaging and accessible without sacrificing its scientific integrity. There is nothing better than a magazine with great content that feels great to read. More articles by Stephanie Vine Related Webinars Business & Regulation Supply Chain Supply Chain Resilience and Sustainability in Biopharmaceuticals 06/11/2024 | Sponsored by Sartorius Business & Regulation Advanced Medicine FDA Accelerated Approval Pathways for Cell and Gene Therapy products 06/22/2020 | Sponsored by Thermo Fisher Scientific Business & Regulation Advanced Medicine Cell Therapy Facilities – Designing for Flexibility, Scalability, and Cost Effectiveness 08/01/2018 | Sponsored by CRB Most Popular 1. Manufacture Advanced Medicine Facing Up to the Challenges in Cell Therapy 11/01/2024 2. Business & Regulation Business Practice Who Are the Best Pharma Companies of 2025? 11/06/2024 3. Manufacture Technology and Equipment Gold and Sugar 11/05/2024 | 14 min read 4. Business & Regulation Profession The Power List 2025: Nominations Are Open 08/20/2024 5. Manufacture Small Molecules The Glass Versus Plastic Conundrum 10/31/2024 | Stephen Brimble | 4 min read Register to The Medicine Maker Register to access our FREE online portfolio, request the magazine in print and manage your preferences. You will benefit from: Unlimited access to ALL articles News, interviews & opinions from leading industry experts Receive print (and PDF) copies of The Medicine Maker magazine Register October Issue of The Medicine Maker Discovery & Development The Virus and the Vaccine Manufacture The Elite Athlete Concept for Cell Therapy Manufacture A Love for Complexity: ADC Drug Development About Us Work at Texere Publishing Advertise with us Contact Us Other Brands Read the latest Newsletter Privacy Notice Terms and Conditions TSMM Privacy Notice © 2024 Texere Publishing Limited. All rights reserved. Reproduction in the whole or in parts is prohibited.1918 Spanish Flu killed 500 Hamiltonians Skip to main content You have permission to edit this article. Edit Close Log In Site search Search Newsletters Today's paper Betting Home Remembrance ceremonies Auto theft True Crime Gun violence Safe-injection sites Excellent spots for fall colours News Hamilton Region Communities Ancaster Burlington Dundas Flamborough Glanbrook - Haldimand Grimsby Hamilton Mountain Stoney Creek Crime Council Topics Indigenous Local Public Notices Haldimand County Public Notices Hamilton Public Notices Stoney Creek Public Notices Ontario Ontario Regional News Ontario Communities News Canada British Columbia Alberta Quebec Nova Scotia Politics Federal Politics Provincial Politics Political Opinion World United States Americas Europe Asia Africa Australia Middle East Opinion Columnists Editorials Contributors Letters to the Editor Editorial Cartoons Life Local Autos Health Food and Drink Home and Garden Relationships Beauty and Fashion Travel Horoscopes Sports Local Ticats High School Bulldogs Forge FC Hockey OHL Football CFL Sports Betting Basketball Baseball Golf Soccer Tennis Auto Racing Olympics and Paralympics Entertainment Local Events Books Movies Music Stage Television Visual Arts Fun & Games Business Local Real Estate Technology Personal Finance Obituaries Special Features Readers' Choice Awards Marketplace Sponsored and Partners Print Editions Volunteer Opportunities Weather SALE: $1 for 6 months SALE: $1 for 6 months Sign up for Newsletters Sign In Manage Profile Subscriptions Billing Information Saved Articles Followed Authors and Searches Newsletters Archives Sign out Site search Search Newsletters Today's Paper Betting 12° Subscribe Now Subscribe Today Newsletters Sign In Manage Profile Subscriptions Billing Information Saved Articles Followed Authors and Searches Newsletters Archives Sign out Sign In Manage Profile Subscriptions Billing Information Saved Articles Followed Authors and Searches Newsletters Archives Sign out SALE: $1 for 6 months SALE: $1 for 6 months Sign up for Newsletters Home Remembrance ceremonies Auto theft True Crime Gun violence Safe-injection sites Excellent spots for fall colours News Hamilton Region Communities Ancaster Burlington Dundas Flamborough Glanbrook - Haldimand Grimsby Hamilton Mountain Stoney Creek Crime Council Topics Indigenous Local Public Notices Haldimand County Public Notices Hamilton Public Notices Stoney Creek Public Notices Ontario Ontario Regional News Ontario Communities News Canada British Columbia Alberta Quebec Nova Scotia Politics Federal Politics Provincial Politics Political Opinion World United States Americas Europe Asia Africa Australia Middle East Opinion Columnists Editorials Contributors Letters to the Editor Editorial Cartoons Life Local Autos Health Food and Drink Home and Garden Relationships Beauty and Fashion Travel Horoscopes Sports Local Ticats High School Bulldogs Forge FC Hockey OHL Football CFL Sports Betting Basketball Baseball Golf Soccer Tennis Auto Racing Olympics and Paralympics Entertainment Local Events Books Movies Music Stage Television Visual Arts Fun & Games Business Local Real Estate Technology Personal Finance Obituaries Special Features Readers' Choice Awards Marketplace Sponsored and Partners Print Editions Volunteer Opportunities Weather Close Home Life Hamilton Life Hamilton Life 1918 Spanish Flu killed 500 Hamiltonians Up to 100 million people are estimated to have died in the 1918 Spanish Flu pandemic May 1, 2021 May 1, 2021 2 min read Save Copy article link Email Share on X Share on LinkedIn Share on Reddit Share on Whatsapp flag wire: false flag sponsored: false article_type: pubinfo.section: publications/hamilton_spectator cms.site.custom.site_domain : thespec.com sWebsitePrimaryPublication : publications/hamilton_spectator bHasMigratedAvatar : false firstAuthor.avatar : We are the first generation to endure a pandemic in more than 100 years. Despite the toll, it has been minuscule in comparison to the Spanish Flu pandemic that began in 1918. It’s estimated 50 to 100 million people died worldwide.The first evidence of the Spanish flu pandemic in Hamilton was reported in September 1918. By the end of the month, a few hundred cases had emerged, but none were considered serious.James Roberts, the city’s medical officer of health, said: “The whole epidemic here, as well as elsewhere, is attributable directly to unseasonable weather.” But within weeks, the number of cases skyrocketed and people by the hundreds were dying. By the end of the year, more than 500 Hamiltonians would be dead, with 7,000 reported cases. ARTICLE CONTINUES BELOW The death toll — from October to December — was devastating in a city with a population of 107,000 at the time. Unlike most influenza strains, which are hardest on the elderly and people with other health issues, the Spanish flu was devastating to the young and healthy. They would die from bacterial pneumonia or the virus itself, which destroyed lung linings. Death was rapid, with many dying within a day of realizing they had been infected. Thousands and thousands of Hamiltonians turned out in what proved to be a superspreader event on Nov. 2, 1918, at the height of the Spanish Flu pandemic, to watch the British Tank Britannia crush an old boxcar at Gore Park. Jon Wells Clarence Graham, a 33-year-old physician, is believed to be the first fatality in Hamilton when he died on Oct. 4. His body was transported back to his hometown, Goderich, by Blachford and Son funeral directors, the first of 401 influenza victims who would pass through its Main Street funeral home. The Ministry of Health told undertakers that the dead should be buried within 24 hours.Some local physicians recommended wearing masks in public places, but the medical officer of health disagreed.“I will never make such a ruling,” Dr. Roberts said. “The masks prevent the good old ozone from circulating through the nostrils and lungs, and that can do no good.” The Hamilton Herald asked for flu survivors to donate blood that could be used to make a serum Hamilton Spectator archives Other quackery was proposed, such as using oil of eucalyptus around the nostrils so the illness “can be checked in its early stages.” ARTICLE CONTINUES BELOW ARTICLE CONTINUES BELOW Roberts’ office issued orders for street cars to operate with all windows open. Schools and theatres were shut down. Store hours were restricted, church services cancelled and public funerals prohibited. The city’s two local hospitals could not handle the deluge of patients. Temporary relief hospitals were established at the former home of Hamilton pioneer Robert Land on Barton Street, the Jockey Club hotel at Barton and Ottawa, and the historic Ballinahinch mansion on James Street South. Members of the Red Cross on duty to receive people effected by the flu in St. Louis in October 1918. LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 1918 Spanish flu facts— Origin unknown, but many believe it started in Kansas.— A milder first wave was reported in the late winter/early spring of 1918.— A devastating second wave emerged in late August and early September.— 50 million to 100 million died worldwide.— 30,000 to 50,000 Canadians died. Report an error Journalistic Standards About the Spec More from The Spec & Partners Close Save asset to your list Please log in to use this feature Log In or Sign Up More Hamilton Life News | The Spec Hamilton Life Take a hike: 12 excellent spots to view fall colours in the Hamilton area Article was updated Oct 15, 2024 Comments Hamilton Life PHOTOS: HSR through the years Article was updated Sep 20, 2024 Comments Hamilton Life What about the dog? How to reduce separation anxiety at back-to-school time Sep 3, 2024 Comments Hamilton Life PHOTOS: Labour Day marks 10 years at Tim Hortons Field. Here’s to Ivor Wynne and everything since Article was updated Aug 30, 2024 Comments Hamilton Life PHOTOS: Looking back at the Winona Peach Festival Article was updated Aug 21, 2024 Comments Top Trending Relationships Opinion I’m a 35-year-old guy who lives at my parents’ house. They’re always around! Should I lay down some ground rules? Ask Lisi Hamilton Region ‘How does a meal cost $1,600?’: Catholic trustees mum as outrage grows over Italy trip expenses Hamilton Region He surrendered his dog after a cancer diagnosis. She was adopted. Two years later, they reunited in a viral video Hamilton Region Business Lindley’s Farm and Market in Ancaster to close after eight generations of farming Crime Man shot by police in west Hamilton has died News ‘It’s been unbelievable’: Hamilton lottery winners claim $1,350,000 MORNING SPEC Get our free morning newsletter Error! There was an error processing your request. There was a problem with the recaptcha. Please try again. Please enter a valid email address. Sign Up Yes, I'd also like to receive customized content suggestions and promotional messages from The Spec. You may unsubscribe at any time. By signing up, you agree to our terms of use and privacy policy. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google privacy policy and terms of service apply. MORNING SPEC You're signed up! You'll start getting Morning Spec in your inbox soon. Want more of the latest from us? Sign up for more at our newsletter page. You may unsubscribe at any time. By signing up, you agree to our terms of use and privacy policy. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google privacy policy and terms of service apply. The Hamilton Spectator About Us Accountability Join our Team Contact Us Community Archives Subscriber Perks Helpful Links Manage my Profile Manage my Home Delivery Subscription Digital Subscriptions FAQs Sitemap Removal request Submit letter or feedback Advertising Advertise with Us Advertising Standards Advertising Terms Post an Obituary Post a Classified Ad Special Features Become a Customer Subscribe to The Spec Home Delivery Offers Sign Up for Newsletters Purchase a Gift Subscription × Browser Compatibility Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.We recommend switching to one of the following browsers: Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Metroland Media Group | Privacy Policy | Terms of use | Accessibility © Copyright 2024 Metroland Media Group Ltd. All Rights Reserved 8 Spadina Avenue, Suite 10A, Toronto, ON M5V 0S8 Back × You are logged in Switch accounts Secure transaction. Cancel anytime. Have an account? Log In Back × Sign Up Account processing issue - the email address may already exist User information Username (Optional) This is the name that will be displayed next to your photo for comments, blog posts, and more. Choose wisely! * First name * Last name * Email Address Your email address will be used to confirm your account. We won't share it with anyone else. * Password Create a password that only you will remember. If you forget it, you'll be able to recover it using your email address. * Confirm Password Confirm your password. CAPTCHA Create Account or Sign up with Metroland Account Have an account? Log In × You're all set! Thank you . Your account has been registered, and you are now logged in. Check your email for details. OK Back × Log In Invalid password or account does not exist Email Address Password Forgot your password? Log In Email me a log in link or Sign in with Metroland Account Admin login Subscribe Need an account? Sign Up Back × Reset Password Submitting this form below will send a message to your email with a link to change your password. Email or Screen Name CAPTCHA Reset Password × Forgot Password An email message containing instructions on how to reset your password has been sent to the email address listed on your account. Back × Email me a log in link Account Email CAPTCHA Send Email Back × Promotional Offers Enter Promo Code Redeem No promotional rates found. Back × Purchase Gift Purchase Access × × Secure & Encrypted Sign in with Email Address Email Address or Metroland Account You are logged in Switch accounts What's your email address? Email Password Confirm password What's your name? First name Last name Who is this gift for? Recipient name Recipient email Optional message for the recipient Who is this gift from? Purchaser name Purchaser email Delivery date Delivery date What's your billing location? State AlabamaAlaskaArizonaArkansasCaliforniaColoradoConnecticutDelawareFloridaGeorgiaHawaiiIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMassachusettsMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth DakotaOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaRhode IslandSouth CarolinaSouth DakotaTennesseeTexasUtahVermontVirginiaWashingtonWashington D.C.West VirginiaWisconsinWyomingPuerto RicoUS Virgin IslandsArmed Forces AmericasArmed Forces PacificArmed Forces EuropeNorthern Mariana IslandsMarshall IslandsAmerican SamoaFederated States of MicronesiaGuamPalauAlberta, CanadaBritish Columbia, CanadaManitoba, CanadaNew Brunswick, CanadaNewfoundland, CanadaNova Scotia, CanadaNorthwest Territories, CanadaNunavut, CanadaOntario, CanadaPrince Edward Island, CanadaQuebec, CanadaSaskatchewan, CanadaYukon Territory, Canada Postal Code Country United States of AmericaUS Virgin IslandsUnited States Minor Outlying IslandsCanadaMexico, United Mexican StatesBahamas, Commonwealth of theCuba, Republic ofDominican RepublicHaiti, Republic ofJamaicaAfghanistanAlbania, People's Socialist Republic ofAlgeria, People's Democratic Republic ofAmerican SamoaAndorra, Principality ofAngola, Republic ofAnguillaAntarctica (the territory South of 60 deg S)Antigua and BarbudaArgentina, Argentine RepublicArmeniaArubaAustralia, Commonwealth ofAustria, Republic ofAzerbaijan, Republic ofBahrain, Kingdom ofBangladesh, People's Republic ofBarbadosBelarusBelgium, Kingdom ofBelizeBenin, People's Republic ofBermudaBhutan, Kingdom ofBolivia, Republic ofBosnia and HerzegovinaBotswana, Republic ofBouvet Island (Bouvetoya)Brazil, Federative Republic ofBritish Indian Ocean Territory (Chagos Archipelago)British Virgin IslandsBrunei DarussalamBulgaria, People's Republic ofBurkina FasoBurundi, Republic ofCambodia, Kingdom ofCameroon, United Republic ofCape Verde, Republic ofCayman IslandsCentral African RepublicChad, Republic ofChile, Republic ofChina, People's Republic ofChristmas IslandCocos (Keeling) IslandsColombia, Republic ofComoros, Union of theCongo, Democratic Republic ofCongo, People's Republic ofCook IslandsCosta Rica, Republic ofCote D'Ivoire, Ivory Coast, Republic of theCyprus, Republic ofCzech RepublicDenmark, Kingdom ofDjibouti, Republic ofDominica, Commonwealth ofEcuador, Republic ofEgypt, Arab Republic ofEl Salvador, Republic ofEquatorial Guinea, Republic ofEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFaeroe IslandsFalkland Islands (Malvinas)Fiji, Republic of the Fiji IslandsFinland, Republic ofFrance, French RepublicFrench GuianaFrench PolynesiaFrench Southern TerritoriesGabon, Gabonese RepublicGambia, Republic of theGeorgiaGermanyGhana, Republic ofGibraltarGreece, Hellenic RepublicGreenlandGrenadaGuadaloupeGuamGuatemala, Republic ofGuinea, Revolutionary People's Rep'c ofGuinea-Bissau, Republic ofGuyana, Republic ofHeard and McDonald IslandsHoly See (Vatican City State)Honduras, Republic ofHong Kong, Special Administrative Region of ChinaHrvatska (Croatia)Hungary, Hungarian People's RepublicIceland, Republic ofIndia, Republic ofIndonesia, Republic ofIran, Islamic Republic ofIraq, Republic ofIrelandIsrael, State ofItaly, Italian RepublicJapanJordan, Hashemite Kingdom ofKazakhstan, Republic ofKenya, Republic ofKiribati, Republic ofKorea, Democratic People's Republic ofKorea, Republic ofKuwait, State ofKyrgyz RepublicLao People's Democratic RepublicLatviaLebanon, Lebanese RepublicLesotho, Kingdom ofLiberia, Republic ofLibyan Arab JamahiriyaLiechtenstein, Principality ofLithuaniaLuxembourg, Grand Duchy ofMacao, Special Administrative Region of ChinaMacedonia, the former Yugoslav Republic ofMadagascar, Republic ofMalawi, Republic ofMalaysiaMaldives, Republic ofMali, Republic ofMalta, Republic ofMarshall IslandsMartiniqueMauritania, Islamic Republic ofMauritiusMayotteMicronesia, Federated States ofMoldova, Republic ofMonaco, Principality ofMongolia, Mongolian People's RepublicMontserratMorocco, Kingdom ofMozambique, People's Republic ofMyanmarNamibiaNauru, Republic ofNepal, Kingdom ofNetherlands AntillesNetherlands, Kingdom of theNew CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaragua, Republic ofNiger, Republic of theNigeria, Federal Republic ofNiue, Republic ofNorfolk IslandNorthern Mariana IslandsNorway, Kingdom ofOman, Sultanate ofPakistan, Islamic Republic ofPalauPalestinian Territory, OccupiedPanama, Republic ofPapua New GuineaParaguay, Republic ofPeru, Republic ofPhilippines, Republic of thePitcairn IslandPoland, Polish People's RepublicPortugal, Portuguese RepublicPuerto RicoQatar, State ofReunionRomania, Socialist Republic ofRussian FederationRwanda, Rwandese RepublicSamoa, Independent State ofSan Marino, Republic ofSao Tome and Principe, Democratic Republic ofSaudi Arabia, Kingdom ofSenegal, Republic ofSerbia and MontenegroSeychelles, Republic ofSierra Leone, Republic ofSingapore, Republic ofSlovakia (Slovak Republic)SloveniaSolomon IslandsSomalia, Somali RepublicSouth Africa, Republic ofSouth Georgia and the South Sandwich IslandsSpain, Spanish StateSri Lanka, Democratic Socialist Republic ofSt. HelenaSt. Kitts and NevisSt. LuciaSt. Pierre and MiquelonSt. Vincent and the GrenadinesSudan, Democratic Republic of theSuriname, Republic ofSvalbard & Jan Mayen IslandsSwaziland, Kingdom ofSweden, Kingdom ofSwitzerland, Swiss ConfederationSyrian Arab RepublicTaiwan, Province of ChinaTajikistanTanzania, United Republic ofThailand, Kingdom ofTimor-Leste, Democratic Republic ofTogo, Togolese RepublicTokelau (Tokelau Islands)Tonga, Kingdom ofTrinidad and Tobago, Republic ofTunisia, Republic ofTurkey, Republic ofTurkmenistanTurks and Caicos IslandsTuvaluUganda, Republic ofUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited Kingdom of Great Britain & N. IrelandUruguay, Eastern Republic ofUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuela, Bolivarian Republic ofViet Nam, Socialist Republic ofWallis and Futuna IslandsWestern SaharaYemenZambia, Republic ofZimbabwe What's your delivery address? Copy billing location Address City State AlabamaAlaskaArizonaArkansasCaliforniaColoradoConnecticutDelawareFloridaGeorgiaHawaiiIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMassachusettsMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth DakotaOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaRhode IslandSouth CarolinaSouth DakotaTennesseeTexasUtahVermontVirginiaWashingtonWashington D.C.West VirginiaWisconsinWyomingPuerto RicoUS Virgin IslandsArmed Forces AmericasArmed Forces PacificArmed Forces EuropeNorthern Mariana IslandsMarshall IslandsAmerican SamoaFederated States of MicronesiaGuamPalauAlberta, CanadaBritish Columbia, CanadaManitoba, CanadaNew Brunswick, CanadaNewfoundland, CanadaNova Scotia, CanadaNorthwest Territories, CanadaNunavut, CanadaOntario, CanadaPrince Edward Island, CanadaQuebec, CanadaSaskatchewan, CanadaYukon Territory, Canada Postal code Country United States of AmericaUS Virgin IslandsUnited States Minor Outlying IslandsCanadaMexico, United Mexican StatesBahamas, Commonwealth of theCuba, Republic ofDominican RepublicHaiti, Republic ofJamaicaAfghanistanAlbania, People's Socialist Republic ofAlgeria, People's Democratic Republic ofAmerican SamoaAndorra, Principality ofAngola, Republic ofAnguillaAntarctica (the territory South of 60 deg S)Antigua and BarbudaArgentina, Argentine RepublicArmeniaArubaAustralia, Commonwealth ofAustria, Republic ofAzerbaijan, Republic ofBahrain, Kingdom ofBangladesh, People's Republic ofBarbadosBelarusBelgium, Kingdom ofBelizeBenin, People's Republic ofBermudaBhutan, Kingdom ofBolivia, Republic ofBosnia and HerzegovinaBotswana, Republic ofBouvet Island (Bouvetoya)Brazil, Federative Republic ofBritish Indian Ocean Territory (Chagos Archipelago)British Virgin IslandsBrunei DarussalamBulgaria, People's Republic ofBurkina FasoBurundi, Republic ofCambodia, Kingdom ofCameroon, United Republic ofCape Verde, Republic ofCayman IslandsCentral African RepublicChad, Republic ofChile, Republic ofChina, People's Republic ofChristmas IslandCocos (Keeling) IslandsColombia, Republic ofComoros, Union of theCongo, Democratic Republic ofCongo, People's Republic ofCook IslandsCosta Rica, Republic ofCote D'Ivoire, Ivory Coast, Republic of theCyprus, Republic ofCzech RepublicDenmark, Kingdom ofDjibouti, Republic ofDominica, Commonwealth ofEcuador, Republic ofEgypt, Arab Republic ofEl Salvador, Republic ofEquatorial Guinea, Republic ofEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFaeroe IslandsFalkland Islands (Malvinas)Fiji, Republic of the Fiji IslandsFinland, Republic ofFrance, French RepublicFrench GuianaFrench PolynesiaFrench Southern TerritoriesGabon, Gabonese RepublicGambia, Republic of theGeorgiaGermanyGhana, Republic ofGibraltarGreece, Hellenic RepublicGreenlandGrenadaGuadaloupeGuamGuatemala, Republic ofGuinea, Revolutionary People's Rep'c ofGuinea-Bissau, Republic ofGuyana, Republic ofHeard and McDonald IslandsHoly See (Vatican City State)Honduras, Republic ofHong Kong, Special Administrative Region of ChinaHrvatska (Croatia)Hungary, Hungarian People's RepublicIceland, Republic ofIndia, Republic ofIndonesia, Republic ofIran, Islamic Republic ofIraq, Republic ofIrelandIsrael, State ofItaly, Italian RepublicJapanJordan, Hashemite Kingdom ofKazakhstan, Republic ofKenya, Republic ofKiribati, Republic ofKorea, Democratic People's Republic ofKorea, Republic ofKuwait, State ofKyrgyz RepublicLao People's Democratic RepublicLatviaLebanon, Lebanese RepublicLesotho, Kingdom ofLiberia, Republic ofLibyan Arab JamahiriyaLiechtenstein, Principality ofLithuaniaLuxembourg, Grand Duchy ofMacao, Special Administrative Region of ChinaMacedonia, the former Yugoslav Republic ofMadagascar, Republic ofMalawi, Republic ofMalaysiaMaldives, Republic ofMali, Republic ofMalta, Republic ofMarshall IslandsMartiniqueMauritania, Islamic Republic ofMauritiusMayotteMicronesia, Federated States ofMoldova, Republic ofMonaco, Principality ofMongolia, Mongolian People's RepublicMontserratMorocco, Kingdom ofMozambique, People's Republic ofMyanmarNamibiaNauru, Republic ofNepal, Kingdom ofNetherlands AntillesNetherlands, Kingdom of theNew CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaragua, Republic ofNiger, Republic of theNigeria, Federal Republic ofNiue, Republic ofNorfolk IslandNorthern Mariana IslandsNorway, Kingdom ofOman, Sultanate ofPakistan, Islamic Republic ofPalauPalestinian Territory, OccupiedPanama, Republic ofPapua New GuineaParaguay, Republic ofPeru, Republic ofPhilippines, Republic of thePitcairn IslandPoland, Polish People's RepublicPortugal, Portuguese RepublicPuerto RicoQatar, State ofReunionRomania, Socialist Republic ofRussian FederationRwanda, Rwandese RepublicSamoa, Independent State ofSan Marino, Republic ofSao Tome and Principe, Democratic Republic ofSaudi Arabia, Kingdom ofSenegal, Republic ofSerbia and MontenegroSeychelles, Republic ofSierra Leone, Republic ofSingapore, Republic ofSlovakia (Slovak Republic)SloveniaSolomon IslandsSomalia, Somali RepublicSouth Africa, Republic ofSouth Georgia and the South Sandwich IslandsSpain, Spanish StateSri Lanka, Democratic Socialist Republic ofSt. HelenaSt. Kitts and NevisSt. LuciaSt. Pierre and MiquelonSt. Vincent and the GrenadinesSudan, Democratic Republic of theSuriname, Republic ofSvalbard & Jan Mayen IslandsSwaziland, Kingdom ofSweden, Kingdom ofSwitzerland, Swiss ConfederationSyrian Arab RepublicTaiwan, Province of ChinaTajikistanTanzania, United Republic ofThailand, Kingdom ofTimor-Leste, Democratic Republic ofTogo, Togolese RepublicTokelau (Tokelau Islands)Tonga, Kingdom ofTrinidad and Tobago, Republic ofTunisia, Republic ofTurkey, Republic ofTurkmenistanTurks and Caicos IslandsTuvaluUganda, Republic ofUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited Kingdom of Great Britain & N. IrelandUruguay, Eastern Republic ofUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuela, Bolivarian Republic ofViet Nam, Socialist Republic ofWallis and Futuna IslandsWestern SaharaYemenZambia, Republic ofZimbabwe Phone Subtotal: Total: How would you like to pay? Add New Card Name on card Credit card CVV Expiration Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Expiration year 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 I Agree to the Subscription Terms of Use. This service will be automatically renewed and your credit card billed once it nears expiration. Secure transaction. Secure transaction. Cancel anytime. × You're all set! Thank you. Your gift purchase was successful! Your purchase was successful, and you are now logged in. A receipt was sent to your email. OK × An error occurred This offer is currently unavailable. Close