Egg and turkey prices likely to remain high due to avian influenza: report | Food Dive Skip to main content CONTINUE TO SITE ➞ Don't miss tomorrow's food industry news Let Food Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox. Daily Dive M-F Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Topics Sign up Search Sign up Search Finances & Deals Food Tech Manufacturing Ingredients Corporate Ops Packaging Policy Protein Beverages Sustainability An article from Dive Brief Egg and turkey prices likely to remain high due to avian influenza: report Published Sept. 8, 2022 Chris Casey Staff Reporter post share post print email license Justin Sullivan via Getty Images Dive Brief: Egg and turkey prices will remain high in the wake of this year’s Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) outbreak, according to a new analysis from CoBank. Roughly 43.8 million birds have been impacted by the outbreak in commercial and backyard flocks throughout 39 states, according to the USDA. Egg prices have nearly tripled since the beginning of the current HPAI outbreak in January, while the price of turkey breast meat has increased 60%, according to CoBank. The outbreak is impacting domestic markets more than the 2014-2015 bird flu, which was the largest HPAI outbreak in history, due to supply chain issues like feed shortages, the report said. CoBank predicts egg and turkey supplies to remain tight and prices to stay higher for longer than the previous HPAI outbreak, which could trigger less demand as consumers grapple with record-high food inflation. Dive Insight: Poultry and egg producers have not only had to deal with high costs for feed this year, but also a disease resulting in the culling of millions of birds. This year’s outbreak has been heavily concentrated in Iowa and surrounding states in the Midwest, as well as the East Coast, according to USDA data. These are primarily egg and turkey production areas, CoBank said. Egg producers have faced the most significant effects of the current outbreak. According to CoBank, 9.5% of pre-outbreak table egg-producing flocks have been culled due to the disease. This is reflected in the price of table eggs in industry benchmark New York markets, which increased to over $3.50 per dozen this summer after starting the year at $1.20 per dozen, the report said. And the current bird flu outbreak is far from over. This week, HPAI was detected in a commercial chicken flock in Ohio believed to belong to egg producer Hillandale Farms, according to local news reports. The impact to broiler chicken production, which are mostly concentrated in the South, appears to be minimal, the report said. Turkey production has faced a similar fate. Wholesale spot market prices of fresh tom breast meat have hit record levels, increasing to $6.50 per pound in the last several weeks, CoBank found. The report attributes this rise to lower availability of breast meat from large turkeys, which producers moved production from after a weaker 2021 market for the bird, along with labor issues in the sector. Around 2.5% of the annual turkey population has been lost due to the HPAI outbreak, CoBank said. Meat giant Hormel, which owns turkey brand Jennie-O, detected bird flu in its flocks earlier this year. In the company’s third-quarter 2022 earnings call this month, CFO Jacinth Smiley said Hormel’s turkey volume declined 20% from the previous quarter, and the company expects a 30% drop for the fourth quarter. Hormel also said that the disease had recently been detected again in some of its flocks after a previous outbreak had cooled down in the summer months. “Further, with the positive cases identified earlier this week in our supply chain, we expect the impact from HPAI to reduce production volume in our turkey facilities through at least the end of the first quarter of fiscal year 2023,” Smiley said. While the threat of a further spread of HPAI has lessened in the summer months, its effects will linger, CoBank said. For example, after the 2015 outbreak and bird cullings, the egg industry saw an increase in productivity and then a flattening in the following years. ”We expect a similar trajectory this time, but additional rebuilding efforts will be necessary to fill the supply gap in the coming years,” CoBank said. purchase licensing rights Filed Under: Ingredients, Meat / Protein Food Dive news delivered to your inbox Get the free daily newsletter read by industry experts Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Editors' picks Sarah Silbiger via Getty Images What to know about the FDA’s reorganization The new structure includes the creation of a unified Human Foods Program, the adoption of a new model for the FDA's field operations and will mean more inspections for CPGs, according to experts. By Elizabeth Flood • Oct. 1, 2024 Adeline Kon/Food Dive Deep Dive Political donations from 15 of the largest US food and beverage makers plunge Contributions from entities associated with these companies totaled $4.5 million during the 2024 election cycle compared to $8.2 million four years ago. By Christopher Doering and Jasmine Ye Han • Oct. 28, 2024 Get the free newsletter Subscribe to Food Dive for top news, trends & analysis Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Most Popular Deep Dive Political donations from 15 of the largest US food and beverage makers plunge Hershey buys candy brand Sour Strips for undisclosed amount Molson Coors to shutter Leinenkugel’s brewery in Wisconsin PepsiCo to shutter 3 more bottling plants, lay off hundreds Library resources Infographic Discover a Traceability Solution That Also Drives Sales Custom content for Kwik Lok Webinar - on demand How eCommerce CEOs are Expanding and Keeping Up in a Time of Tech Transformation Custom content for BigCommerce Webinar - on demand Mastering the FDA's Food Traceability Rules: Data-Driven Strategies for Food Processors Custom content for Datacor View all Company Announcements UPM Specialty Papers and Eastman introduce paper-based food packaging solution with compostabl… From UPM Specialty Papers AQUALAB Launches SKALA Dry From JMRConnect: Shaping Influence° PR Prime Shrimp Expands Retail Footprint to Include Select Whole Foods Market Locations Across th… From Prime Shrimp Edlong Announces Acquisition of Brisan Group From The Edlong Corporation View all | Post a press release What We're Reading Wall Street Journal Food Prices at Highest Level in 18 Months, UN Says Star Tribune General Mills’ pet food sales growth losing steam Agriculture Dive What a second Trump trade war would mean for farmers View all Events 21 NOV Webinar | 11 a.m. ET Are You FSMA 204 Ready? Turn This Challenge into Opportunity Presented by studioID and GS1 US 21 NOV Webinar | 2 p.m. ET Mastering the FDA's Food Traceability Rules: Data-Driven Strategies for Food Processors Presented by studioID and Datacor Promote an event Industry Intel Affordable Storage and Clean Energy: How Financing Enables Zero-Capital Projects Webinar - on demand • Provided by Enel Food Dive news delivered to your inbox Get the free daily newsletter read by industry experts Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Company Announcements View all | Post a press release UPM Specialty Papers and Eastman introduce paper-based food packaging solution with compostabl… From UPM Specialty Papers October 31, 2024 AQUALAB Launches SKALA Dry From JMRConnect: Shaping Influence° PR November 05, 2024 Prime Shrimp Expands Retail Footprint to Include Select Whole Foods Market Locations Across th… From Prime Shrimp November 05, 2024 Edlong Announces Acquisition of Brisan Group From The Edlong Corporation October 30, 2024 Editors' picks Sarah Silbiger via Getty Images What to know about the FDA’s reorganization The new structure includes the creation of a unified Human Foods Program, the adoption of a new model for the FDA's field operations and will mean more inspections for CPGs, according to experts. By Elizabeth Flood • Oct. 1, 2024 Adeline Kon/Food Dive Deep Dive Political donations from 15 of the largest US food and beverage makers plunge Contributions from entities associated with these companies totaled $4.5 million during the 2024 election cycle compared to $8.2 million four years ago. By Christopher Doering and Jasmine Ye Han • Oct. 28, 2024 Latest in Ingredients Leftovers: J&J Snack Foods bites into Bavarian pretzels | YouTube’s ‘Hot Ones’ spices up ramen By Food Dive staff Ingredients in Focus: Taurine By Elizabeth Flood Kerry Group acquires lactose testing technology By Elizabeth Flood Better Meat’s drying process will increase demand for its fermented meat fungus, CEO says By Elizabeth Flood Explore About Editorial Team Contact Us Newsletter Purchase Licensing Rights Press Releases What We're Reading Reach our audience Advertising Post a press release Submit an opinion piece Promote an event Related Publications Grocery Dive Restaurant Dive image/svg+xml Industry Dive is an Informa business © 2024 Industry Dive. All rights reserved. | View our other publications | Privacy policy | Terms of use | Take down policy. Cookie Preferences / Do Not Sell Search Home Topics Finances & Deals Food Tech Manufacturing Ingredients Corporate Ops Packaging Policy Protein Beverages Sustainability Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Get Food Dive in your inbox The free newsletter covering the top industry headlines Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter.Can I Take Antibiotics to Treat the Flu? | Geisinger Skip to main content Menu Find care Patient care Find a provider Find a location 65 Forward ConvenientCare Schedule an appointment Telehealth Pharmacy Pharmacy Locations Mail-order pharmacy Refill a prescription Contact us Pharmacy team Home Infusion Services Conditions & services Orthopaedics Weight management Primary care Heart care Women's health View all conditions & services Get care now Search for conditions View all treatment options ✕ Get care now Patient resources Billing Pay your bill online Patient billing services Participating insurance Financial assistance Pay your bill online Tools & resources Prepare for your visit Advance care planning Ethics in healthcare Request medical records Online gift shops Sign into MyGeisinger Healthcare professionals Resources for providers Nursing Health Care Quality Unit Geisinger institutes Health sciences libraries ✕ Pay your bill online Sign into MyGeisinger Insurance Health plans Shop for a plan Shop for a plan Medicare Advantage Individual & family Medical Assistance CHIP (GHP Kids) Business plans Shop now For members COVID coverage Getting started Pay your premium Member benefits Manage your plan Forms View more Find a provider or location Find a pharmacy or drug Get urgent care Talk to a doctor Member portal For providers For providers Join our provider network Broker resources ✕ Shop now Member portal Education & Research Geisinger College of Health Sciences About GCHS About GCHS Board of Directors Departments Faculty & Professional Development Giving Leadership News Our community Education Education Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine School of Graduate Education School of Nursing Residencies & Fellowships Research Research MyCode Research Cores Research Departments Participate in Research About Research Health Professions ✕ Innovation Join our team Donate Today Schedule appointments Select account MyGeisinger users Health Plan members Additional sign in options Geisinger Logo Select account Menu Schedule appointments Donate Wellness Home Subscribe Find events Read articles PA Health magazine Silver Circle magazine Balance By Geisinger We’ve updated our Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. By using this site, you agree to these terms. close alert banner Balance by Geisinger Can I take antibiotics to treat the flu? Published Sep. 9, 2022 , Updated Jan. 11, 2022 Tags: Cold & flu Wellness Have the flu? Antibiotics aren’t for you. Most of us have tried and true ways we combat flu symptoms, like sipping chicken soup to fight the sore throat and wrapping up in warm blankets to ward off the chills. Maybe you call your doctor, too. But before you ask for any medications, read about the difference between bacterial and viral infections. What you’ve caught will determine your treatment. Viral infections and antibiotics Antibiotics treat bacterial infections, but influenza is caused by a virus, so antibiotics aren’t effective treatment for the flu. “In fact, antibiotics may do more harm than good if you have the flu,” says Tyler Policht, MD, a family medicine doctor at Geisinger. “They won’t help you feel better, and they can cause other health problems.” That’s because viruses infect your body in a different way. Viruses infect your cells and multiply inside of them. For the virus, your cells act as a sort of “Trojan horse” so they can reproduce. Because they hide in your cells, antibiotics can’t affect viruses in the same way. Antibiotics: Too much of a good thing The fewer antibiotics we all take, the better — for ourselves and the whole planet. Although antibiotics kill both good and bad bacteria, they can miss bacteria like Clostridium difficile (C. diff). After taking antibiotics, you could get a C. diff infection, which causes diarrhea and can require emergency medical attention. Antibiotics can also cause abdominal pain and yeast infections like vaginosis or thrush. Overuse of antibiotics also contributes to the rise of “super bugs,” or antibiotic resistant bacteria. So, avoiding antibiotics when possible is one way to promote good health globally. Prevention is the best medicine Keeping yourself healthy during flu season starts with prevention. “The best way to avoid getting the flu is to get vaccinated,” said Dr. Policht. “The flu shot may not be 100 percent effective, but even if you do get sick after getting the vaccine, it’s likely that your illness won’t be as severe.” Getting your flu shot is easier than ever for Geisinger patients. Get a walk-in flu shot during business hours at: Geisinger primary care clinics Convenient Care (urgent care) clinics Geisinger Pharmacy locations To avoid longer wait times, you can schedule an appointment. Treatments for viral flu If you feel sick, talk to your doctor and ask whether you have a bacterial or viral infection. From there, they can tell you what the best treatment is. If it’s bacterial, antibiotics can help. But if it’s viral, it needs to run its course. If you have the flu and seek treatment early enough, in the first two days doctors can prescribe anti-viral medications to shorten the length of the sickness and limit its severity. If you’re diagnosed with the flu after that, over-the-counter medication can still help treat some symptoms. Even without medication, viruses are “self-limiting,” meaning they’ll go away with or without treatment. Try some home remedies, too, like: Rest: Sleep will help your immune system fight the illness. Drinking plenty of fluids: Water, herbal tea with honey and lemon, broth and 100 percent juices can help you feel better and keep you hydrated. Home remedies: Using menthol ointment, taking a hot bath, eating chicken soup and more of your tried-and-true cures for the common cold and flu can help relieve symptoms. If you notice that you’re not getting better after 10 days from a cold or flu, or if your symptoms are getting worse at any time, talk to your doctor. People at high risk of flu complications include: Young children Adults age 65 and older Pregnant women People with certain medical conditions such as asthma, diabetes and heart disease Vaccines, plenty of rest and staying on top of your nutrition will always help your immune system fight the flu. “You can do a few things to protect others from getting sick,” says Dr. Policht. “Stay at home, except to seek medical care, cover your cough and wash your hands often.” Next steps: 4 reasons to get your flu shot 4 flu season etiquette tips to keep you (and everyone else) healthy Protect yourself this flu season. Get a flu shot near me Cold vs flu vs COVID vs allergies: How to spot the difference How to know if you have strep throat Should you take expired medicine? Do you really need a multivitamin? Balance by Geisinger Content from General Links with modal content Balance Sign up for Balance email Events & classes About About Geisinger News & media Careers Security alerts Vendor relations Connect Contact us Make a gift Volunteer Balance by Geisinger PA Health magazine Explore Events & classes Geisinger Health Plan Education Research Medical & insurance records 2024 Geisinger Health Hospital price transparency Developer Terms & conditions HIPAA notice of privacy practices Website privacy policy EEO statement and affirmative action policy Non-discrimination notice Non-discrimination notice (Medicare) Social media guidelines Corporate compliance reporting Report fraud Employee login Provider resources Geisinger Health Plan may refer collectively to Geisinger Health Plan, Geisinger Quality Options Inc., and Geisinger Indemnity Insurance Company, unless otherwise noted. Geisinger Gold Medicare Advantage HMO, PPO, and HMO D-SNP plans are offered by Geisinger Health Plan/Geisinger Indemnity Insurance Company, health plans with a Medicare contract. Continued enrollment in Geisinger Gold depends on annual contract renewal. Geisinger Health Plan Kids (Children’s Health Insurance Program) and Geisinger Health Plan Family (Medical Assistance) are offered by Geisinger Health Plan in conjunction with the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services (DHS). Geisinger Health Plan is part of Geisinger, an integrated health care delivery and coverage organization.Australia’s tough flu season could spell trouble for the US this winter, especially with Covid-19 in the mix | CNN CNN values your feedback 1. How relevant is this ad to you? 2. Did you encounter any technical issues? Video player was slow to load content Video content never loaded Ad froze or did not finish loading Video content did not start after ad Audio on ad was too loud Other issues Ad never loaded Ad prevented/slowed the page from loading Content moved around while ad loaded Ad was repetitive to ads I've seen previously Other issues Cancel Submit Thank You! Your effort and contribution in providing this feedback is much appreciated. Close Ad Feedback Close icon Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships More Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Watch Listen Live TV Subscribe Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch Edition US International Arabic Español Edition US International Arabic Español Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Follow CNN World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Ad Feedback Australia’s tough flu season could spell trouble for the US this winter, especially with Covid-19 in the mix By Brenda Goodman, CNN 4 minute read Published 7:51 AM EDT, Tue September 6, 2022 Link Copied! Video Ad Feedback Researchers work to improve effectiveness of flu shots 02:33 - Source: CNN CNN — Influenza is always unpredictable. Infectious disease experts like to hedge their forecasts with a caution: When you’ve seen one flu season, you’ve seen one flu season. But when forecasters try to get a bead on what influenza might have in store for North America in any given winter, they look to countries like Australia and New Zealand, where the season typically runs from April to October – winter months in the Southern Hemisphere. Sick Young Man sleep in the Bed at the Home Sabphoto/Adobe Stock Photo Yes, you can have Covid-19 and the flu at the same time. Here's what that could look like This year, Australia had its worst flu season in five years. Cases peaked about three times higher than the average for that period, and they topped out about two months earlier than they normally do, according to official government surveillance reports. Rates of influenza-like illness have also been higher in New Zealand this year than they have been for the past two years. The US should take heed, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told Bloomberg News. “The Southern Hemisphere has had a pretty bad flu season, and it came on early,” Fauci said. “Influenza – as we all have experienced over many years – can be a serious disease, particularly when you have a bad season.” NEW YORK, NEW YORK - JULY 27: People visit the American Museum of Natural History on July 27, 2022 in New York City. NYC & Company announced this week that New York City is projected to have 8.3 million foreign tourists, a 207 percent increase, this year up from 2.7 million last year. In total, New York is expecting to receive 56 million visitors in 2022, which is a 70 percent surge from 2021. Tourists from more than 30 countries were banned from traveling to the U.S. during the height of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. The CDC last month lifted the negative test requirement for travelers, which is leading the way for the boost in tourism. Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images The US is on a Covid plateau, and no one's sure what will happen next He said that means the US could see flu make a comeback while Covid-19 is still circulating at higher levels. Recent government modeling predicts that Covid-19 will peak again in early December. If that happens, it would be the first winter in which the US has had to contend with those two respiratory viruses circulating together at high levels, something infectious disease experts have cautioned about since the beginning of the pandemic. Lower immunity and maskless kids When Americans began isolating, social distancing and masking to slow Covid in early 2020, flu all but disappeared. As people have returned to their normal routines, flu has staggered back, but cases haven’t approached pre-pandemic levels, which means most of us haven’t been exposed to the flu for a few years, said Dr. Jennifer Nayak, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at the University of Rochester Medical Center. “With these few mild flu seasons back-to-back, I think immunity in the population is probably lower than what it is entering an average flu season,” Nayak said. A healthcare worker prepares a flu shot during a drive-thru clinic at the Louisiana State Fairgrounds in Shreveport, Louisiana, U.S., on Thursday, Nov. 5, 2020. Shreveport recently completed a test run for distributing an eventual coronavirus vaccine, using a community drive-thru clinic for flu shots. Photographer: Dylan Hollingsworth/Bloomberg via Getty Images Dylan Hollingsworth/Bloomberg/Getty Images A flu pandemic could be even worse than Covid-19 has been, National Academy of Medicine says On top of that, most kids are no longer wearing masks at schools. “We know that kids are an important source of influenza infections. They get it at school or day care, and they bring it home to the household,” Nayak says. Many adults also aren’t wearing masks or avoiding crowded spaces, “so there’s a potential for more transmission of influenza” this year. All of that underscores the need for Americans to get vaccinated. But typically, about half do not. Just 45% of Americans got their flu shots last season, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Flu vaccination rates fell for several at-risk groups, including pregnant women and children. The US government will launch a campaign this fall to urge people to get their flu shots and updated Covid-19 boosters at the same time. Nayak wonders how those public health messages – urging people to get more vaccines to stave off more infections – may sound to pandemic-weary Americans. “I think we have to still see how this plays out with what our influenza vaccination rates are going to do,” she said. Flu’s burden on society All of this is still hypothetical. We won’t really know for another eight weeks or so what the winter may have in store. “I think we’ve got to keep an eye – if we’re going to have something analogous to Australia – to what goes on in November,” said Jeffrey Shaman, a modeling expert at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health. “Do we start to see flu a little earlier than we typically do? And it may take off. And of course, on top of that, we’ve got to worry about how that compiles with the Covid circulating.” Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Friday from the CNN Health team. Two co-circulating respiratory viruses could spell trouble for hospitals, which are still strained and struggling. It could also mean people getting viral illnesses that might leave them vulnerable to ongoing health issues, serious disease and death. “Flu has not become an afterthought,” Shaman said. “Seasonal flu has and continues to impose a very heavy burden on society, one we would like to get a handle on.” Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Health Watch Listen Live TV Follow CNN Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Terms of Use Privacy Policy Ad Choices Accessibility & CC About Newsletters Transcripts © 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved. CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.We're close to cold and flu season. So, what does that look like with COVID-19 in the mix? | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore We're close to cold and flu season. So, what does that look like with COVID-19 in the mix? | CBC News LoadedHealth·AnalysisWe're close to cold and flu season. So, what does that look like with COVID-19 in the mix?This fall and winter, with society fully reopened, scientists suspect we’ll experience the return of cold and flu season — this time around, with COVID-19 in the mix.Scientists bracing for high influenza rates, but it's unclear exactly how fall and winter will play outLauren Pelley · CBC News · Posted: Sep 05, 2022 4:00 AM EDT | Last Updated: September 5, 2022With global travel back and most restrictions lifted, scientists suspect we’ll soon experience the return of cold and flu season — but this time around, COVID-19 will be in the mix. (Ben Nelms/CBC)Social SharingFor several years, pandemic restrictions and social distancing helped keep a variety of respiratory viruses at bay, even as rates of COVID-19 ebbed and flowed. Influenza largely disappeared until early 2022. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection rates were close to zero for months.Now, we're entering uncharted territory. Most restrictions are lifted, global travel has bounced back, and mandates for masks and boosters are few and far between. This fall and winter, with society largely reopened, scientists say they suspect we'll experience the return of cold and flu season — this time around, with another respiratory pathogen in the mix.But how exactly the months ahead will play out is tough to predict.Why COVID-19 and flu could be in a 'tug of war' in the years aheadDoctors advise Ontarians to keep up with vaccines ahead of fall flu season, possible COVID-19 surge"I think to be perfectly honest, nobody really has a good understanding of what the fall is going to look like," said Dr. Michael Gardam, an infectious diseases specialist and CEO of PEI Health.Experts note a variety of scenarios are possible. Pathogens like SARS-CoV-2, influenza and RSV might take turns hitting the public. Perhaps we'll see COVID-19 and flu infections rising in lockstep — dubbed a "twindemic" by some scientists. Or there's a chance it'll just be the flu coming back with a vengeance, as other viruses take a backseat.Any of those three possibilities could be difficult for individuals to navigate, and each is capable of putting serious strain on Canada's already-struggling health-care system."If I had to guess, I'd say we might have a moderately bad flu year," Gardam said. "COVID — I have no idea."Early clues from Australia's flu seasonWhile there's no crystal ball to tell us exactly what's ahead, Australia's 2022 influenza season does offer some clues. There, the seasons are flipped from what people experience in North America, which typically offers an indication of what's to come in Canada. Earlier this year marked Australia's first big COVID-19 surge of the pandemic, with subsequent waves of rising and falling daily infections playing out like a rollercoaster all the way into late summer. The country also endured its worst flu season in recent years, and data from Australia's Department of Health and Aged Care show infections were higher than the five-year average — with infections notably spiking, then dropping, earlier than usual. Some parents, teachers want stricter guidelines around COVID in schools this fallWhy uptake in COVID boosters is lagging in Quebec — and why that matters"Australia is having a real challenge [with flu] but we know at the same they're having a challenge with a lot of COVID," said Gardam, "and so it's just hard to tease out what's what."It's possible that the country's recent flu season was an example of the influenza virus taking turns with SARS-CoV-2, said Alyson Kelvin, a virologist and researcher with the Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization at the University of Saskatchewan. "But we'll have to see a couple seasons of winter virus circulation to know that a bit better."Colorized transmission electron micrograph showing influenza virus particles. Surface proteins on the virus particles are shown in black. (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID))Viruses known for causing the common cold tend to circulate at different times than influenza, she continued, while COVID has popped up during the winter, at times when flu would normally circulate in Canada. "That's the concern: What will those two viruses do when they circulate around the same time?" Kelvin questioned.Expecting a 'really busy flu season'Dr. Allison McGeer, an infectious diseases specialist with the Sinai Health System in Toronto, is among those bracing for that possibility. "If we were just looking at COVID going into the fall, I think that would kind of be OK," she said. "The problem is that what we're expecting on top of it is a really busy flu season."But there's also a chance this year will just be marked by the return of the flu, not a major COVID surge, Gardam said.Alberta doctors brace for tough flu season paired with possible fall COVID surge'Unusual' flu season sees jump in cases in May from lifting of COVID-19 measuresMore socializing indoors, or the arrival of yet another more-contagious or immune-evasive variant could certainly push case COVID counts up. At the same time, Gardam noted that Canada did already experience a wave late this summer, thanks to the rapid spread of BA.5, the latest Omicron subvariant to take hold."If we don't see another variant show up, those of us who've gotten infected with COVID and been vaccinated, we're pretty good for the next few months," he continued. "So maybe the fall will be quiet."WATCH | Why it took so long for flu to return in Canada:Unusually late flu season hits Canada3 years agoDuration 2:02Experts believe lifting public health restrictions may be to blame for an uptick in flu cases across the country, adding pressure to hospitals already under strain from the pandemic’s sixth wave.Pandemic precautions still have a purposeA calm fall overall would be an ideal scenario, given the problems already plaguing Canada's health-care system, from family physician shortages, to long wait times at emergency departments, to high levels of hospital patients who are stuck waiting for alternatives like home or long-term care. But experts say it's also unlikely."The combination of the state our health-care system is in, the fact that we're going to continue to have COVID, the fact that we want to be catching up on all of the surgeries and other things that we got behind on — and the busy flu season — is going to make it really hard," McGeer warned.What's behind Alberta's spike in flu numbersSecond OpinionAlmost half of Canadians may have caught COVIDThe scientists and medical experts CBC News spoke to agreed that there will be some level of circulation of multiple viruses, potentially overlapping at different points in the fall and winter.At a minimum, that could be disruptive to individuals' lives, and cause absenteeism across a wide variety of sectors — including within healthcare itself. It also makes it harder to know which virus you've got, with so much similarity between cold, flu and COVID symptoms."It's a little bit different now expecting people to be able to kind of interpret their situation, and do what is right for them, than it was three years ago," McGeer said.Even so, she said time-tested pandemic protections do still apply, including staying up-to-date on vaccinations, isolating when sick, and taking a COVID test.A COVID-19 vaccination clinic at the Vancouver Convention Centre on Jan. 13, 2022. (Ben Nelms/CBC)On the prevention side, it's worth getting both an annual flu shot and a COVID booster, several experts agreed. In particular, bivalent COVID vaccines that are expected to arrive this fall for adults — which target both the original SARS-CoV-2 and members of the Omicron family — may recover some protection vaccines offered a year ago, which was later lost as new variants learned how to better evade our immune systems, Gardam said.If you do catch a bug and aren't sure what it is, McGeer said it's worth taking time off work, if possible, and taking a COVID test. "Rapid tests are really useful for figuring out … what your symptoms are due to, and what you need to be doing," she added.Then, barring any changes to government policies this fall, it'll be up to individuals to figure out their next steps. What does living with COVID-19 as a society really mean? Here's what experts sayCOVID vs. flu — is it a fair comparison?When to isolateHealth-care workers in close contact with patients should continue to isolate at home if possible, regardless of their test results, McGeer said, along with anyone who does get a positive result for COVID. People in any roles who test negative should still consider themselves contagious with some kind of virus — and take steps to mitigate transmission, which could mean skipping social events, working from home, and wearing a mask if you work alone in an office or while running essential errands.Those pandemic principles are worth carrying forward, Kelvin said, since COVID isn't the only pathogen that can take a toll. WATCH | WHO reports more than 1 million COVID deaths in 2022 so far:More than 1 million dead from COVID-19 so far in 2022: WHO2 years agoDuration 0:53WHO COVID-19 technical lead Maria Van Kerkhove said it was 'concerning' and 'tragic' that more than 1 million people died from COVID-19 this year. She expects more hospitalizations and more deaths as the virus circulates around the world."Influenza is a serious disease… so if you have symptoms that look like influenza, that can also be confused with COVID-19, you should isolate yourself."If Canada faces a challenging fall and winter, and infections from multiple pathogens begin putting a serious burden on the health-care system, Gardam said it would be worth returning to widespread public health measures."If it looks like we're getting into trouble, I personally would be recommending asking people to mask indoors," he said."That's not remotely a lockdown right? I don't think anybody ever wants to go back to a lockdown again, but simple things like wearing a mask, frankly, I don't think it's that big a deal."ABOUT THE AUTHORLauren PelleySenior Health & Medical ReporterLauren Pelley covers the global spread of infectious diseases, pandemic preparedness and the crucial intersection between health and climate change. She's a two-time RNAO Media Award winner for in-depth health reporting in 2020 and 2022, a silver medallist for best editorial newsletter at the 2024 Digital Publishing Awards, and a 2024 Covering Climate Now award winner in the health category. Contact her at: lauren.pelley@cbc.ca.@LaurenPelleyWith files from Melanie Glanz, CBC NewsCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowBird flu is back in Wisconsin. Some poultry producers worry the highly contagious disease is here to stay. - WPR Skip to Audio Player Menu Close Toggle Site Mobile Navigation Home News Shows Culture Music ABOUT Who We Are Events Careers / Volunteer LISTEN Stations & Schedules Music Playlists Ways to Listen SUPPORT Ways to Give Membership FAQ Funding Information CONTACT Get in Touch Help / FAQ Newsletters POLICIES Ethical Guidelines Policies and Reports Privacy Policy News Shows Culture Music Wisconsin Public Radio Homepage Wisconsin Public Radio (WPR) Logo Wisconsin Public Radio (WPR) Logo Donate Icon Donate Search wpr.org Search Icon Agriculture Bird flu is back in Wisconsin. Some poultry producers worry the highly contagious disease is here to stay. Despite having no new cases in domestic flocks, state officials say the disease was detected in wild birds throughout the summer By Hope Kirwan September 7, 2022 Download Turkeys on their last days before the Thanksgiving holiday at Ashley Farms in Flanders, N.J., Tuesday, Nov. 13, 2018. Seth Wenig/AP Photo After a three-month lull, highly contagious avian influenza is back in Wisconsin.The state Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection confirmed the disease in a non-commercial flock in Washington County last week. It’s the first case in Wisconsin since the end of May. DATCP also reported that Minnesota and Indiana confirmed new cases last week after a summer without activity.Last spring, eight commercial flocks and 14 backyard or small farm flocks were culled across Wisconsin because of the disease. It’s the first time the state’s poultry owners have dealt with the highly pathogenic avian influenza since 2015. Stay informed on the latest news Sign up for WPR’s email newsletter. Email NameThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Animal health experts had previously forecast that the virus would die down in hot summer weather before resurging this fall. But state veterinarian Dr. Darlene Konkle said monitoring for the disease in wild birds showed that avian influenza never fully left Wisconsin or other Midwest states.“Even from late spring, early summer, there were still some detections and wild birds here and there,” she said.She said the fall migration season has begun for some bird species, which could be why the state has seen another case in a domestic flock. DATCP is suggesting flock owners once again take added precautions to clean shoes and equipment, prevent contact with wild birds and limit visitors to their flocks or farms.Nick Levendoski, owner of Sunnyside Hatchery in Beaver Dam, said this year’s battle with avian influenza feels different from the 2015 outbreak. He said the previous outbreak was a different strain of the virus that did not have the same impact on wild birds.“Back in 2015, the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus was never seated in the environment like we’re seeing right now,” said Levendoski, who is also president of the Wisconsin Poultry and Egg Industries Association. “Producers and their veterinarians and staff are just preparing for this to be more of a long term challenge because it is so prevalent in the wild as well.”He said producers in Europe have continued to see a similar virus strain pop up again and again. And he thinks that could be the case in the U.S. as well, with the disease impacting domestic flocks every spring and fall during migration season.Konkle said it’s difficult to predict how long the virus will stick around, but she agrees that poultry producers need to be ready for the disease be present through 2023.“I think we all need to be prepared for a little more long term situation with dealing with this virus, certainly through the winter months and into next spring,” she said.Levendoski said most poultry producers have insurance that will help purchase new birds if a flock has to be culled. But he said all producers have to deal with the extra time it takes to ensure they’re following safety protocols, testing for the disease and applying for permits needed to sell and move birds between states.“Their farm may have been clear of the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus. But if they had a neighbor within, you know, a 10-kilometer radius that was positive, there’s just an awful lot of permitting, a lot more inspections. You know, those kinds of costs definitely add up,” he said.Levendoski said he did see apprehension among his customers last spring, mostly backyard flock owners and producers who raise poultry for local markets. But he said sales picked back up in early summer when the state lifted avian influenza precautions. Even with the threat of the disease’s return, he said the overall demand for new birds hasn’t been affected too much.“The one thing that kind of helped to solidify their decisions is otherwise expensive meat and eggs at the grocery store. You know, a lot of folks felt it was still worth the risk, taking a chance to be self-sufficient or to provide for farmers markets and stuff,” Levendoski said.He said those grocery store costs could go up further this winter if virus transmission worsens and the supply of turkeys from large commercial operators is limited heading into the holiday season. Wisconsin Public Radio, © Copyright 2024, Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System and Wisconsin Educational Communications Board. Related Stories The show goes on at World Dairy Expo despite threat of avian flu State officials urge public to protect against bird flu at county fairs, petting zoos USDA requiring avian flu testing in some dairy cows New scarecrows: Lasers aim to deter wild birds and reduce disease on Wisconsin farms Wisconsin dairy farms closely watching avian flu cases in cattle Footer Partner Navigation Wisconsin Public Radio Homepage Wisconsin Public Radio (WPR) Logo Wisconsin Public Radio (WPR) Logo Educational Communications Board University of Wisconsin-Madison NPR PBS Wisconsin Footer Site Navigation ABOUT Who We Are Events Careers / Volunteer LISTEN Stations & Schedules Music Playlists Ways to Listen SUPPORT Ways to Give Support FAQ Funding Information CONTACT Get in Touch Help / FAQ Newsletters POLICIES Ethical Guidelines Policies, Public Files and Reports Privacy Policy © 2024 by Wisconsin Public Radio, a service of the Wisconsin Educational Communications Board and the University of Wisconsin-Madison Social Networks Navigation FacebookInstagramColorado flu season expected to start earlier, be relatively severe Skip to content All Sections Subscribe Now 36°F Monday, November 11th 2024 Digital Replica Edition Home Page Close MenuNews Latest Headlines Colorado News Politics Election 2024 Crime and Public Safety Courts National News World News Education Health Environment Transportation Housing News Obituaries Photos Video Your Hub Weather Sports Sports Sports Columnists Denver Broncos Colorado Rockies Denver Nuggets Colorado Avalanche Colorado Rapids Olympics College Sports Preps Betting Golf Boxing / MMA Sports on TV/Radio Sports Podcasts Olympics Business Business Real Estate Airlines Economy Energy Retail Technology Best Reviews The Know The Know Food and Drink Art Culture Movies TV & Streaming Music Theater Travel Family Friendly Bars Beer Outdoors Outdoors Hiking Fall Colors Cycling Fitness Running Camping Fishing Hunting Water Sports Skiing Snowboarding Winter Sports Opinion Opinion Editorials Columnists Letters Cartoons Endorsements Obituaries Obituaries News Obituaries Place an Obituary Things To Do Things To Do Event Calendar Television Listings Comics Games Horoscopes Ask Amy Home & Garden Free and Cheap Cannabis Recipes Denver Post Store Classifieds Classifieds Automotive Homes Jobs Subscribe Log In Logout Close Menu Sign up for Newsletters and Alerts Sign Up Health | Colorado flu season expected to start earlier,… Share this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) Subscribe Log In Account Settings Contact Us Log Out Spoof a user Sign up for Newsletters and Alerts Sign Up Subscribe Log In Search 36°F Monday, November 11th 2024 Digital Replica Edition Health Latest Headlines Colorado Politics Crime Nation World Education Health Environment Transportation Housing News Obituaries Trending: Health | List: DPS schools that could close 🏫 Health | Colorado election results 🗳️ Health | Election results by county 📍 NewsHealthNewsNews Based on facts, either observed and verified directly by the reporter, or reported and verified from knowledgeable sources. Health | Colorado flu season expected to start earlier, be relatively severe after 2 mild years during pandemic Projections for influenza’s activity in the U.S. based on Australian dataShare this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) Rhonda Patrom, left, gets her flu shot by Tri-County Health Department RN Lisa Winn October 22, 2021. (Photo by Andy Cross, The Denver Post) By Meg Wingerter | mwingerter@denverpost.com | The Denver PostPUBLISHED: September 7, 2022 at 6:00 AM MSTIf Colorado follows the pattern set in the Southern Hemisphere this spring, the flu season is likely to start early and be relatively severe.Flu projections for the United States are based on what happens in Australia, where the seasons are flipped and respiratory viruses spread during what’s spring and summer in the Northern Hemisphere.This year, the flu started spreading widely about a month earlier than it usually does in Australia, and the number of cases was higher than the average over the past five years, though the Australian national health department described its impact as “low to moderate.”The flu typically starts circulating widely around Thanksgiving in the United States and peaks in December or January, said Dr. Michelle Barron, senior medical director for infection prevention and control at UCHealth. If the country follows the pattern set in Australia, that could mean the flu season kicks off in late October or early November, she said.The Southern Hemisphere numbers suggest the flu season could be comparable to the 2019-2020 season, during which 3,546 people were hospitalized with influenza in Colorado, Barron said. That season was essentially cut short when flu activity dropped to almost nothing following Colorado’s COVID-19 stay-at-home order in early April 2020, and the two seasons since then have been milder.“This year has the potential to be a bad flu year. A lot of the measures used during the COVID-19 pandemic such as masking and limiting gatherings that helped limit the spread of flu are no longer in place. We also have less immunity to flu since we haven’t had the same exposures we normally have from year to year,” Barron said.Children younger than 5 and adults older than 65 are at the highest risk of severe illness from flu. Colorado doesn’t track adult flu deaths, which are lumped in with pneumonia from other causes in the statistics. Pediatric deaths typically fluctuate between three and seven per year.Dr. Hector de Leon, a pediatrician at Kaiser Permanente’s Fort Collins clinic, said he’d seen a small increase in respiratory viruses as of late August, though not a large number of flu cases. Some people try to time their flu shots to have the most protection when the season peaks, but it’s better to get vaccinated early, he said. “It’s really hard to predict when you’re going to get” the flu, he said.Related Articles Health | CDC calls for expanded bird flu testing after more dairy worker infections found in Colorado and Michigan Health | What is E. coli? How do you get sick from it? What to know about bacteria behind McDonald’s outbreak Health | Bird flu outbreaks die down, but Colorado keeps monitoring cows and poultry Health | Colorado’s flu season likely to be normal, but COVID is a “wild card” Health | When should I get flu and COVID shots? Experts disagree — but say get them however you can Some clinics may not have flu shots in stock yet, but Walgreens and CVS pharmacies in the Denver area had appointments available as of Tuesday. People who don’t want to book multiple appointments can receive their new omicron COVID-19 boosters and seasonal flu shots at the same time without reducing their protection from either. It takes roughly two weeks after either shot to mount a full immune response.The flu shot is less effective than the COVID-19 vaccines, generally reducing the odds of severe disease by 40% to 60%, but that’s still significant in a bad flu season, de Leon said. The flu shot’s composition changes from year to year, to try to match the strain that’s most likely to dominate.“We don’t want to overwhelm our hospital systems, our clinics,” he said.It’s not clear how COVID-19 and influenza will interact this fall and winter. The two viruses have appeared to seesaw, with one gaining steam as the other receded, de Leon said. But researchers aren’t sure if the virus’ characteristics were an important factor in the mild flu seasons, or if human behavior like wearing masks was the driver.“A lot of us are worried we’re just due” for a bad season, he said.Subscribe to bi-weekly newsletter to get health news sent straight to your inbox. Share this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) Policies Report an Error Contact Us Submit a News Tip Most PopularMost PopularColorado snow totals for Nov. 9, 2024Colorado snow totals for Nov. 9, 2024What Trump’s second term means for Colorado immigrants, public lands, abortion access and Space CommandWhat Trump's second term means for Colorado immigrants, public lands, abortion access and Space CommandBroncos’ Alex Forsyth after Chiefs block game-winning field goal attempt: “I have to be stouter”Broncos' Alex Forsyth after Chiefs block game-winning field goal attempt: "I have to be stouter"How it Happened: Chiefs beat Broncos after blocking last-second field goalHow it Happened: Chiefs beat Broncos after blocking last-second field goalColorado didn’t follow the big national rightward swing toward Donald Trump. Here’s why.Colorado didn't follow the big national rightward swing toward Donald Trump. Here's why.Broncos four downs: Please, Sean Payton, your cute calls on the road aren’t helping Bo NixBroncos four downs: Please, Sean Payton, your cute calls on the road aren't helping Bo NixKeeler: CU Buffs, Travis Hunter overcome trashy Texas Tech fans, Big 12 refs, tortillas to control College Football Playoff destinyKeeler: CU Buffs, Travis Hunter overcome trashy Texas Tech fans, Big 12 refs, tortillas to control College Football Playoff destinyF-16 fighter jets to fly over Denver, Front Range for Veterans Day celebrationF-16 fighter jets to fly over Denver, Front Range for Veterans Day celebrationGabe Evans widens lead over U.S. Rep. Yadira Caraveo as ballot counting nears completion in battle for CongressGabe Evans widens lead over U.S. Rep. Yadira Caraveo as ballot counting nears completion in battle for CongressGabe Evans flips 8th Congressional District for Republicans as Rep. Yadira Caraveo concedes raceGabe Evans flips 8th Congressional District for Republicans as Rep. Yadira Caraveo concedes race Trending Nationally Marijuana and abortion amendments failed in Florida, even with majorities. Blame pregnant pigsThese employees work 32 hours a week and get paid for 40. This is how they do it.Column: Taylor Swift’s Eras Tour just played its last US concert in Indy. Here are 5 ways it will change concert tours forever.Elon Musk, not Melania or Kimberly Guilfoyle, appears in curious new Trump family photoA bigfoot ‘sighting’ report was logged in Connecticut. Here’s what it says. More in Health Colorado News | Second Wind Fund connects Colorado kids at risk of suicide with accessible mental health care Health | CDC calls for expanded bird flu testing after more dairy worker infections found in Colorado and Michigan Health | Boulder County reports first human case of rare insect-borne disease of 2024 Health | Colorado settles lawsuit over housing disabled people in nursing homes 2022 September 7 Subscribe News Alerts Submit a News Tip Member Services Become a Member Place a Hold Digital Replica Edition Sitemap Classifieds Autos Real Estate Jobs Contact Us Careers Denver Post Store Place an Obituary Advertise With Us Network Advertising Privacy Policy Accessibility Today’s Front Page Back Issues Archives Mobile Apps Subscribe Now Terms of Use Cookie Policy Cookie Preferences California Notice at Collection Notice of Financial Incentive Do Not Sell/Share My Personal Information Arbitration Site Map Ethics Policy Powered by WordPress.com VIP Copyright © 2024 MediaNews Group CloseCovid vaccines will likely become annual like flu shots, health officials sayIE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Skip to ContentNBC News Logo2024 ElectionMeet the PressU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthShoppingTiplineScienceCulture & TrendsShare & Save —My NewsManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearchSearchProfile My NewsSign Out Sign InCreate your free profileSectionsU.S. NewsDecision 2024PoliticsWorldLocalBusinessSportsInvestigationsCulture & TrendsHealthScienceTech & MediaWeatherVideo FeaturesPhotosNBC SelectNBC Asian AmericaNBC BLKNBC LatinoNBC OUTtvTodayNightly NewsMSNBCMeet the PressDatelineFeaturedNBC News NowNightly FilmsStay TunedSpecial FeaturesNewslettersPodcastsListen NowMore From NBCCNBCNBC.COMNBCU AcademyPeacockNEXT STEPS FOR VETSNBC News Site MapHelpFollow NBC News news AlertsThere are no new alerts at this timeSearchSearchFacebookTwitterEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardPinterestLinkedinLatest Stories2024 ElectionMeet the PressU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthShoppingTiplineScienceCulture & TrendsCoronavirusCovid vaccines will likely become annual like flu shots, White House officials sayDr. Anthony Fauci said he anticipates a schedule "similar to that of the annual influenza vaccine, with annual updated Covid-19 shots matched to the currently circulating strains."A pharmacist administers a dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine in the Bronx, N.Y., on Dec. 21, 2020.Eric Lee / Bloomberg via Getty Images fileSept. 6, 2022, 4:47 PM UTCBy Aria BendixCovid vaccinations will likely become an annual affair, White House officials said Tuesday, with a schedule resembling that of flu shots."In the absence of a dramatically different variants, we likely are moving towards a path with a vaccination cadence similar to that of the annual influenza vaccine, with annual updated Covid-19 shots matched to the currently circulating strains for most of the population," Dr. Anthony Fauci said at a White House briefing. The reasoning behind this expectation, according to Fauci and White House Covid-19 Response Coordinator Ashish Jha, has to do with improved protection from newly updated Covid booster shots. The updated boosters, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended Thursday, target both the original coronavirus strain and the currently circulating omicron subvariants BA.4 and BA.5. Trial data suggests these shots should yield better protection against both infection and transmission, as well as more lasting protection against severe illness, Jha said — unless a new variant emerges that significantly upends vaccine effectiveness.BA.5 makes up more than 88% of coronavirus specimens and BA.4 sublineages account for more than 11%, CDC Director Rochelle Walensky said Tuesday. “For the first time since December of 2020, these vaccines, our vaccines, have caught up with the virus,” Jha said.“Barring those variant curveballs, for a large majority of Americans we are moving to a point where a single annual Covid shot should provide a high degree of protection against serious illness all year,” he added. The CDC recommends that all teenagers and adults get the updated booster shots after at least two months have passed since their last Covid vaccine or previous booster. Going forward, Fauci and Jha said, they expect similar booster updates to account for dominant omicron subvariants. People with underlying health issues may need to get vaccinated more than once a year, though, Fauci said.However, experts aren't yet sure how much the updated boosters will really improve protection. The CDC authorized the reformulated shots based on tests in mice, plus human trial data that looked at a similar vaccine targeting the original omicron strain, BA.1. That data showed that updated boosters produced higher levels of antibodies than the original vaccines — a sign of stronger, more lasting protection.Omicron and its subvariants have been dominant in the U.S. since December. Although the virus has incurred small changes, or drifts, as it acquires new mutations, its fundamental behavior has stayed the same. For that reason, disease experts are optimistic that yearly shots may be sufficient to protect against future versions of the virus."If people stay up to date on their vaccines, if people get treated if they have a breakthrough infection, we can make deaths from this virus vanishingly rare," Jha said.The U.S. is still seeing a weekly average of around 450 Covid deaths per day, according to NBC News' tally. Aria BendixAria Bendix is the breaking health reporter for NBC News Digital.AboutContactHelpCareersAd ChoicesPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023)NBC News SitemapClosed CaptioningAdvertiseSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday LogoFlu vaccine campaigns begin in Israel amid COVID-19 cross infection fear - The Jerusalem Post Advertisement JP Newsletter Israel News Health & Wellness WORLD NEWS Middle East Business & Innovation Opinion JP Store Login Log Out Archaeology Israel Real Estate Judaism Kabbalah Environment Antisemitism JP Spanish Podcasts JP Shopping Aliyah Portal Premium Jerusalem Post Health & Wellness Flu vaccine campaigns begin in Israel amid COVID-19 cross infection fears The two largest health maintenance organizations in Israel are already inviting their members to community clinics to get their flu shots. By JUDY SIEGEL-ITZKOVICH SEPTEMBER 5, 2022 13:40 Updated: SEPTEMBER 5, 2022 16:38 Doctor giving a vaccine to a patient (illustrative) (photo credit: INGIMAGE) Although Israelis are tired of vaccinations after more than two-and-a-half years of COVID-19, it is urgent that everyone over the age of six months – babies, children, teens and adults – get flu shots as soon as possible. Influenza in the southern hemisphere has proved to be powerful, and combined with a predicted wave of COVID-19 in the coming months, is expected to be dangerous.The two largest health maintenance organizations – Clalit Health Services and Maccabi Healthcare Services – announced on Monday that they are already inviting their members to community clinics to get their flu shots. Usually, the HMOs wait until after the High Holy Days.It is best to make appointments via the health fund’s website, app or telephone. Significant influenza break-out expected in Israel“We are witnessing a difficult winter in terms of the incidence of influenza in the southern hemisphere and in Australia in particular,” Maccabi head nurse Tami Alkalai said. “That is why we expect a significant incidence of influenza in Israel this coming winter. Flu, despite the public perception, can be severe and lead to various complications and even death, especially among at-risk populations – the elderly, chronic patients, children and infants and pregnant women.“The best way to protect yourself from the flu and prevent its possible complications is through vaccination. The vaccine is safe and effective, and we recommend that the entire population, with an emphasis on populations at risk, go and get vaccinated.”Clalit, the HMO with the most members, also launched its flu vaccination campaign after ordering 1,125,000 vaccines, including Flumist nasal spray vaccines for youngsters and special cases, and more powerful vaccines for those 65 and older.Flurona: The novel coronavirus (top) and influenza (bottom) viruses are seen in this composite image. (credit: Wikimedia Commons)Flu vaccines come earlyThe flu vaccination campaign for the winter of 2022-2023 is opening earlier than usual this year. From this coming Wednesday, it will already be possible to schedule an appointment for vaccination on all platforms. “We are entering winter at a time when the incidence of the coronavirus is low, but there is still a fear of another wave,” said Ruth Baruch, director of Clalit’s vaccination campaign and head of the nursing department in the community division.“That is why it is important to get vaccinated against the flu – to avoid cross-infection, so we will be protected with an effective vaccine that significantly reduces illness and severe morbidity.”The vaccines will be given in general clinics all over the nation, and in both women’s health centers and children’s health centers.Sign up for the Health & Wellness newsletter >> Related Tags Israel winter health flu Vaccinations Assuta Health Hot Opinion Dear Jared Kushner, the Jewish people need you By JPOST EDITORIAL To recover, Democrats must expel anti-Zionist extremists who put off Middle America By AMOTZ ASA-EL Leaders of the Jewish enemies have always died as weak cowards By URI PILICHOWSKI How will the recent US election affect Iran, Russia, and North Korea? By LOUIS RENÉ BERES Israel cannot work with an organization that enables Hamas activities and terrorism By ZINA RAKHAMILOVA Most Read 1 Israel can't arm itself with 30,000-pound bombs in time against Iran 2 'We were ambushed': Pogrom in Amsterdam wounds several 3 102 years ago, one of the all-time greatest archaeological discoveries was made 4 Scientists unlock secrets of 3,000-year-old tablet revealing path to Noah's Ark 5 Trump’s victory throws diplomatic bombshell into Israel's multi-front war Advertisement Information About Us Contact us Feedback Terms Of Service Privacy Policy Subscriber Agreement JPost Jobs Cancel Subscription Sitemap פרסום בג'רוזלם פוסט Customer Service Advertise with Us The Jerusalem Post Group Breaking News World News Iran News MDA Heroes The Jerusalem Report Jerusalem Post Lite חדשות מעריב Real Estate Listings Hype Special Content JP Store BrandBlend Services Precious Metals Tools and services JPost Premium Ulpan Online JPost Newsletter Our Magazines Learn Hebrew RSS feed JPost.com Archive Digital Library Lists of Jewish holidays Law לוח חגים ומועדים 2024 זמני כניסת שבת Sites Of Interest Poalim Online JNF-USA The Jerusalem Post Customer Service Center can be contacted with any questions or requests: Telephone: *2421 * Extension 4 Jerusalem Post or 03-7619056 Fax: 03-5613699 E-mail: subs@jpost.com The center is staffed and provides answers on Sundays through Thursdays between 07:00 AM and 14:00 PM and Fridays only handles distribution requests between 7:00 AM and 12:30 PM For international customers: The center is staffed and provides answers on Sundays through Thursdays between 7AM and 14PM Israel time Toll Free number 1-800-448-9291 Telephone +972-3-761-9056 Fax: 972-3-561-3699 E-mail: subs@jpost.com Copyright © 2024 Jpost Inc. All rights reserved • Terms of Use • Privacy Policy Designed byFrontiers | PD-1 and ICOS counter-regulate tissue resident regulatory T cell development and IL-10 production during flu Skip to main content Top bar navigation Frontiers in Immunology About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumPress officeCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Search Frontiers in Immunology Sections Sections Alloimmunity and TransplantationAntigen Presenting Cell BiologyAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders : Autoimmune DisordersAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders: Autoinflammatory DisordersB Cell BiologyCancer Immunity and ImmunotherapyComparative ImmunologyCytokines and Soluble Mediators in ImmunityImmunological MemoryImmunological Tolerance and RegulationInflammationMicrobial ImmunologyMolecular Innate ImmunityMucosal ImmunityMultiple Sclerosis and NeuroimmunologyNK and Innate Lymphoid Cell BiologyNutritional ImmunologyParasite ImmunologyPrimary ImmunodeficienciesSystems ImmunologyT Cell BiologyVaccines and Molecular TherapeuticsViral Immunology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumPress officeCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Frontiers in Immunology Sections Sections Alloimmunity and TransplantationAntigen Presenting Cell BiologyAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders : Autoimmune DisordersAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders: Autoinflammatory DisordersB Cell BiologyCancer Immunity and ImmunotherapyComparative ImmunologyCytokines and Soluble Mediators in ImmunityImmunological MemoryImmunological Tolerance and RegulationInflammationMicrobial ImmunologyMolecular Innate ImmunityMucosal ImmunityMultiple Sclerosis and NeuroimmunologyNK and Innate Lymphoid Cell BiologyNutritional ImmunologyParasite ImmunologyPrimary ImmunodeficienciesSystems ImmunologyT Cell BiologyVaccines and Molecular TherapeuticsViral Immunology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Frontiers in Immunology Sections Sections Alloimmunity and TransplantationAntigen Presenting Cell BiologyAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders : Autoimmune DisordersAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders: Autoinflammatory DisordersB Cell BiologyCancer Immunity and ImmunotherapyComparative ImmunologyCytokines and Soluble Mediators in ImmunityImmunological MemoryImmunological Tolerance and RegulationInflammationMicrobial ImmunologyMolecular Innate ImmunityMucosal ImmunityMultiple Sclerosis and NeuroimmunologyNK and Innate Lymphoid Cell BiologyNutritional ImmunologyParasite ImmunologyPrimary ImmunodeficienciesSystems ImmunologyT Cell BiologyVaccines and Molecular TherapeuticsViral Immunology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Submit your research Search Download article Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) Share on Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex 3K Total views 1,5K Downloads 10 Citations Citation numbers are available from Dimensions View article impact View altmetric score Share on Edited by Xuguang Tai National Cancer Institute (NIH), United States Reviewed by Leonid A. Pobezinsky University of Massachusetts Amherst, United States Zhongmei Zhang National Cancer Institute (NIH), United States Table of contents AbstractIntroductionMaterials and methodsResultsDiscussionsData availability statementEthics statementAuthor contributionsFundingAcknowledgmentsConflict of interestPublisher’s noteSupplementary materialReferences Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex Check for updates Download article Download Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) ORIGINAL RESEARCH article Front. Immunol., 08 September 2022 Sec. T Cell Biology Volume 13 - 2022 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.984476 This article is part of the Research Topic Revisit the Roles of Regulatory T cells in Infection View all 6 articles PD-1 and ICOS counter-regulate tissue resident regulatory T cell development and IL-10 production during flu Michael C. McGee1Tianyi Zhang1Nicholas Magazine1Rezwanul Islam1Mariano Carossino1Weishan Huang1,2*1Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, United States2Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United StatesRegulatory T cells that express the transcription factor Foxp3 (Treg cells) are a highly heterogenous population of immunoregulatory cells critical for maintaining immune homeostasis and preventing immunopathology during infections. Tissue resident Treg (TR-Treg) cells are maintained within nonlymphoid tissues and have been shown to suppress proinflammatory tissue resident T cell responses and promote tissue repair. Human populations are repetitively exposed to influenza infections and lung tissue resident effector T cell responses are associated with flu-induced long-term pulmonary sequelae. The kinetics of TR-Treg cell development and molecular features of TR-Treg cells during repeated and/or long-term flu infections are unclear. Utilizing a Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mouse model along with intravascular fluorescent in vivo labeling, we characterized the TR-Treg cell responses to repetitive heterosubtypic influenza infections. We found lung tissue resident Treg cells accumulated and expressed high levels of co-inhibitory and co-stimulatory receptors post primary and secondary infections. Blockade of PD-1 or ICOS signaling reveals that PD-1 and ICOS signaling pathways counter-regulate TR-Treg cell expansion and IL-10 production, during secondary influenza infection. Furthermore, the virus-specific TR-Treg cell response displayed distinct kinetics, when compared to conventional CD4+ tissue resident memory T cells, during secondary flu infection. Our results provide insight into the tissue resident Foxp3+ regulatory T cell response during repetitive flu infections, which may be applicable to other respiratory infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and COVID.IntroductionFoxp3+ regulatory T (Treg) cells are a population of immunomodulatory CD4+ T cells critical in preventing autoimmunity, immunopathology, and maintaining immune homeostasis (1–3). Treg cells exhibit great heterogeneity and may be found in circulation and secondary lymphoid organs (SLO) (4). Tissue resident Treg cells are maintained in nonlymphoid tissue (NLT) and barrier sites under steady conditions and display limited or no recirculation (4–8). The importance of tissue resident Treg cells extends beyond immunosuppressive functions. For example, a well-described tissue resident Treg cell population in visceral adipose tissue (VAT) can preserve insulin sensitivity and regulate adipocyte metabolism (9–11), while Treg cells accumulate and promote tissue repair upon muscle injury (12).CD4+ and CD8+ tissue resident memory (Trm) cells are present at barrier sites and provide a rapid response to infection (13–17). However, Trm cells have also been found to be drivers of disease and immunopathology (18–22). Recent studies have probed interactions between Treg cells and Trm cells. In the intestines, Treg cells have been shown to promote CD8+ Trm cell development, but suppress the CD8+ Trm cell response leading to development of viral sequelae in the lungs (23, 24). Tissue resident Treg cells have been shown to limit immunopathology driven by CD4+ Trm cells in a chronic Aspergillus fumigatus model (18). Therefore, understanding the tissue resident Treg cell responses may provide insight into vaccine development and therapeutics for tissue repair, chronic inflammation, and viral sequelae.Influenza infection is a leading cause of respiratory illness globally. Both CD4+ and CD8+ Trm cells develop following acute influenza infection and protect against heterotypic challenge (13–16). Dysregulated CD8+ Trm cell responses mediate chronic inflammation and fibrotic sequelae following influenza infection in mice (19, 20). During influenza infection, Treg cells suppress effector T cell cytokine production, reduce tissue damage, promote tissue repair, and promote the resolution of inflammation following viral clearance (25–27). However, the tissue resident Treg cell response has not been characterized during influenza infection.In this study, we utilized intravascular labeling to discriminate circulating (Circ) T cells in the lung vasculature from tissue resident (TR) T cells embedded in the lung parenchyma in conjunction with a Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mouse model in order to characterize the lung tissue resident Treg cell response during primary and secondary influenza infections (28). We found that lung tissue resident Treg cells expanded substantially post influenza infection, at a more significant rate as compared to the circulating counterpart. Moreover, the lung tissue resident Treg cells, along with tissue resident conventional T cells, are the major producers of IL-10, during the acute phases of primary and secondary influenza infections, while tissue resident Treg cell-derived IL-10 production sustained a much longer time post infection, compared to IL-10 production by conventional T cell subsets. Lung tissue resident Treg cells express high levels of immune co-inhibitory and co-stimulatory molecules including PD-1, TIGIT, LAG3, ICOS, GITR and others. Blocking PD-1 or ICOS signaling significantly altered lung tissue resident Treg cell expansion, especially the IL-10-producing population, and phenotype during secondary influenza infection, suggesting that PD-1 and ICOS signaling pathways may counter-regulate tissue resident Treg cell development and function during influenza re-infection. Utilizing MHC Class II tetramers, we also determined the influenza-specific lung tissue resident Treg and CD4+ conventional cell populations displayed distinct kinetics in response to secondary infection. The data presented in this report adds to our knowledge the kinetics and characteristics of lung tissue resident Treg cells during influenza infections.Materials and methodsMiceAll mice were on a C57BL/6 background. Age matched male and female mice were 6-15 weeks at the time of analysis. IL-10GFP (B6(Cg)-Il10tm1.1Karp/J; 014530) (29) and Foxp3RFP (C57BL/6Foxp3tm1Flv/J; 008374) (30) reporter mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and crossed to generate the Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter strain as we previously described (31). All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Louisiana State University.Influenza infectionsAll influenza infections were performed intranasally under light sedation with isoflurane as described previously (31). Mouse adapted influenza A/WSN/1933(H1N1) (WSN) and influenza A/X-31(H3N2) (X31) viral stocks were originally from the Influenza Center of Excellence & WHO Collaborating Center at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, and were kind gifts from Dr. David Topham at University of Rochester Medical Center and Dr. Gary Whittaker at Cornell University respectively. Influenza viruses were propagated in allantoic fluids of 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs at 37 °C for 3 days, and plaque forming units (PFU) were quantified in MDBK cells as previously described (32). For acute infections, mice were infected with 1e3 PFU of WSN and analyzed day 7 post infection. For re-infections with heterosubtypic influenza A viruses, mice were infected with 2e2 PFU WSN (H1N1) and rested for 6 weeks, followed by re-infection 2e4 PFU of X31 (H3N2) and analyzed at the indicated timepoints post-secondary infection. Mouse weight and survival were monitored daily, and mice losing more than 30% of the original weight before the designed experimental endpoints were humanely euthanized and recorded as death incidences.Intravascular labelingTo stain circulating T cells via in vivo fluorescent staining, mice were lightly anesthetized with isoflurane five minutes prior to sacrifice, and immediately injected via retroorbital intravenous injection (IV) with 1.5 μg allophycocyanin (APC)-conjugated anti-CD45.2 antibody in 200 μl sterile PBS as preciously described (33).ICOSL and PD-L1 blockadeMice were injected intravenously via retroorbital injection with the indicated doses at the indicated timepoints (see details in experimental flow illustrations) of InVivoMAb anti-mouse ICOSL (CD275) (BioXCell; clone HK5.3) or InVivoMAb anti-mouse PD-L1 (B7-H1) (BioXCell; clone 10F.9G2) in 200 μl sterile PBS. Rat IgG2a isotypes were purchased from BioXCell as recommended by the product data sheets and used as controls. Treatment antibodies (or isotypes) were given to mice at 500 μg at the first timepoint, and 250 μg at the subsequent timepoints.Organ collection and tissue processingCells from various organs were isolated as we recently described (31). Lungs, mediastinal lymph nodes, and spleens were homogenized via grinding against strainers, followed by filtering through the strainers. Red blood cells were lysed (RBC lysis buffer from Tonbo) before analysis. Cellular portion was resuspended in full RPMI media for staining and analysis via flow cytometry.Antibodies and reagents for flow cytometryAll fluorescent antibodies are listed in “fluorochrome-target (clone; annotation if desirable)” format below. Pacific Blue (PB)-CD103 (2E7), PerCP/Cy5.5-CD11a (M17/4), PerCP/Cy5.5-CD25 (3C7), PE-CD39 (DuHa59), Alexa Fluor (AF) 700-CD4 (GK1.5), PE-Cy7-CD69 (H12F3), BV421-CXCR6 (SA051D1), PE-Cy7-GITR (DTA-1), BV421-ICOS (C398.4A), PE-Cy7-LAG-3 (C9B7W), APC-Cy7-PD-1 (29F.1A12), APC-Cy7-TCRβ (H57-597) and APC-CD45.2 (104) were from BioLegend. PerCP/Cy5.5-T-bet (O4-46) was from BD Pharmingen. violetFluor (vF) 450-CD25 (PC61.5), PE-CD25 (PC61.5), APC-Cy7-CD4 (GK1.5), FITC-CD4 (RM4-5), PerCP/Cy5.5-CD8α (53-6.7), APC-Cy7-CD8α (53-6.7), PE-CTLA-4 (UC10-4F10-11), and APC-TIGIT (1G9) were purchased from Tonbo Biosciences. PE-eFluor610-Foxp3 (FJK-16s) and AF700-Ki-67 (SolA15) were from ThermoFisher Scientific.Other reagents: Ghost Dye™ Violet 510 viability dye was from Tonbo Biosciences. The following reagent(s) was obtained through the NIH Tetramer Core Facility: PE-labeled I-A(b) Influenza A nucleocapsid (NP) 311-325 QVYSLIRPNENPAHK loaded class II tetramer for NP-specific CD4+ T cell detection.Flow cytometrySurface staining of live cells were done in the presence of Fc block and fixable viability dye. For intracellular cytokine staining, cells were stimulated with cell stimulation cocktail (Tonbo Biosciences) for 4-5 hours, subjected to surface marker staining in the presence of Fc block, fixed in 4.2% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized and stained with the indicated anti-cytokine antibodies in intracellular perm/wash buffer (BioLegend) for 2 hours at 4 °C. Nuclear staining was performed with Foxp3 staining buffer kit (eBioscience). T cells were identified via lymphocyte/single cells/live cells/TCRβ+ gating. CD4+Foxp3RFP+ T cells were defined as Foxp3+ gating Treg cells, while CD4+Foxp3RFP- T cells were defined as conventional CD4+ T cells. Tissue resident or circulating status was then determined via fluorescent in vivo IV staining of CD45.2 (CD45.2IV- for tissue resident cells and CD45.2IV+ for circulating cells respectively). IL-10GFP was utilized to analyze ex vivo IL-10 production by T cells during influenza infections.HistologyLeft lung lobes were collected and fixed in 10% formalin. Lung sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and scored by a board-certified pathologist at the Louisiana Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, in a blinded manner. The scoring interactively evaluates the histopathologic levels of bronchiolar necrosis, alveolar bronchiolization/squamous metaplasia, peribronchiolar/perivascular cuffing, and alveolar inflammation. Scores were added together to achieve a cumulative score, at the range of 0 to 24.Statistical analysisT-test, one-way ANOVA and two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test were performed with GraphPad Prism 8 with p ≤ 0.05 considered statistically significant. “NS” refers to “No Significance”.ResultsLung tissue resident Treg cells rapidly expand during acute primary influenza infectionThe kinetics of tissue resident Foxp3-expressing Treg (TR-Treg) cells in the lungs during acute primary influenza infection is not as well characterized as the tissue resident memory CD8+ T cells. To determine whether and to what scale TR-Treg cells expand in the lungs of mouse model of primary acute influenza infections, we used Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mice, infected them intranasally (IN) with the mouse-adapted WSN (H1N1) strain of influenza A and analyzed 7 days post infection (dpi) with in vivo fluorescent anti-CD45.2 antibody staining via intravenous (IV) injection to label the circulating T cells in the lungs (Figure 1A). With IV anti-CD45.2 antibody treatment, immune cells circulating in the pulmonary vascular system will be accessed by the fluorescent antibody and stained positive, while lung tissue resident cells are inaccessible and will be labeled negative (Figure 1B). With this protocol, we found that the number of circulating (Circ) Foxp3+ Treg cells and CD8+ cells remained stable during acute infection compared naïve mice, while their lung tissue resident (TR) counterparts expanded ~12.63 and ~103.85 folds, respectively (Figure 1C). Notably, the TR-Treg cells are significantly expanded following acute primary influenza infection, although not as prominent as the TR-CD8+ T cells (Figure 1C). Using nuclear staining for Ki67, we also observed a significantly higher rate of T cell expansion in the tissue residents than their circulating counterparts, including the CD4+ Foxp3+ Treg, CD4+ conventional T, and the CD8+ T cell subsets (Figure 1D).FIGURE 1 Figure 1 Lung tissue resident Treg cells rapidly expand upon primary acute influenza infection. (A) Schematics of primary infection and in vivo labeling of circulating immune cells: Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mice were infected with 103 PFU of the mouse-adapted WSN (H1N1) virus intranasally (IN), and 7 days post infection, mice were injected with an APC-anti-CD45.2 antibody intravenously (IV), followed by euthanasia 5 minutes after the antibody injection. (B) Illustration of lung immune cell staining for cells residing in the vasculature versus tissue. Circulating (Circ) cells will be exposed to the intravenous antibody staining, while the tissue resident (TR) cells were blocked from staining, resulting in labeling of the circulating cells only. After gating on live singlet T cells, a representative plot of the Circ and TR T cells extracted from the lungs of the infected mice is shown. (C) Representative flow plots and summary of numbers and fold expansion of Circ versus TR CD4+ Foxp3+, CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells isolated from the lungs of Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mice prior to (D0) and 7 days post (D7) acute flu infection. The average number of cells on D0 was set as “1” for fold change calculation. (D) Representative flow plots and summary of Ki-67 expression by Circ and TR cell subsets as in (C). N ≥ 3. Data represent results of more than three experiments. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, by two-way ANOVA or unpaired t test. Data presented as Mean ± S.E.M.To further compare the levels of Treg cell and tissue resident T cell featured markers in the lung TR-Treg cell subset to other Treg cell subsets, including the lung circulating Treg cells and Treg cells found in the lung draining lymph nodes (dLN) and and spleen of the same animals, we gated on the Foxp3RFP+ CD4+ T cells in these compartments and analyzed their levels of expression of CD25, Foxp3, CD103, CD69 and CD11a. The lung TR-Treg cells expressed higher levels of the high affinity IL-2 receptor, CD25, compared to their circulating counterpart in the lung of mice with acute influenza infection, but this level of CD25 expression in lung TR-Treg is comparable to that observed in splenic Treg cells (Figure 2A, B). Interestingly, during acute influenza infection, lung Treg cells, including the TR-Treg and Circ-Treg cell subsets displayed decreased Foxp3 expression while Foxp3 expression remained stable in Treg cells extracted from the lymph nodes and spleens (Figure 2A, B), which is however consistent with previous findings that Foxp3 expression is downregulated during inflammation (34, 35). In contrast, the levels of expression of CD103, CD69 and CD11a were higher in the lung TR-Treg cells, as compared to their circulating counterpart in the lung or Treg cell subsets in the dLN and spleens during acute infection (Figure 2C, D). While compared to the lung tissue resident conventional T cells counterparts (Figure 2E, middle row), lung tissue resident Treg cells (Figure 2E, top row)exhibited higher frequency and level of CD25 expression, but not notably higher levels of conventional tissue resident markers CD69/CD11a (Figure 2F). Together, these data indicate that TR-Treg cells expand and express surface markers classically associated with tissue residency during primary acute flu infection.FIGURE 2 Figure 2 Characterization of signature marker expression by lung tissue resident Treg cells during acute primary influenza infection. Mice were infected and treated as in Figure 1, and cells from lung, draining lymph node (dLN) and spleen were isolated from mice prior to (D0) and 7 days post (D7) acute flu infection. Live singlet T cells were gated for analyses. (A, B) Representative flow histograms and summary of levels of expression of Treg signature markers, CD25 and Foxp3 (MFI: mean fluorescence intensity), by lung TR-Treg, lung Circ-Treg, dLN-Treg, and spleen-Treg cells. (C, D) Representative flow histograms and summary of levels of expression of tissue resident T cell signature markers, CD103, CD69 and CD11a (MFI), by the Treg subsets as described in (A, B). (E, F) Representative flow plots of CD25, CD69 and CD11a expression by lung Circ and TR CD4+ Foxp3+, CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells. N ≥ 3. Data represent results of more than three experiments. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001, by two-way ANOVA. Data presented as Mean ± S.E.M.Lung tissue resident Treg cells express high levels of IL-10, ICOS, and PD-1 during acute influenza infectionDuring acute viral inflammation, Treg cells acquire an effector phenotype characterized by upregulation of the immunomodulatory effector cytokine IL-10, along with costimulatory and co-inhibitory molecules (36–39). Using the Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mouse model, we tracked the levels of IL-10 production in Treg cells during acute influenza infection and found that the lung tissue resident Foxp3+ Treg cells, along with the conventional CD4+ and CD8+ tissue resident T cells are the major producers of IL-10 during acute flu in mice (Figure 3A). The lung tissue residents produced significantly higher levels of IL-10 than their circulating counterparts (Figure 3A). Previous work has found most tissue resident Treg cells display an effector-like phenotype even at steady state, as reflected by the high levels of expression of Treg cell functional feature markers such as the immune checkpoint proteins (4, 36, 40). Co-stimulatory molecules such as ICOS and the TNFRSF family member GITR are highly expressed by tissue resident Treg cells of mice and humans, and play an important role in their maintenance in NLT (38, 39, 41–50). In agreement with these, compared to circulating Treg cells, we found that lung tissue resident Treg cells express higher levels of PD-1, TIGIT and GITR, even at the naïve state, while ICOS and LAG-3 are significantly upregulated following acute influenza infection (Supplemental Figure 1). Notably, lung tissue resident Treg cells maintain a high level of PD-1 expression regardless of flu infection, but significantly upregulate the level of expression of ICOS significantly upon acute flu (Figure 3B). In contrast, the lung tissue resident conventional T cells upregulated the expression of both PD-1 and ICOS to a moderate level upon acute flu, with the exception of tissue resident conventional CD4+ T cells which expressed comparable levels of PD-1 to TR-Treg cells (Figure 3B). These results show that TR-Treg cells display an effector-like phenotype during steady state, and acquire more effector associated features during acute primary influenza infection.FIGURE 3 Figure 3 Lung tissue resident Treg cells display an effector phenotype with high levels of IL-10, PD-1 and ICOS expression. T cells from Figure 2 were further analyzed. (A) Representative flow plots and summary of IL-10GFP expression and numbers of IL-10+ lung Circ and TR CD4+ Foxp3+, CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells. (B) Representative flow histograms and summary of PD-1 and ICOS expression (MFI) by lung tissue resident (TR), lung circulating (Circ), dLN, and spleen CD4+ Foxp3+, CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells. N ≥ 3. Data represent results of more than three experiments. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001, by two-way ANOVA. Data presented as Mean ± S.E.M.Lung tissue resident Treg cells accumulate following resolution of acute influenzaFollowing resolution of inflammation, it has been suggested that tissue resident Treg cells population contracts and downregulates effector molecules (4, 51). A stepwise model has been proposed where local inflammatory and tissue environment signals promote the differentiation of tissue resident Treg cells (40, 52, 53). However, it was unclear whether lung tissue resident Treg cells following acute flu and resolution of the flu-associated lung inflammation would follow a similar kinetics of contraction. When we tracked the Foxp3RFP+ Treg cells in the flu-infected and recovered animals, we found that 42 days post primary infection, there was a significantly increased number of both tissue resident and circulating Treg cells in the lung of the infected animals (Figure 4A), compared to naïve mice. Notably, the lung tissue resident Treg subset maintained at high levels of fold expansion (~ 15-fold) compared to that observed in naïve animals (Figure 4A). This level is similar to the fold expansion 7 days post primary influenza infection (Figure 1C), suggesting that, following acute flu, lung tissue resident Treg cells do not undergo substantial contraction following the resolution of flu infection and the associated inflammation. Moreover, these lung tissue resident Treg cells maintained high levels of expression of both PD-1 and ICOS (Figure 4B). In contrast, the expression of CD25 was lower on lung tissue resident Treg cells compared to their circulating and splenic counterparts (Figure 4C) suggesting that IL-2 signaling may not be the predominant signal for lung tissue resident Treg cell maintenance following influenza infection (39).FIGURE 4 Figure 4 Lung tissue resident Treg cells do not contract and maintain high levels of PD-1 and ICOS expression, following resolution of acute influenza. Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mice were infected with 200 PFU of the mouse-adapted WSN virus (IN), and 42 days post infection, mice were injected with an APC-anti-CD45.2 antibody intravenously (IV), followed by euthanasia 5 minutes after the antibody injection. (A) Representative flow plots and summary of numbers and fold expansion of lung Circ versus TR Treg cells prior to (D0) infection and after resolution of acute influenza (D42). The average number of cells on D0 was set as “1” for fold change calculation. (B) Representative flow histograms of PD-1 and ICOS expression by lung tissue resident (TR), lung circulating (Circ), dLN, and spleen CD4+ Foxp3+, CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells. (C) Representative flow histograms and summary of CD25 expression (MFI) by lung TR-Treg, lung Circ-Treg, dLN-Treg, and spleen-Treg cells. N ≥ 3. Data represent results of three experiments. **p ≤ 0.01, ****p ≤ 0.0001, by unpaired student t test. Data presented as Mean ± S.E.M.Given the prominent levels of PD-1 and ICOS expression in the lung tissue resident Treg cells, following acute influenza infection, we sought to determine whether blockade of PD-1 or ICOS signaling would have significant effects on lung tissue resident Treg cell development and function during this stage. PD-L1 blockade was performed via administration of αPD-L1 antibodies during primary infection (Supplemental Figure 2A). There was no significant difference in the number of lung TR versus Circ Treg cells, despite a slight increase by αPD-L1, between the IgG isotype control and αPD-L1 treated groups (Supplemental Figure 2B). No difference in frequency or number of IL-10 producing TR-Treg cells were observed either, between the isotype and αPD-L1 treated groups (Supplemental Figure 2C). Similarly, to probe the role of ICOS signaling, αICOSL was administered during primary influenza infection (Supplemental Figure 2D). There was a trend towards a reduced number of both lung TR and Circ Treg cells (Supplemental Figure 2E), which is not statistically significant either. Again, no significant difference in the frequency or number of IL-10 producing TR-Treg cells was observed (Supplemental Figure 2F). These data suggest that, during primary acute influenza infection, despite the high levels of PD-1 and ICOS expression, PD-1 and ICOS signaling pathways do not have prominent function in regulating lung tissue resident Treg cells development. However, at this point, it is unclear whether they play more significant roles during the later stage following resolution of the acute infection and upon secondary infections.Lung tissue resident Treg cells rapidly expand and contract upon secondary influenza infectionUnlike tissue resident memory T cell response, the tissue resident Treg cell response has not been characterized during secondary infection (14–16, 54), therefore, we proceeded to characterize the kinetics of lung tissue resident Treg cell development during secondary influenza infection. To circumvent humoral immune response that would diminish homologous secondary infections, we utilized a heterologous infection model in which mouse-adapted WSN (H1N1) was used in primary infection, followed by X31 (H3N2) secondary infection 6 weeks post the primary infection (Figure 5A). We found that lung tissue Treg cells rapidly expanded upon secondary infection (5 days post infection), at a significantly higher rate as compared to their circulating counterpart in the lungs of the same animals, and this expansion was followed by a population contraction (19 days post infection) (Figure 5B, C). This kinetics is similar to the lung tissue resident conventional CD4+ T cell subset in the lungs of the same infected animals (similar fold expansion at ~6.36 and ~6.42 fold respectively). In contrast, their circulating counterparts contracted modestly following secondary influenza infection (Figure 5C). Interestingly, the numbers of lung tissue resident CD4+ T cells, including the Treg and conventional cell subsets, peaked earlier upon secondary infection than lung tissue resident CD8+ T cells and returned towards baseline numbers by day 19, while lung tissue resident CD8+ T cells remained elevated (Figure 5C). Histological examination revealed that, by the time of the secondary infection, lung inflammation had been completely resolved; and following the secondary infection, lung inflammation peaked at day 5 post infection, and had largely resolved by day 19 mirroring the kinetics of the TR-Treg cell expansion (Figure 5D). These data suggested that lung tissue resident Treg cells are one of the first T cell responders to secondary influenza infection and may play a role in dictating immune regulation in response to secondary flu and the associated immunopathology.FIGURE 5 Figure 5 Lung tissue resident Treg cells rapidly expand and contract following secondary influenza infection. (A) Schematics of heterologous secondary influenza infection and analyses: Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mice were infected with 200 PFU of the mouse-adapted WSN virus (H1N1, IN), and 42 days later, were further infected with 2 × 104 PFU of the mouse-adapted X31 virus (H3N2, IN). Mice were analyzed prior to (D0), and 5 and 19 days post the secondary infection. (B) Representative flow plots of in vivo staining of CD45.2 in CD4+ Foxp3+, CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells isolated from the lungs of Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mice prior to (D0) and 5 (D5) and 19 (D19) days post secondary flu infection. (C) Numbers and fold expansion of Circ versus TR CD4+ Foxp3+ (Treg), CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells isolated from the lungs of Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mice at the indicated time points following secondary flu infection. The average number of cells on D0 was set as “1” for fold change calculation. N ≥ 3. Data represent results of three experiments. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ****p ≤ 0.0001, by two-way ANOVA with post-hoc tests for time point-pairwise comparisons. Data presented as Mean ± S.E.M. (D) Representative histological images (H&E staining) and accumulative histopathologic scores of the lungs collected from mice at the indicated time points. Scale bar = 250 μm. N ≥ 3. Data represent results of two experiments. **p ≤ 0.01, by one-way ANOVA, compared to baseline levels (Day -42). Data were presented as Mean ± S.E.M.One of the major questions is whether the lung tissue resident Treg cells function in an antigen-specific manner. Other groups have described influenza antigen-specific Treg cells during secondary infection (55), however the lung tissue residency status was not explored. We were able to detect influenza A NP311-325 epitope-specific Treg and conventional CD4+ T cells in the lung tissue, vascular, and SLO (Supplemental Figure 3). Interestingly, the majority of these NP-specific CD4+ T cells are lung tissue residents peaking during the effector immune stage following secondary flu infection, in both the Treg and conventional CD4+ T cell subsets. At five days post secondary infection, Treg and CD4+ conventional T (Tcon) cells that were lung tissue residents exhibited the highest percentages of NP311-325 tetramer bound fractions (Supplemental Figure 3B, left column), although, by number, there were more NP311-325 -specific CD4+ Tcon cells observed in the spleen (Supplemental Figure 3B, middle column); at this time, NP311-325 -specific lung tissue resident Treg cells had expanded ~6 fold (Supplemental Figure 3B, right column) similar to the lung tissue resident Treg population as a whole (Figure 5C). However, this was less than the NP311-325 -specific lung tissue resident conventional CD4+ T cells which expanded ~19 fold at this time point (Supplemental Figure 3B, right column). By 19 days post secondary flu infection, NP311-325 -specific lung tissue resident Treg cells had contracted to the level comparable to that observed prior to the re-infection, while NP311-325 -specific lung tissue resident conventional CD4+ T cells persisted. Our results indicate that influenza specific lung tissue resident Treg and conventional CD4+ T cell populations display distinct kinetics in response to secondary influenza infection. The fact that influenza antigen-specific lung tissue resident Treg cells expanded and contracted following the footprints of active flu infection, suggest that their expansion may be regulated in an antigen-specific manner, and in return, they may play a role in antigen-specific immunomodulation of the lung immune responses to flu re-infection.Lung tissue resident Treg cells express high levels of IL-10, PD-1 and ICOS during secondary influenza infectionSimilar to the case in primary infection, lung tissue resident T cells, including Treg, CD4+Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cell subsets all expanded following secondary influenza infection. These lung tissue resident T cells also significantly upregulated IL-10 expression, compared to their circulating counterparts isolated from the lungs of the same animals (Figure 6A). Among the lung tissue resident T cell subsets, the tissue resident Treg cells displayed the highest frequency of IL-10-producing cells (Figure 6A). Five days post secondary infection, CD25 were slightly upregulated while Foxp3 was downregulated in the lung tissue resident Treg cells, which are both adjusted back to a level comparable to that observed right before the secondary infection, by 19 days post infection (Figure 6B, C). Expression of tissue resident T cell markers CD103, CD69 and CD11a remained stable at high levels in the lung tissue resident Treg cells during secondary infection, as compared to the lung circulating Treg, dLN-Treg and spleen-Treg cell subsets (Figure 6B, C, column 3-5). More strikingly, PD-1 and ICOS remained at significantly high levels in lung tissue resident Treg cells, as compared to other T cell subsets (Figure 6B, C, last two columns); PD-1 was rapidly downregulated while ICOS was up-regulated by 5 days post secondary infection, and adjusted back to the levels observed before re-infection by 19 days post secondary infection (Figure 6B, C) which are counter-correlated to the kinetics of lung tissue resident Treg cell expansion and IL-10 expression following secondary flu. These data suggest that lung tissue resident Treg cells may play a critical role in modulating the immune responses to flu re-infections via IL-10 production, and their development and function may be counter-regulated by PD-1 and ICOS signaling during flu re-infections.FIGURE 6 Figure 6 Characterization of lung tissue resident Treg cells following secondary influenza infection. T cells from Figure 5 were further analyzed. (A) Representative flow plots and summary of IL-10GFP expression and numbers of IL-10+ lung Circ and TR CD4+ Foxp3+, CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells, on D0, D5 and D19 during influenza secondary infection. (B, C) Representative flow histograms and summary of MFI of CD25, Foxp3, CD103, CD69, CD11a, PD-1 and ICOS expression by lung TR-Treg, lung Circ-Treg, dLN-Treg, and spleen-Treg cells. N ≥ 3. Data represent results of three experiments. **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001, by two-way ANOVA with post-hoc tests for time point-pairwise comparisons. Data presented as Mean ± S.E.M.PD-1 and ICOS signaling counter-regulates lung tissue resident Treg cell survival and IL-10 productionTo further define the role of PD-1 and ICOS signaling pathways in lung tissue resident T cell expansion and IL-10 production during flu re-infection, we tested the effects of PD-1 and ICOS signaling blockades during secondary influenza infection (Figure 7A, D respectively). Administration of neither αPD-L1 nor αICOSL significantly affected weight loss during secondary infection (Supplementary Figure 4A, D). When αPD-L1 was administered, the levels of PD-1 expression by Treg cells (Figure 7B; Supplemental Figure 4B) and the total numbers (Figure 7C) of lung tissue resident Treg, CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells significantly increased, as compared to when the isotype antibody was administered (Figure 7B, C). In contrast, blocking ICOS signaling by αICOSL antibody did not affect PD-1 expression as drastically (Figure 7E; Supplemental Figure 4E), but resulted in a significantly impaired expansion of the lung tissue resident Treg cell population (Figure 7F). Interestingly, neither αPD-L1 nor αICOSL antibody treatment affected ICOS expression on the tissue resident Treg cells (Supplemental Figure 4C, F). We did not find a significant difference in the expression of proliferation marker Ki-67 among the viable tissue resident Treg population between isotype and αPD-L1 nor αICOSL antibody treated mice (Figure 8A, B), at the end point that we analyzed. It is possible that PD-1 and ICOS signaling pathways are not involved in regulating TR-Treg cell proliferation; alternatively, it is also possible that TR-Treg cell proliferation occurred earlier prior to the time point of analyses, and PD-1 and ICOS played a role in regulating lung TR-Treg cell proliferation during the earlier stage following secondary flu infection. However, when we expanded the gating to include all tissue resident Foxp3+ T cells and further examine the rate of viable cells (see gating strategy in Figure 8C), we found that PD-1 and ICOS counter-regulate the viability of the lung TR-Treg cells during secondary flu infection (Figure 8C).FIGURE 7 Figure 7 PD-1 and ICOS signaling counter-regulates lung tissue resident Treg cell expansion and IL-10 production during secondary influenza. (A–C) PD-1 signaling blockade enhances lung tissue resident Treg cells expansion during secondary influenza infection. (A) Schematics of PD-1 signaling blockade during secondary influenza infection: Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mice were infected with 200 PFU of WSN virus (H1N1, IN), and 42 days later, were further infected with 2 × 104 PFU of X31 virus (H3N2, IN). The date of secondary infection was set as “D0”. Anti-PD-L1 antibody (or isotype control) was injected intravenously on D-1, D1 and D3, while mice were analyzed on D5. (B) Summary of PD-1 expression (MFI) by lung TR-Treg, Circ-Treg, dLN-Treg, and spleen-Treg cells, isolated from mice that received either the isotype or anti-PD-L1 antibody treatment. (C) Representative flow plots of in vivo staining of CD45.2 and summary of numbers of TR versus Circ CD4+ Foxp3+ (Treg), CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells isolated from the lungs of the isotype or anti-PD-L1 antibody-treated mice. (D–F) ICOS signaling blockade attenuates lung tissue resident Treg cells expansion during secondary influenza infection. (D) Schematics of ICOS signaling blockade during secondary influenza infection: Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mice were infected as indicated in (A). The date of secondary infection was set as “D0”. Anti-ICOSL antibody (or isotype control) was injected intravenously on D-1, D1 and D3, while mice were analyzed on D5. (E) Summary of PD-1 expression (MFI) by lung TR-Treg, Circ-Treg, dLN-Treg, and spleen-Treg cells, isolated from mice that received either the isotype or anti-ICOSL antibody treatment. (F) Representative flow plots of in vivo staining of CD45.2, and summary of numbers of TR versus Circ CD4+ Foxp3+ (Treg), CD4+ Foxp3-, and CD8+ T cells isolated from the lungs of the isotype or anti-ICOSL antibody-treated mice. N ≥ 3. Data were combined from three different experiments. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ****p ≤ 0.0001, by unpaired student t test. Data presented as Mean ± S.E.M.FIGURE 8 Figure 8 PD-1 and ICOS signaling pathways counter-regulate tissue resident Treg cell viability and IL-10 production during secondary influenza infection. Mice were treated with isotype, anti-PD-L1 or anti-ICOSL during secondary influenza infection, as shown in Figure 7. (A, B) Representative flow plots and summary of frequency of Ki-67+ lung tissue resident Treg cells in mice treated with Isotype, (A) anti-PD-L1 or (B) anti-ICOSL antibody. N ≥ 3. Data represent the results of at least two different experiments and are presented as Mean ± S.E.M. (C) Gating strategy to determine lung tissue resident Treg cell viability, representative flow plots and summary of frequency of viable lung tissue resident Treg cells in mice treated with the indicated antibodies. (D) Representative flow plots of IL-10GFP expression by lung TR-Treg cells, in mice receiving isotype, anti-PD-L1 or anti-ICOSL treatment during secondary influenza infection. Summary of the percentage of IL-10+ fraction and numbers of IL-10+ lung TR-Treg cells under the indicated treatment conditions were shown as well. N ≥ 3. Data were combined from three different experiments. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ****p ≤ 0.0001, by unpaired student t test. Data presented as Mean ± S.E.M.Furthermore, we analyzed the levels of IL-10 production in the lung tissue resident Treg cells during effector stage of the secondary influenza infection, and found that blocking PD-1 signaling resulted in a modest but statistically significant increase in the frequency of IL-10 producing lung tissue resident Treg cells, while blocking ICOS signaling did not affect this parameter, as compared to the isotype antibody-treated group (Figure 8D). However importantly, given the significantly impacts of PD-1 and ICOS signaling blockade in the expansion of the lung tissue resident Treg cells, the absolute numbers of IL-10-producing lung tissue resident Treg cells were significantly increased in the αPD-L1-treated group while decreased in the αICOSL group, compared to the number in the isotype-treated group (Figure 8D). Note that PD-1 blockade has a predominant function in lung tissue resident T cells, including Treg and conventional T cell subsets, while ICOS blockade has more selective impacts specifically on the lung tissue resident Treg cells (Figure 7C, F). However, with αPD-L1 or αICOSL treatment, we did not not observe a significant difference in the frequency or number of IL-10-producing tissue resident conventional CD4+ or CD8+ T cells (Supplemental Figure 5), suggesting that the counter regulatory effects of PD-1 and ICOS signaling on IL-10 production is tissue resident Treg cell specific. Taken together, our data suggest that PD-1 and ICOS signaling pathways counter-regulate lung tissue resident Treg cell survival and function, in particular, the number of IL-10-producing lung tissue resident Treg cell population during secondary flu infection.DiscussionsThere is growing interest in the role of tissue resident Treg cells in tissue homeostasis and inflammation (56), however, our knowledge of the kinetics and characteristics of lung tissue resident Treg cells development and function during repetitive flu infections was rather limited. In this work, we characterized the lung tissue resident Treg cells response during acute primary and repeated influenza infections. We found that lung tissue resident Treg cells can rapidly expand during the effector phases of immune responses following both primary and secondary flu infections, while the lung circulating Treg cells do not expand. During primary flu infection, the lung tissue resident Treg display significantly higher levels of expression of multiple effector molecules including IL-10, PD-1 and ICOS. Following resolution of the primary flu infection, there was an accumulation of lung tissue resident Treg cells expressing high levels of PD-1 and ICOS, consistent with previous reports that ICOShigh Treg cells could accumulate at barrier tissues in both humans and mice (47, 48, 50). PD-1 is constantly expressed at high levels in lung tissue resident Treg cells, as compared to other lung tissue resident T cell types or Treg cells in the other compartments. During the effector phases of immune responses to primary and secondary flu infections, PD-1 expression in lung tissue resident Treg cells is slightly down-regulated, although remains at high levels of expression, which shows an inverse correlation to lung tissue resident Treg cell expansion and IL-10 production. Indeed, blocking PD-1 resulted in a trend of increased expansion of lung tissue resident Treg cells during primary flu and a significant increase in expansion and IL-10 production in lung tissue resident Treg cells during secondary flu infection. On the other hand, ICOS is upregulated during lung tissue resident Treg expansion in the effector phases of immune responses to primary and secondary flu infection and blocking ICOS signaling resulted in an attenuated expansion of lung tissue resident Treg cells, in particular, the IL-10-producing subset.Our data suggest that PD-1 signaling plays a predominant role in negatively regulating lung tissue resident Treg cell survival and IL-10 production during flu, especially during re-infections; while ICOS signaling promotes tissue resident Treg cell survival and IL-10 production during this process. At homeostasis, Treg cell-specific deletion of PD-1 results in increased accumulation of effector-like Treg (eTreg) cells (57), while Treg cell-specific deletion of ICOS results in minor reduction of Treg cell frequency but not total number (58).PD-1 signaling has also been shown to limit the size of the Treg cell population during both chronic and acute infections (57). PD-L1 blockade during chronic LCMV infection expands the liver and lung TR-Treg cell population, potentially through increased proliferation (59). During acute Toxoplasma gondii infection, the PD-1hi eTreg cell population rapidly contracts and could be rescued via PD-L1 blockade (57). PD-L1 blockade coincides with increased proliferation and a reduction in expression of the proapoptotic molecule BIM in Treg cells (57). We observed a similar reduction in PD-1hi TR-Treg cells during secondary infection (Figure 6B, C) as well as improved survival but did not find evidence of increased proliferation (Figure 8A, C). PD-1 signaling has been implicated in balancing CD8+ Trm mediated protection and immunopathology during secondary influenza infection (20). PD-L1 blockade expands tissue resident Treg cells during chronic viral infection (59). Our results further extended our understanding of the role of PD-1 signaling in lung tissue resident Treg cell expansion and function during flu infections.The role of ICOS signaling in Treg cells differs between subsets and tissue environment. ICOS signaling maintains eTreg cells, but not central Treg cell homeostasis, in both lymphoid and nonlymphoid tissue (39). In steady state conditions, ICOS is important for the accumulation of Treg cells in adipose tissue, but not in the lungs or skin (45). ICOS signaling has been shown to be important for induction of tolerance at mucosal sites (60, 61) as well as IL-10 production by Treg cells in certain models of inflammation (61–64). In our work, high levels of ICOS expression is well aligned with lung tissue resident Treg cell expansion and IL-10 production during flu, suggesting that ICOShigh is a feasible marker for characterizing active lung tissue resident Treg cells in flu models. Future studies may be able to further probe the function of these influenza-induced ICOShigh lung tissue resident Treg cells.Knowledge of the role of ICOS and PD-1 signaling in lung tissue resident Treg cells is limited and has not been explored in the context of influenza infection. Our data found that expansion and IL-10 production by tissue resident Treg cells during influenza infection was counter-regulated by ICOS and PD-1 signaling. Opposing roles of ICOS and PD-1 signaling have been demonstrated for effector Treg cells, T follicular regulatory (Tfr) and T follicular helper (Tfh) cells in lymphoid tissues. ICOS and PD-1 signaling have been shown to counter-regulate effector Treg abundance at homeostasis in the spleen. ICOSL blockade reduces the numbers of effector Treg cells, while both PD-L1 blockade and Treg specific deletion of PD-1 results in effector Treg cell accumulation (39, 57). Following immunization, ICOS is required for the differentiation of Tfr cells while PD-1 inhibits Tfr differentiation in lymph nodes (LNs) and circulating in blood (65). In LN, ICOS and PD-1 signaling, via their antagonistic effects on PI3K signaling, counter-regulate Tfh recruitment to the follicle (66, 67). While it is tempting to speculate that PD-1 and ICOS regulate lung tissue resident Treg cell expansion and function via their opposing roles in PI3K/Akt signaling, there could be alternative explanations. PD-1 negatively regulates TCR/CD28 signaling and therefore multiple downstream pathways including PI3K/Akt, PKCθ, and ERK (68–71). In addition to PI3K/Akt, ICOS signals through TBK1 and promotes TCR induced calcium flux (72–74). It is also controversial whether PD-1 directly regulates ICOS signaling (69, 75, 76). Future studies utilizing Treg-specific deletions of PD-1 and ICOS, especially those allowing temporal control of the gene deletions, would aide in defining the roles of PD-1 and ICOS during different stages of flu and signaling pathways required for lung tissue resident Treg cell development and function.There are several lines of evidence pointing towards a critical role of Treg cells during influenza infection. Depletion of Treg cells during primary influenza infection results in an increased effector CD4+ response (25), while depletion following clearance of the virus delays recovery and resolution of inflammation (77). The depletion of Treg cells prior to secondary influenza infection has been shown to increase inflammation, reduce lung function, and increase flu-specific CD8+ T cell response (55). Treg cell-derived amphiregulin has also been shown to be critical for preventing lung tissue damage during acute influenza infection, independent of suppressive function (26). The effects of Treg cell depletions are similar to those observed when IL-10 signaling was blocked in acute primary flu (78) and during resolution of primary flu infection (79). The role of effector T cell-derived IL-10 has been established in pulmonary immunomodulation during primary flu (78), while the role of Treg cell-derived IL-10 in host defense and immunopathology during primary and secondary influenza infections remains to be elucidated. Similar to our findings, anti-PD-L1 treatment increased the number of IL-10-producing Treg cells during Toxoplasma gondii infection, which coincided with the reduction of pathogen-specific effector T cell responses and can be reverted by blocking IL-10 receptor signaling (57), suggesting that a Treg cell-specific PD-1/IL-10 signaling axis is involved in host defense against infections. Mice with Treg cell-specific IL-10 deficiency revealed that IL-10 production by Treg cells was not required for the control of systemic autoimmunity, but it was essential in limiting immunopathology skewed by the environment at the mucosal barriers such as the colon and lungs (80). This model may be useful to help further define the role of Treg cell-derived IL-10 during influenza infections. However, to avoid artifacts due to spontaneous mucosal inflammation and allow time-specific deletion of Treg cell-derived IL-10, an inducible Treg cell-specific IL-10 deletion model would be highly desirable.Taken together, using a unique Foxp3RFP/IL-10GFP dual reporter mouse model and the gold-standard intravascular in vivo staining protocol for identifying lung tissue resident T cells, our work reported here provides a comprehensive characterization of lung tissue resident Treg cells during primary flu and flu re-infections. Our findings that PD-1 and ICOS signaling pathways counter-regulate lung tissue resident Treg cell expansion and IL-10 production during flu infections shed light on lung tissue resident Treg cell biology. The co-inhibitory and co-stimulatory signatures that are highly expressed by the lung tissue resident Treg cells, including PD-1, TIGIT, LAG-3, ICOS and GITR may be used as biomarkers to identify and evaluate the activities of lung tissue resident Treg cells during flu infections, while PD-1 and ICOS signaling may be used as molecular targets to modulate the numbers and functions of lung tissue resident Treg cells, and therefore, lung immune responses during acute pulmonary viral infections.Data availability statementThe raw data supporting the conclusions of this article are available upon request.Ethics statementThe animal study was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Louisiana State University.Author contributionsMCM and WH designed experiments, analyzed and interpreted data, and wrote the manuscript; MCM, TZ, NM, RI, MC, and WH performed experiments; WH conceived research, secured funding and supervised the research. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.FundingThis work was supported in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health (P20 GM130555-6610, R56 AI146226 and R01 AI151139 to WH). MCM is a fellow recipient of the Careers in Immunology Fellowship from the American Association of Immunologists. WH is a fellow recipient of the Research Publication Grant in Engineering, Medicine, and Science from the American Association of University Women.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the NIH Tetramer Core Facility (contract number 75N93020D00005) for providing influenza NP peptide loaded tetramers. We also thank Ms. Qingxia Wang for technical assistance, Drs. David Topham and Gary Whittaker for mouse adapted WSN and X31 viral stocks, and Drs. Jie Sun and Gus Kousoulas for advice and helpful discussions.Conflict of interestWH received research support from MegaRobo Technologies Co., Ltd., which was not used in this study.The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Publisher’s noteAll claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.Supplementary materialThe Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2022.984476/full#supplementary-materialReferences 1. Schmidt A, Oberle N, Krammer PH. Molecular mechanisms of treg-mediated T cell suppression. Front Immunol (2012) 3:51. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00051PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 2. Sakaguchi S, Sakaguchi N, Asano M, Itoh M, Toda M. Immunologic self-tolerance maintained by activated T cells expressing IL-2 receptor alpha-chains (CD25). Breakdown of a single mechanism of self-tolerance causes various autoimmune diseases. J Immunol (1995) 155:1151–64. Available at: https://www.jimmunol.org/content/155/3/1151.longPubMed Abstract | Google Scholar 3. Baecher-Allan C, Hafler DA. Human regulatory T cells and their role in autoimmune disease. Immunol Rev (2006) 212:203–16. doi: 10.1111/j.0105-2896.2006.00417.xPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 4. Liston A, Gray DH. Homeostatic control of regulatory T cell diversity. Nat Rev Immunol (2014) 14:154–65. doi: 10.1038ri3605PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 5. Barros L, Ferreira C, Veldhoen M. The fellowship of regulatory and tissue-resident memory cells. Mucosal Immunol (2022) 15:64–73. doi: 10.1038/s41385-021-00456-wPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 6. Park CO, Kupper TS. The emerging role of resident memory T cells in protective immunity and inflammatory disease. Nat Med (2015) 21:688–97. doi: 10.1038m.3883PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 7. Schenkel JM, Masopust D. Tissue-resident memory T cells. Immunity (2014) 41:886–97. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.12.007PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 8. Durand A, Audemard-Verger A, Guichard V, Mattiuz R, Delpoux A, Hamon P, et al. Profiling the lymphoid-resident T cell pool reveals modulation by age and microbiota. Nat Commun (2018) 9:68. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-02458-4PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 9. Li Y, Lu Y, Lin SH, Li N, Han Y, Huang Q, et al. Insulin signaling establishes a developmental trajectory of adipose regulatory T cells. Nat Immunol (2021) 22:1175–85. doi: 10.1038/s41590-021-01010-3PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 10. Feuerer M, Herrero L, Cipolletta D, Naaz A, Wong J, Nayer A, et al. Lean, but not obese, fat is enriched for a unique population of regulatory T cells that affect metabolic parameters. Nat Med (2009) 15:930–9. doi: 10.1038m.2002PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 11. Cipolletta D, Feuerer M, Li A, Kamei N, Lee J, Shoelson SE, et al. PPAR-gamma is a major driver of the accumulation and phenotype of adipose tissue treg cells. Nature (2012) 486:549–53. doi: 10.1038ature11132PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 12. Burzyn D, Kuswanto W, Kolodin D, Shadrach JL, Cerletti M, Jang Y, et al. A special population of regulatory T cells potentiates muscle repair. Cell (2013) 155:1282–95. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.054PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 13. Strutt TM, Dhume K, Finn CM, Hwang JH, Castonguay C, Swain SL, et al. IL-15 supports the generation of protective lung-resident memory CD4 T cells. Mucosal Immunol (2018) 11:668–80. doi: 10.1038/mi.2017.101PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 14. Turner DL, Bickham KL, Thome JJ, Kim CY, D'Ovidio F, Wherry EJ, et al. Lung niches for the generation and maintenance of tissue-resident memory T cells. Mucosal Immunol (2014) 7:501–10. doi: 10.1038/mi.2013.67PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 15. Teijaro JR, Turner D, Pham Q, Wherry EJ, Lefrancois L, Farber DL. Cutting edge: Tissue-retentive lung memory CD4 T cells mediate optimal protection to respiratory virus infection. J Immunol (2011) 187:5510–4. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102243PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 16. Wu T, Hu Y, Lee YT, Bouchard KR, Benechet A, Khanna K, et al. Lung-resident memory CD8 T cells (TRM) are indispensable for optimal cross-protection against pulmonary virus infection. J Leukoc Biol (2014) 95:215–24. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0313180PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 17. Smith NM, Wasserman GA, Coleman FT, Hilliard KL, Yamamoto K, Lipsitz E, et al. Regionally compartmentalized resident memory T cells mediate naturally acquired protection against pneumococcal pneumonia. Mucosal Immunol (2018) 11:220–35. doi: 10.1038/mi.2017.43PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 18. Ichikawa T, Hirahara K, Kokubo K, Kiuchi M, Aoki A, Morimoto Y, et al. CD103(hi) treg cells constrain lung fibrosis induced by CD103(lo) tissue-resident pathogenic CD4 T cells. Nat Immunol (2019) 20:1469–80. doi: 10.1038/s41590-019-0494-yPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 19. Goplen NP, Wu Y, Son YM, Li C, Wang Z, Cheon IS, et al. Tissue-resident CD8(+) T cells drive age-associated chronic lung sequelae after viral pneumonia. Sci Immunol (2020) 5(53):eabc4557. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.abc4557PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 20. Wang Z, Wang S, Goplen NP, Li C, Cheon IS, Dai Q, et al. PD-1(hi) CD8(+) resident memory T cells balance immunity and fibrotic sequelae. Sci Immunol (2019) 4:eaaw1217. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.aaw1217PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 21. Hondowicz BD, An D, Schenkel JM, Kim KS, Steach HR, Krishnamurty AT, et al. Interleukin-2-Dependent allergen-specific tissue-resident memory cells drive asthma. Immunity (2016) 44:155–66. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.11.004PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 22. Zundler S, Becker E, Spocinska M, Slawik M, Parga-Vidal L, Stark R, et al. Hobit- and blimp-1-driven CD4(+) tissue-resident memory T cells control chronic intestinal inflammation. Nat Immunol (2019) 20:288–300. doi: 10.1038/s41590-018-0298-5PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 23. Ferreira C, Barros L, Baptista M, Blankenhaus B, Barros A, Figueiredo-Campos P, et al. Type 1 treg cells promote the generation of CD8(+) tissue-resident memory T cells. Nat Immunol (2020) 21:766–76. doi: 10.1038/s41590-020-0674-9PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 24. Macleod BL, Elsaesser HJ, Snell LM, Dickson RJ, Guo M, Hezaveh K, et al. A network of immune and microbial modifications underlies viral persistence in the gastrointestinal tract. J Exp Med (2020) 217(12):e20191473. doi: 10.1084/jem.20191473PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 25. Leon B, Bradley JE, Lund FE, Randall TD, Ballesteros-Tato A. FoxP3+ regulatory T cells promote influenza-specific tfh responses by controlling IL-2 availability. Nat Commun (2014) 5:3495. doi: 10.1038comms4495PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 26. Arpaia N, Green JA, Moltedo B, Arvey A, Hemmers S, Yuan S, et al. A distinct function of regulatory T cells in tissue protection. Cell (2015) 162:1078–89. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.08.021PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 27. Harb H, Benamar M, Lai PS, Contini P, Griffith JW, Crestani E, et al. Notch4 signaling limits regulatory T-cell-mediated tissue repair and promotes severe lung inflammation in viral infections. Immunity (2021) 54:1186–1199 e7. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2021.04.002PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 28. Anderson KG, Sung H, Skon CN, Lefrancois L, Deisinger A, Vezys V, et al. Cutting edge: Intravascular staining redefines lung CD8 T cell responses. J Immunol (2012) 189:2702–6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201682PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 29. Kamanaka M, Kim ST, Wan YY, Sutterwala FS, Lara-Tejero M, Galan JE, et al. Expression of interleukin-10 in intestinal lymphocytes detected by an interleukin-10 reporter knockin tiger mouse. Immunity (2006) 25:941–52. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2006.09.013PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 30. Wan YY, Flavell RA. Identifying Foxp3-expressing suppressor T cells with a bicistronic reporter. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. (2005) 102:5126–31. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0501701102PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 31. Huang W, Solouki S, Koylass N, Zheng SG, August A. ITK signalling via the Ras/IRF4 pathway regulates the development and function of Tr1 cells. Nat Commun (2017) 8:15871. doi: 10.1038comms15871PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 32. Li H, Ding J, Chen YH. Recombinant protein comprising multi-neutralizing epitopes induced high titer of antibodies against influenza a virus. Immunobiology (2003) 207:305–13. doi: 10.1078/0171-2985-00244PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 33. Anderson KG, Mayer-Barber K, Sung H, Beura L, James BR, Taylor JJ, et al. Intravascular staining for discrimination of vascular and tissue leukocytes. Nat Protoc (2014) 9:209–22. doi: 10.1038prot.2014.005PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 34. Bailey-Bucktrout SL, Martinez-Llordella M, Zhou X, Anthony B, Rosenthal W, Luche H, et al. Self-antigen-driven activation induces instability of regulatory T cells during an inflammatory autoimmune response. Immunity (2013) 39:949–62. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.10.016PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 35. Hwang SM, Sharma G, Verma R, Byun S, Rudra D, Im SH. Inflammation-induced Id2 promotes plasticity in regulatory T cells. Nat Commun (2018) 9:4736. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07254-2PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 36. Vasanthakumar A, Moro K, Xin A, Liao Y, Gloury R, Kawamoto S, et al. The transcriptional regulators IRF4, BATF and IL-33 orchestrate development and maintenance of adipose tissue-resident regulatory T cells. Nat Immunol (2015) 16:276–85. doi: 10.1038i.3085PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 37. Cretney E, Kallies A, Nutt SL. Differentiation and function of Foxp3(+) effector regulatory T cells. Trends Immunol (2013) 34:74–80. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2012.11.002PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 38. Vasanthakumar A, Liao Y, Teh P, Pascutti MF, Oja AE, Garnham AL, et al. The TNF receptor superfamily-NF-kappaB axis is critical to maintain effector regulatory T cells in lymphoid and non-lymphoid tissues. Cell Rep (2017) 20:2906–20. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.08.068PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 39. Smigiel KS, Richards E, Srivastava S, Thomas KR, Dudda JC, Klonowski KD, et al. CCR7 provides localized access to IL-2 and defines homeostatically distinct regulatory T cell subsets. J Exp Med (2014) 211:121–36. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131142PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 40. Korn T, Muschaweckh A. Stability and maintenance of Foxp3(+) treg cells in non-lymphoid microenvironments. Front Immunol (2019) 10:2634. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02634PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 41. Miragaia RJ, Gomes T, Chomka A, Jardine L, Riedel A, Hegazy AN, et al. Single-cell transcriptomics of regulatory T cells reveals trajectories of tissue adaptation. Immunity (2019) 50:493–504 e7. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2019.01.001PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 42. Delacher M, Imbusch CD, Hotz-Wagenblatt A, Mallm JP, Bauer K, Simon M, et al. Precursors for nonlymphoid-tissue treg cells reside in secondary lymphoid organs and are programmed by the transcription factor BATF. Immunity (2020) 52:295–312 e11. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2019.12.002PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 43. Vaeth M, Wang YH, Eckstein M, Yang J, Silverman GJ, Lacruz RS, et al. Tissue resident and follicular treg cell differentiation is regulated by CRAC channels. Nat Commun (2019) 10:1183. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-08959-8PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 44. Panduro M, Benoist C, Mathis D. Tissue tregs. Annu Rev Immunol (2016) 34:609–33. doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-032712-095948PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 45. Mittelsteadt KL, Hayes ET, Campbell DJ. ICOS signaling limits regulatory T cell accumulation and function in visceral adipose tissue. J Exp Med (2021) 218(6):e20201142. doi: 10.1084/jem.20201142PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 46. Cretney E, Xin A, Shi W, Minnich M, Masson F, Miasari M, et al. The transcription factors blimp-1 and IRF4 jointly control the differentiation and function of effector regulatory T cells. Nat Immunol (2011) 12:304–11. doi: 10.1038i.2006PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 47. Hewavisenti RV, Ferguson AL, Gasparini G, Ohashi T, Braun A, Watkins TS, et al. Tissue-resident regulatory T cells accumulate at human barrier lymphoid organs. Immunol Cell Biol (2021) 99:894–906. doi: 10.1111/imcb.12481PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 48. Malhotra N, Leyva-Castillo JM, Jadhav U, Barreiro O, Kam C, O'Neill NK, et al. RORalpha-expressing T regulatory cells restrain allergic skin inflammation. Sci Immunol (2018) 3:eaao6923. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.aao6923PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 49. Ali N, Zirak B, Rodriguez RS, Pauli ML, Truong HA, Lai K, et al. Regulatory T cells in skin facilitate epithelial stem cell differentiation. Cell (2017) 169:1119–1129 e11. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.002PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 50. Sanchez Rodriguez R, Pauli ML, Neuhaus IM, Yu SS, Arron ST, Harris HW, et al. Memory regulatory T cells reside in human skin. J Clin Invest (2014) 124:1027–36. doi: 10.1172/JCI72932PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 51. van der Veeken J, Gonzalez AJ, Cho H, Arvey A, Hemmers S, Leslie CS, et al. Memory of inflammation in regulatory T cells. Cell (2016) 166:977–90. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.006PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 52. Sullivan JM, Hollbacher B, Campbell DJ. Cutting edge: Dynamic expression of Id3 defines the stepwise differentiation of tissue-resident regulatory T cells. J Immunol (2019) 202:31–6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800917PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 53. Li C, DiSpirito JR, Zemmour D, Spallanzani RG, Kuswanto W, Benoist C, et al. TCR transgenic mice reveal stepwise, multi-site acquisition of the distinctive fat-treg phenotype. Cell (2018) 174:285–299 e12. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.004PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 54. Hogan RJ, Usherwood EJ, Zhong W, Roberts AA, Dutton RW, Harmsen AG, et al. Activated antigen-specific CD8+ T cells persist in the lungs following recovery from respiratory virus infections. J Immunol (2001) 166:1813–22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.3.1813PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 55. Brincks EL, Roberts AD, Cookenham T, Sell S, Kohlmeier JE, Blackman MA, et al. Antigen-specific memory regulatory CD4+Foxp3+ T cells control memory responses to influenza virus infection. J Immunol (2013) 190:3438–46. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203140PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 56. Zhou X, Tang J, Cao H, Fan H, Li B. Tissue resident regulatory T cells: novel therapeutic targets for human disease. Cell Mol Immunol (2015) 12:543–52. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2015.23PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 57. Perry JA, Shallberg L, Clark JT, Gullicksrud JA, DeLong JH, Douglas BB, et al. PD-L1-PD-1 interactions limit effector regulatory T cell populations at homeostasis and during infection. Nat Immunol (2022) 23:743–56. doi: 10.1038/s41590-022-01170-wPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 58. Chang J, Bouchard A, Bouklouch Y, Panneton V, Li J, Diamantopoulos N, et al. ICOS-deficient regulatory T cells can prevent spontaneous autoimmunity but are impaired in controlling acute inflammation. J Immunol (2022) 209:301–9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2100897PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 59. Snell LM, Xu W, Abd-Rabbo D, Boukhaled G, Guo M, Macleod BL, et al. Dynamic CD4(+) T cell heterogeneity defines subset-specific suppression and PD-L1-blockade-driven functional restoration in chronic infection. Nat Immunol (2021) 22:1524–37. doi: 10.1038/s41590-021-01060-7PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 60. Miyamoto K, Kingsley CI, Zhang X, Jabs C, Izikson L, Sobel RA, et al. The ICOS molecule plays a crucial role in the development of mucosal tolerance. J Immunol (2005) 175:7341–7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.11.7341PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 61. Busse M, Krech M, Meyer-Bahlburg A, Hennig C, Hansen G. ICOS mediates the generation and function of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells conveying respiratory tolerance. J Immunol (2012) 189:1975–82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103581PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 62. Redpath SA, van der Werf N, Cervera AM, MacDonald AS, Gray D, Maizels RM, et al. ICOS controls Foxp3(+) regulatory T-cell expansion, maintenance and IL-10 production during helminth infection. Eur J Immunol (2013) 43:705–15. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242794PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 63. Kornete M, Sgouroudis E, Piccirillo CA. ICOS-dependent homeostasis and function of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells in islets of nonobese diabetic mice. J Immunol (2012) 188:1064–74. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101303PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 64. Herman AE, Freeman GJ, Mathis D, Benoist C. CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cells dependent on ICOS promote regulation of effector cells in the prediabetic lesion. J Exp Med (2004) 199:1479–89. doi: 10.1084/jem.20040179PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 65. Sage PT, Francisco LM, Carman CV, Sharpe AH. The receptor PD-1 controls follicular regulatory T cells in the lymph nodes and blood. Nat Immunol (2013) 14:152–61. doi: 10.1038i.2496PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 66. Xu H, Li X, Liu D, Li J, Zhang X, Chen X, et al. Follicular T-helper cell recruitment governed by bystander b cells and ICOS-driven motility. Nature (2013) 496:523–7. doi: 10.1038ature12058PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 67. Shi J, Hou S, Fang Q, Liu X, Liu X, Qi H. PD-1 controls follicular T helper cell positioning and function. Immunity (2018) 49:264–274 e4. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2018.06.012PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 68. Sheppard KA, Fitz LJ, Lee JM, Benander C, George JA, Wooters J, et al. PD-1 inhibits T-cell receptor induced phosphorylation of the ZAP70/CD3zeta signalosome and downstream signaling to PKCtheta. FEBS Lett (2004) 574:37–41. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.083PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 69. Hui E, Cheung J, Zhu J, Su X, Taylor MJ, Wallweber HA, et al. T Cell costimulatory receptor CD28 is a primary target for PD-1-mediated inhibition. Science (2017) 355:1428–33. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf1292PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 70. Parry RV, Chemnitz JM, Frauwirth KA, Lanfranco AR, Braunstein I, Kobayashi SV, et al. CTLA-4 and PD-1 receptors inhibit T-cell activation by distinct mechanisms. Mol Cell Biol (2005) 25:9543–53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.21.9543-9553.2005PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 71. Yokosuka T, Takamatsu M, Kobayashi-Imanishi W, Hashimoto-Tane A, Azuma M, Saito T. Programmed cell death 1 forms negative costimulatory microclusters that directly inhibit T cell receptor signaling by recruiting phosphatase SHP2. J Exp Med (2012) 209:1201–17. doi: 10.1084/jem.20112741PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 72. Gigoux M, Shang J, Pak Y, Xu M, Choe J, Mak TW, et al. Inducible costimulator promotes helper T-cell differentiation through phosphoinositide 3-kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. (2009) 106:20371–6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0911573106PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 73. Pedros C, Zhang Y, Hu JK, Choi YS, Canonigo-Balancio AJ, Yates JR, et al. A TRAF-like motif of the inducible costimulator ICOS controls development of germinal center TFH cells via the kinase TBK1. Nat Immunol (2016) 17:825–33. doi: 10.1038i.3463PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 74. Fos C, Salles A, Lang V, Carrette F, Audebert S, Pastor S, et al. ICOS ligation recruits the p50alpha PI3K regulatory subunit to the immunological synapse. J Immunol (2008) 181:1969–77. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.3.1969PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 75. Bennett F, Luxenberg D, Ling V, Wang IM, Marquette K, Lowe D, et al. Program death-1 engagement upon TCR activation has distinct effects on costimulation and cytokine-driven proliferation: Attenuation of ICOS, IL-4, and IL-21, but not CD28, IL-7, and IL-15 responses. J Immunol (2003) 170:711–8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.2.711PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 76. Mizuno R, Sugiura D, Shimizu K, Maruhashi T, Watada M, Okazaki IM, et al. PD-1 primarily targets TCR signal in the inhibition of functional T cell activation. Front Immunol (2019) 10:630. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00630PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 77. Moser EK, Hufford MM, Braciale TJ. Late engagement of CD86 after influenza virus clearance promotes recovery in a FoxP3+ regulatory T cell dependent manner. PloS Pathog (2014) 10:e1004315. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004315PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 78. Sun J, Madan R, Karp CL, Braciale TJ. Effector T cells control lung inflammation during acute influenza virus infection by producing IL-10. Nat Med (2009) 15:277–84. doi: 10.1038m.1929PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 79. Dutta A, Huang CT, Chen TC, Lin CY, Chiu CH, Lin YC, et al. IL-10 inhibits neuraminidase-activated TGF-beta and facilitates Th1 phenotype during early phase of infection. Nat Commun (2015) 6:6374. doi: 10.1038comms7374PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 80. Rubtsov YP, Rasmussen JP, Chi EY, Fontenot J, Castelli L, Ye X, et al. Regulatory T cell-derived interleukin-10 limits inflammation at environmental interfaces. Immunity (2008) 28:546–58. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.02.017PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarKeywords: influenza infections, tissue resident T cells, Foxp3, ICOS, PD-1, IL-10Citation: McGee MC, Zhang T, Magazine N, Islam R, Carossino M and Huang W (2022) PD-1 and ICOS counter-regulate tissue resident regulatory T cell development and IL-10 production during flu. Front. Immunol. 13:984476. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.984476Received: 02 July 2022; Accepted: 19 August 2022;Published: 08 September 2022.Edited by:Xuguang Tai, National Cancer Institute (NIH), United StatesReviewed by:Leonid A Pobezinsky, University of Massachusetts Amherst, United StatesZhongmei Zhang, National Cancer Institute (NIH), United StatesCopyright © 2022 McGee, Zhang, Magazine, Islam, Carossino and Huang. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.*Correspondence: Weishan Huang, huang1@lsu.edu Disclaimer: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Footer Guidelines Author guidelinesEditor guidelinesPolicies and publication ethicsFee policy Explore ArticlesResearch Topics Journals Outreach Frontiers Forum Frontiers Policy Labs Frontiers for Young Minds Connect Help centerEmails and alerts Contact us SubmitCareer opportunities Follow us © 2024 Frontiers Media S.A. All rights reserved Privacy policy | Terms and conditions﻿ Flu Shot Myths and Misconceptions Debunked MenuNewslettersSearchHealth Conditions A-ZWellness & Self-CareNewsProduct ReviewsFind a DoctorTools & ResourcesAbout UsHealth Conditions A-ZFind helpful content on common health and medical conditions.See AllBreast CancerCold & FluCrohn's DiseaseDepressionEczema (Atopic Dermatitis)High Blood PressureLung CancerMenopauseMigraineMultiple SclerosisProstate CancerPsoriasisRheumatoid ArthritisType 2 DiabetesWellness & Self-CareExplore wellness and self-care topics for your physical and mental well-being.See AllAcupunctureBug BitesDehydrationFitness and ExerciseFood & DietHealthy RecipesKetogenic DietMeditationMediterranean DietSelf-CareSkin CareStressWeight LossYogaNewsStay updated with the latest health and medical news.See AllFeatured storiesWhy Good Sleep Is Critical After a Heart AttackNew Colorectal Cancer Blood Tests Not as Effective as ColonoscopyAre Compounded Weight Loss Drugs on Their Way Out?Product ReviewsLearn about the best products to support your health and wellness.See AllBest Colostrum SupplementsBest Creatine SupplementsBest Probiotics for WomenBest Collagen PowdersBest Greens PowdersBest Online Glasses RetailersBest Online Therapy ServicesBest Online Therapy That Takes InsuranceBest Shoes for Standing All DayBest Cold Plunge TubsBest Costco Hearing AidsFind a DoctorFind the best doctors for you that are near you.See AllCardiologistDermatologistGastroenterologistOB/GYNOrthopedic SurgeonPediatricianPrimary CareQuizzes & CalculatorsTest your health knowledge and gain personalized insights.Tippi - Everyday TipsGet health and medical tips and advice.Symptom CheckerIdentify possible conditions based on your symptoms and signs.Consumer’s GuidesUnderstand how to get the most from your medical treatments.Check In, Check UpHolistically evaluate your condition management by taking these assessments.All VideosWatch video stories and information on health and medical topics.Who We AreLearn about our award-winning editorial team and health content leaders.Health Expert NetworkDiscover the medical and wellness experts who review of our content.Editorial PolicyFind out about our strict editorial policies, ethics, and standards.Product Testing PolicyReview how we vet products and services. Cold & Flu7 Flu Shot Myths You Should Stop BelievingNo, the flu shot can’t give you the flu. Here’s the truth about the (many!) misconceptions people have about the flu vaccine.ByJulia CalifanoMedically ReviewedbyJane Yoon Scott, MDUpdated on September 6, 20227 Flu Shot Myths You Should Stop BelievingNo, the flu shot can’t give you the flu. Here’s a look at the (many!) misconceptions people have about the flu vaccine.Next up video playing in 10 secondsIf precedent serves, only about half of all American adults and children will get a flu shot to stave off infection and serious illness during the 2022–2023 flu season.If you’re one of the millions who are planning to opt out — because of some alarming claims about the vaccine you heard from a friend or read on social media, perhaps, or because you think you are too healthy to need a flu shot — public-health experts are asking you to reconsider.They are urging all Americans who are eligible for the influenza vaccine (which includes nearly everyone over the age of 6 months, including pregnant people) to get a flu shot, ideally by the end of October.While flu cases were low to nonexistent in the United States since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic thanks to precautions like mask mandates and stay-at-home orders, scientists are concerned about an influenza resurgence now that most of these safety measures are gone.In fact, our flu hiatus may have set us up for a potentially severe flu season.Typically, exposure to the flu virus (even if you don’t get sick) gives your immune system a boost, allowing your body to fend off the virus faster at the next encounter.But many people — particularly those who didn’t get a flu shot in prior years — won’t have that immunity advantage, says Eili Klein, PhD, associate professor of emergency medicine at Johns Hopkins Medicine in Baltimore and a senior fellow at the Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics, and Policy in Washington, DC.Unfortunately, political divisiveness and social media misinformation have made many Americans increasingly skeptical of vaccines — not just COVID-19 shots but also flu vaccines, as well as mass vaccination programs in general.Even before the pandemic, social media was rife with anti-vaccination sentiment, reports the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. Anti-vaccination messaging often relies on sensationalism and harnessing fear to grab people’s attention and reach the widest audience.And it works: A study published in the September 2020 issue of the journal Vaccine found that people who were exposed to tweets that expressed concerns about flu vaccines during the 2018–2019 flu season were more likely to have negative attitudes about the flu shot, and were also less likely to get the shot, compared with those who didn’t see those tweets.Don’t let false “facts” and conspiracy theories leave you and your family unprotected. Here, we take on long-standing and newly circulating misconceptions about the flu shot and offer must-know advice on how to stay safe.Can You Get a Flu Shot and a COVID Vaccine at the Same Time?It’s perfectly safe and medically acceptable to get a flu shot and a COVID-19 booster at the same time, says Purvi S. Parikh, MD, of NYU Langone Health. One day we might even see the two vaccines combined.Next up video playing in 10 secondsMisconception No. 1: Flu Vaccines Are Useless, Since You Can Still Get the Flu After You’ve Been InoculatedThe flu shot isn’t perfect, but it is an important tool. There are multiple strains of the influenza virus circulating each year, and each year they change. So vaccine developers base their formulas on their best predictions about which strains will be dominant.“When it’s a perfect match, the shot works extremely well,” explains Megan Culler Freeman, MD, PhD, a pediatric infectious disease fellow at UPMC Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh. “But even when it’s not a perfect match, there is usually some cross-protection, which means if you do get the flu, it won’t be nearly as severe.”That could save you from being flattened for a week or longer, having to see a doctor, or, worse, being hospitalized.During the pre-COVID (2019–2020) flu season, the flu shot prevented an estimated 7.5 million influenza illnesses, 3.7 million flu-associated medical visits, 105,000 flu-associated hospitalizations, and 6,300 flu-associated deaths, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).Misconception No. 2: The Flu Shot Can Give You the Flu“The flu shot is made from an inactive virus, so it’s impossible for it to give you the flu,” says David Brill, DO, a physician in the department of family medicine at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio.“It is possible but not common to have a day of body aches or not feeling well after getting the shot, but that’s just your immune system doing what it’s supposed to be doing, and nothing compared to the actual flu,” he explains.Immunity to the flu isn’t immediate, however. It takes about two weeks after vaccination for antibodies to develop in the body and for you to become protected. “It’s possible for someone to get the shot and then catch the flu before immunity kicks in,” notes Dr. Freeman. “But you would never get the flu because of the shot.”Misconception No. 3: The Flu Shot Increases Your Risk of Getting COVID-19There is no evidence that getting a flu vaccine makes you more likely to get sick from a coronavirus like the one that causes COVID-19, states the CDC.You may have heard about a study published in January 2020 in Vaccine and publicized on social media that identified an association between the flu vaccine and four commonly circulating coronaviruses (but not the type that causes COVID-19). This research prompted a spate of additional studies, none of which supported the original finding, says the CDC.One study, published in October 2020 in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases, found no connection between the flu vaccine and an increased risk of infection with other respiratory viruses, including seasonal coronaviruses.Bottom line: “The flu shot doesn’t make you any more — or any less — likely to get COVID-19,” says Freeman.Misconception No. 4: Once Flu Season Starts, It’s Too Late to Get the ShotThe CDC recommends getting vaccinated by the end of October so that you have immunity by the time the influenza virus starts circulating in your community.But if you don’t make that deadline, don’t stress — or give up on the whole idea. The flu is unpredictable and seasons can vary. “As long as flu viruses are circulating, it’s still worth getting a flu shot,” says Dr. Brill.In March 2022, the CDC reported an unusual spring spike in flu cases across the United States and noted that unvaccinated people could still benefit from getting a flu shot.Misconception No. 5: It’s Healthier to Get the Flu and Let Your Immune System Do Its JobUnfortunately, there’s nothing healthy about getting the flu. “People can have pretty severe and negative outcomes from getting natural flu,” says Freeman.In addition to causing 7 to 10 days of full-on misery, influenza can lead to severe complications, such as pneumonia or inflammation of the heart or brain — and even death.Contrary to what many people think, vaccines don’t weaken your immune system or prevent it from working the way it should, points out Brill.“Vaccines actually stimulate your immune system and get it to work in the direction you want it to, without getting the actual illness,” he explains. Getting vaccinated is a much safer choice than getting sick.Misconception No. 6: Young, Healthy People Do Not Need to Worry About the FluWhile it’s true that the flu is most threatening to the very young, the elderly, and people with underlying illnesses or medical conditions, it can cause severe symptoms in anyone.Even healthy children and adults are at risk of hospitalization or severe complications from a bout of the flu, notes Brill.Also keep in mind that you’re not just getting the flu shot for yourself but also for everyone around you. The more people get vaccinated, the less likely it is that influenza will spread, a concept known as herd immunity.“You should get a flu shot for Grandma or the older person in line in front of you at the grocery store,” advises Brill. You can’t pass along a virus if you never get it yourself.Misconception No. 7: You Shouldn’t Get a Flu Shot and the COVID-19 Vaccine or Booster at the Same TimeThis is a common source of confusion because earlier in the pandemic, out of an abundance of caution, the CDC recommended waiting at least two weeks between a COVID-19 shot and any other vaccine.However, the CDC has since revised its advice. They now say it’s safe to get a COVID-19 vaccine or booster without worrying about the timing of other vaccines, including the flu shot.A recent CDC study found that people are slightly more likely to experience (generally mild) side effects such as fatigue if they get a COVID-19 booster and a flu vaccine at the same time, so if that’s a concern you may want to spread these shots out a bit.Meet Our ExpertsSee Our Editorial PolicyMeet Our Health Expert NetworkJane Yoon Scott, MDMedical ReviewerJane Yoon Scott, MD, is an infectious disease physician and an assistant professor of medicine at Emory University in Atlanta. Dr. Scott enjoys connecting with her patients, empowering them to understand and take ownership of their health, and encouraging them to ask questions so that they can make informed and thoughtful decisions.She graduated with the highest honors from the Georgia Institute of Technology, then received her MD from the Medical College of Georgia. She completed her internal medicine residency training and chief residency at Temple University Hospital, as well as a fellowship in infectious diseases at Emory University. She is board-certified in both internal medicine and infectious diseases.When she is not seeing patients, Dr. Scott works with neighboring health departments to promote public health, especially to communities that have been historically underserved. She also teaches medical trainees and lectures medical students at the Emory University School of Medicine.In her free time, Dr. Scott appreciates a good coffee shop, weekend hikes, playing guitar, strolling through cities, sampling restaurants, and traveling to new places.See full bioJulia CalifanoAuthorJulia Califano is an award-winning health journalist with a passion for turning complex medical research and information into news you can actually use and understand. She strives to help people feel more in control of their lives, conditions, and overall health. In addition to Everyday Health, Julia's work has been featured in SELF, Good Housekeeping, Women’s Health, Health, DailyWorth, More, Food & Wine, Harper's Bazaar, the Slingshot Fund, Glamour, and Time Inc. Content Solutions, to name a few. She has also served as an editor and writer at Condé Nast, Hearst, and Time Inc. Outside of work, Julia's favorite things include photography, summers on Cape Cod, good coffee, hiking, and (when her kids allow it) reading. She lives in the New York City area with her husband and two sons.See full bioSee Our Editorial PolicyMeet Our Health Expert NetworkSign up for our Healthy Living Newsletter!Enter your emailSubscribeBy subscribing you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Related ArticlesSee All in Cold & Flucold & fluFlu Shot: What You Need to KnowMedically ReviewedbyJane Yoon Scott, MD|November 6, 2024cold & fluThe Consumer’s Guide to Flu VaccinesMedically ReviewedbyJane Yoon Scott, MD|October 30, 2024cold & fluHandwashing: Benefits and How to Do It CorrectlyMedically ReviewedbyGrant Chu, MD|October 28, 2024cold & fluEarache: Is It a Cold or an Ear Infection? Medically ReviewedbyJessica Lee, MD|October 24, 2024cold & fluShould You Feed a Cold, Starve a Fever? Plus The Best and Worst Foods When You’re SickMedically ReviewedbyAllison Buttarazzi, MD|October 14, 2024cold & fluThe Facts on Flu Shot Side Effects and RisksMedically ReviewedbyJane Yoon Scott, MD|September 19, 2024cold & fluGet a Flu Shot Now or Wait?Medically ReviewedbyJane Yoon Scott, MD|September 9, 2024cold & fluCan You Get the Flu in Summer?Medically ReviewedbyMichelle Seguin, MD|August 13, 2024cold & fluShould You Worry About TikTok’s ‘Mystery Virus’?Published onMarch 11, 2024cold & fluCOVID-19, Flu, RSV Rates Are on the Decline, CDC Says in Latest BriefingPublished onJanuary 26, 2024 Wellness inspired. Wellness enabled.FacebookXInstagramPinterestYoutubeTikTokA PROPERTY OFEHGLogoAbout UsPrivacy PolicyEditorial PolicyTerms of UseMeet Our Health Expert NetworkConsumer Health Data Privacy PolicyCareersAccessibility StatementDo Not Sell My Personal InformationContact UsHealth HubsAll Health TopicsPopular TopicsDrugs & SupplementsSitemapAdChoicesNEWSLETTERSGet the best in health and wellnessEnter your emailSubscribeBy subscribing you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.© 1996-2024 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company. All rights reserved. Everyday Health is among the federally registered trademarks of Everyday Health, Inc. and may not be used by third parties without explicit permission.All information on the Everyday Health website is for informational purposes only, and is not intended to be used for medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. For more details, see Everyday Health's Terms of Use.BadgesType 2 DiabetesExocrine Pancreatic InsufficiencyEczemaLung CancerMacular DegenerationMultiple SclerosisProstate CancerBreast CancerAlzheimer's DiseaseMenopauseHeart FailureCelebrity Health & WellnessCrohn's DiseaseParkinson's DiseasePsoriasisHypothyroidismAtrial FibrillationUlcerative ColitisHair LossRheumatoid ArthritisHepatitis CCOPDDepressionAnkylosing SpondylitisCold & FluPsoriatic ArthritisEndometriosisKeto DietADHDBipolar DisorderMigraineHypertensionAsthmaHIV/AIDSOvarian CancerAnxiety DisordersHigh CholesterolWeight LossIBSStressMediterranean DietColorectal CancerLeukemiaAcupunctureSkin CareHealthy RecipesDehydrationFitness & ExerciseYogaMeditationSelf-CareBug-BitesJournal Sentinel Subscription Offers, Specials, and DiscountsGet unlimited access with a subscriptionEssential DigitalOne month freeSubscribe NowWhat's includedUnlimited access to and our apps.The eNewspaper: a digital replica of the newspaper.Add a user to your digital subscription for free.Essential Digital$45 for 1 yearSubscribe NowWhat's includedUnlimited access to and our apps.The eNewspaper: a digital replica of the newspaper.Add a user to your digital subscription for free.Print DeliveryAs low as $1.00Subscribe NowWhat's includedAll the features of Essential DigitalPrint delivery of USA TODAY CrosswordNo commitment required. Cancel anytime.*Offer available to new customers only. All savings based off the regular rate. Read the full Subscription Terms and Conditions.© 2024 www.jsonline.comMany Kids Will Need More Than 1 Flu Shot This Season. Does Yours? IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Versatile joggers, a problem-solving mascara, more Amazon fall bestsellers — from $12Skip to ContentToday LogoOn The ShowAbout TODAY3rd Hour of TODAY Hoda & JennaSaturday TODAYSunday TODAYShop the ShowShopShop the ShowBlack FridayProduct ReviewsSteals & DealsGift GuidesNewsletterWellnessStart TODAYMental HealthWomen's HealthFitnessSleepDiet & NutritionParentsBaby NamesKids HealthFamilyBabiesParenting TipsLOLFoodOn the Show RecipesMost Popular RecipesAll RecipesFood NewsWhat to Cook This WeekLifeAstrologyEssaysHolidaysInspirationJokesTODAY PlazaJoin us on the PlazaHistory of the PlazaCiti Concert SeriesSearchShare this —Search TodaySearchSectionsHealth & WellnessParentingFoodShopPop CultureNewsLifeStyleShowsTODAY3rd Hour of TODAYTODAY with Hoda & JennaSaturday TODAYSunday TODAY with Willie GeistWatch Full EpisodesMoreNewsLifeBooksTrendingRecipesRead With JennaAstrologyInspirational HolidaysRelationshipsTODAY TableHelpNewslettersStart TODAYJokesShop TODAY AwardsCiti Concert SeriesListen All DayFollow todayMore BrandsNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoFacebookPinterestEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardTwitterLinkedinOn The ShowShopWellnessParentsFoodLifeTODAY PlazaCold & FluHow to know if your kid will need more than 1 flu shot this yearThis year's flu season is expected to be worse than recent ones, so it's more important than ever to get children vaccinated against influenza.Sept. 6, 2022, 8:59 PM UTC / Source: TODAYBy Maura HohmanThe American Academy of Pediatrics, the United States' leading pediatricians' group, released recommendations for the 2022-2023 flu season on Tuesday, urging all children 6 months and older to get vaccinated against influenza this fall."Vaccines remain the best way to prevent severe illness and keep kids in classrooms," the statement read. "The AAP observes that vaccination coverage lagged last season and that, historically, the flu has taken a disproportionate toll on families who are Black, Hispanic or American Indian or Alaska Native."Last year, only 55% of kids were vaccinated against the flu. The organization stressed that it's especially important for kids to get the flu shot because COVID-19 is continuing to circulate."We should not underestimate the flu," Dr. Kristina Bryant, lead author of AAP's policy statement, said in a press release. "Besides making your child miserable and wreaking havoc on your family’s routine, influenza can also be serious and even deadly in children."Parents should ask their pediatricians to administer the flu vaccine to children 6 months and older as soon as it is available, ideally by the end of October, per AAP. Other recommendations to keep in mind include:Both the intramuscular shot and the nasal spray are good options. The AAP doesn't prefer one over the other.Caregivers and close contacts of medically vulnerable children should also receive a flu shot.Kids eligible to receive a COVID-19 vaccine or booster can receive it at the same time as the flu shot.Pregnant women can safely receive the flu shot any time during pregnancy, and it's also safe for breastfeeding moms and babies.Some children should also receive two flu shots this year. Here's what to know.Does your child need two flu shots this year?The AAP recommended three groups of kids get two flu shots this year, spaced at least four weeks apart:Children 6 months through 8 years old who are getting the flu shot for the first time in their livesChildren 6 months through 8 years old who've only gotten the flu shot once beforeChildren 6 months through 8 years old whose vaccination status is unknown2022-2023 flu season: What to expectThe AAP's guidance comes as experts have said to expect a worse flu season this year. Australia's flu season, often a harbinger for what will happen in the U.S., was its worst in five years. But this is just one of a few reasons it's important to get kids their flu shot this year: Vaccination rates among kids have fallen amid the pandemic, and the last couple of flu seasons have been mild due to pandemic restrictions, meaning many kids haven't been exposed to the virus and are more vulnerable as a result.“We haven’t had much flu, so people haven’t really been motivated to go out and get their kids vaccinated," Dr. Mark Kline, physician-in-chief at Children’s Hospital New Orleans, told NBC News.So this year, with many kids back in classrooms full-time, it's more important than ever to get the flu shot and make sure they're caught up on all routine vaccinations, such as polio.Maura HohmanMaura Hohman is the senior health editor for TODAY.com and has been covering health and wellness since 2015.RelatedGetty Images/iStockphotoThese are the best cold remedies according to doctorsCold & Flu / Updated Nov. 8, 2024Mindful Media / Getty ImagesHow to make yourself sneeze, according to doctorsCold & Flu / Updated Oct. 15, 2024Getty ImagesAre your fall allergy symptoms worse this year? Allergists explain whyCold & Flu / Updated Oct. 3, 2024Getty ImagesWhen is the best time to get your flu shot? What to expect for the 2024-2025 flu seasonCold & Flu / Updated Sept. 17, 2024Getty Images4 reasons you keep getting colds every few weeks and how to prevent themCold & Flu / Updated June 4, 2024@kalejunkie via TiktokImmunity cubes are going viral for preventing illness. A dietitian explains if they really workCold & Flu / Updated Jan. 18, 2024Courtesy Kensie ThomasA healthy, 27-year-old father of 3 died of the flu. These were his first symptomsCold & Flu / Updated Jan. 17, 2024bymuratdeniz / Getty Images stockPickle juice is going viral as a fast treatment for sore throat. Doctors explain if it worksCold & Flu / Updated Jan. 15, 2024Getty ImagesWhat your nagging cough says about your health — and when to see a doctorCold & Flu / Updated Jan. 8, 2024erdikocak / Getty ImagesIs honey good for you? 2 tablespoons a day could provide these health benefitsDiet & Fitness / Updated Jan. 5, 2024AboutContactHelpVisitTODAY AppsAD ChoicesPrivacy PolicyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationCA NoticeNEW TERMS OF SERVICE (UPDATED JULY 7, 2023)NEW TERMS OF SERVICE (UPDATED OCTOBER 3, 2024)CareersClosed CaptioningTODAY SitemapAdvertiseTODAY Store Shop TODAYSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday Logo'Tomato Flu' Likely Unusual Presentation of Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease ​ Skip to content Health Search the site GO Please fill out this field. Newsletters Search Please fill out this field. News Conditions A - Z Conditions A - Z Anxiety Coronavirus Type 2 Diabetes Headaches and Migraines Heart Disease View All Nutrition Nutrition Eat Well Nutrition Basics Vitamins and Supplements View All Wellness Wellness Mental Health Fitness Skincare Sexual Health View All What to Buy What to Buy Nutrition & Supplements Oral & Dental Care Sleep Products Over the Counter Skincare View All About Us About Us Editorial Process Medical Expert Board Diversity Pledge Testing and Vetting Products Read More Stay informed with emails from us Search the site GO Please fill out this field. Newsletter Sign Up News Conditions A - Z Anxiety Coronavirus Type 2 Diabetes Headaches and Migraines Heart Disease View All Nutrition Eat Well Nutrition Basics Vitamins and Supplements View All Wellness Mental Health Fitness Skincare Sexual Health View All What to Buy Nutrition & Supplements Oral & Dental Care Sleep Products Over the Counter Skincare View All About Us Editorial Process Medical Expert Board Diversity Pledge Testing and Vetting Products News 'Tomato Flu' Is Likely Just an Unusual Presentation of Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease The "new" illness was identified in India in May, but experts believe it may be a strain of a common childhood virus. By Julia Landwehr Julia Landwehr Julia is a news reporter for Health, where she covers breaking and trending news on health and wellness topics. Before joining Health, Julia held an internship position at Verywell Health, where she also covered news. Her work has been featured in The Heights, an independent student newspaper at Boston College, and Minnesota Monthly. health's editorial guidelines Published on September 6, 2022 Fact checked by Marley Hall Fact checked by Marley Hall Marley Hall is a writer and fact-checker specializing in medical and health information. She uses her experience in medical research to ensure content is accurate across multiple Dotdash Meredith brands. health's fact checking process Close Studio Firma/Stocksy Fast Facts A Lancet correspondence dubbed a virus circulating among children in India “tomato flu,” but experts believe it may just be an abnormal presentation of hand, foot, and mouth disease. The tomato flu lesions were described as red and painful blisters that were fleshier and more raised than typical hand, foot, and mouth disease sores. Experts say more evidence from India is needed to determine whether the outbreak is tied to one specific hand, foot, and mouth strain, or if there are other causes behind the outbreak. Tomato flu—the "mystery illness" that has been infecting young children in India, and was first identified in May—may actually be a strain of hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) with an atypical presentation. The virus first grabbed worldwide attention following an August 17 correspondence in The Lancet Respiratory Medicine, when researchers detailed a "new virus"—dubbed tomato flu or tomato fever—in the Indian state of Kerala in children under 5 years old. The illness reportedly showed symptoms similar to COVID-19 (fever, fatigue, and body aches) as well as a very specific rash—one that erupted with "red and painful blisters throughout the body that gradually [enlarged] to the size of a tomato," the report said. "They called it a flu, a tomato flu, which is descriptive, but it's not really scientifically accurate," Ian Michelow, MD, head of infectious diseases and immunology at Connecticut Children's Hospital, told Health. "It's really just a description of a rash in children who are ill with a fever, and it's not really describing whether they've got a different type of virus, or a new virus, or an emerging virus, or whether it's just a variant of something that already exists." At the time of the report, more than 82 children under the age of 5 reportedly had the infection—but after two children based in the United Kingdom developed the same rash, researchers in the U.K. found that the virus to blame was actually a typical strain of HFMD—specifically Coxsackievirus A16 (CA16)—that had been presenting abnormally. "The 'Kerala tomato flu' in these children were caused by CA16, one of the commonest [enterovirus] causes of HFMD in India," U.K clinicians and researchers wrote in a letter to the editor for The Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal. The findings were further confirmed by a news report in the BMJ, identifying the so-called tomato flu as a potential variant of the HFMD. "We have observed these lesions in children as far back as 2001," CK Sasidharan, MD, a pediatric specialist and senior consultant at the Baby Memorial Hospital in Kozhikod, Kerala, told the journal. Here's what to know about HFMD, how it's likely presenting as tomato flu, and what parents should know about the virus. CDC Issues Parechovirus Warning—Here's What PeV Can Look Like in Infants A Common Childhood Disease Showing Up Differently For the letter to the editor in The Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal, the researchers in the U.K. published their sequencing of what appeared to be tomato flu in a 13-month-old girl and her 5-year-old brother, who had recently returned from Kerala. Both children tested positive for Coxsackievirus A16, a type of enterovirus that frequently causes HFMD, according to lead study author Julian Tang, PhD, clinical virologist and honorary associate professor of respiratory sciences at the University of Leicester. "Coxsackie[virus] A16 is very common as a cause of HFMD and is well described in India, [but] the presentation is a bit unusual," said Tang. "Normally, you get kind of smaller punctate lesions, which are not as big and fleshy as the ones we saw." HFMD typically affects children younger than 5 years old, and is not usually serious, but is very contagious. The disease often presents as fever and flu-like symptoms, along with sores in the mouth and a rash on the hands and soles of the feet that are usually small, red, and sometimes slightly raised. The lesions that Tang and his team saw, in contrast, were raised and almost resembled monkeypox sores (clinicians tested the 13-month-old patient for monkeypox, but they tested negative). These tomato flu cases may be really caused by one or multiple newer evolutions of these coxsackie viruses, he said. It's this atypical presentation of what is most likely HFMD that caused so much worry, according to Dr. Michelow. "If you're only used to seeing the typical type of HFMD, and you suddenly see an outbreak of the atypical type of HFMD, maybe it's a different strain of the virus, you'd be concerned because you're not used to seeing that and you think it's a different illness," Dr. Michelow said. "It could be the same virus, same family of viruses, but a different presentation. And that's what we're seeing right now." What Are the First Signs of Monkeypox? Here's When Symptoms Typically Show Up More Information on Cases from India Is Still Needed Even though Tang and his team confirmed that the two tomato flu cases in the U.K. children were caused by Coxsackievirus A16, it doesn't necessarily mean that this is true across the board for all infections in the current Kerala outbreak. "I don't have any data from the local doctors and children there. So I also want to be careful not to overhype just our little case report," Tang said. "Ours could be atypical, and all the others something else. But I don't think so." In general, too, there are lots of childhood diseases that cause rashes, everything from impetigo to Ritter's disease, Dr. Michelow explained. "Rashes in children are very common and they can appear differently even by the same cause of virus or bacteria. They can have different variations in the way they present," Dr. Michelow said. "And so it's difficult to say when, at a certain time of year, something is circulating—is it truly one particular cause, or could it be a variety of different causes that are just happening at the same time?" According to the Lancet report, dengue fever and chikungunya, common mosquito-borne illnesses in India, had similar symptoms to tomato flu, and that tomato flu may be an after-effect of these illnesses. Though there's no real data right now to confirm or deny this link, Dr. Michelow thinks it could be further evidence that this outbreak could actually be made up of a number of different things—some HFMD, and some others after effects of these mosquito-borne illnesses. The only way to answer all of the remaining questions about tomato flu is to wait for more information from the Kerala region, according to medical experts. "Maybe there's some pediatricians there collating all these cases. If they collate like 20 or 30 sequences from viruses from those children," Tang said, "Then they could say with more authority, 'This is really HFMD; we found coxsackie viruses, coxsackie A10, A16, A24, A6, and this is all kind of typical HFMD,' and then that will basically put it to rest." The good thing for now is that early reports of tomato flu show that it's not severe or life-threatening. Some enteroviruses—EA71, which caused a 2017 outbreak in Thailand, and EVD68, which has popped up mainly in the U.S.—can cause life-threatening complications, like brain swelling or paralysis. But that does not seem to be the case with this HFMD outbreak, Tang. "Speculation can also make parents more worried unnecessarily. The main thing is that this Kerala tomato flu seems to be self limiting, all the kids recover, no deaths, no complications," Tang said. He hopes that his findings will alert pediatricians to be on the lookout for HFMD and other rashes that may be presenting differently in children, so that they can get the proper diagnosis. Even in his own practice, Dr. Michelow said he's noticed an increase in the number of children coming in with HFMD rashes that seem to be presenting more abnormally. It's a good thing for doctors to be aware of. "We're trying to expand the knowledge of pediatricians who see these children everyday," said Tang, "and to include differentials that include these kinds of lesions [and] unusual lesions." Was this page helpful? Thanks for your feedback! Tell us why! Other Submit Related Articles Vaccine-Derived Polio: What to Know After 1st Case in Nearly a Decade Identified in New York Marburg Virus Disease Outbreak in Ghana: What to Know About the Highly Fatal Illness Do You Need a Polio Booster? What Vaccinated People Should Know What Is Mucormycosis? India Sees Potentially Fatal Fungal Infections Rise During COVID-19 The Seine River Is Contaminated—How Dangerous Is It for Olympic Athletes? New York Declares State of Emergency Over Growing Polio Concerns Most Americans Don't Know Heart Disease Is the Country's Leading Cause of Death Can COVID Cause Hearing Loss? Study Finds Link Among Young Adults CDC Recommends Meningococcal Vaccine for Some Amid Florida Outbreak More Than 130 Million Americans Are Breathing Unhealthy Air, New Report Shows What New York’s New Weight Discrimination Bill Means for Weight Stigma What Are the First Signs of Monkeypox? Here's When Symptoms Typically Show Up Everything to Know About the Current US Bird Flu Situation—Including What's Going on In Missouri Powassan Virus Symptoms to Know After Connecticut Woman Dies From Tickborne Illness CDC Says Waiting 8 Weeks Between COVID-19 Vaccines May Lower Myocarditis Risk for Some What Is Human Metapneumovirus? CDC Reports Unusual Spike of Respiratory Virus Health Newsletters Follow Us News Conditions A-Z Nutrition Wellness About Us Medical Expert Board Editorial Process Diversity Pledge Privacy Policy Product Vetting Terms of Service Careers Advertise Contact Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Health is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Newsletter Sign Up Newsletter Sign UpIs it a Cold or the Flu? Malayalam Sign-In E-PAPER VIDEO PODCASTS Sign-Out HOME NEWS KERALA WEB STORIES New SPORTS ENTERTAINMENT LIFESTYLE CAREER & CAMPUS FOOD TRAVEL PODCASTS VIDEOS INFOGRAPHICS TOPICS Paris 2024 Olympics Manorama Online Local News Manorama News TV ManoramaMAX Radio Mango Subscription Sections Hello Log Out Life Decor Health Keralaspora Astrology Home LifeStyle Is it a Cold or the Flu? IANS Published: September 09, 2022 04:26 PM IST Mail This Article × Recipient's Mail This is error message ( For more than one recipient, type addresses seperated by comma ) Your Name This is error message Your Email id This is error message Your Comment This is error message Captche Code This is error message Submit Reset Email sent successfully Image Credit: IANS Topic | Health New Delhi: Cases of common cold and flu (influenza) are on the rise. However, because both viral respiratory illnesses cause similar, often overlapping symptoms, distinguishing between them can be difficult. Dr Agam Vora, Chest Physician, Advanced Multi Specialty Hospitals, Vile Parle (West). Assoc. Hon. & In-Charge, Department of Chest & TB, Dr R.N. Cooper Municipal General Hospital said, "With seasonal changes and sudden shifts in the weather during the monsoon season, we witness a rise of various viral infections ranging from the flu to common cold. It is especially important to recognizethe differences across conditions to effectively treat them and speed up the process of recovery. Further, to avoid these seasonal infections, understanding and adopting preventive measures are also important to keep people healthyand protected." It is critical for individuals to be able to quickly determine whether they are suffering from a cold or the flu so that they can seek the appropriate medical attention. To distinguish the two, there are a few notable differences to keep in mind. RELATED ARTICLES Health Despite multiple treatment modalities why is asthma still a dilemma Health New lung cancer pill cuts risk of casualty by half Here are four key differences between a cold and the flu: While both spread easily from person to person through the air, personal contact and bodily discharge (like saliva or from fluids from coughing or sneezing), they are caused by different viruses. The flu is caused by different strains or types of the influenza virus specifically, while a common cold can be derived from multiple viruses, the most common one being rhinovirus. To understand if an individual is experiencing the flu, consulting a doctor is recommended. They will assess one's symptoms and might recommend getting tested to determine the nature of the virus. Symptoms common to both conditions include body aches, fatigue, headache, sore throat, cough and nasal congestion or a runny or stuffy nose. However, the flu typically involves high grade fever as well (often 101 degrees Fahrenheit or higher), unlike a cold. Another distinguishing symptom is chills (shaking or shivering), which are common with influenza but not with colds. And overall, cold symptoms are usually milder than flu symptoms. There are also differences in the onset of conditions, with a cold's symptoms starting more gradually, while the flu's symptoms begin more abruptly and rapidly escalate. Cold symptoms tend to improve after a week. In the case of the flu, it can gradually improve over two to five days, but effects can also last over a week. The flu can also lead to more serious complications when compared to a cold. Influenza can become a serious condition leading to hospitalization, especially amongst at-risk individuals with comorbidities, including lung or heart problems, diabetes or hypertension. Lung infections or pneumonia are also associated complications. Understanding these distinctions is critical for guiding needed care. At the same time, as the flu season begins this year, it is critical to remember that there are preventive measures that can be taken. As a result, recognising the steps to avoid these conditions this season can be beneficial. As per the WHO, vaccination is one of the key steps to prevent flu infections. This is recommended annually as immune protection from the flu shot can decline over time. Annual shots, in accordance with WHO recommendations, enhance protection against the evolving influenza virus, which changes its structure every year. Meanwhile, there is no vaccine against the common cold, but maintaining good hygiene is key to avoid it. Dr. Jejoe Karan Kumar, Director, Medical Affairs at Abbott said, "By educating the population on the need for a range of preventive measures against respiratory illnesses, including vaccination, we can empower people to protect themselves and others from such conditions. This can prevent unnecessary complications down the line, particularly for children, the elderly and individuals with underlying conditions." Other common preventive measures for both the flu and the common cold, in addition to influenza vaccination, include washing hands more frequently (for at least 20 seconds), limiting close contact with anyone who has cold or flu symptoms, and avoiding touching one's eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands. Take precautions to avoid infection this season, but also be aware of the warning signs so you can seek appropriate care in a timely manner. Tags: Health Fitness Lung Disease The comments posted here/below/in the given space are not on behalf of Onmanorama. The person posting the comment will be in sole ownership of its responsibility. According to the central government's IT rules, obscene or offensive statement made against a person, religion, community or nation is a punishable offense, and legal action would be taken against people who indulge in such activities. MORE IN LIFESTYLE Health 61-year-old Malayali bodybuilder becomes world champion in international competition Health Actor Nepoleon's son's wedding: What is muscular dystrophy? Health Anthony Albanese's social media ban for kids: Why it matters for mental health Health 'Kadannal' or wasp attack: Precautions, remedies and safety tips Health Halim seeds, aliv or aashaali for women's health: Best ways to have them Health Do your eyes twitch often? Here are the reasons Health Heart attacks in young adults: What to do if you have a family history of heart diseases? Health National Cancer Awareness Day: Theme, origin, preventive measures and the way forward Health Worried of bad breath? Simple home remedies to keep it at bay LOAD MORE MANORAMA ONLINE APP Go live with Manorama Online App, the number one Malayalam News site on our mobiles and tablets. SERVICES M4MARRY HELLO ADDRESS MANORAMA QUICKERALA QKDOC MANORAMA HORIZON OTHER SITES MANORAMAONLINE LOCAL NEWS GLOBAL MALAYALI MANORAMA NEWS TV MANORAMAMAX RADIO MANGO VANITHA THE WEEK MANORAMA YEARBOOK CONTACT Manorama Online, Malayala Manorama, P.B No.26, Kottayam 686 001, Kerala, India. About Us Contact Us Manorama Products Media Kit Privacy Careers @Manorama Terms of Use RSS © Copyright 2024 Onmanorama. All Rights Reserved. Login to Onmanorama × 5muv5h1qfu74mfln0booie0el0 https-www-onmanorama-com-lifestyle-health onmanorama-topic-general-topics-76-health onmanorama-topic-general-topics-16-fitness onmanorama-topic-general-topics-24-lung-disease https-www-onmanorama-com-acp https-www-onmanorama-com-lifestyleWhen Should You Get Your Flu Shot for the 2022-2023 Season? | SELFSkip to main contentOpen Navigation MenuMenuWhen Should You Get Your Flu Shot?FitnessFoodHealthLoveBeautySportsLifeHealth ConditionsShoppingMoreChevronSearchSearchFitnessFoodHealthLoveBeautySportsLifeHealth ConditionsShoppingVideoChallengesWorkoutsNewsletter SignupHealth ConditionsChevronInfectious DiseasesChevronCold and FluChevronWhen Should You Get Your Flu Shot?Experts say the 2022-2023 flu season may be especially bad.By Maggie O'NeillSeptember 9, 2022Denis NovikovSave this storySave this storySave this storySave this storyFrom updated COVID boosters to confusion about monkeypox vaccine eligibility, important vaccine updates have been top of mind this summer. But experts say there’s one immunization you shouldn’t forget to book as fall approaches: your flu shot. It’s important to get the flu vaccine every year, but it should be an even higher priority for the 2022-2023 flu season, Thomas Russo, MD, an infectious disease expert at the University of Buffalo Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, tells SELF.That’s because data from Australia’s flu season, which starts to wane just as flu season ramps up in the US, is raising some concerns among infectious disease experts. “We look at Australia to predict our flu season. And this year, they had a horrific flu season,” Kenneth Koncilja, MD, an internal medicine and geriatrics specialist at Cleveland Clinic, tells SELF. “The season peaked two months earlier than normal and with worse intensity.”Last season’s lower numbers, both in Australia and in the US, are likely a success story of all the COVID precautions we took, like masking and social distancing, which are measures that help protect against any respiratory illness, including cold and flu, Dr. Russo says.But as COVID restrictions were lifted globally, influenza once again reared its ugly head. “People are traveling, interacting without masks,” Dr. Russo points out. That’s why experts fear a rise in cases may also unfold in the US this year.So this isn’t the time to pass on your flu vaccine—especially if you face a higher risk of severe illness (or plan on visiting someone who is vulnerable, like your grandparents or a pregnant friend, as you enjoy the holidays). But when should you get your flu shot, anyway? Here’s what you need to know, including when flu season begins and the best time to schedule your appointment.When does flu season start and how long does it typically last?Influenza viruses are detected year-round, but cases tend to spike during the fall and winter months in the US. The exact timing of flu season varies from year to year, per the Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention (CDC), but flu activity (read: when the germs start spreading) usually starts to increase in October and peaks sometime between December and February. That said, “significant activity” may still be recorded as late as May.When should you get your flu shot?The CDC recommends the flu shot for everyone six months or older; you can get vaccinated as early as September, and you ideally shouldn’t wait past October, per the CDC. There’s a reason you’re supposed to get your vaccine before flu season is in full swing; “It takes a couple of weeks [for the vaccine] to kick in,” Dr. Russo says. That means your body generally needs about two weeks to develop flu-fighting antibodies after your vaccination—so you’re not protected right after your appointment.If you aren’t able to get your flu shot during September or October, it’s still worth getting vaccinated later in the season, since flu cases are reported well into spring, Dr. Russo says.Can you get your flu shot and your COVID-19 vaccine or booster at the same time?If you want to make the most of a trip to the pharmacy, there’s no reason you can’t get both shots at the same time (in different arms), Dr. Russo says.As with most vaccines, you may experience certain side effects after you get the flu shot. These can include low-grade fever, headache, muscle aches, nausea, and fatigue, as well as redness, soreness, or swelling at the injection site. Similar side effects can occur after the COVID-19 vaccine, according to the CDC. Feeling a bit crummy post-jab is a totally normal response and typically means your body is doing its job by reacting to the vaccine. You should feel generally better in a few days, so don’t sweat it too much.Of course, if you rather not deal with two achy arms at once, there’s no harm in spacing out your vaccines by a week or two either, Dr. Russo says. If you have a high risk of severe COVID and flu, ask your health care provider when it’s best to get vaccinated—they may recommend prioritizing one vaccine over the other, depending on your personal health history.Where can you get your flu vaccine?In addition to doctors’ offices, community health clinics, and urgent care centers, you can also get your flu vaccine at most pharmacies and even many grocery stores, including chains like CVS, Walgreens, Walmart, Target, and Publix.Some pharmacies only give the flu shot for free if you have health insurance, though. You may also have to get your vaccine at a certain location, such as a primary care provider’s office, in order for your insurance company to cover it. So it’s worth calling ahead of your appointment to make sure you won’t be charged. (Without insurance, a flu shot can cost anywhere from $20 to $75, depending on where you go.)It’s also worth checking in with your employer. Some companies offer flu shots for free as a benefits perk, Dr. Koncilja says. Student health centers also typically offer free flu shots to college students.The CDC’s vaccine finder tool can help you find the nearest place to book an appointment in your area. And if you don’t have insurance, you can always try contacting your local health department, Dr. Russo suggests. Experts in your community may be able to recommend clinics that provide the vaccine to everyone for free, regardless of insurance status.Related:I Don’t Feel Sick Anymore—But Is My Cold Still Contagious?Here’s Why a Post-COVID Cough Can Last So Miserably Long6 Strategies to Help You Avoid Getting Sick While TravelingMaggie O’Neill is a health editor based in New York. She was a fellow of the Association of Health Care Journalists’ 2020 class on Women’s Health Journalism and 2021 class on Cancer Reporting. She received her BA in Journalism and Politics from New York University and her MFA in Creative... Read moreXSELF does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Any information published on this website or by this brand is not intended as a substitute for medical advice, and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.Topicsnewscold and fluvaccinesMore from SelfHow to Safely Pause or Postpone Your PeriodYep, you can actually bypass bleeding, according to ob-gyns.The One Question You Should Never Ask Your Partner During a FightIt turns the conversation into a debate instead of an opportunity to understand each other.On Cloud Shoes Are Everywhere Right Now—Here Are the Best Pairs for Every ActivityPodiatrists say these sneakers are actually worth the hype; here are their picks.The Best Walking Shoes for Wide Feet, According to PodiatristsExpert-approved pairs that feel comfy and fit great.The Best Black Friday and Cyber Monday Treadmill Deals This YearYou don’t have to wait until Thanksgiving to shop the biggest sales.What to Do If You’re Waking Up to Pee Every Damn NightLots of things can trigger this issue—but that doesn’t mean you’re doomed to poor rest.What It Means if You’re Wholly Numb Right Now—And How to CopeIt’s a normal way of processing a range of big emotions at once, according to experts.Your Grief Over the Election Results Is Entirely ValidExperts say it’s natural to mourn any lost hopes, dreams, and expectations for the future.Discover new workout ideas, healthy-eating recipes, makeup looks, skin-care advice, the best beauty products and tips, trends, and more from SELF.FacebookXPinterestInstagramTiktokMore from SelfAbout SELFNewsletter Sign UpVideoMastheadAccessibility helpContactContactCareersUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy RightsRSS FeedsAccessibility HelpCondé Nast Store© 2024 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. SELF may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad ChoicesWhen should I get my flu shot this year? New CDC guidance for people 65 and older - al.com Skip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseQuick Look-Change your current location »Current -Mostly SunnyTonightLow -Mostly SunnyTomorrowHigh -Mostly SunnyView full weather reportBirminghamHuntsvilleMobileMontgomeryTuscaloosaAnniston/GadsdenBeachesAlabamaSubscribeSubscribeThe Birmingham NewsThe Huntsville TimesPress-RegisterMore local news for Birmingham, Huntsville, and Mobile – Start Today for $1NewsWhen should I get my flu shot this year? New CDC guidance for people 65 and olderUpdated: Sep. 06, 2022, 9:52 p.m.|Published: Sep. 06, 2022, 10:57 a.m.Flu season typically starts in the U.S. in October before peaking between December and February and extending into May. (Stuart Ramson/AP)By Leada Gore | lgore@al.comEven as COVID-19 continues to circulate, flu is lurking in the background.Flu season typically starts in the U.S. in October before peaking between December and February and extending into May. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, it takes about two weeks after vaccination for flu antibodies to develop in the body, so timing comes into play when scheduling your influenza vaccine.Most people need only one dose of flu vaccine for the season, making September and October a good time to be vaccinated. Ideally, according to CDC, everyone should be vaccinated by the end of October.Some more guidance from CDC:Most adults, especially those 65 years and older, and pregnant people in the first or second trimester should generally not get vaccinated early (in July or August) because protection may decrease over time. You should consider early vaccination, however, if you know you won’t be able to come back for a vaccination.Some children need two doses of flu vaccine. For those children, it is recommended to get the first dose as soon as vaccine is available, because the second dose needs to be given at least four weeks later. Vaccination during July and August also can be considered for children who need only one dose.Vaccination during July and August also can be considered for people who are in the third trimester of pregnancy during those months, because this can help protect their infants for the first few months after birth (when they are too young to be vaccinated).New guidance for seniorsThe CDC does not recommend any particular flu vaccine for people younger than age 65. It does have preferential vaccines for those ages 65 and older, and that’s new guidance this year.“For people 65 years and older, there are three flu vaccines that are preferentially recommended over standard-dose, unadjuvanted flu vaccines. These are Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent vaccine, Flublok Quadrivalent recombinant flu vaccine and Fluad Quadrivalent adjuvanted flu vaccine,” CDC said.If those aren’t available, the CDC recommends getting any available vaccine.You can find more information on those recommendations here.The CDC recommends everyone 6 months and older get a flu vaccine each year, with a few rare exceptions. You can see more guidance on that here.READ MORE:COVID boosters aimed at omicron are coming to Alabama in SeptemberRECOMMENDED•al.comAlabama schools hit with whooping cough outbreaks: What parents need to knowNov. 8, 2024, 12:19 p.m.Abortion rights advocates win in 4 states and clear way to overturn Missouri ban but lose in FloridaNov. 5, 2024, 5:27 p.m.Free COVID vaccines may be endingAlabama man pleads guilty to using $1.2 million in COVID relief for houses, luxury carsIf you purchase a product or register for an account through a link on our site, we may receive compensation. By using this site, you consent to our User Agreement and agree that your clicks, interactions, and personal information may be collected, recorded, and/or stored by us and social media and other third-party partners in accordance with our Privacy Policy.Footer NavigationAbout UsAbout Alabama Media GroupJobs at Alabama Media GroupAdvertise with usAbout AL.comFrequently Asked QuestionsAccessibility StatementContact UsOnline StoreSubscriptionsAL.comThe Birmingham NewsThe Huntsville TimesPress-RegisterNewsletterAlready a SubscriberManage your SubscriptionPlace a Vacation HoldMake a PaymentDelivery FeedbackAL.com SectionsNewsBusinessSportsHigh School SportsAlabama Life & CultureOpinionArchivesObituariesJobsAutosYour Regional News PagesAnniston/GadsdenBirminghamHuntsvilleMobileMontgomeryTuscaloosaGulf Coast BeachesOn the GoMobile AppsTablet AppsFollow UsPinterestTwitterFacebookInstagramRSSCustomer ServiceSend us an emailSubmit a news tipBuy newspaper front pages, posters and moreMore on AL.comVideosWeather NewsSite Map & searchSponsor ContentPost a jobCookie Settings|Privacy Policy|User Agreement|Ad ChoicesDisclaimerUse of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement, (updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights (updated 7/1/2024).© 2024 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.Ad ChoicesHow pandemics affect divorce rates now – and 100 years ago | Divorce | The Guardian Skip to main contentSkip to navigationClose dialogue1/1Next imagePrevious imageToggle captionSkip to navigationPrint subscriptionsSearch jobs Sign inIntInternational editionUK editionUS editionAustralia editionEurope editionThe Guardian - Back to homeThe GuardianNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleShow moreHide expanded menuNewsView all NewsWorld newsUS elections 2024UK newsClimate crisisUkraineEnvironmentScienceGlobal developmentFootballTechBusinessObituariesOpinionView all OpinionThe Guardian viewColumnistsCartoonsOpinion videosLettersSportView all SportFootballCricketRugby unionTennisCyclingF1GolfUS sportsCultureView all CultureBooksMusicTV & radioArt & designFilmGamesClassicalStageLifestyleView all LifestyleFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneySearch input google-search SearchSupport usPrint subscriptionsSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsThe Guardian appVideoPodcastsPicturesNewslettersToday's paperInside the GuardianThe ObserverGuardian WeeklyCrosswordsWordiplyCorrectionsSearch input google-search SearchSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoney In spite of the stress and enforced togetherness of the pandemic, the divorce rate actually dropped 12% in 2020. Photograph: JGI/Jamie Grill/Getty Images/Tetra images RFView image in fullscreenIn spite of the stress and enforced togetherness of the pandemic, the divorce rate actually dropped 12% in 2020. Photograph: JGI/Jamie Grill/Getty Images/Tetra images RFDivorce This article is more than 2 years oldHow pandemics affect divorce rates now – and 100 years agoThis article is more than 2 years oldIt’s not clear that isolating at home drove couples to separate – and conditions were different during the 1918 flu epidemicVictoria Bekiempis in New YorkSat 10 Sep 2022 08.00 BSTLast modified on Sat 10 Sep 2022 17.19 BSTShareEaster and William Asmus had only been married three months when a petty dispute over theater revealed deep betrayal.On 5 November 1918, Easter attended a play, Where Poppies Bloom, a drama portraying German “intrigue” during the first world war. When Easter got home, she started to tell William all about it. William “flew into a rage and told me I was not to see any war shows; that he was a German and that I, as his wife, was accepting the bounty of a German.”Easter was horrified. When the New York City couple married, William had insisted that he was a US citizen. By marrying a German, Easter “was deprived of her American citizenship and to her great mortification and disgrace, became a subject of the Emperor of Germany, and an enemy alien of the United States of America.”Easter left their home that day, possibly facing poverty and estrangement from her country. Easter’s next move was perhaps more shocking than her husband’s treachery, given the era: she decided to seek an annulment and alimony of $35 a week, according to court documents.Easter’s long-ago predicament surfaced after reports about a phenomenon said to be playing out amid Covid-19: pandemic divorces. Reports described a seeming surge of divorces, separations and sundry splits across the US during coronavirus pandemic. The narrative behind this purported trend is that spouses and partners, stuck at home with their significant others, saw minor annoyances snowball into active hatred and long-simmering resentments turn unsustainable.Much like contentious romantic splits, however, the existence of this specific pandemic-spurred social shift remains a matter of contention. While reports present anecdotal evidence that more people are fleeing their partners – or planning to do so – data doesn’t universally support this.Bowling Green State University researchers Krista Westrick-Payne and Wendy D Manning examined divorce rates during the pandemic and took into account whether pandemic deaths could account for any decline in divorce filings. They found that there was a 12% drop in divorces in 2020.These reports and data, however conflicting, nevertheless made some wonder: what were splits like during the 1918-19 influenza pandemic, which also ravaged the US?A sampling of New York City court documents – which had been sealed for 100 years, and obtained after about 18 months of requests – provides remarkable insight into this. Even as the pandemics ravaged the US a century apart, some of the same issues played out in the divorce courts: colorful language and breathless moralizing showed that marital mudslinging is timeless and immune to disease, even if the spouses were not.They also offer a remarkable glimpse into life in New York more than a 100 years ago, at a time when getting a divorce – for a brave woman – was a risky business full of social disapproval and huge economic risk.In addition to Asmus, another unhappy wife of the early 20th century was Celia Abramovitz, a dressmaker who filed for divorce against her husband, Isidore, in February 1919. Celia alleged that Isidore had committed adultery with women since they wed in 1910 – a New York City lover starting in 1913, and a Montreal, Canada, paramour beginning in 1914 – and said she wanted out of this international love quadrangle.Said acts of adultery were committed without the consent, connivance, privity, or procurement of the plaintiff“Said acts of adultery were committed without the consent, connivance, privity, or procurement of the plaintiff,” court papers stated. More, Celia alleged that the Bostoni, Romania, native lived with his lovers, including one “during the entire year of 1918”.Witness testimony in Celia’s case revealed the breadth of this betrayal. Jacob Golfman, a “woolens and silks” merchant from Montreal who had known Isidore for three years, said that Isidore introduced him to his wife “after a while”.Isidore lived in Montreal with this woman under the same roof and there were three children, whom Isidore introduced as his own, and described her as his wife to “tens of” other people. Golfman once happened upon Isidore, undressed, and his apparent wife in their bedroom.“Is that the lady on the stand?” Celia’s attorney asked.“No, sir, this lady I never saw before with the exception of here in New York.” Golfman learned that the Canadian woman wasn’t Isidore’s wife when he was “arrested and all in that case”.Isidore did not mount a defense against Celia’s divorce petition. A judge found him in default and granted her request.There were spurned husbands, too. Some, like Frank Allen, used relatively plain language in their petitions. Allen, who on 16 December 1918 sought separation from his wife, Mary said that she treated him “in a cruel and inhuman manner in that she committed adultery” over the past year.Mary, he said, “conducted herself as to render it unsafe and improper for [him] to cohabit with her”.But some jilted husbands, such as Arthur Alton , had more sensational petitions.On 22 November 1918, Arthur Alton sought divorce from his wifeAnna claiming that she had cavorted with another man for several years. One day prior, the accused adultress was allegedly caught in the act.Myron Avedikian, an acquaintance of Arthur, traveled with him and several others to Anna’s alleged love nest on Manhattan’s Upper West Side. The party rang the bell.“They answered and they opened the door. We went in together and we saw them – the door open[ed] in the dining room, we saw them both together in the dining room,” Avedikian said in a deposition.Mrs Alton was dressed – not very good clad, I don’t think she had much“You saw the defendant Anna Alton in a room with a man who was not her husband?” Alton’s lawyer asked. Avedikian answered in the affirmative and said that the dining room opened into the bedroom – which had only one bed.“Mrs Alton was dressed – not very good clad, only had an apron and underneath the apron, I don’t think she had much,” Avedikian said. The lawyer asked: “Did she have her stockings on?”, to which Avedikian replied, “No.”“The apron had only one button at the back, so you could see the bare back of her.” The man “had no coat on and was buttoning his pants” when Avedikian and Arthur arrived at the home. The bed, Avedikian said, “wasn’t fixed very nice, certainly”.When Arthur revealed he was Anna’s husband, the man “fussed, but after a while, they started to talk, and they said not to make any noise while doing down”.On 12 August 1919 Arthur got his wish. A judge entered a judgment “dissolving the bonds of matrimony … and freeing the plaintiff from the obligations thereof, and permitting the plaintiff to remarry but forbidding the defendant from remarrying any other person during the lifetime of the plaintiff “except by express permission of the Court”.While it’s not surprising that this matrimonial paperwork would be written in such impassioned terms – divorces, separations and annulments are emotionally tense – there was a legal reason behind this as well. Before 2010, New York state did not have “no fault” divorce, meaning that one spouse had to accuse the other of “adultery, cruelty, imprisonment or abandonment”.Nancy Chemtob, a matrimonial attorney whose high-profile clients have included Mary-Kate Olsen in her split from Olivier Sarkozy, said that a spouse was required to provide proof, this dragged out the proceedings in a way requiring proof of these factors. “I want to get divorced, I don’t like my husband – OK, well, that’s not going to work,” Chemtob said of the days before no-fault divorces.A wife could accuse her husband of cruelty, but ultimately fail to get a divorce if he professed love on the witness stand. One spouse could accuse another of adultery, while the other could respond with a blanket denial of this claim. “How do you prove that?” Chemtob said.Michael Stutman, chairman of the New York City Bar Association matrimonial law committee, pointed out that even when marriages did end, women were at a dramatic disadvantage.“In some states, in the event the female was found to have behaved in certain ways during the marriage before the divorce, that could disenfranchise her from any claim of support as well – while that same conduct, if evidenced by the male, by the husband, he suffered no consequence.”The ultimate impact of Covid-19 on divorce rates remains unclear – the pandemic hasn’t ended yet – but statistics from the influenza pandemic provide interesting historical context. In the five years leading up to the influenza pandemic, there was a gradual increase in divorce rates.In 1913, divorce rate was 0.9 per 1,000 people. In 1914 and 1915, that number climbed to 1.0. In 1916, the rate went up still more, to 1.1 and in 1917, it reached 1.2 per 1,000.Then came the influenza pandemic. There was a dip in 1918, to 1.1 per 1,000, but in 1919, it rebounded to 1.3. After that, the divorce rate continued to trend upward, even with periodic dips, peaking in the 1950s, according to CDC vital statistics.Ranjit Dighe, professor of economics at the State University of New York at Oswego, said that increase in divorces in the late 1910s and 1920s came amid tremendous social upheaval about gender roles.Dinhe noted that Congress voted to give women the right to vote in 1919, a legal decision that was ratified in 1920. This, in turn, might have contributed to the dramatic rise in divorces. “You probably had more women who were a lot more independent-minded.”As for a dip in 1918, Dighe said he would be surprised if the influenza pandemic itself had much of an impact in divorce, as some claim Covid-19 has had. “You didn’t have a lot of people quarantining, couples kind of jammed together,” Dinge said, as officials “really tried to sweep it under the rug”, even more so than early on in Covid.However, the influenza pandemic might have addressed marital woes in another way. “It’s entirely possible that some couples that would have been divorced didn’t have to, because one was dead,” Dighe said. “Bad marriages might have ended in death because of influenza.”Explore more on these topicsDivorceWomenCoronavirusInfectious diseasesShareReuse this contentMost viewedMost viewedFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneyNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleOriginal reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morningSign up for our emailHelpComplaints & correctionsSecureDropWork for us Privacy policyCookie policyTerms & conditionsContact usAll topicsAll writersDigital newspaper archiveTax strategyFacebookYouTubeInstagramLinkedInXNewslettersAdvertise with usSearch UK jobsBack to top© 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)Austin Public Health urges flu vaccines and new COVID-19 boostersPlease ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of website accessibilitySun, 10 Nov 2024 15:27:02 GMT (1731252422574)Story Infinite Scroll - News3 v1.0.0 (common)c176e2edee36242d1f910bbcf0b370e84d231d3fNewsWeatherRadarMapsCamsWeather Alert DaysHurricane CenterAllergensWeather BlogWeather AppWe Are Austin SportsGame CenterWatch Now 83 Sat 77 Sun 82Austin Public Health urges flu vaccines and new COVID-19 boostersby Fred CantuTue, September 6th 2022 at 5:22 PMUpdated Wed, September 7th 2022 at 7:17 PMFile image of a nurse drawing a dose of flu vaccine. (Photo by Tim Boyle/Getty Images)TOPICS:AustinAustin Public HealthFlu vaccinecovid vaccineAustraliaHealth Medical PharmaUnited Statessocial issuesA flu outbreak on the other side of the world is raising concern about flu spreading here at home. A tough flu season right now in Australia has medical professionals here worried about what's to come when flu season hits the U.S.Nelda Garcia is the RN program supervisor for Austin Public Health. She explains, “We usually look to the southern hemisphere to give us a guide on how we're going to be and that's why we're emphatic about pushing the flu shot this year.”With that news, Austin public health is now urging everyone to get their flu shot. Back-to-school has kids indoors again, and before you know it the holidays will gather everyone together even closer. So, Austin Public health recommends you get the new COVID booster when getting your flu shot.COVID shots are a harder sell these days with people now reporting they got COVID even though they were vaccinated. But Garcia says the vaccines save lives. “No one is saying you're not going to get sick, you're not going to get the flu, you're not going to get COVID," she says adding, "What it keeps you out of is the hospital and/or dying."ALSO | Should you get a new COVID booster? If so, when?On Tuesday the White House COVID-19 Response Team suggested that getting your flu shot and your COVID booster at the same time may become the new norm. Dr. Anthony Fauci said, “In the absence of a dramatically different variant we likely are moving toward a path with a vaccination cadence similar to that of the annual influenza vaccine.The feds say just like the annual flu shot is formulated against current flu strains, the new COVID booster provides important new protection against current variants. White House COVID-19 Coordinator Dr. Ashish Jha says, “So here’s the simple version: If you’re 12+ and previously vaccinated, it’s time to go get an updated COVID-19 shot.”The new COVID boosters aren't available from Austin Public Health yet. But some local pharmacies and health care providers do have them. Something to ask your doctor about when you get your flu shot.Stay ConnectedLike UsFollow Ussbg-envelopeNewsletter Sign up /sign-up© 2024 Sinclair, Inc.TermsEEOFCCFCCPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyCookie PreferencesLoading ...Should you get a flu shot and COVID booster at the same time in Michigan? | Bridge Michigan Skip to main content Main navigation Popular Popular Most Popular Article Consumers, DTE to expand EV charger network in Michigan July 8, 2024 | Kelly House in Michigan Environment Watch Most Popular, #2–7 2024 Michigan elections: A record 5.6 million Michigan votes cast in Tuesday electionNovember 6, 2024 Michigan live election results 2024: US Senate, Mike Rogers, Elissa SlotkinNovember 5, 2024 Elissa Slotkin wins razor-thin race for Michigan US Senate seatNovember 6, 2024 Michigan live election results 2024: US president, Kamala Harris, Donald TrumpNovember 5, 2024 Donald Trump wins Michigan, White House as 'blue wall' collapsesNovember 6, 2024 Michigan House flips to Republicans: Here’s how they did itNovember 6, 2024 Topics Topics Talent & Education Government Health Children & Families Business Urban Affairs Quality of Life Environment Guest Commentary Archive About About About Staff Funders Individual Membership Business & Nonprofit Membership Power Circle Membership Sponsorship Jobs The Center for Michigan Corrections Policy (Empty item) Events Sign Up Contact Search Close menu Light theme Dark theme Michigan’s nonpartisan, nonprofit news source Menu Election coverage you value DONATE Topic: Michigan Health Watch Should you get a flu shot and COVID booster at the same time? With a new COVID booster, health officials have suggested a “two-fer” — getting the flu shot and COVID booster at the same appointment. (Shutterstock) September 9, 2022 Robin Erb (Email) Michigan Health Watch Coronavirus MichiganShare This: Share this article on Twitter Share this article on Facebook Share this article on LinkedIn Share this article via email Print this article Michigan Health WatchShould you get a flu shot and COVID booster at the same time?Share This: Share this article on Twitter Share this article on Facebook Share this article on LinkedIn Share this article via email Print this article Donate Flu cases have been minimal the past two seasons, worrying experts that some people won’t get immunized The Biden administration suggests people get their flu shot at the same time they get a redesigned COVID boosterHealth experts differ on the timing of the flu shot, but say it’s better to get both shots now then to forget one of them With two relatively non-existent flu seasons — not to mention a weariness over repeated COVID boosters — Michigan residents might be reluctant to roll up their sleeves this fall for an annual flu shot.Not good, experts say.“Flu is going to circulate — absolutely,” said Joe Fava, assistant professor of pharmacy practice at Wayne State University.Related:Michigan COVID booster appointments filling up. How to get yours.Redesigned COVID boosters arrive in Michigan. Here’s what you need to knowHeart disease exposes disparities, so medicine goes mobile in DetroitLong COVID patients, dismissed by doctors, turn to art to show their painDespite worries of a “twindemic” (of flu and COVID), influenza practically disappeared from Michigan and the United States through much of the pandemic millions of people isolated at home and took safety precautions.“People were masking up, hand-sanitizing,” said Farah Jalloul, state emergency preparedness coordinator for the Michigan Pharmacists Association. “If anyone sneezed, everyone walked away from them.”But fewer people are toting masks around these days, and daily safety protocols have loosened, if not disappeared altogether, from schools. So expect a more typical flu season this year along with staying on top of the newly redesigned COVID vaccine. What’s new with flu In Michigan, the season typically begins in October, peaking in December, January or February — though the season peaked late last winter. Without the large volumes of flu sufferers the past two years, immunity against it has dropped, said Josh Petrie, a researcher specializing in influenza at the Wisconsin-based Marshfield Clinic Research Institute. Petrie worked at the University of Michigan flu lab until earlier this year and continues to collaborate with the Michigan researchers as part of the CDC’s national flu surveillance network.Looking forward, he said Friday, “I’d guess we’ll have a flu season more typically like those before the pandemic.” That’s not the only reason to be concerned about influenza this year. While flu activity remains low around Michigan, according to the latest state health department surveillance report, some worry that a particularly rough flu season in Australia that peaked in June — Australia’s wintertime flu season — could be bound for the United States.Too early?The Biden administration has encouraged people to get the updated COVID booster as soon as they are eligible. The new vaccine, which is now available in Michigan, has been tailored to target the current omicron subvariants. But administration officials have faced some pushback by suggesting people get both shots — for COVID and flu — at the same time. Some health experts worry that getting a flu shot in early September may be too early, given the late peak of the flu season this past year. The flu shot’s effectiveness wanes after several months, in part, because flu strains shift and the body’s immune response against the virus fades in the months following the shot. (In comparison, some vaccines, like those against measles, rubella, and diphtheria, protect for a lifetime.)But Fava, Jalloul and Petrie told Bridge that healthy people should worry more about making sure they get a flu shot than trying to time it to when the virus will peak this year. The calculation: If getting both shots at the same time makes it more likely you won’t forget one of them, just get them and don’t worry about whether they are perfectly timed. The flu season is too unpredictable to precisely time a vaccine, anyway, Petrie said.“It would be nice to time your flu vaccine to as close to the beginning of the season as possible, but it’s just not predictable,” he said.The alternative is to wait, but the worry is that flu season will be well underway before individuals are once again reminded about the flu.“It might be a little bit early, but the trade off is getting people vaccinated in the first place,” he said.For her part, Jalloul said she usually gets the flu shot as soon as, or soon after, supplies arrive in the summer — August or September, she said. Fava usually gets his in mid-September, he said.Petrie, the flu researcher, said Friday he was going to get his flu shot this week, but misplaced his wallet.The new COVID booster For some Michiganders, including those over 50, the newly designed COVID booster is a fifth jab to fight the coronavirus.Despite that, interest in the latest shot has been steady this week, said Jalloul of the pharmacists’ association. Of course, she said, those asking for the COVID and flu shots now are the most motivated — often older Michiganders who are most at risk for severe disease if they’re infected.Following federal guidance, Jalloul also recommends a “two-fer” visit to pharmacy customers — a COVID booster and the seasonal flu shot at the same time.The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that influenza shots be offered during September or October, and they should remain available as long as influenza viruses are circulating. Recommendations are different for young children. Children ages 6 months through 8 years require two doses. They should receive the first dose when the vaccine becomes available in the summer. People moderately or severely infected with COVID-19 are advised to hold off getting a flu shot until they’ve recovered. The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services has set a goal this year of 4 million Michiganders vaccinated against the flu last year. It fell short last year, with 3.3 million being vaccinated, according to the state’s flu dashboard. More than 3.1 million of them were given by Jan. 1. Related Articles: Free COVID tests return in time for Michigan’s respiratory disease season September 26, 2024 | Robin Erb in Michigan Health Watch Michigan repurposes COVID testing sites to reduce health disparities September 16, 2024 | Robin Erb in Michigan Health Watch In Michigan, 1 in 3 students miss 18+ days of school a year, data shows September 13, 2024 | Isabel Lohman, Mike Wilkinson in Talent & Education How impactful was this article for you?Rate1/5Rate2/5Rate3/5Rate4/5Rate5/5Michigan Health WatchMichigan Health Watch is made possible by generous financial support from: Please visit the About page for more information, and subscribe to Michigan Health Watch. Share the article you just read on Twitter Share the article you just read on Facebook Share the article you just read via email Most Read Always have a backup plan & other lessons from Bridge Michigan’s EV road trip Five days, 1,180 miles, lots of headaches and fun: Driving Michigan in an EV Michigan EV enthusiasts get ready for 1st all-electric Woodward ‘Clean Cruise’Editor’s Choice 2024 Michigan elections: A record 5.6 million Michigan votes cast in Tuesday election Mining rush brings hope, dread to Upper Peninsula, amid historic energy shift In bustling Marquette, tensions grow amid $1M condos, influx of new residents Only donate if we've informed you about important Michigan issues See what new members are saying about why they donated to Bridge Michigan:“In order for this information to be accurate and unbiased it must be underwritten by its readers, not by special interests.” - Larry S.“Not many other media sources report on the topics Bridge does.” - Susan B.“Your journalism is outstanding and rare these days.” - Mark S.If you want to ensure the future of nonpartisan, nonprofit Michigan journalism, please become a member today. You, too, will be asked why you donated and maybe we'll feature your quote next time! Pay with VISA Pay with MasterCard Pay with American Express Pay with PayPal Donate Now Like Bridge Michigan on Facebook Follow Bridge Michigan on Twitter Follow Bridge Michigan on Instagram Subscribe to Bridge Michigan’s RSS feed Quick Links Home Popular Topics Privacy Policy Archive About Subscribe Contact ©2024 Bridge Michigan. All rights reserved. Website by Gravity WorksUPDATE: Equine Influenza Vaccine Shortage - The Official Website of British Showjumping Member Login G Membership How To Join/Renew Categories Fees New Member Discounts Day Tickets to Ride Safe and Fair Sport Report a Concern Safeguarding Equine Welfare Clean Sport Policy Just for Schools Membership Club Membership Para Equestrian Jumping Classification Contacts and Links Para Jumping Grades Retraining of Racehorses Import Winnings National Membership Sponsored Member Discounts & Offers Membership Forms Regions East News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us East Midlands News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us Northern News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us Scotland News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Royal Highland Show Qualifiers Royal Highland Show Qualified Riders Scottish Branch Championships Scottish Pony Performance League Scottish Pony Parent League Scottish Champions Tour Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us South East News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us South West News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us Wales News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us West Midlands News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us Training Dates & Venues Coaching Academy First Aid Courses Safeguarding Workshops Work Based Apprenticeships British Showjumping National Training Centre Becoming a British Showjumping Coach Step Up Your Coaching Programme Shows Winter Qualifiers 2024/25 Show Calendar Show Notices Qualifying Dates, Venues and Qualified Riders Blue Chip Dates 2024-2025 Scottish Branch Champs Qualifying Wording International International Calendar Fees Guide to FEI & FAQs International Forms Selection Policies, Viewing Shows & Team Dates Updates Leagues Para Leagues National Para League Para Equestrian League (Graded Competition) Gold League - Horse Find An International Stairway Silver League - Horse Bronze League - Horse Young Riders League Top Owners League HorseQuest Top Horse League Children on Horses FEI World Ranking List KBIS Club Regional Ranking List International Stairway Series Area/International Trials Points Pony/Rider Leagues Bronze Pony/Rider Combination League Silver Pony/Rider Combination League Gold 128 Pony/Rider Combination League Gold 138 Pony/Rider Combination League Gold 148 Pony/Rider Combination League Forces Equine Just For Schools Team League Just For Schools Individual League National Champion Title Holders Retrained Racehorses Retraining of Racehorses National Recognition Awards Retraining of Racehorses Bronze League Retraining of Racehorses Club League News News Headlines More News Home News Headlines UPDATE: Equine Influenza Vacci... UPDATE: Equine Influenza Vaccine Shortage Tuesday 06 September 2022 Further to the update issued jointly with the British Equestrian Veterinary Association (BEVA) and the British Horseracing Authority (BHA) on 17 August, it has been confirmed there are distribution problems with equine influenza doses of Boehringer Ingelheim’s Proteq product. This is a Europe-wide issue, but the impact of a shortage of doses has hit the UK first, with a number of veterinary practices already out of stock. Early indications from the company are that the issues will continue until the end of October at the very earliest. Working closely with BEVA, British Equestrian’s Emergency Response Group (BEF ERG) can offer temporary guidelines to help minimise the impact of the shortage of vaccine stocks for a limited period whilst preserving the health of our national equine herd. The BEF ERG will continue to meet regularly to monitor the situation and work on a strategy to manage vaccine stocks through the shortage and as supplies return to normal. British Showjumping specific guidance Whilst there is an issue with vaccine supply, we are removing the advice to have 6 monthly boosters which will will help conserve stocks for those horses who need it more urgently. Our remaining vaccine rules including the 12 month booster requirement remain in place at this point. More information can be found below - for any British Showjumping related queries please contact sportteam@britishshowjumping.co.uk BEVA have modelled advice based on risk groups within the equine population, based on their vaccination history and frequency of mixing/competing: Lowest Adult horses Fully vaccinated and mixing rarely Other horses on the yard occasionally mixing Low Adult horses Incomplete vaccination history and mixing occasionally Other horses on the yard occasionally mixing Medium Adult horses Fully vaccinated and mixing frequently High Young horses aged four or under Incomplete vaccination history and mixing rarely Other horses on the yard rarely mixing Highest Young horse aged four or under and mixing frequently Leisure horses We recommend general leisure horse owners in the low or lowest category whose horse’s 12-monthly booster is due anytime while the shortage is in place should defer their vaccination by up to three months, giving a maximum of 15 months since the previous booster. Any decision to defer the 12-month booster should be done against local risk assessment and in consultation with the owner’s vet. BEVA has established that there is evidence that horses are still protected at 15 months, even is this situation is far from ideal and the protection isn’t as great as it was at 12 months. Having had a good history of vaccination in the past is likely to help. Those who defer their vaccination should then follow with a booster within nine months to ensure the protocol of horses having two boosters within a two-year period is maintained. Horses due from late August until the situation is resolved would move to an annual vaccination programme which would look like: 2021 – 12-month interval, then 2022 – up to 15-month interval and in 2023 – up to nine-month interval. Example horse: 15 September 2021 – annual EI booster administered 2022 booster deferred to a maximum of 15 December 2022 Booster administered 10 December 2022 2023 booster due by two years from the 2021 date. Horse owners who defer their vaccination should get the affected horse’s passport signed and dated by their vet to document the delay with the statement ‘12-month booster delayed to due to vaccine shortage – due before > vet to insert date (within three months of due date) <’. This passport entry can be made anytime from one month prior to the original vaccine due date until the date on which the 15-month extension has elapsed, provided that it has been signed before the horse attends a gathering. It’s important to note that owners of horses who would fall into the criteria below are strongly advised to stay within the 12-month vaccination requirement to meet requirements or be at risk of having to restart the vaccination course or be refused entry: planning to affiliate with any member body with a current 12-month vaccination requirement in their rules are destined to race under BHA rules have international aspirations to compete under FEI rules currently or in the future planning to take part in activities which require competition and/or stabling at a racecourse, agricultural/equestrian college or equestrian venue which operates a six and/or 12-monthly vaccination requirement. BEF is liaising closely with these venues and will provide specific information should any decide to allow horses vaccinated between 12 and 15 months during the vaccine shortage to use their facilities at present and in the future. Competition horses For horses registered to member bodies who regulate affiliated competitions, a different approach has been agreed with the Olympic disciplines. Due to the vaccination requirements currently in place there is a higher level of immunity among those horses competing, providing a strong foundation and reducing the risk level. However, competition horses also mix more frequently with others and there is a need for close regulatory alignment with other governing bodies, including the FEI and BHA. Having reviewed the advice and recommendations from BEVA, we are awaiting further guidance from the FEI for international competition, which is anticipated later this week, on Thursday 8 September. In the meantime, owners with horses who compete under the auspices of one of our member bodies, or plan to do so in future, should note the following measures: British Horse Society (including British Riding Clubs), Pony Club, Riding for the Disabled Association, Association of British Riding Schools and The Showing Council Horses competing under their rules will be permitted to defer to a 15-month booster followed by a nine-month booster until further notice to preserve two boosters in two years. These horses should have their passports marked and signed by their vet to document the delay and identify the new booster due date (within 15 months). Owners of horses who are considering registering with a member body retaining the 12-month requirement, have an aspiration to compete internationally or take part in activities which use racecourses and/or agricultural or equine colleges, should stay within the 12-month booster requirement. British Dressage, British Eventing, British Horseball Association and British Carriagedriving These disciplines currently state that the most recent booster injection must have been given within six calendar months (+21 days) prior to the horse competing. There will be a temporary national derogation of this rule with immediate effect, until further notice. The requirement of a 12-month vaccination booster will continue to remain in place. British Showjumping The strong recommendation to have a vaccination booster within six months of a competition has been removed with immediate effect. The requirement of a 12-month vaccination booster will remain in place until further notice. British Equestrian Vaulting Will retain their 12-month booster rule for the foreseeable future while monitoring the situation. Endurance GB The 12-month booster requirement will be retained. However, in exceptional circumstances where the shortage prevents a booster being administered, the horse may extend to 15 months with prior approval by the EGB Welfare Director. These horses must have their passports marked and signed by their vet to document the delay and identify the new booster due date (within 15 months). Competitors/supporters who go over their 12-month booster will need to restart their vaccination programme if they wish to enter an FEI ride, an Endurance GB ride where FEI sections are taking place or a ride where BHA vaccination rules apply. British Reining, Mounted Games Association of Great Britain and UK Polocrosse Association Decision on retaining a 12-month requirement or derogation to 15 months is pending. Horse owners are reminded that many member body rules require horses to have clear six- or seven-day period from a booster being administered to competing. Please consult your discipline rule book. Further updates We will share any updates from the FEI on their requirements following their Board meeting taking place on Thursday 8 September. Owners of horses who compete internationally under FEI registration should endeavour to follow their current requirements until told otherwise. The BHA issued an update on their current position on 27 August and will continue to monitor the situation with the BEF and BEVA. Those who are not affiliated with a member body but compete or regularly mix with other horses should consult with their vet against BEVA’s risk groups when making a decision on deferring vaccination boosters. Celia Marr, Chair of British Equestrian’s Equine Infectious Diseases Advisory Group, commented, “We find ourselves in a very difficult situation on how best to mitigate the risks posed by this vaccine shortage. However, the ERG is working collaboratively within BEF’s member bodies and with BEVA and BHA, and we hope that we have established guidelines which allow vets to effectively manage supplies within their practices while preserving the established herd immunity amongst our vaccinated population. “We know the devastating impact an equine flu epidemic can have and must continue to work together to prevent that. Moving the low and lowest risk and some medium-risk horses to a 15- and nine-month programme, while not perfect, is a good solution to ensure we have enough vaccine in the country to protect our most vulnerable horses, manage the equine influenza risk and prevent as many horses as possible from having to restart their vaccination course. We’re grateful to the member bodies for working with us to manage the situation.” Jim Eyre, BEF Chief Executive added, “The ERG, our member bodies, BEVA and BHA have acted decisively in what is an ever-changing situation, which we’ll continue to monitor closely and manage. We want to reassure horse owners in the United Kingdom that deferring their booster for three months will give protection to healthy, adult horses with a good vaccination history and following with the next booster within nine months, so the horse effectively has ‘two in two’, is important. We’re grateful for everyone’s immediate support and actions in a bid to manage this crisis. The ERG will continue monitor the situation with member bodies and BEVA and, while the end of October has been indicated for supply issues to be resumed, we will make plans under the assumption that this could continue. We will continue to meet until normal vaccine supplies are resumed and six and/or 12-month boosters can be reinstated for all vaccinated horses.” The need for every owner to put in strong biosecurity and surveillance measures is always important but now more than ever. Horse owners should be alert to the signs of illness in horses and, if displayed, not travel or compete, but call the vet as soon as possible. Equally, when introducing new horses into your yard/herd, you should always operate a quarantine programme. It’s advisable currently to adopt pre-movement PCR testing and a five-day PCR test five days after arrival for new equines if unvaccinated. BEVA has frequently asked questions on their websites, which may help with any queries horse owners may have. Image credit: British Equestrian Next Article > Recent News Headlines Longines League of Nations™ 2025 qualified teams announced06/11/2024 Daisy-Bella Newman’s Commands Victory in the 138cm Grand Prix victory at South View Arena at her final big show with Party for Cornflakes05/11/2024 Iwan Carpenter seizes victory in the Under 25 British Championship Qualifier at Kelsall Hill Equestrian Centre04/11/2024 Paul Sims records his third consecutive 1.40m win on Jankorado GB at Kelsall Hill Equestrian Centre with victory in the Winter Grand Prix04/11/2024 Sandy McLean claims victory in the UNIBED – High Performance Equine Bedding Grades B&C Qualifier at Kelsall Hill Equestrian Centre 04/11/2024 view news archive » Search Other Links About Us Contact Us Sitemap Podcast Sponsors & Partners Sponsorship Recruitment Useful Links © 2024 British Showjumping. The British Showjumping Association is a Limited Company registeredin England and Wales with the registration number 210797. Privacy Policy | Registered office: Meriden Business Park, Copse Drive,Meriden, West Midlands, CV5 9RG Tel: 024 7669 8800 | Fax: 024 7669 6685 Site designed and managed by ideasBarn Site Menu Home Members Online Membership Sponsored Member Discounts & Offers Membership Forms Import Winnings Club Membership National Membership Safe and Fair Sport Clean Sport Policy Equine Welfare Safeguarding Report a Concern Retraining of Racehorses Just for Schools Membership Para Equestrian Jumping Para Jumping Grades Classification Contacts and Links How To Join/Renew New Member Discounts Fees Day Tickets to Ride Categories Regions East News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us East Midlands News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us Northern News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us Scotland News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Royal Highland Show Qualifiers Royal Highland Show Qualified Riders Scottish Branch Championships Scottish Pony Performance League Scottish Pony Parent League Scottish Champions Tour Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us South East News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us South West News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us Wales News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us West Midlands News Show Dates Show Centres Show Information Training Dates/Venues Training Coaches Contact Us Training Dates & Venues Academy Coaching Becoming a British Showjumping Coach Step Up Your Coaching Programme Safeguarding Workshops Work Based Apprenticeships British Showjumping National Training Centre First Aid Courses Shows Qualifying Dates, Venues and Qualified Riders Scottish Branch Champs Blue Chip Dates 2024-2025 Qualifying Wording Show Notices Winter Qualifiers 2024/25 Show Calendar International International Forms Selection Policies, Viewing Shows & Team Dates Guide to FEI & FAQs Updates International Calendar Fees Leagues FEI World Ranking List KBIS Club Regional Ranking List International Stairway Series Pony/Rider Leagues Gold 138 Pony/Rider Combination League Gold 148 Pony/Rider Combination League Bronze Pony/Rider Combination League Gold 128 Pony/Rider Combination League Silver Pony/Rider Combination League Forces Equine Young Riders League Area/International Trials Points Just For Schools Team League Just For Schools Individual League Children on Horses National Champion Title Holders Retrained Racehorses Retraining of Racehorses Club League Retraining of Racehorses Bronze League Retraining of Racehorses National Recognition Awards Bronze League - Horse Para Leagues Para Equestrian League (Graded Competition) National Para League HorseQuest Top Horse League Silver League - Horse Gold League - Horse Find An International Stairway Top Owners League News More News News HeadlinesJersey anti-bird flu measures to begin on WednesdaySkip to contentBritish Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveHomeNewsIsrael-Gaza WarWar in UkraineUS & CanadaUKUK PoliticsEnglandN. IrelandN. Ireland PoliticsScotlandScotland PoliticsWalesWales PoliticsAfricaAsiaChinaIndiaAustraliaEuropeLatin AmericaMiddle EastIn PicturesBBC InDepthBBC VerifyUS ElectionFull resultsKamala HarrisDonald TrumpJD VanceTim WalzSportBusinessExecutive LoungeTechnology of BusinessFuture of BusinessInnovationTechnologyScience & HealthArtificial IntelligenceAI v the MindCultureFilm & TVMusicArt & DesignStyleBooksEntertainment NewsArtsArts in MotionTravelDestinationsAfricaAntarcticaAsiaAustralia and PacificCaribbean & BermudaCentral AmericaEuropeMiddle EastNorth AmericaSouth AmericaWorld’s TableCulture & ExperiencesAdventuresThe SpeciaListEarthNatural WondersWeather & ScienceClimate SolutionsSustainable BusinessGreen LivingVideoLiveLive NewsLive SportHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherNewslettersJersey anti-bird flu measures to begin on WednesdayBBCAll bird keepers in Jersey must house their flocks from Wednesday 7 SeptemberBirdkeepers in Jersey must keep their birds housed from Wednesday to try to halt further outbreaks of avian flu.The government of Jersey announced an island prevention zone following an increase in reports of confirmed avian influenza cases.Enclosures must be covered with a "solid or impermeable roof" to prevent wild bird faeces from entering.Deputy Jonathan Renouf said poultry must also be kept away from wild birds to protect both birds and livelihoods.The Minister for the Environment said: "The virus is causing mass mortalities and suffering in flocks, and we must now step up measures island-wide to protect both the birds and the livelihoods of commercial farmers. Disinfectant foot dips"Bird flu has the potential to wipe out huge numbers of birds so we must act now to do everything we can to minimise the risks of infection. The key is keeping poultry away from contact with wild birds."It is the second time the government has enforced bird flu restrictions on the island in 2022.Birdkeepers should keep food and water stations away from vermin-proofed perimeter fencing, and must install Defra-approved disinfectant foot dips at entrances and exits.Mr Renouf said imposing restrictions was not a "decision we have taken lightly", and urged bird keepers to follow "good biosecurity measures to help us ensure the situation doesn't further escalate".On Friday, all poultry keepers were told they must register their flocks, regardless of size, by deputy chief veterinary officer Caroline Terburgh.Follow BBC Jersey on Twitter and Facebook. Send your story ideas to channel.islands@bbc.co.uk.All poultry keepers urged to register flocksConcerns over rising bird flu cases in seabirdsFarmers told to prepare for bird flu restrictionsDead seagull tests positive for bird flu in JerseyBird flu restrictions imposed on islandThird bird in Jersey tests positive for bird fluDead buzzards test positive for bird fluBritish Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherBBC ShopBBC in other languagesFollow BBC on:Terms of UseAbout the BBCPrivacy PolicyCookiesAccessibility HelpContact the BBCAdvertise with usDo not share or sell my infoContact technical supportCopyright 2024 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Avian Influenza Update: Wednesday, 7 September • Paignton Zoo Skip to content About Contact Media Careers BuyTickets OnlineShop Ongoing updates and improvements Find out more Visit Visit Plan your visit Latest updates Things to do What’s on Memberships Memberships Become a member Wildlife & conservation Wildlife & conservation A-Z of animals Live webcams Conservation projects Botanical gardens Keeper talks Education & research Education & research Educational visits Science & research Education resources Adoptions & experiences Adoptions & experiences Adopt an animal Current adoption supporters Animal experiences Support us Support us Corporate support Donate Volunteer Online Shop Cart0 Tickets Newsletter Shop Donate Avian influenza update: Wednesday, 7 September Since receiving the positive test results for avian influenza in two of our birds, we have been cooperating with the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) and the Department of Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs (Defra) to investigate the infection and implement the necessary biosecurity and quarantine measures.The positive test results have meant that we have been placed under a restriction notice by APHA, and the findings of their investigation have led to a list of actions that we are now required to comply with before this restriction can be lifted. The prompt response of our teams has meant that the number of affected birds has been kept to a minimum but APHA have identified 2 areas of concern: the main lake and our free-ranging peafowl.The main lake houses our Dalmatian pelican, sarus crane, bar-headed geese, greylag geese, black necked swan, and red crested pochard. The majority of these birds, along with almost all of our peafowl, have been rounded up and placed into biosecure quarantine facilities elsewhere in the zoo. Despite the phenomenal efforts by our teams, a small number of birds have so far evaded capture and we are now in the very difficult position of accepting that these individuals must be removed by other means. We will therefore be complying with APHA’s requirement that these birds be humanely culled by a specialist APHA team.As a conservation charity, we exist to help halt species decline and we firmly believe that every species is important so we are doing everything we can to protect our animals, many of which are endangered. Our conservation mission extends to species and habitats across the globe, as well as those that live in our zoos and reserves. Our expert bird team cares for over 400 birds, including some of the world’s most threatened species, and we remain determined to continue this vital work despite this devastating setback.We continue to work with APHA and Defra to determine the next steps for those birds that have already been placed into secure quarantine and hope to provide further updates on them soon. We also continue to make the necessary changes to enclosures and aviaries around the site to strengthen the biosecurity and safety of our other birds away from the main lake area.Our priority throughout has been the health and welfare of our birds and we have been doing all we can to ensure their safety and the continued provision of their usual excellent care. This is a heart-breaking situation and we repeat our earlier message of thanks to the many hundreds of people who have offered their support, and made donations to our zoo.If you would like to support us in these challenging times, please visit our website and you will find various ways to do so in our Support Us section.We hope to open again fully to the public this weekend (Saturday, 10 September) and will provide further updates via our website and social media. SUPPORT US LINKS Sign up to our newsletter Subscribe Our website uses cookies. By continuing to use the site you are agreeing to the use of cookies. Click here to find out why. © Copyright Paignton Zoo 2024. All Rights Reserved. South West Environmental Parks Ltd, is an educational, scientific and conservation charity dedicated to protecting our global wildlife heritage. Paignton Zoo, Totnes Road, Paignton, Devon TQ4 7EU (Registered office). Company No. 792877 Registered Charity No. 300923 Website by Bigwave Marketing Sign up to our newsletter Subscribe © Paignton Zoo 2024 Registered charity number 300923 About Contact Media Careers Privacy Cookies Terms & Conditions Sitemap Website by Bigwave MarketingSwine flu: Warning signs and symptoms, treatments, key precautions to avoid H1N1 | Health - Hindustan Times Explore Search Monday, Nov 11, 2024 New Delhi oC Subscribe Games E-Paper Sign in My Account Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Enjoy unlimited access Subscribe Now! Get features like Ad lite A Minimal Ad Experience HT Premium Articles Expertly crafted articles Quickreads Segment News brief in summary format HT E-paper Access digital news experience Start 14 Days Free Trial Home Assembly Elections 2024 HT Premium HTCity Loan ₹10 Lakh India World Real Estate Powered by Entertainment Trending Astrology Lifestyle Education Business Cities Latest News Games & Puzzles IPL Auction Win iPhone 15 The Taste of Time Photos Web Stories Sports Delhi News Mumbai News Bengaluru News Technology Quickreads Daily Digest Following Games + 5 more Technology Quickreads Daily Digest Following Games Swine flu: Warning signs and symptoms, treatments, key precautions to avoid H1N1 ByZarafshan Shiraz, Delhi Sep 09, 2022 10:49 AM IST Read this news in brief form Share Via Copy Link Doctors reveal what are the key precautions required to avoid swine flu or H1N1, the symptoms and warning signs to look out for if someone has caught it, treatments to overcome it and special precautions and care are required specifically for children and the elderly H1N1 is simply one of the strains of the influenza virus, that causes H1N1 flu, also commonly called “swine flu” as it was originally found in pigs. The virus is quite contagious and spreads between humans quickly and effectively, causing symptoms similar to those of the regular human flu. Swine flu: Warning signs and symptoms, treatments, key precautions to avoid H1N1 (cottonbro) Symptoms and warning signs: In an interview with HT Lifestyle, Dr Vikram Vora, Medical Director, India Subcontinent – International SOS, shared, “The symptoms and warning signs of H1N1 flu are very similar to regular human flu and are caused by the growth of the virus in the cells of the nose, throat and lungs. These include fever (with or without chills), sore throat, cough, runny nose/stuffy nose, watering of the eyes, headache or heaviness, fatigue, nausea, vomiting and at times, diarrhoea. Children may sometimes experience difficulty in breathing, chest pain, dehydration and rarely, seizures. These symptoms improve within a few days after infection.” Echoing the same, Dr Kishor Sathe, Specialist Emergency Medicine at PD Hinduja Hospital and MRC in Mumbai said that the warning signs to look out for if someone has caught swine flu or H1N1 are itching in the throat, running nose, fever, body ache, high-grade fever myalgia, cough with expectoration and breathlessness as they are some of the key symptoms. Adding to the list, Dr Anant Pandhare, Medical Director at Dr Hedgewar Hospital in Maharashtra's Aurangabad, mentioned, “Some of the most common symptoms are chills, fever, cough, diarrhoea, vomiting, headache, throat pain, body ache, running nose, breathlessness and requirement of O2 in some cases who are having comorbidities such as diabetes and hypertension. Severe symptoms of swine flu in young kids and infants include dyspnea, apnea, tachypnea, dehydration etc. In some cases, acute respiratory failure can occur.” Treatments: While Dr Kishor Sathe revealed that Oselatamivir is the drug to treat H1N1, Dr Vikram Vora said, “Most people who get infected will require only supportive treatment, primarily aimed at providing symptomatic relief. Staying hydrated, taking fever and pain medication and resting usually help. There are antiviral drugs available that may be prescribed in the early days of the infection to reduce the duration and severity of symptoms.” He added, “Drugs like Oseltamivir are used but there is a possibility of the virus becoming resistant to it of not correctly used. Hence, the usage must be medically directed and restricted to those at high risk for complications (hospitalized/institutionalized patients, pregnant women, young children with respiratory illnesses, adults with obesity or chronic diseases, those undergoing immunosuppression and older individuals above 60 years of age).” Key precautions to avoid swine flu or H1N1: Insisting that prevention is possible, Dr Vikram Vora asserted that it rests on the adoption of basic measures like: 1. Being informed – it is critical to rely on credible medical information for awareness, when it comes to infectious diseases 2. Covering the nose and mouth with a tissue when one coughs or sneezes. Be sure to dispose the tissue immediately after use, in a safe manner 3. Frequent handwashing with soap and water or use of hand sanitizers 4. Avoiding close contact with those who are obviously or suspected to be sick 5. Isolation to prevent spreading it to others 6. Most importantly, getting an annual influenza vaccine helps reduce the risk and severity of H1N1. Dr Kishor Sathe suggested, “Avoid crowded and closed places; if you have symptoms use a face mask. Don’t sneeze in open; if you are not wearing a mask then sneeze on your elbow. Keep a healthy diet and keep your diabetes in control.” According to Dr Anant Pandhare, “Despite the contagious nature and severity of this disease, there are several ways to prevent it. To prevent swine flu frequently wash hands with soaps or hand sanitisers, do not touch your nose, mouth, and eyes as the virus can survive out in the open on any surface, stay at home and isolate yourself if you are ill and avoid large gatherings when swine flu is in season.” Special precautions and care required specifically for children and the elderly: Dr Kishor Sathe advised, “Children are required to have good sleep and a healthy diet. If they are having symptoms then do gargling and wear masks, the same thing applies to elderly people as well.” Highlighting that children and the elderly are especially prone to developing complications of influenza (regardless of whether it is caused by H1N1 or other flu virus strains), Dr Vikram Vora pointed out, “Young children, especially those with other respiratory illnesses may face an exacerbation of lung disease when infected with H1N1, manifesting as chest pain, fever and rarely seizures. Elderly individuals may also develop complications and must be protected.” He recommended some essential protective measures for these vulnerable groups: 1. Keeping them away from other sick or apparently sick individuals 2. Initiation of prompt treatment under competent medical supervision 3. Avoidance of aspirin (in children and adolescents) for pain and fever relief 4. Yearly administration of Influenza vaccine to young children and the elderly Catch every big hit,... See more Catch every big hit, every wicket with Crick-it, a one stop destination for Live Scores, Match Stats, Quizzes, Polls & much more. Explore now!.Catch your daily dose of Fashion, Taylor Swift, Health, Festivals, Travel, Relationship, Recipe and all the other Latest Lifestyle News on Hindustan Times Website and APPs. News / Lifestyle / Health / Swine flu: Warning signs and symptoms, treatments, key precautions to avoid H1N1 SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON Share this article Read this news in brief form Share Via Copy Link Swine Flu Swine Fever H1n1 Influenza H1n1 H1n1 Virus Doctors Kids Children Child Care Child Health Fitness Fitness Inspiration Fitness Goal Virus Influenza Virus SHARE Copy Whatsapp Twitter Facebook Linkedin [Best Deals] Best air purifier brands for a healthier home: Fight pollution with top picks Best geysers in India: Top 11 energy-saving water heaters you can trust Best top load washing machines: Top 10 efficient, and effective options for you Best serums for sensitive skin: 10 top picks to soothe and nourish your skin Best 5 star geysers for home: Top 10 instant water heaters to choose from View All Join Hindustan Times Create free account and unlock exciting features like Newsletters, Alerts and Recommendations Get personalised news and exciting deals Bookmark the stories you want to read later REGISTER FOR FREE Already have an account? Sign In SKIP Subscribe to our best newsletters HT Daily Capsule Sign Up to Subscribe Newsletter subscribed successfully Latest News World News India News Cricket Live Score Cricket Schedule T20 World Cup Suryakumar Yadav Virat Kohli Yashasvi Jaiswal Axar Patel Hardik Pandya Ravindra Jadeja Shivam Dube Rishabh Pant Sanju Samson Arshdeep Singh Jasprit Bumrah Kuldeep Yadav Mohammed Siraj Yuzvendra Chahal Tim David David Warner Cameron Green Travis Head India vs Sri Lanka India vs South Africa India vs Pakistan India vs Netherlands India vs Ireland India vs England India vs Bangladesh India vs Australia India vs Afghanistan CITY NEWS Bengaluru News Bhopal News Chandigarh News Chennai News Dehradun News Delhi News Gurugram News Hyderabad News Indore News Jaipur News Kolkata News Lucknow News Mumbai News Noida News Patna News Pune News Ranchi News Other Cities Entertainment Bollywood News Hollywood News Music Tamil Cinema Telugu Cinema TV Web Series Entertainment Others Books HT Insight Brand Post Brand Stories Elections Upcoming Elections Income Tax Calculator ASTROLOGY Horoscope Education Admission News Board Exams Competitive Exams Employment News Exam Results Education News LIFESTYLE Art and Culture Brunch Fashion Festivals Health Recipes Relationship Travel Pet Web Stories Trending Business Photos Videos Environment Science Opinion Editorials Car and Bike Technology Sports Badminton Football Hockey Tennis Others Quickreads Covid 19 Assembly Election GAMES Daily Sudoku Daily Crossword Daily Word Jumble TRENDING NEWS CBSE Date Sheet 2025 UP Police Constable Result 2024 Live UGC NET 2024 Live SSC CGL Result 2024 Live India News Live Entertainment News Live World News Live Trending News Live US News Live Bollywood News LIVE Hollywood News Live Horoscope Today LIVE Cricket News Live Sanjiv Khanna Gautam Gambhir Onion Price Singham Again box office collection IPL 2025 Auction Maharashtra Election 2024 Jharkhand Election 2024 Assembly Election 2024 Cricket Score LIVE Cricket Schedule Gold rate World News TRENDING TOPICS CBSE Date Sheet 2025 UP Police Constable Result 2024 Live UGC NET 2024 Live SSC CGL Result 2024 Live India News Live Entertainment News Live World News Live Trending News Live US News live Bollywood News LIVE Hollywood News Live Horoscope Today LIVE Cricket News Live Sanjiv Khanna Gautam Gambhir Onion Price Singham Again box office collection Maharashtra Assembly Election 2024 IPL Auction 2025 Jharkhand Assembly Election Assembly Election 2024 Cricket Cricket Match Today India News World News Latest Lifestyle News Air quality ‘poor’, Supreme Court raps Delhi police for not imposing cracker ban J.K. Rowling calls herself 'left-leaning liberal who's ‘anti-authoritarian,’ netizens say ‘you sound like RFK Jr’ Swiggy IPO allotment today: Steps to check status, current GMP, other details Swati Maliwal assault case: Ex-Delhi CM aide moves against charge sheet cognisance Loved The Substance? 6 more chilling body horror movies to watch JKBOSE 10th bi-annual, private results awaited, here's how to check scores at jkbose.nic.in Celebs are manifesting big on 11:11 today—Are you ready to do the same? Kerala takes tourism to new heights with stunning seaplane service. Here’s all you need to know Home Loan Calculator: An Essential Tool for Home Loan EMI Calculation 5 surprising things banned in India About Us Contact us Terms of use Privacy policy Weather Today HT Newsletters Subscription Disclaimer Print Ad Rates Code of Ethics Site Map RSS Feeds © 2024 HindustanTimes Click to Top Story Saved Live Score OPEN APP Edit Profile Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Now Your Subscription Plan Renew Subscription Manage Subscription Saved Articles Following My Reads Sign out New Delhi 0C Monday, November 11, 2024 Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Now Home HTLS 2023 Astrology India News Lifestyle Entertainment Elections Trending Videos Education Photos Sports Cities Daily Digest Quickreads Opinion Analysis For You Following Web Stories Science HT Games Podcasts Weather Technology Latest News Cricket India vs Sri Lanka Live Cricket Score Cricket Teams Cricket Players ICC Rankings Cricket Schedule Shreyas Iyer Harshit Rana Kusal Mendis Ravi Bishnoi Rinku Singh Riyan Parag Washington Sundar Avishka Fernando Charith Asalanka Dasun Shanaka Khaleel Ahmed Pathum Nissanka World News US News Cities Delhi Mumbai Bengaluru Gurugram Noida Hyderabad Chennai Kolkata Bhopal Chandigarh Dehradun Indore Jaipur Lucknow Patna Pune Ranchi Other Cities Business Income Tax Calculator Petrol Prices UGC NET Answer Key 2024 Live Diesel Prices Gold Rate Silver Rate Lifestyle Fashion Health Relationships Art and Culture Travel Recipes Festivals Pet Brunch Entertainment Bollywood TV Web Series Music Hollywood Telugu Cinema Tamil Cinema Anime Education Study Abroad Board Exams JEE Exam Results Admission News Employment News Competitive Exams BBA Colleges Engineering Colleges Medical Colleges BCA Colleges BBA Exams BCA Exams Medical Exams Engineering Exams Astrology Horoscope Love Horoscope Tarot Chinese Panchang Annual Horoscope Festival Calendar Compatibility Calculator Career Horoscope Manifestation Transits HT Premium E-Paper The Economist Articles HT Insider HT Insight Elections 2024 Lok Sabha States Lok Sabha Parties Lok Sabha Candidates Videos india news infocus HT Insight Explainer Video On The Record HT Weekend Aur Batao Vikram Chandra Daily Wrap Photos Entertainment Photos Lifestyle Photos News Photos Sports Olympics 2024 Olympics Medal Tally Other Sports Sports Football Tennis EPL 2023-24 ISL 2023-24 Hockey Asian Games 2023 HT Insight Public Health Economic Policy International Affairs Climate Change Gender Equality knowledge future tech Governance More from HT HT Epaper Auto HT Tech HT Bangla HT School Quiz HT Friday Finance HT Premium Explore Hindustan Times HT Newsletters Weather Today About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Disclaimer Print Ad Rates Code of Ethics Sitemap RSS Feeds Subscription - Terms of Use Copyright © HT Digital Streams Ltd. All rights reserved. Follow Us On My Account Sign in Home Cricket Premium Games Sign In // // //Drop in Influenza Cases Though Not Yet in the Clear: MHMS - Solomon Times Online Solomon Islands News - Be the First to Know, Participate Honiara, Solomon IslandsMonday, 11 November 2024 19:32 PM Twitter_Logo_White-on-Blue Home News Economy Sports Features Letters Search Drop in Influenza Cases Though Not Yet in the Clear: MHMS Of the 10 deaths, 4 had influenza A H3, 1 with chlamydia pneumonia, 2 had no swabs taken, 1 swab was invalid and 1 swab returned negative for any viruses or bacteria and the other result is still pending. Source: File Share Tuesday, 06 September 2022 09:18 AM The Ministry of Health and Medical Services (MHMS) says nationally there’s been a 49% decrease in the total number of Influenza Like Illness (ILI) cases reported between Aug 19 and 25. Total reported cases of ILI over the one week was1729 cases compared to 3370 cases reported in the previous week.A significant decline in case numbers was noted across all sentinel sites in Honiara (Kukum clinic, Mataniko clinic, NRH and Rove clinic), Malaita (Atoifi Hospital, Auki clinic, and Kilu’ufi Hospital), Guadalcanal (Good Samaritan Hospital) and Makira (Kirakira Hospital).“We are still not yet in the clear as an increasing number of ILI cases are being reported in Gizo and Taro, and Lata where the number of cases increasing between August 19 and 25 compared to the preceding week.“This is the highest as compared to previous Influenza-Like Illnesses outbreaks in the past 10 years.“With regards to age groups affected, the majority of cases were aged from 0 to 39 years; however, all age groups from 0 to 60 plus were affected. The age group with the most cases are those 5 years and below with more females presenting at the health facilities than males,” the Health Ministry said in a prepared statement.The Ministry says that since July there have been 1,593 respiratory presentations at NRH Emergency Department. Of these, there have been 10 respiratory- related deaths.5 of these deaths were amongst ages between 44 to 84 years that have underlying health conditions and the other 5 were amongst children aged 0 to 14 years, 2 of whom had known underlying condition.Of the 10 deaths, 4 had influenza A H3, 1 with chlamydia pneumonia, 2 had no swabs taken, 1 swab was invalid and 1 swab returned negative for any viruses or bacteria and the other result is still pending.Laboratory testing continues to show Respiratory viruses as the cause for the outbreak of current flu like illness experienced with Influenza A Rhinovirus/Enterovirus, adenovirus and all causes of the common cold or flu.Source: With MHMS Media RelatedNewsEconomy Share What do you think? Any Comments? Comment here or write your own Letter to the Editor. Disclaimer: Solomon Times Online may edit or delete your comment and cannot guarantee that all submissions will be published or remain online. The comments expressed on these page are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of Solomon Times Online. News Latest Solomon Island News Solomon Economy News Solomon Politics News Solomon Sports News Solomon Culture and Arts Pacific Regional News Features and Letters Features Letters to the Editor Social Solomon Times @ Facebook Solomon Times @ Twitter Miscellaneous Contact us Write to the Editor About us Terms of Use Privacy Statement © 2007 - 2024 Solomon Times Online. All rights reserved. Terms of Use Privacy Statement Powered by Callidus SolutionsFlu Season May Be Rough In FL As it Collides With COVID: Experts | Across Florida, FL PatchSkip to main contentAcross FloridaSubscribePostAdvertiseState NewsCommunity CornerCrime & SafetyPolitics & GovernmentSchoolsTraffic & TransitObituariesPersonal FinanceBest OfArts & EntertainmentBusiness & TechHealth & WellnessHome & GardenSportsTravelKids & FamilyPetsRestaurants & BarsSee all communitiesAdvertiseNearby CommunitiesJacksonville, FLPonte Vedra Beach, FLOrlando, FLSavannah, GAHilton Head, SCLand O' Lakes, FLNew Port Richey, FLNew Tampa, FLLutz, FLLakeland, FLState EditionFloridaNational EditionTop National NewsSee All CommunitiesHealth & FitnessFlu Season May Be Rough In FL As it Collides With COVID: ExpertsPublix, Walgreens, CVS and other pharmacies in Florida are scheduling flu shot appointments or offering shots on a walk-in basis.Deb Belt, Patch StaffPosted Wed, Sep 7, 2022 at 6:17 pm ETWalgreens, CVS, Publix and other pharmacies in Florida are scheduling flu shot appointments or offering shots on a walk-in basis as health officials worry about a possible worse-than-usual flu season in the United States. (Shutterstock)FLORIDA — Flu season is about to hit in Florida, and health experts are urging everyone over 6 months, with rare exceptions, to get their flu shots.Walgreens, CVS, Publix and other pharmacies in Florida are already scheduling appointments or offering shots on a walk-in basis as health officials worry about what a worse-than-usual flu season in the Southern Hemisphere portends for the United States. Here are links to schedule flu shots at several Florida pharmacy chains:Find out what's happening in Across Floridawith free, real-time updates from Patch.SubscribeCVS: You can schedule a flu shot at a CVS pharmacy near you via their website. Find a CVS location in your area, including pharmacies in some Target stores.Walgreens: The chain says it has flu vaccines available for anyone age 3 and older. Schedule your flu shot online. Find a pharmacy location near you.Publix: The chain says it has flu vaccines available. Schedule your flu shot online. Find a pharmacy location near you. Australia, for example, is experiencing its worst flu season in five years. The flu season runs from April-October in the Southern Hemisphere. New Zealand also saw its highest rates of influenza in two years. The flu season, which in the United States starts in October, is coming as COVID-19 continues to circulate, fueling concerns of a “twindemic.” Various forecasts point to an uptick in COVID cases, though likely not as severe as last year’s omicron surge.Find out what's happening in Across Floridawith free, real-time updates from Patch.SubscribeU.S. health officials “better pay attention” to the flu season in the Southern Hemisphere, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told Bloomberg News as he prepares to exit the office he’s held for nearly 40 years. That part of the world “has had a pretty bad flu season, and it came on early,” Fauci said. “Influenza — as we all have experienced over many years — can be a serious disease, particularly when you have a bad season.”If the seasonal flu and accelerating rates of COVID-19 collide, the upcoming winter would be the first U.S. health officials have had to contend with two serious respiratory diseases circulating together at higher levels. Fauci and other infectious disease experts have warned about a twindemic since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic. The flu season typically starts in October, and it takes about two weeks after vaccination for flu antibodies to develop, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That makes the timing of flu shots important.It’s safe to get flu shots and COVID-19 vaccinations at the same time, according to the CDC. That includes the newly authorized omicron-specific booster shot. Health officials recommend the booster for most Americans. The CDC offers guidance on who should get a flu shot. In general, children, older people and those with underlying conditions such as asthma, COPD and other respiratory problems are the most vulnerable to the flu. The CDC said people 65 and older should get one of three preferential vaccines — Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent vaccine, Flublok Quadrivalent recombinant flu vaccineGet more local news delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up for free Patch newsletters and alerts.Thank (1)ShareMore from Across FloridaPolitics & Government|5dFL Abortion, Marijuana Measures Fail + Other Amendment ResultsPolitics & Government|4dTrump Takes Florida, Projected To Win Presidency: Latest UpdatesHealth & Fitness|Oct 17FL Among States Where Young Adults Most Likely To Succeed: RankingBest of Across FloridaAcross Florida | Travel5 Road Trip Adventures As Safe From Hurricanes As Possible In FloridaAcross Florida | Travel5 Florida Road Trips That Are Worth The Drive And Aren’t Disney WorldAcross Florida | Community Corner17 Florida Landmarks You Ought To Visit: Take A Tour In Photos Find out what’s happening in yourcommunity on the Patch appCorporate InfoAbout PatchCareersPartnershipsAdvertise on PatchSupportFAQsContact PatchCommunity GuidelinesPosting InstructionsTerms of UsePrivacy Policy© 2024 Patch Media. All Rights Reserved.Drop in Influenza Cases Though Not Yet in the Clear: MHMS - Solomon Times Online Solomon Islands News - Be the First to Know, Participate Honiara, Solomon IslandsMonday, 11 November 2024 19:32 PM Twitter_Logo_White-on-Blue Home News Economy Sports Features Letters Search Drop in Influenza Cases Though Not Yet in the Clear: MHMS Of the 10 deaths, 4 had influenza A H3, 1 with chlamydia pneumonia, 2 had no swabs taken, 1 swab was invalid and 1 swab returned negative for any viruses or bacteria and the other result is still pending. Source: File Share Tuesday, 06 September 2022 09:18 AM The Ministry of Health and Medical Services (MHMS) says nationally there’s been a 49% decrease in the total number of Influenza Like Illness (ILI) cases reported between Aug 19 and 25. Total reported cases of ILI over the one week was1729 cases compared to 3370 cases reported in the previous week.A significant decline in case numbers was noted across all sentinel sites in Honiara (Kukum clinic, Mataniko clinic, NRH and Rove clinic), Malaita (Atoifi Hospital, Auki clinic, and Kilu’ufi Hospital), Guadalcanal (Good Samaritan Hospital) and Makira (Kirakira Hospital).“We are still not yet in the clear as an increasing number of ILI cases are being reported in Gizo and Taro, and Lata where the number of cases increasing between August 19 and 25 compared to the preceding week.“This is the highest as compared to previous Influenza-Like Illnesses outbreaks in the past 10 years.“With regards to age groups affected, the majority of cases were aged from 0 to 39 years; however, all age groups from 0 to 60 plus were affected. The age group with the most cases are those 5 years and below with more females presenting at the health facilities than males,” the Health Ministry said in a prepared statement.The Ministry says that since July there have been 1,593 respiratory presentations at NRH Emergency Department. Of these, there have been 10 respiratory- related deaths.5 of these deaths were amongst ages between 44 to 84 years that have underlying health conditions and the other 5 were amongst children aged 0 to 14 years, 2 of whom had known underlying condition.Of the 10 deaths, 4 had influenza A H3, 1 with chlamydia pneumonia, 2 had no swabs taken, 1 swab was invalid and 1 swab returned negative for any viruses or bacteria and the other result is still pending.Laboratory testing continues to show Respiratory viruses as the cause for the outbreak of current flu like illness experienced with Influenza A Rhinovirus/Enterovirus, adenovirus and all causes of the common cold or flu.Source: With MHMS Media RelatedNewsEconomy Share What do you think? Any Comments? Comment here or write your own Letter to the Editor. Disclaimer: Solomon Times Online may edit or delete your comment and cannot guarantee that all submissions will be published or remain online. The comments expressed on these page are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of Solomon Times Online. News Latest Solomon Island News Solomon Economy News Solomon Politics News Solomon Sports News Solomon Culture and Arts Pacific Regional News Features and Letters Features Letters to the Editor Social Solomon Times @ Facebook Solomon Times @ Twitter Miscellaneous Contact us Write to the Editor About us Terms of Use Privacy Statement © 2007 - 2024 Solomon Times Online. All rights reserved. Terms of Use Privacy Statement Powered by Callidus SolutionsWHO recognizes ‘Weqaya’ as a national center for influenza in Saudi Arabia - Saudi Gazette Monday November 11, 2024 / 09 , Jumada al-ula , 1446 Leading The Way SG Saudi Arabia Opinion Discover Saudi World Sports Business Life Advertisements SAUDI ARABIA WHO recognizes ‘Weqaya’ as a national center for influenza in Saudi Arabia September 05, 2022 Public Health Authority "Weqaya" has obtained the recognition of the World Health Organization (WHO) as a national center for influenza in Saudi Arabia. Follow Saudigazette on RIYADH — Public Health Authority "Weqaya" has obtained the recognition of the World Health Organization (WHO) as a national center for influenza in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, based on WHO'S evaluation results of Weqaya's public health laboratories".The evaluation included ensuring that all recognition criteria and requirements are met, as well as the requirements related to quality, security and biosafety.This recognition comes not only due to the achievement of the highest standards and quality in the authority's laboratories, but also to Weqaya's regular participation in the WHO external quality assurance project, and the regularity of reports related to influenza surveillance data submitted to WHO.Weqaya’s public health laboratories work as a national reference, as they support the authority’s scope of work based on building a comprehensive monitoring system that includes epidemiological surveillance activities for influenza viruses and other respiratory pathogens.Weqaya also supports WHO efforts to ensure rapid response through effective participation in providing scientific advice to decision-makers at the national level. The laboratories' efforts through the authority contribute to reaching the necessary recommendations regarding seasonal influenza vaccine formulas. — SPA< Previous PageNext Page > September 05, 2022 450 views HIGHLIGHTS SAUDI ARABIA Iran’s president hails Saudi Arabia’s summit initiative in call with crown prince 11 hours ago Iran’s president hails Saudi Arabia’s summit initiative in call with crown prince SAUDI ARABIA Minister of National Guard inaugurates Riyadh Global Medical Biotechnology Summit 2024 13 hours ago Minister of National Guard inaugurates Riyadh Global Medical Biotechnology Summit 2024 SAUDI ARABIA Prince Faisal meets Palestinian PM, Lebanese FM in Riyadh 16 hours ago Prince Faisal meets Palestinian PM, Lebanese FM in Riyadh COPYRIGHT © 2024 WWW.SAUDIGAZETTE.COM.SA - ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Powered by NewsPress NEWS CATEGORY saudi arabia world opinion business sports life advertisements COMPANY about us Epaper contact us Archive OTHER Epaper contact us ArchiveNew rapid test detects both the flu and COVID-19Watch TVNewsSportLifestyleTravelEntertainmentProduct ReviewsCouponsStanDomainDriveConnect with us Search NationalNSWVICQLDSAWAACTTASNTLatestUS Election 2024Israel-HamasCrimeTechnologyHealthFinanceExplainersCost of LivingPoliticsWorldAsiaEuropeNZUKUSAChinaAfricaVideosLiveToday ShowACA60 MinutesSportOlympicsAFLCricketFootballLive scoresNRLWeatherFinanceBusiness newsFind and comparePersonal financeSmall businessCelebrityEntertainment newsCelebrityRoyal newsTV guideAppApp StoreGoogle PlayMeet The TeamAbout 9NewsContact usMeet the teamPrivacyTerms of useYour location:SYDNEYSYDNEY, NSWPERTH, WAMELBOURNE, VICHOBART, TASBRISBANE, QLDDARWIN, NTADELAIDE, SACANBERRA, ACTYour web browser is no longer supported. To improve your experience update it hereBREAKINGAdult dead, child injured in Victorian kindergarten truck crashNewsNationalNew rapid test detects both the flu and COVID-19By Savannah Meacham • AAP8:24pm Sep 8, 2022 Tweet Facebook Mail A new rapid test can detect both the flu and COVID-19 within minutes. The Therapeutic Goods Administration has approved two testing kits capable of picking up both pathogens on one stick."It can tell the difference between COVID-19 and also flu, the main strains being A/B influenza," Steve Quinlin from Touch Biotechnology said.READ MORE: Buxton driver allegedly filmed himself 67 minutes before crashThe test can pick up both the flu and COVID-19. (9News)A single pack of the testing kit costs $15. They can be ordered online or will be on shelves in supermarkets and pharmacies within weeks."We've got an accuracy of over 98 per cent so it's very high so people should feel very confident and comfortable with doing this test," Quinlin said.While it's not the same as a gold standard PCR experts, say the accuracy is a big development."Being able to test accurately and quickly for both flu and COVID is a major advance, it's important to households, workplaces, to aged care centres, especially in my opinion," infectious disease expert Professor Robert Booy said.READ MORE: Hail, thunderstorms, flash flooding warning as cold front hits east coastIt is available online and it's hoped to be available in supermarkets soon. (9News)As part of the condition for approval, the TGA requires suppliers to provide ongoing quality and performance data.The kits will also be subject to independent testing at two labs including the Peter Doherty Institute in Melbourne."What's really important when you get a new test is that you check that it's working properly, that it finds what it's meant to find," Booy said.The latest COVID-19 strain spreading across the worldView GalleryContinue readingCOVID 19AustralianationalfluhealthmedicalscienceCoronavirusCONTACT USSend your stories to contact@9news.com.auAuto news: Surprising reason councils use these black road cables.Top Stories'Tragically sad': Worker killed, child injured after water tanker crashes into kinderan hour agoHe charged a machine gun one minute before WWI endedInside the Sydney Harbour mansion that sold for $26 millionVictoria Cross awarded posthumously to Vietnam War heroAboutContactWatch TVLive TVTV ShowsCategoriesConnect your TVHow to watchTV GuideNewsLatestNationalWorldPoliticsTechWeatherFinanceToday ShowA Current Affair60 MinutesSportLive ScoresOlympicsNRLCricketTennisAFLRugbyFootballAthleticsGolfCombatLifestyleLatestRoyalsStyleCelebrityKitchenTravelCoachYouParentingMoneyHoroscopesEntertainmentLatestTV ShowsMAFSThe BlockLove IslandLego MastersTipping PointThe SummitGetawayTravel GuidesProduct ReviewsTechnologyBeautyStyle + FashionLivingKitchenHealth + FitnessParentingGift IdeasRadio2GB3AW4BC6PRStanTV ShowsMoviesSportStan OriginalsDomainAdvice & GuidesProperty SearchHome LoansHome Price GuideDriveCar ReviewsCar NewsNew Car ShowroomCars for SalePedestrian TVEntertainmentNewsOnlineTelevisionCouponsUber EatseBayAmazonNikeHomeNewslettersWork with usAdvertise with usSupportTerms of usePrivacy© 2024 Nine Entertainment Co.NRH records 10 respiratory related deaths – Solomon Star News Skip to content BREAKING NEWS Solomon Star News Solomon Islands leading daily newspaper Search: Facebook page opens in new windowX page opens in new window Home National Business Sports Religion Women Entertainment ViewpointEditorial Letters to the Editor Private View Classifieds Contact Home National Business Sports Religion Women Entertainment ViewpointEditorial Letters to the Editor Private View Classifieds Contact NRH records 10 respiratory related deathsYou are here:HomeNewsNRH records 10 respiratory related… Sep62022NewsNews - NationalTHE National Referral Hospital has recorded 10 respiratory-related deaths since the country recorded cases of influenza-liked-illnesses in July this year.The Ministry of Health and Medical Services said since July, 1593 respiratory presentations were recorded at the National Referral Hospital (NRH) Emergency Department.It said of these, there have been 10 respiratory-related deaths.“Five of these deaths were amongst ages between 44 to 84 years that have underlying health conditions and the other five were amongst children aged 0 to 14 years, two of whom had known underlying condition,” the Ministry said.It said of the 10 deaths, four had influenza AH3, one with chlamydia pneumonia, two had no swabs taken, one swab was invalid and one swab returned negative for any viruses or bacteria and the other result is still pending.“Laboratory testing continues to show Respiratory viruses as the cause for the outbreak of current flu like illness experienced with Influenza A Rhinovirus/Enterovirus, adenovirus and all causes of the common cold or flu,” the Ministry said.It warned that these viruses can cause severe diseases, hospitalization, and deaths in certain people who are more at risk such as small children and older adults, people with co-existing diseases such as diabetes, heart disease, respiratory disease and obesity and others.The Ministry added that the cases of respiratory illnesses undergo testing for SARS-Cov_2m that causes COVID-19, but the number of samples tested positive for COVID are very low.Categories: News, News - NationalBy Sol Star NewsSeptember 6, 2022 Share this post Share on FacebookShare on Facebook Share on XShare on X Pin itShare on Pinterest Share on LinkedInShare on LinkedIn Author: Sol Star News Post navigationPreviousPrevious post:OPEN CALLNextNext post:Chinese businesswoman murder trial begins todayRelated postsTwo SIPSP advisors join RSIPFNovember 11, 2024Gold buyers defy orderNovember 11, 2024Girl who dumps baby pleads guiltyNovember 11, 2024China design team visit Malaita PremierNovember 11, 2024JAC F6 students urged to trust GodNovember 11, 2024Govt officers attend training in AustNovember 11, 2024Malaita qualifies again for PCDFNovember 11, 2024Wale lashes out at $199m discretionary exemptionsNovember 10, 2024 NEWS National Business RegionalSPORTS National RegionalVIEWPOINT Letters to the Editor Private View EditorialFEATURES Go to TopBird flu could become endemic after ‘unprecedented’ outbreak | Guernsey Press Local news you can trustNewsSportWeatherServicesPodcastsBusinessPoliticsNews from the IslandsTravelEducationVoicesCoronavirusCampaignsFeaturesMore CloseNewsSportWeatherServicesPodcastsJobsPropertyMotoringBiSiFamily NoticesPicture StorePride Of GuernseyDigital EditionsNewslettersBird flu could become endemic after ‘unprecedented’ outbreakBIRD FLU could become a year-round avian illness, States veterinary officer David Chamberlain has said, as the ‘unprecedented’ outbreak gathers pace in local bird populations.By Juliet PouteauxPublished Sep 8, 2022States vet David Chamberlain. (31243615)The outbreak has been building up momentum in Channel Islands colonies in recent weeks, with bodies of sea birds washing up on local beaches.Mr Chamberlain said it was hard to know how the outbreak would progress due to its unprecedented nature.About 40 dead birds have been reported in Guernsey and around 20 in Alderney.He added that multiple dead sea birds had been tested for avian influenza in the two islands.‘A significant proportion of these have returned positive results,’ he said.‘This established that sea birds within the Bailiwick were being exposed to and succumbing to avian influenza. Therefore, we now reasonably presume that dead sea birds are likely to have succumbed to avian influenza.‘Having established the presence of avian influenza in sea birds, we have now focused our attention on testing bird species which feed on live or dead birds. This includes scavengers such as corvids, e.g. crows, ravens, magpies, and also some birds of prey. We have also started to test birds which have died unexpectedly in poultry flocks.’So far, one backyard flock has tested positive in Alderney but no poultry tested from Guernsey have returned a positive result.Should any poultry in Guernsey test positive, local animal health regulations would require similar action to that seen in Jersey. From yesterday an island prevention zone was set up covering Jersey in a bid to reduce the spread of bird flu.Since 2005, avian influenza records in Europe have typically started in the autumn, reached a peak after the new year, and died out around Easter. This pattern continued in 2021 to 2022, but due to very high numbers of avian influenza outbreaks nearby in France, a prevention order was enacted in January 2022 requiring local poultry keepers to take additional measures to protect their flocks from wild birds.This outbreak trailed off around Easter 2022 and the order was lifted.But the latest outbreak is not behaving like previous ones.‘This current outbreak of bird flu is atypical and entirely unprecedented, starting in the northern isles of Scotland in late May,’ Mr Chamberlain said.‘It spread down the east coast of Scotland and England before jumping the Channel to northern France.’He said it was impossible to say what would happen next.‘Wild birds could be so widely infected that avian influenza persists all year around, i.e. the disease has become endemic,’ he said.‘If this becomes the case, there will be a need for all poultry keepers to make changes to the way they keep their birds. More information and updates will be given at the appropriate time depending on how the situation develops.’Similar storiesBig projects at risk as P&R starts mini-BudgetNews|1 hour agoLes Beaucamps class sizes are fastest-growing of 11-16 schoolsNews|1 hour agoPublic get to see plans for Victor Huge CentreNews|1 hour agoSixth Form Centre at La Mare remodelling to start in summerNews|1 hour ago‘My Guernsey-born great-uncle deserves the Victoria Cross’News|2 hours agoMost popular1Big projects at risk as P&R starts mini-BudgetNews|1 hour ago2Rotten eggs put in appeal collection binNews|20 hours ago3‘My Guernsey-born great-uncle deserves the Victoria Cross’News|2 hours ago4Les Beaucamps class sizes are fastest-growing of 11-16 schoolsNews|1 hour ago5Public get to see plans for Victor Huge CentreNews|1 hour agoFollow us onGet involvedSend Us Your NewsSubscribe to the Guernsey PressUseful linksAdvertise with usMaking a complaintGuernsey AirportGuernsey HarboursAbout the websiteAbout usContact usTerms of website usePrivacy PolicyAcceptable Use PolicyHomepageFollow us onTwitterFacebook Back to top© 2024 Guernsey Press. All rights reserved.Here's what you need to know about BC's fall COVID-19 booster shots TikTok Sign in Join Latest News Environment Local News Housing Crime Transportation Sports Lifestyle Food and Drinks Arts Outdoors Photos and Videos Business Offbeat Events Latest event stories Event Calendar More Contests Events Calendar Branded Become an insider Advertise The Buzzle Sign in Welcome!Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Create an account Sign up Welcome!Register for an account your email your username A password will be e-mailed to you. Password recovery Recover your password your email Search 0 News Terms and Conditions Advertise Got a tip? Contact Us Commenting Policy Contest Rules Company: Become an Insider About Us Advertise Contact us See pricing InstagramLinkedinTwitter 0 Monday, November 11, 2024 0 My AccountGet into your account.LoginRegister Newsletter Join over 8,000 Victorians who receive our daily newsletter! To subscribe, simply enter your email address on our website or click the subscribe button below. Don't worry, we respect your privacy and won't spam your inbox. Your information is safe with us. SubscribeI've read and accept the Privacy Policy. 131,300FansLike73,111FollowersFollow5,432FollowersFollow23,500FollowersFollow376SubscribersSubscribe Latest News Environment Local News Housing Crime Transportation Sports Lifestyle Food and Drinks Arts Outdoors Photos and Videos Business Offbeat Events Latest event stories Event Calendar More Contests Events Calendar Branded Become an insider Advertise The Buzzle Search Events Calendar NewsCOVID-19 Here’s what you need to know about BC’s fall COVID-19 booster shots Tuesday, September 6th, 2022 By Curtis Blandy Mary Winspear Centre vaccine clinic Share FacebookTwitterWhatsAppReddItEmailCopy URL With schools open again and autumn right around the corner, BC is rolling out their COVID-19 booster shot plan. Much like how the flu-shot has a booster every year to keep us all healthy through the winter months, COVID-19 booster shots will soon be available. The province announced today that BC residents will soon begin to receive invitations to book fall 2022 booster shots, and are being urged to make an appointment as soon as the invitation arrives. Parents and guardians are being asked by the BC Provincial Medical Officer, Dr. Bonnie Henry to make sure their children’s vaccines are up to date and they receive a fall booster, if appropriate. With students returning to school, the province said it is important to make sure they are protected against COVID-19 by having an up-to-date vaccination. The updated vaccine that will be available is a “bivalent” vaccine – a combination of protection against different variants of a virus. In this case, the bivalent vaccines will protect against COVID-19 and its Omicron variant. Moderna and Pfizer both have bivalent vaccines developed and BC will start to receive doses for administration by September 6th. Health Canada approved the use of this updated vaccine on September 1st. It is proven to be effective and safe for everyone eligible for the vaccination. Residents will be eligible if it’s been six months since their last vaccine. If they’ve been infected with COVID-19 since their last vaccination, they will have to wait three months minimum since that infection to receive the booster. The invitations for the booster vaccine are being prioritized accordingly: Health care workers Risk groups (vulnerable, immuno-suppressed and chronically ill groups, indigenous communities and those aged 60+) Those with a long interval since their last vaccination Co-administration with the influenza vaccine booster shot will be available when the flu shot arrives in early October. Here are your steps to ensuring you get a vaccination invitation: Ensure registration in Get Vaccinated BC – online or through Provincial Call Centre 1-833-838-2323 Update email or mobile number in Get Vaccinated BC if it has changed If you recently arrived to BC , submit COVID-19 vaccination records here, so you will get your invitation Wait for invitation for Fall Booster – by mobile or email from Get Vaccinated BC Curtis BlandyCurtis Blandy has worked with Victoria Buzz since September 2022. Previously, he was an on air host at The Zone @ 91-3 as well as 100.3 The Q in Victoria, BC. Curtis is a graduate from NAIT’s radio and television broadcasting program in Edmonton, Alta. He thrives in covering stories on local and provincial politics as well as the Victoria music scene. Reach out to him at curtis@victoriabuzz.com. Read more Crime West Shore RCMP pulls out of 3 regional programs, opts for localized services instead Events 13 things to do in and around Victoria this Remembrance Day long weekend—November 9th to 11th Environment City staffer says other municipalities are overwhelming Victoria’s resources during winter News Section of Gorge Road closed due to two-vehicle collision: Saanich Police Arts There’s an exhibition for a traditional Japanese artform coming to Victoria this month Latest Stories Crime West Shore RCMP pulls out of 3 regional programs, opts for localized services instead Events 13 things to do in and around Victoria this Remembrance Day long weekend—November 9th to 11th Environment City staffer says other municipalities are overwhelming Victoria’s resources during winter News Section of Gorge Road closed due to two-vehicle collision: Saanich Police Your hub for the latest news, events, and buzz in Greater Victoria. Victoria Buzz acknowledges and respects the lək̓ʷəŋən Peoples, Songhees, Esquimalt, and W̱SÁNEĆ First Nations on whose traditional territory we operate. Company Become an Insider About Us Advertise Contact us Latest Stories Crime West Shore RCMP pulls out of 3 regional programs, opts for localized services instead Events 13 things to do in and around Victoria this Remembrance Day long weekend—November 9th to 11th Environment City staffer says other municipalities are overwhelming Victoria’s resources during winter Share with family and Friends Share FacebookTwitterWhatsAppReddItEmailCopy URL Terms and conditions Privacy policy Careers © Victoria Buzz - All rights reserved FacebookInstagramTikTokTwitter X XInfluenza cases rise in Gizo, Taro and Lata – Solomon Star News Skip to content BREAKING NEWS Solomon Star News Solomon Islands leading daily newspaper Search: Facebook page opens in new windowX page opens in new window Home National Business Sports Religion Women Entertainment ViewpointEditorial Letters to the Editor Private View Classifieds Contact Home National Business Sports Religion Women Entertainment ViewpointEditorial Letters to the Editor Private View Classifieds Contact Influenza cases rise in Gizo, Taro and LataYou are here:HomeNewsInfluenza cases rise in Gizo,… Sep72022NewsNews - NationalAS viral respiratory illnesses cases decline in most hospitals and clinics in Honiara and Guadalcanal, the Western, Choiseul and Temotu provincial capitals have reported a rise in cases.This was uttered by the World Health Organisation Advisor to the Ministry of Health and Medical Services (MHMS) Dr Yogesh Choudhri.He said an increase in influenza-like illness had been reported in Gizo in the Western Province, Taro in the Choiseul Province and Lata in the Temotu Province.“…but an increase is being reported right now in Gizo, Lata and Taro.”Dr Choudhri said in terms of severe cases, last week they had two in Taro, three in Gizo and four in Lata.“When we analysed these cases, we found that most of these cases were caused by influenza pathogens, whilst some were caused by the human rhinovirus and Adenovirus.“So, there is a mix of different pathogens that is causing these illnesses,” he added.By LACHLAN EDDIE Newsroom, HoniaraCategories: News, News - NationalBy Sol Star NewsSeptember 7, 2022 Share this post Share on FacebookShare on Facebook Share on XShare on X Pin itShare on Pinterest Share on LinkedInShare on LinkedIn Author: Sol Star News Post navigationPreviousPrevious post:GUILTY PLEA!NextNext post:Farmers benefiting from Taro Pack House ProjectRelated postsTwo SIPSP advisors join RSIPFNovember 11, 2024Gold buyers defy orderNovember 11, 2024Girl who dumps baby pleads guiltyNovember 11, 2024China design team visit Malaita PremierNovember 11, 2024JAC F6 students urged to trust GodNovember 11, 2024Govt officers attend training in AustNovember 11, 2024Malaita qualifies again for PCDFNovember 11, 2024Wale lashes out at $199m discretionary exemptionsNovember 10, 2024 NEWS National Business RegionalSPORTS National RegionalVIEWPOINT Letters to the Editor Private View EditorialFEATURES Go to Top