JavaScript is disabled in your browser. Please enable JavaScript to proceed. A required part of this site couldn’t load. This may be due to a browser extension, network issues, or browser settings. Please check your connection, disable any ad blockers, or try using a different browser.Ecologic study of influenza vaccination uptake and COVID-19 death rate in New York City | BMC Public Health | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search BMC Public Health Home About Articles Submission Guidelines Collections Join the Editorial Board Submit manuscript Ecologic study of influenza vaccination uptake and COVID-19 death rate in New York City Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 01 June 2022 Ecologic study of influenza vaccination uptake and COVID-19 death rate in New York City Ashley Moreland1, Christina Gillezeau1, Adriana Eugene1, Naomi Alpert1 & …Emanuela Taioli1 Show authors BMC Public Health volume 22, Article number: 1089 (2022) Cite this article 1238 Accesses 5 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundThe aim of this ecological study was to assess the area-level relationship between cumulative death rate for COVID-19 and historic influenza vaccination uptake in the New York City population.MethodsPredictors of COVID-19 death included self-reported influenza vaccination in 2017, as well as four CDC-defined risk factors of severe COVID-19 infection available at the ecological level, which were diabetes, asthma, BMI 30–100 (2 kg/m2) and hypertension, in addition to race and age (65 + years).ResultsAfter adjusting for potential confounders, for every one-unit increase in influenza vaccination uptake for each zip code area, the rate of COVID-19 deaths decreased by 5.17 per 100,000 residents (p < 0.0001).ConclusionsZip codes with a higher prevalence of influenza vaccination had lower rates of COVID-19 mortality, inciting the need to further explore the relationship between influenza vaccination uptake and COVID-19 mortality at the individual level. Peer Review reports BackgroundNew York City was an early and prominent epicenter of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic in the United States, with over 360,000 cases and 24,000 deaths [1] as of December 2, 2020. Even though COVID-19 vaccinations are widely available, demand has tapered [2], and many Americans are still hesitant to get vaccinated [3]. As such, it is necessary to understand why some people had worse or better outcomes by assessing similarities in how people respond to different respiratory viruses.Influenza vaccination has been postulated to mitigate COVID-19 severity [4], particularly in elderly populations [5, 6]. However, there are racial and socio-economic factors associated with both COVID-19 severity [7] and the likelihood of getting an influenza vaccine [7] that could act as confounders. Although previous studies have been conducted in Italy [5, 6] and two non-peer reviewed articles in the United States and Brazil, none include these possible confounders. For the first time, we assessed the area-level relationship between cumulative death rate for COVID-19 and historic influenza vaccination uptake in New York City and adjusted for possible confounders, including racial factors and COVID-19 severity, as defined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [8].MethodsAn ecological analysis was conducted at the modified zip code tabulation area (MODZCTA) level; there are 178 MODZCTAs in New York City. Cumulative COVID-19 death rates through December 2, 2020 were extracted by MODZCTA from the New York City (NYC) Department of Health (DOH) Coronavirus repository. Age-adjusted prevalence (%) of self-reported influenza vaccination in the previous year, diabetes, asthma, BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2, and hypertension by United Hospital Fund (UHF) neighborhood were sourced from the 2017 Community Health Survey (CHS) via the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s EpiQuery tool [9]. Inclusion of diabetes, asthma, BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2, and hypertension was based on CDC-defined risk factors of severe COVID-19 infection [8]. Other covariates of interest, including the percent of residents who were white, Hispanic, and ≥ 65 years old in each ZCTA, were extracted from the American Community Survey (ACS) 2018 5-year estimates [10]. Data for CHS and ACS indicators were converted to MODZCTA using crosswalks provided by the NYC DOH [11, 12]. This study is exempt from IRB approval as data used is de-identified and publicly available. We conducted a multivariable linear regression analysis to assess the MODZCTA level association of COVID-19 death rates with prevalence of influenza vaccination in 2017, adjusting for possible confounders. All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations' or the 'Declaration of Helsinki'.ResultsOverall, in NYC in 2017, 44% of residents reported receiving an influenza vaccine in the previous year, 13% reported having asthma, 25% reported having a BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2, and 28% reported having hypertension. The overall population of NYC was 43% white, 29% Hispanic, and 15% 65 years or older (Table 1).Table 1 Multiple linear relationship between COVID-19 death rate and influenza vaccination prevalence in NYC residentsFull size tableAfter adjusting for potential confounders, predictors accounted for 49% of the variability in the COVID-19 death rate (p < 0.0001), and for every one-unit increase in influenza vaccination uptake for each zip code area, the rate of COVID-19 deaths decreased by 5.17 per 100,000 residents (p < 0.0001) (Fig. 1). The proportion of white residents (Badj = -1.710, p < 0.0001) was also significantly inversely associated with mortality. Older age (Badj = 11.980, p < 0.0001) and the proportion of Hispanic residents were positively associated with COVID-19 mortality (Badj = 1.580, p = 0.0002).Fig. 1Distribution of the COVID-19 cumulative death rate per 100,000 residents February 29-December 2, 2020 (top) and age-adjusted prevalence (%) of self-reported influenza vaccination (bottom) from UHF 2017 CHS across 178 NYC Modified Zip Code Tabulation AreasFull size imageDiscussionWe show here for the first time, to our knowledge, that New York City neighborhoods with a higher prevalence of influenza vaccination had lower rates of COVID-19 mortality, even after adjustment for racial and ethnic makeup, and distribution of age and health risk factors for severe COVID-19. While the association with risk factors for severe COVID-19 was tempered after adjustment, our results still reveal some racial/ethnic disparities in the COVID-19 death rate, which may be indicative of reduced health care accessibility among minority populations [13] and increased risk for community spread [14]. However, a major limitation of this analysis is that the neighborhood-level study design hinders our ability to come to individual-level conclusions. Additionally, influenza vaccination uptake may indirectly indicate better access to healthcare in general, which may contribute to reduced COVID-19 severity. Further, it is also possible that people who get an influenza vaccine may have better health knowledge, and may have been more likely to engage in health behaviors that would reduce the risk of infection, such as masking and social distancing. Influenza vaccine data are from 2017, as the CHS does not report more recent data, and the duration of the heterologous or non-specific effects of vaccines is unknown.This analysis is the first to consider these confounders in a US based database and contribute this information to the current literature on COVID-19. These findings suggest that influenza vaccination may have contributed to lower COVID-19 mortality. Further examining this relationship may help elucidate our understanding of population wide prevention and mitigation measures for other respiratory viruses. We suggest that future research should explore the relationship between influenza vaccination uptake and COVID-19 mortality at the individual level.ConclusionIn light of this study, influenza vaccination should be actively promoted, in addition to the COVID-19 vaccine, as it may bolster public health, particularly for those not yet eligible for a COVID-19 vaccine. Availability of data and materials The data that support the findings of this study are openly. AbbreviationsCOVID-19: Coronavirus disease of 2019 CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention MODZCTA: Modified Zip Code Tabulation Area NYC: New York City DOH: Department of Health UHF: United Hospital Fund CHS: Community Health Survey ACS: American Community Survey ReferencesNYC Department of Health. COVID-19: Totals Data. https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/covid/covid-19-data-totals.page Accessed 2 Dec 2020.Wright, W and McDonnell Nieto del Rio, G. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/09/us/covid-vaccine-surplus.html New York Times.Sgaier, SK. Meet the Four Kinds of People Holding Us Back From Full Vaccination. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/05/18/opinion/covid-19-vaccine-hesitancy.html New York Times.Debisarun PA, Gössling KL, Bulut O, et al. Induction of trained immunity by influenza vaccination - impact on COVID-19. PLoS Pathog. 2021;17(10):e1009928. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1009928 (Published 2021 Oct 25).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Amato M, Werba JP, Frigerio B, et al. Relationship between Influenza vaccination coverage rate and COVID-19 outbreak: an Italian ecological study. Vaccines. 2020;8(3):535.Article Google Scholar Marín‐Hernández D, Schwartz RE, Nixon DF. Epidemiological evidence for association between higher influenza vaccine uptake in the elderly and lower COVID‐19 deaths in Italy. J Med Virol. 2020.Grohskopf LA, Liburd LC, Redfield RR. Addressing Influenza Vaccination Disparities During the COVID-19 Pandemic. JAMA. 2020;324(11):1029.Article CAS Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. People at Increased Risk for COVID-19 (Coronavirus Disease). https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncoveed-extra-precautions/index.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fcoronavirus%2F2019-ncov%2Fneed-extra-precautions%2Fpeople-at-increased-risk.htmlDepartment of Health and Mental Hygiene NYCDoHaMH EpiQuery. https:/yc.gov/health/epiquery Accessed 12 Nov 2020.US Census Bureau. American Community Survey. 2018 American Community Survey 5-Year estimates. https://data.census.gov/cedsci/ Accessed 28 Apr 2020.NYC Department of Health. ZCTA to MODZCTA Crosswalk. https://github.comychealth/coronavirus-data/blob/master/Geography-resources/ZCTA-to-MODZCTA.csvNew York City United Hospital Fund Codes. https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/doh/downloads/pdf/ah/zipcodetable.pdfDorn AV, Cooney RE, Sabin ML. COVID-19 exacerbating inequalities in the US. Lancet. 2020;395(10232):1243–4.Article CAS Google Scholar Carrión D, Colicino E, Pedretti NF, et al. Assessing capacity to social distance and neighborhood-level health disparities during the COVID-19 pandemic. In: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. 2020. Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsNot applicable.FundingNot applicable.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsInstitute for Translational Epidemiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USAAshley Moreland, Christina Gillezeau, Adriana Eugene, Naomi Alpert & Emanuela TaioliAuthorsAshley MorelandView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChristina GillezeauView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdriana EugeneView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNaomi AlpertView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEmanuela TaioliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsAM: Conceptualization, methodology, data curation, writing- original draft preparation, visualization, investigation, software, validation. CG: conceptualization, investigation, writing- reviewing and editing, software, validation, data curation; AE: data curation. NA: conceptualization, investigation, writing- reviewing and editing, software, validation. ET: conceptualization, investigation, writing- reviewing and editing. All authors have approved the submitted version of this study.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Emanuela Taioli.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable. Consent for publication Not applicable. available at the following: 1. New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s COVID-19 data repository at https://github.comychealth/coronavirus-data 2. New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s EpiQuery tool at https:/yc.gov/health/epiquery 3. US Census Bureau’s American Community Survey 5-year estimates at https://data.census.gov/cedsci/ Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleMoreland, A., Gillezeau, C., Eugene, A. et al. Ecologic study of influenza vaccination uptake and COVID-19 death rate in New York City. BMC Public Health 22, 1089 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-13515-zDownload citationReceived: 11 October 2021Accepted: 16 May 2022Published: 01 June 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-13515-zShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsInfluenza vaccinationCOVID-19Socioeconomic factors Download PDF Advertisement BMC Public Health ISSN: 1471-2458 Contact us General enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.Magnitude and breadth of antibody cross-reactivity induced by recombinant influenza hemagglutinin trimer vaccine is enhanced by combination adjuvants | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Magnitude and breadth of antibody cross-reactivity induced by recombinant influenza hemagglutinin trimer vaccine is enhanced by combination adjuvants Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 02 June 2022 Magnitude and breadth of antibody cross-reactivity induced by recombinant influenza hemagglutinin trimer vaccine is enhanced by combination adjuvants Jenny E. Hernandez-Davies1, Emmanuel P. Dollinger2, Egest J. Pone1, Jiin Felgner1, Li Liang1, Shirin Strohmeier3, Sharon Jan1, Tyler J. Albin4 nAff7, Aarti Jain1, Rie Nakajima1, Algimantas Jasinskas1, Florian Krammer3,5, Aaron Esser-Kahn6, Philip L. Felgner1, Qing Nie2 & …D. Huw Davies1 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 12, Article number: 9198 (2022) Cite this article 3025 Accesses 13 Citations 6 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects AdjuvantsImmunologyVaccines AbstractThe effects of adjuvants for increasing the immunogenicity of influenza vaccines are well known. However, the effect of adjuvants on increasing the breadth of cross-reactivity is less well understood. In this study we have performed a systematic screen of different toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists, with and without a squalene-in-water emulsion on the immunogenicity of a recombinant trimerized hemagglutinin (HA) vaccine in mice after single-dose administration. Antibody (Ab) cross-reactivity for other variants within and outside the immunizing subtype (homosubtypic and heterosubtypic cross-reactivity, respectively) was assessed using a protein microarray approach. Most adjuvants induced broad IgG profiles, although the response to a combination of CpG, MPLA and AddaVax (termed ‘IVAX-1’) appeared more quickly and reached a greater magnitude than the other formulations tested. Antigen-specific plasma cell labeling experiments show the components of IVAX-1 are synergistic. This adjuvant preferentially stimulates CD4 T cells to produce Th1>Th2 type (IgG2c>IgG1) antibodies and cytokine responses. Moreover, IVAX-1 induces identical homo- and heterosubtypic IgG and IgA cross-reactivity profiles when administered intranasally. Consistent with these observations, a single-cell transcriptomics analysis demonstrated significant increases in expression of IgG1, IgG2b and IgG2c genes of B cells in H5/IVAX-1 immunized mice relative to naïve mice, as well as significant increases in expression of the IFNγ gene of both CD4 and CD8 T cells. These data support the use of adjuvants for enhancing the breath and durability of antibody responses of influenza virus vaccines. Similar content being viewed by others The antibody landscapes following AS03 and MF59 adjuvanted H5N1 vaccination Article Open access 30 August 2022 Impact of adjuvants on the biophysical and functional characteristics of HIV vaccine-elicited antibodies in humans Article Open access 04 August 2022 Enhancing breadth and durability of humoral immune responses in non-human primates with an adjuvanted group 1 influenza hemagglutinin stem antigen Article Open access 11 November 2023 IntroductionDespite seasonal vaccination, influenza virus remains a major source of annual morbidity and mortality, and a constant pandemic threat. Influenza A virus (IAV) evolves as it replicates in human and animal hosts owing to an error-prone RNA polymerase that lacks proof-reading function, randomly generating amino acid substitutions in viral proteins. Under selection by the immune response, mutants emerge that escape existing immunity1,2,3,4. The major target of neutralizing antibodies (nAbs) elicited by infection or vaccination is hemagglutinin (HA) on the virion surface, which functions on the virion as a receptor for cell-surface sialic acid to mediate viral entry into host cells5,6. Thus far, 16 distinct HA subtypes have been found in IAV isolated from mammalian and avian hosts, and two more from bats7,8. A secondary target of nAbs is neuraminidase (NA), a viral-surface enzyme that facilitates egress from infected cells. There are 11 known NA subtypes. Immune escape is caused by the accumulation of amino acid substitutions in epitopes recognized by nAbs, a process known as antigenic drift3,9,10. This process has led to the emergence of many more drifted variants of HA than of NA.The segmented RNA genome of influenza virus can also lead to the wholesale exchange of different HA subtypes in cells co-infected with two or more different subtypes of influenza virus11, a process known as antigenic shift. Currently only IAVs expressing H1 and H3 subtypes are circulating in humans. However, exchange with a novel HA subtype to which humans have not been previously exposed has the potential to cause pandemics. For example, the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus H5N1 A/goose/Guangdong/1996 lineage is endemic in poultry in several countries and has caused sporadic lethal infections in humans12. The antigenic novelty of these viruses pose a continued risk for pandemic potential in naïve human populations13,14. Pre-pandemic preparedness involves stockpiling vaccines against potential pandemic IAVs. Ultimately, however, it is unknown which subtype will lead to the next pandemic. Thus, the induction of broad protection is as important for pandemic vaccines as it is for seasonal vaccines.Protection afforded by seasonal vaccination is short-lived, necessitating revision of the vaccine strains on an annual basis. Effectiveness against circulating strains varies year-to-year, anywhere from 0 to 60%, depending on the accuracy with which the vaccine strains predicted correspond to the strains that are eventually seen in circulation15, and the overall immune competence of the vaccinee16,17. Both of these limitations conspire to reduce vaccine efficacy and durability, which ultimately leads to varying levels of morbidity and mortality in susceptible populations. It is likely effectiveness could be improved by a broadly-protective seasonal vaccine which targets conserved epitopes shared by variants18,19,20,21.In this study, we administered mice a recombinant trimerized HA (either H5 from A/Vietnam/1203/04 or H7 from A/Anhui/1/2013) with 8 different toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists, with or without an oil-in water emulsion, to assess immunogenicity and breadth of the response. All of the adjuvants tested enhanced these responses over antigen alone to varying levels and with different Th1/Th2 ratios. A combination adjuvant we refer to as “IVAX-1”, comprising synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides containing unmethylated cytosine-guanine motifs (CpG ODNs) and monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA) (TLR9 and 4 agonists, respectively) with emulsion induced broad Ab responses by microarray that developed quickly and reached greatest magnitude. The response was skewed towards Th1 (IgG2c>IgG1) and included nAbs after boosting. A single-cell transcriptomic analysis of whole spleens from mice receiving HA/IVAX-1 confirmed the polarization seen by immunological methods, with additional insights into the spectrum of effects of IVAX-1 during a virus neutralizing response.Materials and methodsAntigens and virusesTrimerized HA from A/Vietnam/1203/04 (H5N1) or A/Anhui/1/2013 (H7N9) were expressed in insect cells and purified on nickel chelate columns as described22. Full-length HA0 and HA1 regions for protein microarray printing, B cell labeling and T cell recall assays, were purchased from Sino Biological Inc. (Beijing, China). Reassortant influenza virus A/Vietnam/1194/2004 (H5N1) × A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (NIBRG-14 from National Institute for Biological Standards & Controls, South Mimms, UK) was propagated in fertilized hen eggs (Charles River) and titers determined by hemagglutination23 and TCID50 assay, where TCID50 is the tissue-culture infective dose, i.e., dilution of virus that caused a cytopathic effect in 50% of wells containing Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells24. All virus handling was performed in USDA inspected and approved BSL2+/ABSL2+ facilities.AdjuvantsTri-agonist TLR2/6_4_7 was synthesized by conjugation reactions (amide bond formation, maleimide-thiol Michael addition and azide-alkyne click chemistry) of individual TLR agonists to a central triazine as described previously25. The individual agonists comprised Pam2CSK4, a TLR2 and TLR6 agonist (TLR2/6 a), pyrimido-indole (TLR4 a), and 2Bxy, an imidazoquinoline derivative (TLR7 a). TLR tri-agonist and individual TLR agonists were purified by either high performance liquid chromatography or gel extraction, and their masses were confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) or electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry. The CpG-1018 (TLR9 a) was purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, Iowa) and dissolved in sterile water at 1 mM as stock. Monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA, TLR4 a) was purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids Inc., (Alabaster, AL; purity > 99%). Since MPLA has limited solubility in aqueous solution, this agonist was integrated into liposomes of the inert colipid 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol) (DOPG; Avanti Polar Lipids Inc., Alabaster, AL) an at 1:5 molar ratio. A squalene oil-in-water emulsion (AddaVax) was purchased from Invivogen Inc. (San Diego, CA). Absence of endotoxin (endotoxin activity of < 1 EU/mL) in TLR a samples, with the exception of MPLA, was confirmed with LAL Endotoxin Assay Kits (Genscript, Piscataway, NJ) or by HEK TLR4 reporter cell assay (Invivogen, San Diego, CA). MPLA is manufactured in organic solvents and has minimal endotoxin activity.Mouse immunizationsAll animal work was approved by the UCI Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC protocol No. AUP-18-096) and by the Animal Care and Use Review Office (ACURO) of the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command (USAMRMC). The laboratory animal resources at UCI are Internationally accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC No. 000238). All experiments were performed in accordance with the animal use protocol approved by IACUC and ACURO. This article also follows recommendations in the ARRIVE guidelines for reporting of animal research26. Female C57Bl/6 mice (7–10 weeks of age) were purchased from Charles River Inc., and housed in standard cages with enrichment. Each vaccine dose comprised 2.5 μg trimerized HA antigen with different TLR agonists (Table 1). Formulations were used without or with an equal volume of AddaVax and administered via the sub-cutaneous (s.c.) route (50 μL, base of tail) under brief anesthesia with inhaled isofluorane/O2 mixture. Mice were weighed and monitored daily for the first two weeks for any changes in behavior or appearance and periodically thereafter. Blood was collected into heparinized microcapillary tubes at regular time points (d0, d10, d28, d43) by facial vein bleed under anesthesia with inhaled isofluorane/O2 and at the experimental endpoint (d103) by cardiac puncture under terminal anesthesia. Tissues (spleens, lymph nodes) were harvested post-mortem for T cell recall assays. For intranasal immunizations (i.n.), vaccine formulations containing 2.5 μg trimerized H5 were administered in a total volume of 20 μL using a micropipette pipette to the right-side nares of mice transiently anesthetized in an isofluorane/O2 mixture. These mice were boosted via the same route and dose on d56 and lung and nasal washes collected 13 days later.Table 1 Formulations used for adjuvant screen.Full size tableProtein microarraysHA protein microarrays were fabricated as previously described27. Briefly, purified influenza HAs spanning 18 influenza A virus subtypes expressed in human or insect cells as either HA0 or HA1 molecules, were purchased from Sino Biological Inc. (Beijing, China). Each lyophilized antigen was reconstituted to a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with 0.001% Tween 20 (T-PBS) and printed onto nitrocellulose-coated glass AVID slides (Grace Bio-Labs, Inc., Bend, OR, USA) using an Omni Grid 100 microarray printer (Genomic Solutions). For probing, plasma samples were diluted 1:100 in protein array blocking buffer (GVS, Sanford, ME, USA) supplemented with a poly-histidine peptide (HHHHHHHHHHGGGG) (Biomatik USA, Delaware, USA) to final concentration 0.10 μg/mL, and pre-incubated at room temperature (RT) for 30 min. Concurrently, arrays were rehydrated in blocking buffer for 30 min prior to replacement of the blocking buffer with pre-incubated plasma. Arrays were incubated overnight at 4 °C with gentle agitation. After washing 6 times with Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 0.05% Tween 20 (T-TBS) at RT, arrays were incubated for 2 h at RT with biotinylated anti-mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch; Cat No. 115-068-071) or anti-mouse IgA (Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories [KPL]; Cat. No. 16-18-01). Arrays were then washed 6 times with T-TBS, followed by incubation with streptavidin-conjugated Qdot-800 (Life technologies; Cat. No. Q10173MP) diluted 1:250 in blocking buffer for 1 h at RT. For IgG subtyping, anti-mouse IgG1-Alexa Fluor647 or IgG2c-Alexa Fluor555 (Southern Biotech; Cat. Nos. 1073-31 and 1077-32) were used. Arrays were washed three times each with T-TBS followed by TBS, dipped in distilled water, and air-dried by centrifugation at 500 × g for 10 min. Images were acquired using the ArrayCAM imaging system (Grace Bio-Labs Inc., Bend, OR) with gain and exposure times of 50 and 400–1000 ms, respectively. Spot and background intensities were measured using an annotated grid (.gal) file. Signal intensities (SI) for each antigen on the array were first background corrected by subtracting sample-specific T-PBS buffer signals from purified protein spot signals.Hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assaysHI assays were performed essentially as described23. Mouse plasma samples were tested in duplicate by first treating 10 μL plasma with 30 μL receptor destroying enzyme (RDE; Denka Seiken, Inc.) for 18 h at 37 °C, after which 30 μL of 2.5% sodium citrate was added and heated at 56 °C for 30 min24. The volume was brought up to 100 μL with PBS, pH7.2 to give a starting dilution of 1/10. Duplicate serial dilutions of 25 μL plasma/well were performed across a V-bottomed microtiter plate (Thermo Fisher) in HI assay buffer (FTA Hemagglutination Buffer, Fisher Scientific) and an equal volume of virus (diluted to 4 hemagglutination units [HAU]/25 μL HI assay buffer) added for 30 min at RT to allow neuralization to occur. One row without plasma or virus (HI assay buffer only) and one row of without plasma (virus only) were also included as controls. To each well was added 50 μL 0.5% freshly-washed turkey red blood cell suspension (Rockland Immunochemicals, Inc., Limerick, PA) in HA buffer and left for 45 min at 4 °C to allow red cell pellets to form. The neutralization titer was defined as the reciprocal of the last dilution in which a clear pellet was seen, and multiplied by 10 to correct for the initial dilution from RDE treatment. An HI titer of 1/40 is considered the cut-off for protection in humans28. Positive control plasma for neutralization assays were produced against reassortant H5N1 virus (obtained from NIBSC, UK, Cat. No. NIBRG-14) in C57Bl/6 mice by administering 5 × 104 TCID50 in 10 μL via i.n. route followed 2 weeks later by the same dose administered in 100 μL via intraperitoneal (i.p.) route.Microneutralization (MN) assaysMN assays were performed as described24 with modifications. Briefly, MDCK cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA; Cat. No. CCL-34) and maintained in Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM; ATCC Cat. No. 30-2003) containing penicillin/streptomycin (Thermofisher) and 10% heat inactivated fetal calf serum (ATCC-Cat. No. 30-2020), and cultured at 37 °C/5% CO2 in a humid environment. Cells were sub-cultured when 80–85% confluency and only early passage cells were used for MN assays. One day prior to assay, MDCK cells were sub-cultured into flat-bottomed 96 well plates at 2 × 104 cells/well in 100µL. Serum samples were treated overnight with 3 volumes of RDE for 18 h at 37 °C, and then inactivated at 56 °C for 30 min. Plasma were then diluted 1:10 in virus growth media, comprising serum-free EMEM containing 0.6% BSA and 1 µg/mL N-p-Tosyl-l-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-treated trypsin (Worthington Biochemical), and two-fold serially diluted in virus growth medium in a separate 96-well plate. Reassortant H5N1 virus (NIBSC; Cat. No. NIBRG-14) was diluted to 100 TCID50 per 50 µL in virus growth media, and 50 µL of virus added to wells containing the serially diluted plasma, and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C/5% CO2. Control wells contained virus only and growth media only. After 1 h incubation, media from cell monolayers was replaced with the serum-virus mixtures and plates incubated for 1 h. Serum-virus mixtures were then replaced with 200 µL of virus growth media + 2% fetal bovine serum, and plates incubated for 48 h at 37 °C. Cells were then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Fisher Scientific; Cat. No. AAJ19943K2) in PBS for 30 min, washed in PBS and permeabilized in 0.1% PBS/Triton X-100 at RT for 15 min. Cells were then washed and blocked in a blocking buffer of 3% bovine serum albumen (BSA; Sigma-Aldrich, Cat. No. A9085) in PBS for 1 h at RT. Influenza virus nucleoprotein (NP) was then detected using anti-NP mAbs (Millipore Cat Nos. MAB 8257 and MAB 8258) combined at 1/1000 dilution each in blocking buffer, followed by horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (KPL, Cat. No. 074-1802) diluted to 1:3000 in blocking buffer. Plates were developed in 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) peroxidase substrate (SureBlue; SeraCare KPL Cat. No. 5120-0075) and reactions stopped using 0.18 M H2SO4. Assays were quantified in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) plate reader (Emax Plus, Molecular Devices LLC, San Jose, CA) at 450 nm using SoftMax Pro 7.1 software.T cell recall assaysMice that had been immunized with trimerized H5 VN04 for serological studies were re-used for T cell recall assays at the serological endpoint. Prior to the assay, mice were boosted via the i.p. route with 100 μL the same vaccine formulation used to prime, and splenocytes were harvested 10 days later. Recall assays were performed using ELISpot format essentially as described previously29. Antigens used for recall were HAs expressed in HEK293 cells (Sino Biological: H1 Cal09, Cat. No. 11055-V08H; H5 VN04 Cat. No. 11062-V08H2; and H7 AH13 Cat. No. 40103-V08H) as well as Ebola virus glycoprotein expressed in insect cells (IBT BioServices Cat. No. 0501-015). Assays were performed in T cell medium (TCM) comprising Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco’s Medium (IMDM), containing 5 × 10-5 M β-mercaptoethanol, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 10% fetal calf serum as described29. After 18 h of incubation, the assay supernatants were collected for multiplex cytokine screening using the LEGENDplex kit (BioLegend Inc., San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, before the ELISpot was processed. T cell recall assays were also performed using virus-infected antigen-presenting cells (v-APCs) as a source of recall antigen for restimulating CD8 T cells. For this, erythrocyte-depleted splenocytes were washed 3× in PBS, then incubated with H5N1/PR8 reassortant influenza virus to a final concentration of 1 HAU in serum-free infection medium (Eagles Minimal Essential Medium, 0.6% BSA, 1 μg/mL EDCP-treated trypsin + antibiotics) at 37 °C/5%CO2 with gentle agitation every 10 min. After 1 h incubation, v-APCs were washed 1× in PBS then resuspended at 107 cells/ml in TCM (as described above) containing 0.2% FCS. The v-APCs were used neat (107 cells/ml) or diluted to 106, 105 and 0 cells/mL in a suspension of 107 cells/mL uninfected splenocytes in TCM. The titrated vAPCs were then mixed with an equal volume of responder splenocytes from either immunized or naïve control mice at 107 cells/mL, and 100 μL of APC:responder cell suspension added to wells of pre-coated ELISPOT plates, or flat-bottomed 96 well plates for intracellular cytokine staining (ICS). Plates were incubated for 18 h before processing for cytokine detection by ELISpot, ICS, or supernatant assay by LEGENDplex.Intracellular cytokine staining (ICS)Intracellular cytokine staining was performed using reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Biolegend Inc.). Briefly, cells were harvested from recall assays in round-bottom 96-well plates by centrifuging at 400 × g for 5 min, and surface-labeling the cells with an antibody cocktail comprising BV510-anti-CD8, BV650-anti-CD19, BV785-anti-CD4 and 7AAD for 20 min at RT. After washing in Dulbecco’s PBS (DPBS), cells were fixed and permeabilized for 20 min at RT in Cyto-Fast Fix/Perm buffer. After washing 2× in Cyto-FastPerm Wash solution, cells were incubated with an intracellular antibody cocktail comprising PacBlue-anti-Tbet, AF488-anti-IFNγ, PE-anti-Gata3, PECy7-anti-IL4, AF647-anti-IL17A and APCCy7-anti-IL2 in 50 μL per well of Cyto-Fast Perm Wash for 30 min at RT in the dark. After washing with 200 μL of Cyto-FastPerm Wash solution, cells were washed 2 × in Cell Staining Buffer (BioLegend Cat. No. 420201) and 100 μL samples were acquired from 96-well plates on a Novocyte 3000 for 50 s, with FSC-H threshold set at 100,000, and voltage settings such that unstained cells have autofluorescence values between 102 and 103 units. Unstained and single-color stained controls were used to set up the compensation matrix. Flowjo software (BD Inc.) was used for flow cytometry compensation, additional data processing, gating, analysis and rendering figures. Briefly, live lymphocytes were gated by appropriate forward vs side scattering, followed by singlet gating by area vs. height of forward scattering pulse, and followed by 7AAD-gating of live (non-apoptotic and non-necrotic cells). Finally, analysis of each T cell subpopulation was conducted as summarized in the “Results” section.B cell labellingHA proteins (Sinobiological Inc.) were conjugated to fluorescent dyes using the DyLight Microscale Antibody Labeling Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA; Cat. No. 22858) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, as described previously27. Briefly, lyophilized HAs were reconstituted in 100 μL H2O (1 mg/mL) and 8 μL of 0.67 M borate buffer added. H1, H5 and H7 were added to DyLight405, 488 and 650 (Cat. Nos. 53021, 53025, 8543), respectively, vortexed gently and incubated at RT for 1 h. Excess unbound dye was removed by gentle mixing with 108 μL of Dye Removal Resin (centrifuged prior to mixing to remove the storage buffer) followed by centrifugation at 1000 × g to collect the labelled proteins. For B cell labelling, splenocyte cell suspensions were first surface labelled at RT for 30 min with a cocktail of fluorescent Abs and reagents, comprising BV510-anti-CD138, BV655-anti-CD3, BV785-anti-CD19, PE-anti-IgG2a, PE/Cy-anti-GL7, and APC/Cy7-anti-IgM (BioLegend Inc., San Diego, CA) and 7- aminoactinomycin D (7AAD; Thermo Fisher) at 2 × 106 cells/well in 96-well round-bottom plates. After washing in PBS, cells were fixed, permeabilized and washed using an intracellular staining kit (Cyto-Fast from BioLegend) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were then incubated in a concentration of 2 μg/mL, which is equivalent to 100 ng per well (50 μL total vol) of fluorescently-labeled HA monomers in Cyto-Fast Perm/Wash buffer for 1 h then washed with 200 μL of Perm/Wash buffer. This concentration of fluorescent HA (100 ng per well) was determined to be optimal in titration experiments by having virtually no background staining of plasma cells from nonimmunized mice, and showing good separation of the HA+ from HA- population. Data were acquired using a Novocyte 3000 flow cytometer for 50 s, with FSC-H threshold set at 100,000, and voltage settings such that unstained cells have autofluorescence values between 102 and 103 units. Unstained and single-color stained controls were used to set up the compensation matrix. Data were analyzed with FlowJo software. CD19+ (including dim or lo and bright or high) cells were gated in a two-dimensional CD19 vs. CD3 plot, followed by gating of antigen-specific (plasma) cells in a 2D CD138 vs. CD19 plot (plasma cells are defined CD138 + CD19lo). For additional 2D plots, gated plasma cells were plotted in 2D showing H1 vs. H5, H1 vs. H7 and H5 vs. H7 to measure potential cross-reactivity. Additional statistics were carried out using tables and layouts in FlowJo followed by rendering graphs in Excel (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA).Single cell transcriptomic sequencing and analysisThree C57Bl/6 female mice were administered 5 μg H5 monomer (Sinobiological Cat. 11062-V08H1) in 50 μL adjuvant (IVAX-1) comprising an equal mixture of AddaVax emulsion (Invivogen) and PBS containing MPLA in liposomes and CpG ODN 1018, at final concentrations of 3 and 1 nmole, respectively. The use of monomers was based on array profiling data comparing responses to H5 trimers and monomers (Supplementary Fig. S1). These profiles were highly correlated when either form of H5 was administered in IVAX-1 via the s.c. route. The formulation was administered the via the s.c. route (base of tail) and boosted similarly on d14, and again on d28 (second boost via i.p. route), and spleen (SP) and lymph nodes (LN) from multiple sites harvested 7 days later. Single cell suspensions of LN cells and erythrocyte-depleted SP were prepared by gently pressing tissues through a cell strainer. SP and LN cell suspensions from two age-matched naïve mice were also prepared for comparison. The four samples (unimmunized LN, unimmunized SP, immunized LN, immunized SP) were then bar coded separately using cell multiplexing kits (3' CellPlex Set A, 10X Genomics, Cat. No. 1000261) at 2 × 106 total cells per sample following manufacturer’s protocol. The final barcoded cells were resuspended at ~ 2000 cell/μL, and then mixed to form two pools: one comprised unimmunized LN and SP cells (~ 5000 each) in one droplet encapsulation and cDNA library preparation channel, and the other immunized LN and SP (~ 5,000 cells each) similarly prepared in another channel. These two channels were subjected to single-cell cDNA library preparation (10× Genomics Chromium 3’ v3 kit) and then sequenced with a target depth of ~ 50 K reads per cell using the Illumina HiSeq system. For read alignment and data preprocessing, FastQC30 was first used to quality control FastQ format raw data using the fastqc command and the –noextract flag. The multiplexed samples were then demultiplexed, and the FastQs were aligned to the CellRanger31 reference mm10-3.0.0 using STAR implemented in CellRanger v6.0.2 with the multi command and default parameters. The output .mtx and feature barcode files from CellRanger were read into SCANPY v1.7.232. Only the SP data were considered for downstream analyses presented here. The following operations were performed using SCANPY’s built-in functions unless otherwise stated. The resulting count matrices were concatenated such that only genes that were expressed in both unimmunized and immunized mice (hereafter referred to as “batches”) were included. Only cells that were confidently demultiplexed, that were expressing more than 200 genes, and genes that were expressed in more than 3 cells, were considered for the downstream analysis. The count data were log-normalized using the “Seurat” method33,34. For data batch-correction, the data were reduced to 50 dimensions using principal component analysis. The principal components were batch-corrected using harmonypy implemented in SCANPY with defaults. The k-nearest neighbor graph was constructed on the batch-corrected principal components with 100 neighbors and cosine distance metric. The resulting graph was reduced to 2 dimensions using UMAP for visualization. The cell types were identified using a support vector machine (SVM) model implemented in scikit-learn v0.24.235 with a sigmoid kernel and C = 10 trained on unpublished single cell transcriptomic data. The features (genes) were subset to those that were present in both datasets, the features in the training dataset were fit and scaled using scikit-learn’s StandardScaler function, and the features in the splenocyte dataset were scaled with the same scaler; 20% of the training data were held out for validation. Genes that were differentially expressed between different cell types were identified using the Mann–Whitney-U rank-sum test, with Benjamini–Hochberg correction36. Ribosomal genes (Rps and Rpl) were excluded from the testing. Only genes with an absolute value of log2 fold change > 0.5 were considered. Scrublet37 v0.2.3 was used to determine doublet probabilities. Scrublet pairs random transcriptomes together to form a training dataset, which it then uses to train a k-nearest neighbors doublet classifier. The scrublet pipeline was run as specified by the documentation with defaults.Cell–cell communication inferences were made using CellChat v1.1.2, a recently developed tool that generates and plots cell–cell communication probabilities and interaction strengths from single cell transcriptomic data38. The normalized data were exported from SCANPY and imported into Seurat v4.0.3 using custom functions. The CellChat interaction strengths were generated for each dataset individually (with min.cells = 100, all other parameters were left as defaults) and then combined. The differential interaction strength was plotted using the netVisual_diffInteraction function in CellChat with defaults. The comparison between all unvaccinated and vaccinated cells was performed by subsetting the treatment naïve and vaccinated groups until each celltype had the same number of cells in each group, then doing differential expression as above.Other data analysis and statisticsProtein microarray data were tested for significance between groups using two- tailed Mann–Whitney tests for unpaired data or two-tailed Kruskal–Wallis tests with Dunn’s multiple-comparisons using GraphPad Prism 6.7 (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA). A P value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Flow data were analyzed with FlowJo software (FlowJo Llc., Ashland, OR). To determine antibody breadth, geometric means of Log2-transformed data for each antigen were determined for each vaccine group, and an antigen was scored seropositive if above a cutoff defined as the mean + 2SD of the signals for an irrelevant protein on the array (NA) which was not used to immunize. Array data were tested for significance using Kruskal Wallis Dunn's multiple comparison test in R or Prism. Graphical outputs were generated in Prism and Microsoft Excel.ResultsBreadth and magnitude of IgG response is influenced by TLR agonist(s) and emulsionThe protein microarray was used to determine the effect of different adjuvant formulations on the breadth of the IgG response. We utilized HA monomers expressed in eukaryotic cells as detection antigens on the array. Therefore, conformation-dependent epitopes present only on the quaternary structure of assembled trimers will not be displayed. Similarly, other conformation-dependent epitopes may be under-represented on the monomers, particularly the HA1 fragment, according to the conformation adopted by the antigen. Nevertheless, the array revealed a hierarchy of responses (characterized by breadth and magnitude) induced by different adjuvants. Groups of C57Bl/6 female mice (7–10 weeks old) were administered via the s.c. route (base of tail) a single dose of trimerized VN04 H5 in a different TLR agonist (TLR a), or combination TLR a, and formulated without or with squalene oil-in-water emulsion (AddaVax) as shown in Table 1. Agonists comprised Pam2CSK4 (TLR2/6 a), pyrimido-indole derivative and monophosphoryl lipid A (both TLR4 a), imidazoquinoline derivative (TLR7 a), ODN 1018 CpG DNA containing a phosphorothioate backbone (TLR9 a), and a chemically linked tri-agonist (TLR2/6_4_7) as described previously25. The pyrimido-indole TLR4 a is less potent than the conventional MPLA agonist for TLR4, but is more suited for tri-agonist synthesis25,39. Plasma samples were obtained at days 10, 28, 43 and 103 for probing against an influenza protein microarray described previously27, which displayed 125 different monomeric full length HA (HA0) drift variants and 131 HA1 variants, spanning all 18 HA subtypes. Other than transient weight loss in the first 24 h after vaccination, the animals in each group showed normal increases in body weight (Supplementary Fig. S2).IgG responses peaked ~ d28–d43; the IgG profiles by protein microarray for full-length HA0 and HA1 on d28 are shown in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. Full-length H5 drift variants on the array range overall from 90.3 to 99.8 (average 96.4) % sequence identity with the immunizing HA (VN04 H5), while drift variants of H1 (the closest phylogenetic group to H5) range from 59.5 to 65.6 (average 62.9) % sequence identity with VN04 H5. These values are higher if the conserved HA2 regions are compared. Thus, 92.9–99.6 (average 97.8) % identity for H5 variants, and 75.7–77.9 (average 77.1) percent identity for H1 variants. In addition to H1, H5 immunization also induces heterosubtypic cross-reactivity for other closely-related Group 1 HAs, including H2 and H6. In the absence of AddaVax emulsion (orange symbols in Figs. 1 and 2), the magnitude of responses were greatest with MPLA and the CpG/MPLA combination adjuvant (Fig. 1G,H). The linked TLR 2/6_4_7 tri-agonist and TLR2/6 a also induced robust H5 responses (Fig. 1A,C), while unlinked TR2/6,4,7 tri-agonist, TLR7 a, and TLR9 a induced weak, but measurable homosubtypic IgG cross-reactivity only without emulsion (Fig. 1B,E,F, respectively). H5 with pyrimido-indole derivative (TLR4 a), or administered alone without TLR a, failed to induce detectable IgG under the conditions used (Fig. 1D,I, respectively). Comparisons between the different TLR agonists administered without emulsion revealed the magnitude of the response induce by TLR4a (MPLA) and TLR9 a/TLR4 a (CpG/MPLA) was significantly higher than most of the other vaccine groups (Supplementary Table S1). Linked TLR 2/6_4_7 triagonist without emulsion was also significantly higher than TLR4 a (PID) and antigen alone.Figure 1IgG profiles in response to trimerized influenza virus VN04 H5 vaccine formulated with different TLR agonists, with or without squalene oil-in-water emulsion (AddaVax). Antibody profiles were determined by probing immune plasma (d28-post vaccination) against HA protein microarray (Supplementary Table S1). Antigens (horizontal axis) are full-length (HA0) HA variants ranked within subtype H1-H18 by overall average of whole study population. Magnitude of response (vertical axis) are geometric means of each vaccine group (N = 4 mice). Breadth of response is summarized in Table 2. CpG cytosine-guanine oligo deoxynucleotide, AddaVax; MPLA monophosphoryl lipid A; PID pyrimido-indole derivative; TLRa TLR agonist. Kruskal Wallis Dunn's multiple comparison between + and − AddaVax are indicated for H1 and H5; ****P < 0.0001; ***P ≤ 0.001; **P ≤ 0.01; *P < 0.05.Full size imageFigure 2IgG profiles in response to trimerized influenza virus VN04 H5 vaccine formulated with different TLR agonists, with or without squalene oil-in-water emulsion (AddaVax). As per Fig. 1, except arrayed antigens (horizontal axis) are HA1 regions of HA. Abbreviations, as Fig. 1.Full size imageAddaVax alone was an excellent adjuvant for H5 (Fig. 1I), and consistently elevated the responses induced by different TLR agonists. Indeed, when magnitudes were compared between emulsified adjuvants, only TLR9a/TLR4a (CpG/MPLA) + AddaVax reached significance over any other groups (Supplementary Table S1). Of particular note, the pyrimido-indole derivative (TLR4 a), which failed to elicit detectable IgG against H5, produced robust homo- and hetero-subtypic cross-reactivity when co-administered with AddaVax. This was higher than achieved with AddaVax or TLR4 a alone, indicative of a synergistic response. AddaVaxThe effect of the emulsion was often dramatic. For example, the cross-reactive response to antigen administered with unlinked tri-agonist, TLR7 a, or TLR9 a, were modest and homosubtypic (H5) only, but homo- (H5) responses and hetero- (H1) responses were significantly elevated when co-administered in AddaVax. Interestingly, the smallest change by inclusion of AddaVax was seen with MPLA (a TLR4 a), which is by itself a strong adjuvant for H5; the profile after coadministration with AddaVax was essentially unchanged. However, this may be related to the liposome needed for delivery of hydrophobic MPLA which may not benefit from an oil-in-water emulsion in the same way as other water-soluble agonists.The breadth induced by each formulation is summarized in Table 2. In the absence of AddaVax, all formulations (with the exception of the pyrimido-indole derivative), induced broad homosubtypic responses to H5 variants, with TLR4a (MPLA) and TLR9 a/TLR4 a (CpG/MPLA) inducing the broadest. Heterosubtypic cross-reactivity was more restricted. For example, cross-reactivity for over half of the H1 variants was induced by MPLA and CpG/MPLA only, with breadth for less than half of H1 variants induced by the linked and unlinked triagonist and TLR 2/6 a. TLR4 (pyrimido-indole derivative), TLR7 a and TLR9 a failed to induce cross-reactivity to H1 or any other Group 1 HAs. Cross-reactivity was also generated against H6 by four of the nine non-emulsion TLR a formulations, with CpG/MPLA inducing the broadest response of the four. CpG/MPLA was also the only non-emulsion formulation to induce cross-reactivity to the more phylogenetically distant H8 (100%) and H11 (33%). In contrast, all formulations containing AddaVax, including AddaVax alone, induced a maximally broad response (100%) against H5 and H6, and near maximal responses against H1 and H2.Table 2 Summary of breadth of response elicited by H5 administered in different adjuvants.Full size tableHA1 fragments contain the variable head domain and part of the more conserved stalk of the protein. Previous studies with this array format have shown that sera with reactivity to the full-length (HA0) may also recognize HA1, depending on whether there are antibodies present against the head27,40. IgG profiles to HA1 fragments are shown in Fig. 2 with breadth of response shown in Table 2. The TLR9 a/TLR4 a (CpG/MPLA) combination adjuvant induced the broadest IgG homosubtypic cross-reactivity for HA1 fragments of H5 in the absence of emulsion (Fig. 2H); the magnitude of this was elevated by combining with AddaVax although this increase was not significant. Responses were also induced by other formulations. Several of these were significantly higher when administered in AddaVax compared to without (Fig. 2B–F,I), although these were characterized by reduced breadth (Table 2) and magnitude (Fig. 2) compared to emulsified CpG/MPLA. The weaker response to HA1 compared to full length HA0 may reflect the smaller size of the HA1 polypeptide, and consequently the fewer B cell epitopes available for recognition by the polyclonal response. Alternatively, the conformation of HA1 may not accurately reflect the conformation of the same sequence within the trimerized full-length protein, which may also contribute to the reduced strength of the response. To this point, we presented data previously27 showing that conformation-sensitive mAbs raised against H1 from the 2009 pandemic recognized both HA0 and HA1 on the array, suggesting the HA1 is folded correctly.Hetero-subtypic cross-reactivity against HA1 fragment was minimal. Several of the emulsified adjuvants induced a limited response to a single H1 variant HA1 (4% breadth) while only the emulsified CpG/MPLA adjuvant also induced a response to all three of the H2 variants displayed (Fig. 2H).H5 has undergone antigenic drift in poultry and natural wildfowl populations, and different H5 variants are typically grouped into clades and subclades41. A successful pre-pandemic vaccine will need to provide broad coverage across different clades to provide anticipatory protection. Thus, Fig. 3 shows array data of H5 variants by clade, which reveals broad cross-clade reactivity generated by the majority of adjuvants tested. In the absence of AddaVax, cross-clade reactivity is the strongest in TLR9 a/TLR4 a, (CpG/MPLA), TLR 4a (MPLA), linked TLR 2/6, 4_7 a, and TLR 2/6 a groups. In the presence of reactivity is elevated for all adjuvant groups.Figure 3Cross-clade homosubtypic cross-reactivity measured by protein microarray. IgG profiles in response to trimerized influenza virus VN04 (A/VN/1203/2004) H5 vaccine formulated with different TLR agonists, with or without squalene oil-in-water emulsion (AddaVax). H5 antigens (horizontal axis) are full-length (HA0) HA variants that have been organized by clade (classifications from www.fludb.org). Signal intensities (vertical axis) are geometric means of each vaccine group (N = 4 mice). (A) minus AddaVax; (B) with AddaVax. Boxed, two VN04 H5 proteins on the array (expressed in human or insect cells) that correspond with immunizing H5 variant. Abbreviations, as Fig. 1.Full size imageIn addition to antibody profiles, we assessed the dynamics of the response. Figure 4 shows the development of homosubtypic reactivity at 3 time points after a single dose. In the absence of AddaVax, the TLR9 a/TLR4 a (CpG/MPLA) combination adjuvant produced the most rapid response, being the only vaccine to have elicited detectable antibodies on day 10. By day 28, IgG reactivity was also seen from linked TLR 2/6_4_7 a tri-agonist, TLR2/6 a, and TLR4 a (MPLA), which remained elevated at day 42. In the presence of AddaVax, all the vaccines elicited reactivity by day 28, although CpG/MPLA/AddaVax again elicited the most rapid response, as can be seen on day 10. We conclude from these data, and data presented in Figs. 1 and 2, that of all the adjuvants tested, CpG/MPLA/AddaVax induces a broad response that appeared more quickly and reached a greater magnitude than the other formulations tested. The response was also durable after a single dose, remaining high at d42. Of interest, at d42 the responses induced by AddaVax alone or TLR4 a(MPLA)/AddaVax remained high, and indeed higher than CpG/MPLA/AddaVax.Figure 4Dynamics of IgG profiles in response to trimerized influenza virus VN04 H5 vaccine formulated with different TLR agonists. Box plots of H5 drift variants; each spot corresponds a different H5 variant on the microarray (geometric mean of 4 mice). Different TLR agonists, listed at the bottom, were administered (A) without or (B) with squalene oil-in-water emulsion (AddaVax). Abbreviations, as Fig. 1.Full size imageTh1/Th2 balance is variable according to adjuvant usedBoth IgG1 v IgG2c subtyping on microarrays and cytokine profiling in T cell recall assays were performed on the same groups of immunized C57Bl/6 mice to evaluate the Th1/Th2 response elicited by each adjuvant tested (Fig. 5). In the absence of AddaVax emulsion, TLR2/6_4_7 a tri-agonist, and individual TLR2/6 a and TLR7 a stimulated IgG1 antibodies (Th2) (Fig. 5A). In contrast, TLR9 a/TLR4 a (CpG/MPLA) was strongly polarized to IgG2c (Th1), while TLR4 a (MPLA) gave a more balanced response. AddaVax was an excellent adjuvant in its own right, significantly elevating both IgG1 and IgG2c compared to H5 without adjuvant. When combined with TLR agonists, AddaVax elevated IgG1, with all but two (linked triagonist and TLR7 a) reaching significance (test a in Fig. 5A). AddaVax also significantly elevated IgG2c from four of the TLR agonists (test a); interestingly, several were lower than the IgG2c response achieved by AddaVax alone (test b). AddaVax also significantly elevated IgG1 from TLR9a/TLR4a although the response was still IgG2c/Th1 polarized. Responses to TLR9 a (CpG) and TLR4 a (MPLA) were more balanced with both IgG1 and IgG2c detected. It is noteworthy that in the absence of AddaVax responses to some TLR agonists were undetectable (i.e., unlinked tri-agonist, and individual TLR4 (PID) and TLR9 agonists); however, in the presence of AddaVax all three were strongly immunogenic. Figure 5Th1 vs. Th2 balance in response to H5 vaccine formulated with different TLR agonists, with or without AddaVax. (A), Box plots of IgG1 and IgG2c profiles for H5 drift variants; each spot corresponds a different H5 variant on the microarray (geometric mean of 4 mice). Kruskal Wallis Dunn's multiple comparison tests are shown above each column; test a, + AddaVax vs. − AddaVax; test b, left side, each TLR a/− AddaVax vs. no TLR a/− AddaVax; right side, each TLR a/+ AddaVax vs. no TLR a/AddaVax; ****P < 0.0001; ***P ≤ 0.001; **P ≤ 0.01; *P < 0.05 (colors correspond to IgG isotype). (B) Spot-forming cells (SFC) in IFN-γ and IL-4 ELISpots performed on the same mice as shown in (A) 10 days post i.p. boost on d56 (means of 4 mice), using H1, H5 and H7 as recall antigens. Cell viability confirmed using Con-A mitogen (not shown). (C) Multiplex cytokine bead array (LEGENDplex) of culture supernatants of ELISpots shown in (B). Other abbreviations, as Fig. 1.Full size imageIFN-γ and IL-4 release was determined from the same mice at the experimental endpoint by ELISpots (Fig. 5B). The recall assay included immunizing (H5) antigen, as well as hemagglutinins H1 and H7 (63% and 42% sequence identity with H5, respectively). Despite observing heterosubtypic cross-reactivity at the Ab level, IFN-γ and IL-4 spot-forming cells (SFCs) were detected against H5 only. Several cytokine patterns were consistent with IgG1/IgG2c profiles. For example, in the absence of AddaVax, the only two groups to induce IgG2c were agonists to TLR4 (MPLA) and the combination TLR9 a/TLR4 a (CpG/MPLA) adjuvant; accordingly, these also produced H5-specific IFN-γ SFCs in the recall assay. In the presence of AddaVax, these two agonists elicited elevated signals to IgG1 which correlated with the presence of IL-4 SFCs. Similarly, in the absence of AddaVax, linked TLR 2/6_4_7 tri-agonist and TLR2/6 and 7 agonists produced only IgG1 (Th2) and no IFN-γ SFCs, of which two (linked TLR tri-agonist and TLR2/6 a) produced detectable IL-4 SFCs. In the presence of AddaVax, linked and unlinked TLR tri-agonist, and individual TLR 2/6, 4 and 7 agonists produced strongly polarized IgG1 (Th2) responses and correspondingly low numbers of IFN-γ SFCs but detectable IL-4. This contrasts with AddaVax alone, which produces a balanced IgG1/IgG2c profile, suggesting these TLR agonists suppress the production of IgG2c. Of note is the TLR4a, PID, which appears ineffective at inducing antibody or cytokines in the absence of AddaVax, but which becomes a strong Th2-polarizing adjuvant in the presence of AddaVax, displaying strong IgG1 signals and robust IL-4 SFC numbers. Note this contrasts with the combination TLR9 a/TLR4 a (CpG/MPLA) in the absence of emulsion, which strongly polarizes the response to IgG2c (Th1) and a production of IFN-γ SFCs. Thus, the breadth of the cross-reactive response and polarization can be tuned according to the adjuvant, as summarized in Table 3.Table 3 Summary of the effect of different adjuvants on homo- (H5) and hetero- (H1) subtypic cross-reactivity and polarization of the Th1 vs Th2 response.Full size tableThe largest numbers of IFN-γ and IL-4 producing SFCs was induced by the combination of MPLA, CpG and AddaVax. This appears to result from synergy between AddaVax and either TLR agonist, as the SFC numbers for MPLA + AddaVax or CpG + AddaVax were greater than the sum of SFC numbers for the individual components. Measurements of antigen-specific B cells also suggest these components are synergistic (see “CpG and MPLA synergize in the induction of antigen-specific plasma cells” below).Additional cytokines were assayed in the supernatants of recall assay using multiplex bead detection (Fig. 5C). The highest concentrations were elicited by MPLA/AddaVax and CpG/MPLA/AddaVax combination adjuvants. The former produced high levels of Th1-associated IL-2 and TNF-α, as well as high levels of IL-6, which is produced by different APCs and promotes Th2 differentiation42. These data are consistent with the balanced IgG1/IgG2c profile seen by arrays and ELISPOTs. CpG/MPLA/AddaVax also produced high levels of IL-2 and TNF-α, but lower levels of IL-6, which may contribute to the skewing toward IgG2c over IgG1. Both MPLA/AddaVax and CpG/MPLA/AddaVax also induced modest levels of Th17-associated cytokines. Among the non-emulsified formulations (left side of Fig. 5), of note is CpG/MPLA. This adjuvant is strongly biased to Th1 with elevated IL-2 and TNF-α but low IL-5 and IL-6, consistent with the strongly polarized IgG2c response. MPLA produces a more balanced Th1/Th2 cytokine profile, consistent with the balanced IgG1/IgG2c response. The remaining non-emulsified agonists, which produced mainly IgG1 skewed responses, produced both Th1 and Th2-associated cytokines. Interestingly, H5 alone (without TLR agonist or emulsion), which did not induce detectable antibodies, was associated with the release of several cytokines in the recall assay. This profile was amplified by AddaVax, notably release of IL-5. This would suggest H5 has an inherent capacity to stimulate a T cell response, as has been reported by others43,44, although the mechanism is unknown.CpG and MPLA synergize in the induction of antigen-specific plasma cellsIt was of interest to determine whether the effects of combining CpG and MPLA in AddaVax were synergistic, since synergies may allow lower doses of adjuvant to be used and development of less reactogenic vaccines. To address this, we used antigen-specific B cell labelling to quantify these in mice administered influenza HA in CpG/MPLA/AddaVax, and compared these with CpG/AddaVax or MPLA/AddaVax individually. The CpG/MPLA/AddaVax combination adjuvant induced more total plasma cells (Fig. 6A) and antigen-specific B cells (Fig. 6B) than the sum of CpG/AddaVax and MPLA/AddaVax separately, indicating a synergistic effect. Almost all the antigen-specific B cells were CD138+, indicating their differentiation into plasma cells. These numbers are shown as bar charts in Fig. 6C. IgG isotype staining of antigen-specific plasma cells revealed both IgG1 and IgG2a are produced (Fig. 6D), although the majority expressed IgG2a, consistent with the Th1>Th2 polarization seen by array profiling, and T cell recall assay (Fig. 5).Figure 6MPLA and CpG synergize to induce HA-specific plasma cell formation in vivo. Mice were immunized on day 0 with PBS (control), or influenza virus HA (H7 from A/Anhui/1/2013) alone or with MPLA, CpG or MPLA/CpG, all in the presence of AddaVax. Mice were boosted i.p. on day 14, and spleens harvested on day 19. (A) Plasma cells, defined as CD138+, CD19lo; (B) antigen-specific plasma cells; (C) numbers of total (blue) and antigen-specific (red) plasma cells; (D) total plasma cells, defined as CD19lo CD138+ as in (A) above, are plotted to visualize H7 fluorescence vs IgG1 or IgG2a expression. H7-specific plasma cells induced by immunization with IVAX1 produce predominantly Th1-associated IgG2a.Full size imageFurther characterization of the utility of IVAX-1 as an adjuvantWe then performed a series of experiments to characterize CpG/MPLA/AddaVax combination adjuvant (IVAX-1) further. Since array is a non-functional assay, it was of interest to determine if IVAX-1/H5 induced virus neutralization. Figure 7A shows plasma generated using VN04 H5/IVAX-1 neutralized H5N1 reassortant virus in vitro. We noticed, as reported previously27, that boosting was required to reach detectable levels of neutralization. We showed earlier that IVAX-1 engendered a robust IFNγ-response in the ELISpot (Fig. 5B). As the antigen for recall was supplied as soluble H5, it was expected that most of the processed antigen would be presented in the context of class II MHC to CD4 T cells, rather than to CD8 T cells. This was confirmed when intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) was used in place of the ELISpot to identify the source of IFNγ (Fig. 7B). Therefore, we attempted to improve the recall of CD8 T cells using H5N1 influenza virus-infected splenocytes (vAPCs). However, we saw no improvement in detection of antigen-specific CD8 cells. Although the data support the notion that IVAX-1 preferentially stimulates CD4 T cells, we cannot exclude a CD8 T cell response as infected respiratory epithelial cells (the natural host cell for IAV) may be required for vAPCs instead of splenocytes. We also explored intranasal (i.n.) administration of IVAX-1, since the above experiments were based on the s.c. route only. The i.n. route is often used to engender an IgA response in the nasal and respiratory mucosa. Mice were administered H5/IVAX-1 via the i.n. route and boosted on d56. Other than transient weight loss (< 8%) within 24 h of the prime and boost, there were no adverse events associated with this intranasal delivery or boosting (not shown). At the experimental endpoint (d69), IgG, IgG1, IgG2c and IgA profiles were determined for plasma, and nasal and lung washed by microarray (Fig. 7C). Robust IgG responses were seen in plasma, dominated by subtype IgG2c, consistent with the findings seen when the same vaccine was administered by the s.c. route, as shown in Fig. 5. Robust IgA responses were found in nasal and lung washes, and IgG was also found in the lung, although no IgA was detected in plasma. Ab profiles recognized by IgG, IgG2c and IgA were identical after i.n. administration, and comprised recognition of both H5 (homo-subtypic) and H1 (hetero-subtypic) variants. Indeed, the IgG profile induced by i.n. administration was highly correlated with that induced by s.c. administration (Fig. 7D).Figure 7Further characterization of H5/IVAX-1. Mice were administered trimerized H5 antigen from A/Viet Nam/1203/04 in combination adjuvant CpG/MPLA/AddaVax (“IVAX-1”). (A) Virus microneutralization (MN) and hemagglutination (HI) assays. Five C57Bl/6 mice were immunized and boosted on days 14 and d42 (red arrows), and plasma samples collected at different time points tested for neutralization against reassortant H5N1 virus. Plasma from H5N1-infected mouse (Inf) was used as a positive control. Neutralizing titers against H5N1 virus increase with boosting. (B) IVAX-1 preferentially stimulates CD4+ T cells compared to CD8+ T cells. T cell recall assays were performed by incubating splenocytes from H5/IVAX1-immunized mice with recall antigens as either soluble H5 protein (monomers from Sinobiological) at different concentrations (mg/mL), or syngeneic vAPCs (splenocytes exposed for 1 h to reassortant H5N1 influenza virus) at different splenocyte : vAPC ratios. Cultures were incubated overnight, and the proportions of IFNγ-positive CD4 and CD8 cells determined using ICS. (C) H5/IVAX-1 administered by intranasal (i.n.) route induces IgG2c in lung and plasma, and IgA in lung and nasal turbinate washes. B6 mice were administered H5 trimers in IVAX-1 adjuvant via the i.n. route on d0 and d56. Antibody profiling was performed on d69 using protein microarrays probed with plasma and lung and nasal washes. Antigens are ranked left-to-right in the same order in each panel indicating the IgG and IgA profiles are essentially identical. (D) Administration of H5/IVAX-1 via the i.n. route induces essentially identical profiles to administration via the s.c. route. Shown are scatter plots of Abs signals against different H5 variants on protein microarrays. Plasma samples were obtained after i.n. and s.c. administration (x and y axes, respectively); each point represents a different H5 drift variant.Full size imageSingle-cell mRNA sequencing (sc mRNA seq) analysisFinally, in order to generate a transcriptomic “fingerprint” of IVAX-1 for future comparison with other adjuvants, we performed an unbiased single cell transcriptomic analysis of whole spleen cell suspensions pooled from 3 immunized B6 mice that received H5/IVAX-1 barcoded using the 10× Genomics platform and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq, and performed a similar analysis on an aged-matched naïve control B6 mouse for comparison (see methods). A previously trained supervised support vector machine model (SVM) was first used to define different cell types based on transcriptional profiles. The majority of splenocytes were of lymphoid origin with some myeloid cells, as shown in the Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plot in Fig. 8A and Supplemental Fig. S3A. The heatmap in Fig. 8B shows expression profiles of transcriptionally active splenocytes in mice receiving H5/IVAX-1. Cell populations were identified by differential gene expression of the subtype compared to all other subtypes. Overall, three main arms are delineated: T lymphocytes (which also includes NK/T cells, γδ T cells, and Tregs), B lymphocytes, and myeloid cells (myeloid dendritic cells, macrophages, monocytes and neutrophils). Interestingly, the unbiased hierarchical clustering of cell type transcription profiles placed B cells more closely related to myeloid cells than to T cells. The major cell populations were well delineated by marker genes. Thus, the T cells cluster show elevated expression of Trac, Trbc2, Cd3g and Cd3d (TCR α and β chain constant domains, and CD3γ and δ chains, respectively). Others include Ms4a4a and b (CD20 homolog expressed on mature Th1 cells45); Tcf7 (T cell-specific transcription factor46); and Skap1 (regulator of TCR signaling through MAP kinase47). Nkg7 and Ctsw genes (NK cell granule protein 7 and cathepsin W) are particularly elevated in NK/T cells and play roles in cell-mediated killing by NK and CD8 T cells48,49. Also of note is expression of Il2rb (IL2 receptor β chain) which is expressed in NK/T and regulatory T cells (Tregs) at this time point. Also expressed in Tregs is the signature gene Izumo1r (Folr4; folate receptor)50,51. The B cells arm shows elevated expression of Cd79a and Cd79b (BCR CD79α and β chains); Ebf1 (B cell-specific transcription factor52); Ighm (IgM heavy chain); and Cd74 (MHC class II invariant chain53). Cells in the myeloid cell express Fcer1g (IgE Fc receptor); Tyrobp (an immunoreceptor-associated tyroskine kinase); and Ifitm3 (IFN-induced transmembrane protein 3), an anti-viral protein which restricts the entry of several viruses into host cells54. Among the myeloid cells, neutrophils show expression of S100 family proteins, including S100a8 and S100a9 (myeloid-related proteins 8 and 14), which are known to be released by activated phagocytes and amplify the inflammatory effect of LPS mediated through TLR455. Also expressed in neutrophils is Msrb1 (methionine reductase) which appears to enhance the expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines by macrophages56, and Hp (haptoglobulin), a major acute phase protein. These data serve as an additional verification that the SVM correctly identified the cell types. Interestingly we found a small population of B and T cell doublets which were identified due to their expression of both T cell markers (Cd3g) and B cell markers (Cd79a) and an unbiased doublet detection algorithm (Supplementary Fig. S3B–D). Doublets in droplet-based sequencing platforms can be indicative of juxtacrine signaling.Figure 8Analysis of single cell transcriptomic data in unimmunized and H5/IVAX-1 immunized mice. C57Bl/6 female mice (N = 3) were administered 5 μg H5 in 50μL IVAX-1 adjuvant s.c. and boosted on d14 (s.c.) and d28 (i.p.), and spleens collected 7 days later. Splenocytes from a single age-matched naïve mouse were also prepared for comparison. (A) UMAP visualization of splenocytes before and after vaccination shows transcripts are derived mostly lymphoid lineage with some myeloid cells. (B) Heatmap of differential expression testing; the highest differentially expressed genes for most major populations are their marker genes (see text for details). Each column represents a single cell. (C) Expression of B cell Ighg2c, Ighg2b and Ighg1 genes is elevated after immunization, with more IgG2 transcripts compared to IgG1. (D) Mean expression of Ifng gene in CD8+ and CD4+ T cells before and after immunization showing upregulation in both subsets. (E) Circular plot showing the main cell–cell interactions in pre- and post-vaccination splenocytes (blue and red lines, respectively).Full size imageWe then asked whether the differential IgG2c>IgG1 response characterized above could be corroborated using the transcriptomic data. We found Ighg2c, Ighg2b and Ighg1 genes were all upregulated in B cells from immunized mice relative to naïve mice (Supplementary Fig. S4 and Fig. 8C), with log2-fold changes of 6.21 (p-value = 2.14 × 10–93), 4.35 (p-value = 2.33 × 10–281) and 2.69 (p-value = 1.10 × 10–158), respectively (Mann–Whitney U rank-sum test). This is consistent with the moderately skewed IgG2c>IgG1 response observed by IgG isotyping after IVAX-1 administration (Fig. 5a). We also compared the expression of the Ifng gene in naïve and immunized mice (Fig. 8D), which showed IFNγ was expressed by both CD4 and CD8 T cells, with log2-fold increases of 0.7 (p-value = 0.28) and 0.9 (p-value = 0.69), respectively (Mann–Whitney U rank-sum test), consistent with a robust IFNγ response in T cell recall assays (Fig. 5B). Interestingly, intracellular cytokine staining suggested IVAX-1 was not a strong inducer of antigen-specific CD8 cells (Fig. 7B), although as mentioned above, this may reflect suboptimal restimulation conditions for CD8 cells in the recall assay. Overall, these data show that the transcriptomic Th1/Th2 balance matched that defined by IgG subtyping and cytokine expression in T cell recall assays.We also inferred cell–cell signaling interactions between different cell types using CellChat, a recently developed tool that defines intercellular signaling strengths between specified cell types in single-cell transcriptomic data. This tool has previously been used to analyze differential wound healing signaling in adult mice38. As shown in Fig. 8E, lymphocytes (i.e., NK/T cells, T cells, Tregs and B cells) communicate predominantly with macrophages before immunization, whereas this shifts to dendritic cells and neutrophils after immunization. The γδ T cells, B/T cell doublets and resident monocytes were excluded from the analysis because they did not meet the cutoff of 100 cells. Intra-cell type communication (e.g., T cells to T cells) is higher for lymphocytes in unimmunized mice and higher for neutrophiles and dendritic cells in immunized mice. Overall, these data provide a useful first look at the transcriptomic and cellular interactome induced by IVAX-1 at a single time point. Similar studies at different time points after vaccination, and with different adjuvants for comparison are in progress.DiscussionIn this study, we administered mice recombinant influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) formulated with a panel of eight different TLR agonist adjuvants administered without or with the squalene-in-water emulsion, AddaVax. A major aim was to identify adjuvants able to induce the broadest Ab response across different HA subtypes and drift variants using the microarray approach. We are cognizant that not all conformation-dependent epitopes will be available for recognition on the HA monomer microarray and may underrepresent the full polyclonal response. Nevertheless the data do reveal a performance hierarchy of the different adjuvants.. In the absence of AddaVax, most TLR agonists tested induced excellent breadth for H5 variants, while cross-reactivity for the more distantly-related H1 was confined to five of the eight adjuvants with a range of breadths induced (Fig. 1 and Table 2). AddaVax induced excellent breadth for H5, both alone and when combined with TLR agonists. Cross-reactivity for H1 and other subtypes by TLR agonists was also improved by combining with AddaVax, both in terms the number of formulations able to induce heterosubtypic cross-reactivity, and breadth induced. The response to IVAX-1 (CpG/MPLA/AddaVax) was chosen for further study as the response was the most rapid and reached the greatest magnitude (Figs. 1 and 4). IVAX-1 also elicited the strongest homosubtypic responses to the HA1 portion of H5 that contains the variable head domain (Fig. 2). IVAX-1 induced both IgG1 and IgG2c secreting B cells, with a polarization to IgG2c and a dominant Th1 cytokine profile in T cell recall assays (Fig. 5).A key observation was IVAX-1 induced higher numbers of antigen-specific plasmablasts than the sum of the numbers when CpG/AddaVax or MPLA/AddaVax were used separately (Fig. 6), suggesting a synergistic rather than additive effect. Unlike other adjuvants such as complete Freund’s adjuvant or Titermax, IVAX-1 can be used for boosting without inducing lesions or other adverse events (data not shown). IVAX-1 can also be administered intranasally, and elicits IgA in lung and nasal washes (Fig. 7); the IgA profile displayed a cross-reactivity pattern that was identical to the IgG profile induced by the same route or by s.c. administration. Despite observing heterosubtypic cross-reactivity by antibodies, T cell responses in B6 mice administered H5 were H5-specific and did not show heterosubtypic cross-reactivity for H1 or H7. We speculate this is most likely related to a paucity of shared sequences in these HA subtypes capable of being presented by I-Ab, the only class II MHC allele available in C57Bl/6 mice for presentation, although this has to be tested experimentally. Finally, we performed a preliminary sc mRNA seq study. In an unbiased analysis of the data, of note was elevated expression of Ighg2c, Ighg2b and Ighg1 genes in immunized mice relative to naïve mice, consistent with the IgG subtyping by serology and flow cytometry.The technology for producing influenza vaccines had changed little since the 1930’s. Virus is propagated in fertilized chicken eggs and inactivated using propriolactone, followed by detergent extraction to enrich the lipid membrane fraction containing the integral HA and NA antigens (so-called ‘split’ vaccines). Although alternative vaccines made from tissue culture-derived virus (Flucelvax) or recombinant HA (Flublok), are widely available, > 80% of seasonal influenza vaccines used in the U.S. are still made in eggs. Most seasonal influenza vaccines are also administered without adjuvant, in part because inactivated virus vaccines retains some inherent immunogenicity57,58. Effectiveness is likely related to pre-existing immunity which is easier to boost than a primary response. Protection is short-lived, in part because bone marrow plasma cells quickly wane59. FluAd (Seqirus), currently the only adjuvanted seasonal vaccine, is a tetravalent inactivated split virus vaccine administered in MF5960, a squalene-in-water emulsion that is very similar to AddaVax61. The Ab response to FluAd is broader than non-adjuvanted equivalents60,62,63. Yet, this vaccine is administered only to the elderly (> 65 years), where its improved immunogenicity is used to overcome immune senescence rather than for increased breadth or other benefits. Adjuvants play an important role in pandemic preparedness by accelerating the response, enhancing immunogenicity and breadth, and dose-sparing of vaccine64,65. Early efforts at adjuvanting a pre-pandemic H5N1 vaccine using alum (aluminum salts such as aluminum hydroxide, which until 2017 was the only adjuvant available for human use) failed to elicit sufficient neutralization66. However, the use of modern emulsions has led to the licensure of several pre-pandemic vaccines, including Q-Pan (ID Biomedical Corporation of Quebec), a monovalent split H5N1 vaccine, and Pandemrix (GlaxoSmithKline) monovalent split H1N1 vaccine, both adjuvanted with AS03 (GSK), a squalene-in-water emulsion with α-tocopherol67.A small but growing number of pattern recognition receptor (PRR) agonists are being used in licensed vaccines. These agonists represent a new generation of vaccine adjuvants, and can be classified according to the particular PRR signaling pathway they act through, i.e., (a) toll-like receptor (TLRs), (b) nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like (NOD) receptors, and c) stimulators of the cGMP-AMP Synthase STimulator of INterferon Genes (cGAS-STING) pathway. Adjuvant system 4 (AS04) from GSK, which comprises traditional alum combined with monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA), a synthetic form of the TLR4-binding domain of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)68, is currently used with the approved vaccines against HPV and HBV, Cervarix69 and Fendrix70, respectively. Shingrix, an approved vaccine against shingles (herpes zoster virus) is adjuvanted with AS01B, which consists of MPLA and the natural saponin surfactant, Quil-A (QS-21)71. Synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides containing unmethylated cytosine-guanine dinucleotide motifs (ODN CpG) exerts adjuvant effect through TLR972,73 and has recently been approved as adjuvant for the recombinant HBV vaccine, Heplisav-B74,75. PRR agonists are yet to be approved for split inactivated seasonal influenza virus vaccines, despite studies showing there may be several benefits, including increasing magnitude, breadth and duration of the response. These benefits have been reviewed extensively in recent years64,76,77,78.There is also increasing awareness that combining adjuvant components also increases the efficacy of vaccines though enhanced stimulation of APCs and lymphocytes79,80,81,82,83,84,85. In this study, we saw a synergistic effect on Ag-specific plasmablast numbers when combining CpG and MPLA. Other studies have shown CpG + MPLA stimulate the induction of IL12 from dendritic cells, while neither agonist was effective when used alone82. The same group also showed single-dose administration of an inactivated split influenza vaccine with CpG and MPLA led to improved homo- and hetero-subtypic cross-protection compared to vaccine administered with CpG or MPLA alone83. Consistent with the findings reported here, CpG + MPLA induced IgG2c (Th1) polarization. The effects of CpG and MPLA alone were more discrepant; in our hands, CpG failed to induce a significant Ab response after a single dose, and MPLA induced both isotypes (IgG2c>IgG1), while Ko et al.83 reported CpG induced IgG2c and MPLA induced IgG1 (Th2). These discrepancies may have been caused by the different antigen preparations used (recombinant protein used here, vs. split inactivated virus) or the doses of antigen or TLR a administered. A general consensus is both CpG and MPLA engender a Th1-biased response in B6 mice and humans86,87. The molecular basis of CpG + MPLA synergy has been hypothesized to arise from activation of both MyD88 and TRIF signaling pathways88,89.In this study we used recombinant HA proteins, rather than split inactivated virus, to evaluate different adjuvants. Recombinant proteins may offer several advantages over current egg-based methods, including more rapid manufacture, flexibility in design, and avoidance of adaptation to growth in eggs. HA stalk-focused immunization strategies to overcome antigenic drift are also readily amenable to recombinant protein approaches90. Currently, Flublok is the only approved recombinant HA-based seasonal vaccine, comprised of HA proteins from four influenza viruses expressed in insect cells. Flublok is administered without adjuvant, although immunogenicity is achieved by using a threefold higher dose of each HA protein, i.e., 45 μg compared to ~ 15 μg for a typical split vaccine64. In our hands, doses of 2.5 μg H5 protein was unable to elicit an antibody response in B6 mice without adjuvant although high doses may overcome this. We also used a single dose regimen. Although MN and HI assays were performed on the plasma samples collected in the adjuvant screen herein, we saw no virus neutralization (data not shown), consistent with our previous studies27 and other data (Fig. 7A) that show boosting is required to achieve virus neutralization, at least with the antigen doses used here.Overall, the studies described here are consistent with the notion that adjuvanted recombinant HA proteins are a possible path toward broader vaccine coverage than is currently achieved with non-adjuvanted inactivated vaccines, particularly if used in conjunction with multivalent antigens27. Achieving a true ‘universal’ vaccine will be challenging using adjuvants alone, without additional stalk directed immunization strategies to target conserved epitopes. Intuitively, cross-reactivity between variable epitopes is likely to be less effective than between conserved regions, as substitutions of just a few key amino acids in an epitope can abrogate neutralization. We speculate this may be offset by the use of adjuvants, which, by driving affinity maturation, may lead to higher affinity nAbs better able to tolerate substitutions than those generated by non-adjuvanted vaccines. This has the added benefit of exploiting the natural immunodominance of the head domain during vaccination and natural infection. ReferencesBouvier, N. M. & Palese, P. The biology of influenza viruses. Vaccine 26S, D49–D43 (2008).Article CAS Google Scholar Kim, H., Webster, R. G. & Webby, R. J. Influenza virus: Dealing with a drifting and shifting pathogen. Viral Immunol. 31, 174–183 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Altman, M. O., Angeletti, D. & Yewdell, J. W. Antibody immunodominance: The key to understanding influenza virus antigenic drift. Viral Immunol. 20, 362–372 (2018). Google Scholar Petrova, V. N. & Russell, C. A. The evolution of seasonal influenza viruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 16, 47–60 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Luo, M. Influenza virus entry. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 726, 201–221 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wu, N. C. & Wilson, I. A. Influenza hemagglutinin structures and antibody recognition. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 10, a038778 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ciminski, K., Pfaff, F., Beer, M. & Schwemmle, M. Bats reveal the true power of influenza A virus adaptability. PLoS Pathog. 16, e1008384 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, Y., Wu, Y., Tefsen, B., Shi, Y. & Gao, G. F. Bat-derived influenza-like viruses H17N10 and H18N11. Trends Microbiol. 22, 183–191 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wiley, D. C., Wilson, I. A. & Skehel, J. J. Structural identification of the antibody-binding sites of Hong Kong influenza haemagglutinin and their involvement in antigenic variation. Nature 289, 373–378 (1981).Article CAS PubMed ADS Google Scholar Air, G. M., Laver, W. G. & Webster, R. G. Mechanism of antigenic variation in an individual epitope on influenza virus N9 neuraminidase. J. Virol. 64, 5797–5803 (1990).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Urbaniak, K. & Markowska-Daniel, I. In vivo reassortment of influenza viruses. Acta Biochim. Pol. 61, 427–431 (2014).Article PubMed Google Scholar Wan, X. F. Lessons from emergence of a/goose/guangdong/1996-Like H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses and recent influenza surveillance efforts in Southern China. Zoonoses Public Health 59, 32–42 (2011).Article Google Scholar Cattoli, G. et al. Antigenic drift in H5N1 avian influenza virus in poultry is driven by mutations in major antigenic sites of the hemagglutinin molecule analogous to those for human influenza virus. J. Virol. 85, 8718–8724 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sutton, T. C. The pandemic threat of emerging H5 and H7 avian influenza viruses. Viruses 10, 461–482 (2018).Article PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Agor, J. K. & Özaltın, O. Y. Models for predicting the evolution of influenza to inform vaccine strain selection. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 14, 678–683 (2018).Article Google Scholar Sasaki, S. et al. Limited efficacy of inactivated influenza vaccine in elderly individuals is associated with decreased production of vaccine-specific antibodies. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 3109–3119 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zbinden, D. & Manuel, O. Influenza vaccination in immunocompromised patients: Efficacy and safety. Immunotherapy 6, 131–139 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Crowe, J. E. Is it possible to develop a ‘universal’ influenza virus vaccine? Potential for a universal influenza vaccine. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a029496Angeletti, D. et al. Outflanking immunodominance to target subdominant broadly neutralizing epitopes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1816300116 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Guthmiller, J. J. et al. First exposure to the pandemic H1N1 virus induced broadly neutralizing antibodies targeting hemagglutinin head epitopes. Sci. Transl. Med. 13, eabg4535 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Krammer, F. The human antibody response to influenza A virus infection and vaccination. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 19, 383–397 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Krammer, F. et al. A carboxy-terminal trimerization domain stabilizes conformational epitopes on the stalk domain of soluble recombinant Hemagglutinin substrates. PLoS ONE 7, e43603 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Liu, W.-C., Nachbagauer, R. & Krammer, F. Assessment of influenza virus hemagglutinin stalk-specific antibody responses. Methods Mol. Biol. 1836, 487–511 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gross, F. L., Bai, Y., Jefferson, S., Holiday, C. & Levine, M. Z. Measuring influenza neutralizing antibody responses to A(H3N2) viruses in human sera by microneutralization assays using MDCK-SIAT1 cells. J. Vis. Exp. 129, 56448 (2017). Google Scholar Albin, T. J. et al. Linked toll-like receptor triagonists stimulate distinct, combination-dependent innate immune responses. ACS Cent. Sci. 5, (2019).Kilkenny, C., Browne, W. J., Cuthill, I. C., Emerson, M. & Altman, D. G. Improving bioscience research reporting: The arrive guidelines for reporting animal research. PLoS Biol. 8, (2010).Hernandez-Davies, J. E. et al. Administration of multivalent influenza virus recombinant hemagglutinin vaccine in combination-adjuvant elicits broad reactivity beyond the vaccine components. Front. Immunol. 12, 2695 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Hobson, D., Curry, R. L., Beare, A. S. & Ward-Gardner, A. The role of serum haemagglutination-inhibiting antibody in protection against challenge infection with influenza A2 and B viruses. J. Hyg. (Lond.) 70, 767–777 (1972).CAS Google Scholar Davies, D. H. et al. T cell antigen discovery using soluble vaccinia proteome reveals recognition of antigens with both virion and nonvirion association. J. Immunol. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1400663 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Andrews, S. FastQC: A quality control tool for high throughput sequence data. https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/ (2010). Zheng, G. X. Y. et al. Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single cells. Nat. Commun. 8, (2017).Wolf, F. A., Angerer, P. & Theis, F. J. SCANPY: Large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis. Genome Biol. 19, 15 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Satija, R., Farrell, J. A., Gennert, D., Schier, A. F. & Regev, A. Spatial reconstruction of single-cell gene expression data. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 495–502 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888-1902.e21 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2825–2830 (2011).MathSciNet MATH Google Scholar Benjamini, Y. & Hochberg, Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. B. 57, 289–300 (1995).MathSciNet MATH Google Scholar Wolock, S. L., Lopez, R. & Klein, A. M. Scrublet: Computational identification of cell doublets in single-cell transcriptomic data. Cell Syst. 8, 281–291 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jin, S. et al. Inference and analysis of cell–cell communication using Cell Chat. Nat. Commun. 12, 1088 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Chan, M. et al. Identification of substituted pyrimido[5,4-b]indoles as selective toll-like receptor 4 ligands. J. Med. Chem. https://doi.org/10.1021/jm301694x (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nakajima, R. et al. Protein microarray analysis of the specificity and cross-reactivity of influenza virus hemagglutinin-specific antibodies. mSphere. https://doi.org/10.1128/msphere.00592-18 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Van Kerkhove, M. D. Brief literature review for the WHO global influenza research agenda †-highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 risk in humans HPAI/H5N1 in humans. Influ. Other Respir. Viruses 7, 26–33 (2013).Article Google Scholar Diehl, S. & Rincón, M. The two faces of IL-6 on Th1/Th2 differentiation. Mol. Immunol. 39, 531–536 (2002).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lu, Y. et al. The interaction of influenza H5N1 viral hemagglutinin with sialic acid receptors leads to the activation of human γδ T cells. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 10, 463–470 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Liu, W.-C., Lin, S.-C., Yu, Y.-L., Chu, C.-L. & Wu, S.-C. Dendritic cell activation by recombinant hemagglutinin proteins of H1N1 and H5N1 influenza A viruses. J. Virol. 84, 12011–12017 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Venkataraman, C., Schaefer, G. & Schindler, U. Cutting edge: Chandra, a novel four-transmembrane domain protein differentially expressed in helper type 1 lymphocytes. J. Immunol. 165, 632–636 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhu, Y., Wang, W. & Wang, X. Roles of transcriptional factor 7 in production of inflammatory factors for lung diseases. J. Transl. Med. 13, 1–13 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Smith, X., Taylor, A. & Rudd, C. E. T-cell immune adaptor SKAP1 regulates the induction of collagen-induced arthritis in mice. Immunol. Lett. 176, 122 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ng, S. S. et al. The NK cell granule protein NKG7 regulates cytotoxic granule exocytosis and inflammation. Nat. Immunol. 21, 1205–1218 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Ondr, J. K. & Pham, C. T. N. Characterization of murine cathepsin W and its role in cell-mediated cytotoxicity. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 27525–27533 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kalekar, L. A. & Mueller, D. L. Relationship between CD4 Tregs and anergy in vivo. J. Immunol. 198, 2527 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yamaguchi, T. et al. Control of immune responses by antigen-specific regulatory T cells expressing the folate receptor. Immunity 27, 145–159 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nechanitzky, R. et al. Transcription factor EBF1 is essential for the maintenance of B cell identity and prevention of alternative fates in committed cells. Nat. Immunol. 14, 867–875 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Su, H., Na, N., Zhang, X. & Zhao, Y. The biological function and significance of CD74 in immune diseases. Inflamm. Res. 66, 209–216 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bailey, C. C., Zhong, G., Huang, I.-C. & Farzan, M. IFITM-family proteins: The cell’s first line of antiviral defense. Annu. Rev. Virol 1, 261–283 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Vogl, T. et al. Mrp8 and Mrp14 are endogenous activators of Toll-like receptor 4, promoting lethal, endotoxin-induced shock. Nat. Med. 13, 1042–1049 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lee, B. C. et al. Selenoprotein MsrB1 promotes anti-inflammatory cytokine gene expression in macrophages and controls immune response in vivo. Sci. Rep. 7, (2017).Hovden, A. O., Cox, R. J. & Haaheim, L. R. Whole influenza virus vaccine is more immunogenic than split influenza virus vaccine and induces primarily an IgG2a response in BALB/c mice. Scand. J. Immunol. 62, 36–44 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Jeisy-Scott, V. et al. TLR7 recognition is dispensable for influenza virus A infection but important for the induction of hemagglutinin-specific antibodies in response to the 2009 pandemic split vaccine in mice. J. Virol. 86, 10988–10998 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Davis, C. W. et al. Influenza vaccine-induced human bone marrow plasma cells decline within a year after vaccination. Science 370, 237–241 (2020).Article CAS PubMed ADS Google Scholar O’Hagan, D. T. MF59 is a safe and potent vaccine adjuvant that enhances protection against influenza virus infection. Expert Rev. Vaccines 6, 699–710 (2007).Article PubMed Google Scholar Del Giudice, G., Rappuoli, R. & Didierlaurent, A. M. Correlates of adjuvanticity: A review on adjuvants in licensed vaccines. Semin. Immunol. 39, 14–21 (2018).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Ansaldi, F. et al. Cross-protection by MF59-adjuvanted influenza vaccine: Neutralizing and haemagglutination-inhibiting antibody activity against A(H3N2) drifted influenza viruses. Vaccine 26, 1525–1529 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Banzhoff, A. et al. MF59®-adjuvanted vaccines for seasonal and pandemic influenza prophylaxis. Influenza Other Res. Viruses 2, 243–249 (2008).Article Google Scholar Tregoning, J. S., Russell, R. F. & Kinnear, E. Adjuvanted influenza vaccines. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 14, 550–564 (2018).Article Google Scholar Galli, G. et al. Fast rise of broadly cross-reactive antibodies after boosting long-lived human memory B cells primed by an MF59 adjuvanted prepandemic vaccine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106, 7962–7967 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Young, B. E., Sadarangani, S. P. & Leo, Y. S. The avian influenza vaccine Emerflu. Why did it fail?. Expert Rev. Vaccines 14, 1125–1134 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Garçon, N., Vaughn, D. W. & Didierlaurent, M. Development and evaluation of AS03, an Adjuvant System containing α-tocopherol and squalene in an oil-in-water emulsion. Expert Rev. Vaccines 11, 349–366 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Didierlaurent, A. M. et al. AS04, an aluminum salt- and TLR4 agonist-based adjuvant system, induces a transient localized innate immune response leading to enhanced adaptive immunity. J. Immunol. 183, 6186–6197 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Angelo, M. G. et al. Strategies for continuous evaluation of the benefit-risk profile of HPV-16/18-AS04-adjuvanted vaccine. Expert Rev. Vaccines 13, 1297–1306 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kundi, M. New hepatitis B vaccine formulated with an improved adjuvant system. Expert Rev. Vaccines 6, 133–140 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lecrenier, N. et al. Development of adjuvanted recombinant zoster vaccine and its implications for shingles prevention. Expert Rev. Vaccines 7, 619–634 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Hemmi, H. et al. A Toll-like receptor recognizes bacterial DNA. Nature 408, 740–745 (2000).Article CAS PubMed ADS Google Scholar Bode, C., Zhao, G., Steinhagen, F., Kinjo, T. & Klinman, D. M. CpG DNA as a vaccine adjuvant. Expert Rev. Vaccines 10, 499–511 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cooper, C. & MacKie, D. Hepatitis B surface antigen-1018 ISS adjuvant-containing vaccine: A review of HEPLISAV safety and efficacy. Expert Rev. Vaccines 10, 417–427 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Eng, N. F., Bhardwaj, N., Mulligan, R. & Diaz-Mitoma, F. The potential of 1018 ISS adjuvant in hepatitis B vaccines: HEPLISAV" review. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 9, 1661–1672 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Nagashima, K. & Mousa, J. Next-generation influenza HA immunogens and adjuvants in pursuit of a broadly protective vaccine. Viruses 13, (2021).Li, Z., Zhao, Y., Li, Y. & Chen, X. Adjuvantation of influenza vaccines to induce cross-protective immunity. Vaccines 9, 1–22 (2021).CAS Google Scholar Wei, C. et al. Next-generation influenza vaccines: Opportunities and challenges. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 19, 239–252 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mutwiri, G. et al. Combination adjuvants: The next generation of adjuvants?. Expert Rev. Vaccines 10, 95–107 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Apostolico Jde, S., Lunardelli, V. A., Coirada, F. C., Boscardin, S. B. & Rosa, D. S. Adjuvants: Classification, modus operandi, and licensing. J. Immunol. Res. 2016, 1459394 (2016).PubMed Google Scholar Bidet, K. et al. Mimicking immune signatures of flavivirus infection with targeted adjuvants improves dengue subunit vaccine immunogenicity. NPJ Vaccines 4, 27 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ko, E. J., Lee, Y. T., Lee, Y., Kim, K. H. & Kang, S. M. Distinct effects of monophosphoryl lipid A, oligodeoxynucleotide CpG, and combination adjuvants on modulating innate and adaptive immune responses to influenza vaccination. Immune Netw. 17, 326–342 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ko, E. J. et al. MPL and CpG combination adjuvants promote homologous and heterosubtypic cross protection of inactivated split influenza virus vaccine. Antiviral Res. 156, 107–115 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cao, X. Self-regulation and cross-regulation of pattern-recognition receptor signalling in health and disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16, 35–50 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Temizoz, B. et al. TLR9 and STING agonists synergistically induce innate and adaptive type-II IFN. Eur. J. Immunol. 45, 1159–1169 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kayraklioglu, N., Horuluoglu, B. & Klinman, D. CpG oligonucleotides as vaccine adjuvants. Methods Mol. Biol. 2197, 51–85 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Romerio, A. & Peri, F. Increasing the chemical variety of small-molecule-based TLR4 modulators: An overview. Front. Immunol. 11, (2020).Bagchi, A. et al. MyD88-dependent and MyD88-independent pathways in synergy, priming, and tolerance between TLR agonists. J. Immunol. 178, 1164–1171 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Garcia-Cordero, J. L., Nembrini, C., Stano, A., Hubbell, J. A. & Maerkl, S. J. A high-throughput nanoimmunoassay chip applied to large-scale vaccine adjuvant screening. Integr. Biol. 5, 650–658 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Mathew, N. R. & Angeletti, D. Recombinant influenza vaccines: Saviors to overcome immunodominance. Front. Immunol. 10, (2020).Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Quy Nguyen and Melanie Oakes, UCI Genomics High Throughput Facility, for single cell transcriptomic sequencing. We also thank the UCI Laser Spectroscopy Labs for use of dynamic light scattering facilities. Supported by Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) Grant HDTRA1-18-1-0036 and NIH U01 Grant AI160397. ED and QN were supported by the NSF Grant DMS1763272 and a grant from Simons Foundation (594598). ED is also supported by the NIH Grant T32GM136624. Work in the Krammer laboratory was supported by NIAID Collaborative Influenza Vaccine Innovation Centers (CIVIC) contract 75N93019C00051. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of the U.S. Department of Defense or the U.S. Army.Author informationAuthor notesTyler J. AlbinPresent address: Avidity Biosciences, San Diego, CA, 92121, USAAuthors and AffiliationsVaccine Research and Development Center, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USAJenny E. Hernandez-Davies, Egest J. Pone, Jiin Felgner, Li Liang, Sharon Jan, Aarti Jain, Rie Nakajima, Algimantas Jasinskas, Philip L. Felgner & D. Huw DaviesDepartment of Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USAEmmanuel P. Dollinger & Qing NieDepartment of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USAShirin Strohmeier & Florian KrammerDepartment of Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USATyler J. AlbinDepartment of Pathology, Molecular and Cell-Based Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USAFlorian KrammerPritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USAAaron Esser-KahnAuthorsJenny E. Hernandez-DaviesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEmmanuel P. DollingerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEgest J. PoneView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJiin FelgnerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLi LiangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShirin StrohmeierView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSharon JanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTyler J. AlbinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAarti JainView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRie NakajimaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlgimantas JasinskasView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFlorian KrammerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAaron Esser-KahnView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPhilip L. FelgnerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarQing NieView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarD. Huw DaviesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsJ.E.H.-D., E.J.P., and D.H.D. designed experiments; J.E.H.-D., D.H.D., E.J.P., J.F., L.L., S.S., S.J., T.J.A., A.J., R.N., and A.J., performed experiments and/or data analysis; A.E.-K. provided reagents; E.P.D. performed transcriptomic data analysis; F.K., P.L.F., Q.N. and D.H.D. provided funding; J.E.H.-D. and D.H.D. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to D. Huw Davies.Ethics declarations Competing interests JEH-D, JF, EJP, AJ, SJ, RN, AJ, PLF and DHD own shares in Nanommune Inc. Nanommune does not sell any products described in this paper, nor funded any part of the work described herein. Neither Nanommune or its shareholders are likely to benefit from the results described in this publication. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleHernandez-Davies, J.E., Dollinger, E.P., Pone, E.J. et al. Magnitude and breadth of antibody cross-reactivity induced by recombinant influenza hemagglutinin trimer vaccine is enhanced by combination adjuvants. Sci Rep 12, 9198 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-12727-yDownload citationReceived: 22 November 2021Accepted: 26 April 2022Published: 02 June 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-12727-yShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Immunogenicity and protection of a variant nanoparticle vaccine that confers broad neutralization against SARS-CoV-2 variants James LogueRobert M. JohnsonMatthew B. Frieman Nature Communications (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyCan diarrhea be a symptom of the flu? Medical News TodayHealth ConditionsHealth ConditionsAlzheimer's & DementiaAnxietyAsthma & AllergiesAtopic DermatitisBreast CancerCancerCardiovascular HealthCOVID-19DiabetesEnvironment & SustainabilityExercise & FitnessEye HealthHeadache & MigraineHealth EquityHIV & AIDSHuman BiologyLeukemiaLGBTQIA+Men's HealthMental HealthMultiple Sclerosis (MS)NutritionParkinson's DiseasePsoriasisPsoriatic ArthritisSexual HealthUlcerative ColitisWomen's HealthHealth ProductsHealth ProductsAllNutrition & FitnessVitamins & SupplementsCBDSleepMental HealthAt-Home TestingMen’s HealthWomen’s HealthDiscoverNewsLatest NewsOriginal SeriesMedical MythsHonest NutritionThrough My EyesNew Normal HealthPodcastsAll3 ways to slow down type 2 diabetes-related brain agingToxic metals in tampons: Should you be worried?Can tattoos cause blood or skin cancer?Can we really ‘outrun the Grim Reaper’?What makes a diet truly heart-healthy?Is intermittent fasting actually bad for your heart?ToolsGeneral HealthDrugs A-ZHealth HubsHealth ToolsFind a DoctorBMI Calculators and ChartsBlood Pressure Chart: Ranges and GuideBreast Cancer: Self-Examination GuideSleep CalculatorQuizzesRA Myths vs FactsType 2 Diabetes: Managing Blood SugarAnkylosing Spondylitis Pain: Fact or FictionConnectAbout Medical News TodayWho We AreOur Editorial ProcessContent IntegrityConscious LanguageNewslettersSign UpFollow UsSubscribeIs diarrhea a symptom of flu?Medically reviewed by Megan Soliman, MD — Written by Caitlin Geng — Updated on February 17, 2023About flu and diarrheaStomach flu and diarrheaOther flu symptomsTreating fluTreating diarrheaPreventing fluSummaryDiarrhea and other gastrointestinal (GI) problems are uncommon symptoms of the flu.While influenza (flu) is a common cause of respiratory illness, it only sometimes causes diarrhea. Researchers do not know why or how this may occur.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), diarrhea during the flu is more common in children than in adults.This article looks at why influenza may cause diarrhea, stomach flu, and vomiting. It also looks at other flu symptoms and treatments.Why does influenza cause diarrhea?Share on PinterestRZCREATIVE/StocksyThe flu virus typically infects people via a respiratory route. However, GI symptoms, including diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain, sometimes occur. GI symptoms can indicate severe flu and represent a secondary infection.It is common for the flu virus to spread to the GI tract after a respiratory infection. However, researchers do not know how it is spread.Researchers suggest that a person with the flu may experience diarrhea as a result of taking flu medications, which can irritate the gut, or because of a direct viral effect or secondary bacterial infection.Researchers that identified flu viruses in feces estimate that these reach and affect the GI tract due to:the flu virus replicating in the intestinal cellsa person swallowing the flu virusaffected intestinal immune cellsStomach flu and diarrheaStomach flu, also known as viral gastroenteritis, is a highly contagious intestinal infection. Symptoms include diarrhea, vomiting, and stomach cramps.Stomach flu is not the same as influenza, which primarily affects the respiratory system. Stomach flu mainly affects the intestines and stomach.A person can develop stomach flu from different viruses, including:rotavirus, which is most common between April and Decembernorovirus, which is the most contagious form of stomach fluastrovirus, which typically affects people with weakened immune systemsadenovirus, which can cause a wide range of symptomsA person will usually develop symptoms following contact with someone who has the stomach flu. They may also develop symptoms from food and water containing the virus.Other flu symptomsOther symptoms of the flu may include:feverchillsheadachesstuffy or runny nosecoughmuscle achessore throatfatigueTreating fluIndividuals most commonly treat the flu at home with over-the-counter (OTC) medications, such as painkillers, decongestants, and cough medications.Resting, ensuring enough fluids, and managing body temperature can also help reduce the severity of symptoms.In some instances, a doctor may prescribe antiviral drugs that can reduce the severity of flu symptoms. They can also reduce the overall amount of time a person is sick by 1 or 2 days. The drugs work most effectively if a person takes them within 2 days of getting the infection. People who are at high risk of serious complications from flu viruses might especially benefit from antiviral medication. People at higher risk of complications include:young childrenpeople 65 years old and olderpeople with other medical conditions, such as heart disease, asthma, and diabetesTreating diarrheaA person can usually treat diarrhea using OTC medications, such as bismuth subsalicylate (Kaopectate or Pepto-Bismol) and loperamide (Imodium).However, if a person has a fever or notices blood in their stools, it may indicate a different type of infection, such as bacteria or parasites. For instances such as these, a doctor may not recommend OTC medications. It is important to treat dehydration, which can result from diarrhea. A person should drink plenty of water to replace lost fluids and consider other options to replace electrolytes, including:sports drinkscaffeine-free soft drinksbrothsfruit juicesIf diarrhea lasts longer than 2 days, a person should consider contacting a doctor.Preventing fluThere are several ways a person can actively prevent the flu. These include:Flu vaccines: Flu vaccines protect against the most common flu viruses. Anyone 6 months or older should receive a flu vaccine, as it can also help prevent high risk people from serious flu complications and illness.Stopping the spread: Individuals should avoid contact with people who are sick with the flu, if possible. Similarly, if a person has the flu, they should limit their contact with others. Covering the nose and mouth while coughing or sneezing and not touching the face can also limit the spread of the flu.People should also wash their hands thoroughly and regularly as well as disinfect surfaces. SummarySome people with the flu may experience diarrhea as a symptom. The flu virus may spread to the GI tract as a secondary virus and cause diarrhea. Researchers are unsure of exactly how and why this occurs.Stomach flu, or viral gastroenteritis, differs from the flu. Stomach flu primarily affects the intestines and stomach, while the flu primarily affects the respiratory system. The two viruses have different causes.A person can usually treat the flu and diarrhea at home using OTC medications. However, if complications occur and symptoms become severe, they should seek medical attention.A person may prevent the flu by avoiding contact with the virus and by receiving a flu vaccine.Flu / Cold / SARSGastroIntestinal / GastroenterologyInfectious Diseases / Bacteria / VirusesFluHow we reviewed this article:SourcesMedical News Today has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.Clinical signs and symptoms of influenza. (2020).https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/acip/clinical.htmDeriu, E., et al. (2016). Influenza virus affects intestinal microbiota and secondary salmonella infection in the gut through type I interferons.https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/article?id=10.1371/journal.ppat.1005572Flu. (2019).https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/flu/Flu symptoms & complications. (2021).https://www.cdc.gov/flu/symptoms/symptoms.htmFlu treatment. (2021).https://www.cdc.gov/flureatment/index.htmlMinodier, L., et al. (2015). Prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with influenza, clinical significance, and pathophysiology of human influenza viruses in faecal samples: What do we know?https://virologyj.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12985-015-0448-4Norovirus. (2022).https://www.cdc.govorovirus/index.htmlPreventive steps. (2021).https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/prevention.htmPrevent seasonal flu. (2021).https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/index.htmlPshenichnaya, N., et al. (2016). Diarrhea in adult patients with influenza B.https://www.ijidonline.com/article/S1201-9712(16)30938-9/fulltextStuempfig, N. D., et al. (2021). Viral gastroenteritis.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK518995/Symptoms & causes of viral gastroenteritis (“stomach flu”). (2018).https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/viral-gastroenteritis/symptoms-causesTreatment for diarrhea. (2016).https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/diarrheareatmentViral gastroenteritis (“stomach flu”). (n.d.).https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/viral-gastroenteritisWhat you should know about flu antiviral drugs. (2021).https://www.cdc.gov/flureatment/whatyoushould.htmShare this articleMedically reviewed by Megan Soliman, MD — Written by Caitlin Geng — Updated on February 17, 2023Latest newsClassic and green Mediterranean diets may help slow brain agingRheumatoid arthritis linked to changes in the gut microbiome in new studyDaytime sleepiness may be a sign of higher dementia riskCould taking fish oil supplements help lower cancer risk?Can a combo of “active” therapies help lower dementia risk?Related CoverageThe flu: Is it contagious?Medically reviewed by Angela M. Bell, MD, FACPThe flu is contagious. People who catch the flu can transmit the virus to another person even before symptoms appear. Learn more here.READ MOREGastritis vs. gastroenteritisMedically reviewed by Saurabh Sethi, M.D., MPHGastritis and gastroenteritis are two different conditions, affecting different parts of the digestive system. Learn more.READ MOREHow to treat and prevent bacterial gastroenteritisBacterial gastroenteritis, or food poisoning, is a digestive infection that can cause diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.READ MOREHemorrhagic gastroenteritis in humans: What to knowEscherichia coli (E. coli), specifically the O157:H7 strain, is a bacteria species responsible for causing hemorrhagic gastroenteritis. Learn more…READ MOREAbout UsContact UsTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsHealth HubsMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzyWhy Unprecedented Bird Flu Outbreaks Are Concerning Scientists | Scientific American Skip to main contentScientific AmericanMay 31, 20224 min readWhy Unprecedented Bird Flu Outbreaks Are Concerning ScientistsMass infections in wild birds pose a significant risk to vulnerable species, are hard to contain and increase the opportunity for the virus to spill over into peopleBy Brittney J. Miller & Nature magazineA double-crested cormorant struggles and is likely dying of avian flu along the edge of Baker's Lake on April 13, 2022, near Barrington, Illinois. Stacey Wescott/Chicago Tribune/Tribune News Service via Getty ImagesA highly infectious and deadly strain of avian influenza virus has infected tens of millions of poultry birds across Europe, Asia, Africa and North America. But scientists are particularly concerned about the unprecedented spread in wild birds — outbreaks pose a significant risk to vulnerable species, are hard to contain and increase the opportunity for the virus to spill over into people.Since October, the H5N1 strain has caused nearly 3,000 outbreaks in poultry in dozens of countries. More than 77 million birds have been culled to curb the spread of the virus, which almost always causes severe disease or death in chickens. Another 400,000 non-poultry birds, such as wild birds, have also died in 2,600 outbreaks — twice the number reported during the last major wave, in 2016–17.Researchers say that the virus seems to be spreading in wild birds more easily than ever before, making outbreaks particularly hard to contain. Wild birds help to transport the virus around the world, with their migration patterns determining when and where it will spread next. Regions in Asia and Europe will probably continue to see large outbreaks, and infections could creep into currently unaffected continents such as South America and Australia.On supporting science journalismIf you're enjoying this article, consider supporting our award-winning journalism by subscribing. By purchasing a subscription you are helping to ensure the future of impactful stories about the discoveries and ideas shaping our world today.Although people can catch the virus, infections are uncommon. Only two cases have been reported since October, one each in the United Kingdom and the United States. But scientists are concerned that the high levels of virus circulating in bird populations mean that there are more opportunities for spillover into people. Avian influenza viruses change slowly over time, but the right mutation could make them more transmissible in people and other species, says Ian Barr, deputy director of the World Health Organization (WHO)-collaborating influenza centre at the Doherty Institute in Melbourne, Australia. “These viruses are like ticking time bombs,” he says. “Occasional infections are not an issue — it’s the gradual gaining of function of these viruses” that is the real concern, he says.Virus originThe highly pathogenic H5N1 strain emerged in commercial geese in Asia in around 1996, and spread in poultry throughout Europe and Africa in the early 2000s. By 2005, the strain was causing mass deaths in wild birds, first in East Asia and then in Europe. Since then, the strain has repeatedly infected wild birds in many parts of the world, says Andy Ramey, a research wildlife geneticist at the US Geological Survey Alaska Science Center in Anchorage. Through repeated spillovers, Ramey says, H5N1 seems to have become more adapted to wild birds. It’s “now become an emerging wildlife disease”, he says.In 2014, a new highly pathogenic H5 lineage — called 2.3.4.4 — emerged and started infecting wild birds without always killing them. This created opportunities for the virus to spread to North America for the first time. The lineage has since dominated outbreaks around the world, including the current ones.The virus affects some wild bird species more severely than others. For instance, some infected mallard ducks (Anas platyrhynchos) show no signs of disease, whereas the virus killed roughly 10% of the breeding population of barnacle geese (Branta leucopsis) in the Norwegian archipelago of Svalbard late last year and hundreds of Dalmatian pelicans (Pelecanus crispus) in Greece earlier this year. Wildlife researchers are trying to understand why the virus affects species differently. They are particularly concerned about the virus’s impact on vulnerable bird species with smaller populations or restricted geographic ranges, and species that are particularly susceptible to infection, such as whooping cranes (Grus americana) and emperor geese (Anser canagicus), Ramey says.Ramey adds that only a fraction of cases in wild birds are diagnosed and reported. More monitoring could unveil the true magnitude of wild bird mortality, he says.Controlling the spreadBetter monitoring of infected wild birds could also help to alert poultry facilities to the risk of future outbreaks — although regions with large poultry or migratory bird populations are at high risk of further outbreaks no matter how good their surveillance is, says Keith Hamilton, head of the department for preparedness and resilience at the World Organisation for Animal Health.Tracking disease in wild birds is resource-intensive and challenging owing to the sheer size of their populations, Hamilton says. He suggests targeted surveillance in areas more likely to encounter the virus, such as popular flyways or breeding grounds.An effective vaccine for poultry could help to stem the spread, along with decreases in the number of birds in production facilities, says Michelle Wille, a wild-bird virologist at the University of Sydney in Australia. The poultry industry can also continue to improve biosecurity by restricting entry to facilities, protecting their water sources and decreasing contact between poultry and wild birds.Although poultry populations can be culled to stop the spread of highly pathogenic avian influenza, researchers emphasize that wild birds should not be harmed to mitigate outbreaks. Killing wild birds to prevent further infections would not work because of the huge size and vast ranges of their populations, says Lina Awada, a veterinary epidemiologist at the World Organisation for Animal Health. It could even make the situation worse, because it would disrupt wild-bird movements and behaviours, helping the virus spread further, she says.“The same way we shouldn’t be shooting bats because of coronavirus, the solution to this is not trying to kill wild birds,” Wille says.Researchers say that what is needed is a holistic approach that considers how avian influenza spreads through wild birds, poultry and people. Collaboration between public-health researchers and animal-health groups is vital for picking up spillover events into people. “If we control this in poultry, we control this in humans, and it’s likely that we control this in wild birds, as well,” Wille says.This article is reproduced with permission and was first published on May 26 2022.Brittney J. Miller is a news writing intern at Nature.More by Brittney J. MillerFirst published in 1869, Nature is the world's leading multidisciplinary science journal. Nature publishes the finest peer-reviewed research that drives ground-breaking discovery, and is read by thought-leaders and decision-makers around the world.More by Nature magazineExpand Your World with ScienceLearn and share the most exciting discoveries, innovations and ideas shaping our world today.SubscribeSign up for our newslettersSee the latest storiesRead the latest issueGive a Gift SubscriptionFollow Us:Return & Refund PolicyAboutPress RoomFAQsContact UsInternational EditionsAdvertiseAccessibility StatementTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyCalifornia Consumer Privacy StatementUse of cookies/Do not sell my dataScientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.© 2024 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, A DIVISION OF SPRINGER NATURE AMERICA, INC.ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.Should I get the Flu Shot? Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Should I get the Flu Shot? Download PDF Copy By Dr. Sanchari Sinha Dutta, Ph.D.Reviewed by Aimee Molineux Introduction What is influenza? Influenza vaccination Who should get the influenza vaccine? Who should not get the influenza vaccine? Who should not get the nasal spray influenza vaccine? Can influenza vaccines cause respiratory illness? Influenza vaccination during COVID-19 pandemic References Further reading Influenza is a respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses. The infection can cause serious complications in young children, elderly people, and those with pre-existing health conditions. The best possible way to avoid complications is getting influenza vaccines annually. During the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, getting an influenza vaccine is particularly important to reduce the risk of co-infection and the pressure on healthcare systems. Image Credit: fizkes/Shutterstock What is influenza? Influenza is an infectious respiratory infection caused by influenza viruses (types A and B). The primary affected areas are the nose, throat, and occasionally lungs. Although most remain mild, influenza infections can sometimes progress to severe complications, hospitalization, and even death. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) report, about 3 to 5 million people develop severe influenza and about 290,000 to 650,000 people die from it every year globally. The risk is particularly higher for older adults, children, and people with comorbidities. The most common symptoms are fever, chills, cough, sore throat, headaches, body aches, runny nose, and fatigue. In children, influenza infection can cause diarrhea and vomiting. Similar to other respiratory viruses like severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), influenza viruses transmit from person-to-person via respiratory droplets that are generated during coughing, sneezing, or even talking. In some rare cases, viral transmission occurs through infected surfaces. Influenza vaccination The best possible way to get protected against influenza is vaccination. Influenza vaccines are generally offered as injectable (flu shots) or as nasal spray. Three types of vaccines have primarily been developed for the flu season, including two flu shots (inactivated and recombinant influenza vaccines) and a nasal spray (live attenuated influenza vaccine). The ideal time for getting a flu vaccine is between September and October every year. Because of the rapidly evolving nature of influenza viruses, it is important to get flu vaccines annually. This helps prime the immune system to develop antibodies against emerging viral variants. Who should get the influenza vaccine? Different flu vaccines are available for different age groups. For young children aged 6 months and above, the standard-dose inactivated vaccines are recommended. For adults aged 18 years and above, recombinant vaccines are recommended. For older adults aged 65 years and above, adjuvanted and high-dose inactivated vaccines are recommended. The vaccination is particularly important for at-risk individuals, including pregnant women and people with weakened immune system. People with chronic diseases, including cancer, cardiopulmonary illness, neurological disorders, diabetes, obesity, cystic fibrosis, kidney or liver disease, and HIV infection, are recommended to get the vaccine. Young children (age range: 6 months – 8 years) who are getting influenza vaccine for the first time should be immunized with two vaccine doses given at an interval of at least 4 weeks. Afterward, they may receive a single dose annually. Image Credit: Tero Vesalainen/Shutterstock Who should not get the influenza vaccine? Children younger than 6 months do not need a flu vaccination. The vaccination is also not recommended for people who have severe allergies to any of the components of flu vaccines, including gelatin, antibiotics, or other ingredients. Similarly, people who had previously developed severe allergies following a flu shot should not get another shot. Related StoriesUnraveling the mechanism of Shufeng Jiedu Capsules in influenza treatmentStem cell therapy advances: MSCs show potential in managing COVID-19 and influenza infectionsStudy reveals distinct genetic risk factors for influenza and COVID-19People with egg allergy and those who had ever developed Guillain-Barré Syndrome (a rare paralyzing disease) should talk to their doctors before vaccination. Who should not get the nasal spray influenza vaccine? Nasal spray flu vaccines are available for individuals aged between 2 and 49 years. Children younger than 2 years and adults older than 50 years should not receive a nasal spray vaccine. In addition, people with severe allergies, immunocompromised patients, children (2 – 17 years) receiving aspirin- or salicylate-containing medicines, children (2 – 4 years) with asthma, pregnant women, people with cerebrospinal fluid leakage, and people with cochlear implants should not get a nasal spray vaccine. People who have recently taken antiviral medicines for influenza should not receive nasal spray flu vaccination. Read Next: Influenza Immunization Can influenza vaccines cause respiratory illness? Influenza vaccines do not cause influenza or other respiratory illnesses. The vaccines do not increase the risk of COVID-19. However, in some cases, influenza vaccines can cause fever and muscle aches for a couple of days. These are the side-effects of vaccination due to production of protective antibodies. Influenza vaccines take around two weeks to provide full protection. Any exposure to influenza viruses within this time frame may cause influenza despite vaccination. Influenza vaccination during COVID-19 pandemic According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), USA, seasonal spread of influenza viruses has caused 38 million infections, 400,000 hospitalizations, and 22,000 deaths during 2019 – 2020. During the same period, flu vaccines have prevented 7 million infections, 105,000 hospitalizations, and 6,300 deaths in the US. Getting a flu vaccine is particularly important during the pandemic as both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses are expected to co-circulate during the flu season. Thus, developing immunity against influenza through vaccination will reduce the possibility of a doctor’s visit, which in turn will reduce the risk of acquiring SARS-CoV-2 infection. In addition, it will help reduce the burden on healthcare systems and preserve medical resources for critically ill patients, including COVID-19 patients. References Who Should and Who Should NOT Get a Flu Vaccine. 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/whoshouldvax.htm#anchor_1555704832 Flu shot: Your best bet for avoiding influenza. 2021. Mayo Clinic. Available at: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/flu/in-depth/flu-shots/art-20048000 Influenza (seasonal). 2018. World Health Organization. Available at: https://www.who.intews-room/fact-sheets/detail/influenza-(seasonal) It’s a Good Time to Get Your Flu Vaccine. 2021. US Food and Drug Administration. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/its-good-time-get-your-flu-vaccine Further ReadingAll Influenza ContentInfluenza - What is Influenza?Types of InfluenzaInfluenza ImmunizationInfluenza EpidemiologyMore... Last Updated: May 30, 2022 Written byDr. Sanchari Sinha DuttaDr. Sanchari Sinha Dutta is a science communicator who believes in spreading the power of science in every corner of the world. She has a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) degree and a Master's of Science (M.Sc.) in biology and human physiology. Following her Master's degree, Sanchari went on to study a Ph.D. in human physiology. She has authored more than 10 original research articles, all of which have been published in world renowned international journals. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APADutta, Sanchari Sinha Dutta. (2022, May 30). Should I get the Flu Shot?. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.net/health/Should-I-get-the-Flu-Shot.aspx.MLADutta, Sanchari Sinha Dutta. "Should I get the Flu Shot?". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.net/health/Should-I-get-the-Flu-Shot.aspx>.ChicagoDutta, Sanchari Sinha Dutta. "Should I get the Flu Shot?". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.net/health/Should-I-get-the-Flu-Shot.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardDutta, Sanchari Sinha Dutta. 2022. Should I get the Flu Shot?. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.net/health/Should-I-get-the-Flu-Shot.aspx. Suggested Reading A call for robust H5N1 influenza preparedness and responseSeasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicWHO announces recommended viral composition for 2025 influenza vaccinesStudy reveals a promising approach to developing universal influenza vaccineUS study uncovers antiviral resistance in swine-origin influenza, urging enhanced pandemic surveillanceWastewater surveillance detects influenza and H5 viruses from human and animal sourcesResearch identifies respiratory transmission potential of H5N1 virusNew project launched to accelerate development and accessibility of H5N1 mRNA vaccine candidates Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Diabetes (Subscribe or Preview) Allergies (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Study confirms flu vaccine effectiveness against A H1N1 in young childrenRed fox is first documented Alaska mammal infected with current strain of avian influenza • Alaska Beacon HOME NEWS Economy & Environment Education Decision 2024 Government & Politics Health Justice Commentary ABOUT SUBSCRIBE DONATE Part of States Newsroom Economy & Environment Education Decision 2024 Government & Politics Health Justice 4:00 Brief Economy & EnvironmentHealth Alaska in Brief Red fox is first documented Alaska mammal infected with current strain of avian influenza By: Yereth Rosen - June 1, 2022 4:00 am Red fox kits stand in the tall grass on St. Matthew Island in July of 2019. Alaska has recorded its first fox infected with highly pathogenic avian influenza, and the wildlife veterinarian with the Alaska Department of Fish and Game says that young foxes and other young scavenging mammals are liley to be more susceptible to infections. (Photo by Rachel Richardson/USGS Alaska Science Center) A dead red fox on the Aleutian Island of Unalaska was found to be infected with the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus that has spread around the world and into populations of domestic poultry and wild birds. The fox was the first Alaska mammal found infected with the current influenza strain. The infection was confirmed last week, according to state officials. That fox joins other foxes in the upper Midwestern U.S. states and the Canadian province of Ontario as the first wild mammals in North America documented as infected with this type of avian influenza. The Unalaska fox was found in the same area as some dead eagles that also were found to have died from this avian influenza, according to the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. It is believed that the fox, like the eagles, was scavenging on smaller birds that were infected, officials said. There will likely be other mammals infected in the coming weeks and months, said Kimberlee Beckmen, a wildlife health veterinarian with the Department of Fish and Game. Several types of mammals are scavengers, she said, so “we’re expecting it to show up in other species.” Within those species, young animals are more likely to fall victim to this new avian influenza, she said. She noted that influenza-infected foxes found sick or dead elsewhere have been kits. In the case of the Unalaska fox, it was found to have been suffering from another illness, she said. “So it was probably highly susceptible,” she said. AAn adult female northern harrier flies above California’s Suisun Marsh. A member of the species found dead in Juneau was infected with highly pathogenic avian influenza. (Photo by Billy Thein/USGS Western Ecological Research Center) In addition to the red fox, a dead northern harrier – a type of hawk – was found infected with this avian influenza, according to the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation. The case, from Juneau, was the first in Alaska so far for any species of wild bird other than bald eagles, Canada geese or, in a case from Fairbanks, a lesser Canada goose, according to DEC records. It was also the nation’s second northern harrier documented with the current avian influenza strain – so far. An earlier case was found in North Dakota, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. Beckman said the discovery of an infected northern harrier in Alaska was not a surprise. “We’re expecting it to be in other raptors because raptors are scavengers,” she said. As of Tuesday, there were about 1,300 documented cases of wild birds infected with the current avian influenza, according to the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. While bald eagles and geese have been hard hit, a wide variety of species have been found infected in the Lower 48 states, including peregrine falcons, owls, seabirds, wild turkeys and, in a Florida zoo, several vultures. In Alaska, there have been 25 wild birds found infected as of Tuesday, along with a backyard flock of chickens in the Matanuska-Susitna Borough, according to the DEC’s running tally. XRed fox is first documented Alaska mammal infected with current strain of avian influenza by Yereth Rosen, Alaska Beacon June 1, 2022 Red fox is first documented Alaska mammal infected with current strain of avian influenza by Yereth Rosen, Alaska Beacon June 1, 2022 A dead red fox on the Aleutian Island of Unalaska was found to be infected with the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus that has spread around the world and into populations of domestic poultry and wild birds. The fox was the first Alaska mammal found infected with the current influenza strain. The infection was confirmed last week, according to state officials. That fox joins other foxes in the upper Midwestern U.S. states and the Canadian province of Ontario as the first wild mammals in North America documented as infected with this type of avian influenza. The Unalaska fox was found in the same area as some dead eagles that also were found to have died from this avian influenza, according to the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. It is believed that the fox, like the eagles, was scavenging on smaller birds that were infected, officials said. There will likely be other mammals infected in the coming weeks and months, said Kimberlee Beckmen, a wildlife health veterinarian with the Department of Fish and Game. Several types of mammals are scavengers, she said, so “we’re expecting it to show up in other species.” Within those species, young animals are more likely to fall victim to this new avian influenza, she said. She noted that influenza-infected foxes found sick or dead elsewhere have been kits. In the case of the Unalaska fox, it was found to have been suffering from another illness, she said. “So it was probably highly susceptible,” she said. AAn adult female northern harrier flies above California’s Suisun Marsh. A member of the species found dead in Juneau was infected with highly pathogenic avian influenza. (Photo by Billy Thein/USGS Western Ecological Research Center) In addition to the red fox, a dead northern harrier – a type of hawk – was found infected with this avian influenza, according to the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation. The case, from Juneau, was the first in Alaska so far for any species of wild bird other than bald eagles, Canada geese or, in a case from Fairbanks, a lesser Canada goose, according to DEC records. It was also the nation’s second northern harrier documented with the current avian influenza strain – so far. An earlier case was found in North Dakota, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. Beckman said the discovery of an infected northern harrier in Alaska was not a surprise. “We’re expecting it to be in other raptors because raptors are scavengers,” she said. As of Tuesday, there were about 1,300 documented cases of wild birds infected with the current avian influenza, according to the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. While bald eagles and geese have been hard hit, a wide variety of species have been found infected in the Lower 48 states, including peregrine falcons, owls, seabirds, wild turkeys and, in a Florida zoo, several vultures. In Alaska, there have been 25 wild birds found infected as of Tuesday, along with a backyard flock of chickens in the Matanuska-Susitna Borough, according to the DEC’s running tally. Alaska Beacon is part of States Newsroom, a nonprofit news network supported by grants and a coalition of donors as a 501c(3) public charity. Alaska Beacon maintains editorial independence. Contact Editor Andrew Kitchenman for questions: info@alaskabeacon.com. Follow Alaska Beacon on Facebook and X. View Republishing Guidelines Copy to clipboard 1Republish Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. AP and Getty images may not be republished. Please see our republishing guidelines for use of any other photos and graphics. Yereth RosenYereth Rosen came to Alaska in 1987 to work for the Anchorage Times. She has reported for Reuters, for the Alaska Dispatch News, for Arctic Today and for other organizations. She covers environmental issues, energy, climate change, natural resources, economic and business news, health, science and Arctic concerns. In her free time, she likes to ski and watch her son's hockey games.Alaska Beacon is part of States Newsroom, the nation’s largest state-focused nonprofit news organization.MORE FROM AUTHOR Related News Alaskans charged $5.78 billion for hospital stays last year,…by Yereth RosenNovember 1, 2024 Overdose deaths are rising among Black and Indigenousby Tim HendersonOctober 31, 2024 Alaska births and deaths both declined in 2023, and…by Yereth RosenOctober 29, 2024 INDEPENDENT AND ILLUMINATING JOURNALISM Democracy Toolkit // Register to vote | Find your polling place and registration status | How to vote early or by mail | View public notices DEMOCRACY TOOLKIT Register to voteFind your polling place and registration statusHow to vote early or by mailView public notices © Alaska Beacon, 2024 v1.59.8 ABOUT US The Alaska Beacon is an independent, nonpartisan news organization focused on connecting Alaskans to their state government. Our journalists fairly and fearlessly report on the people and interests that determine state policy. We’re part of States Newsroom, the nation’s largest state-focused nonprofit news organization. DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. (See full republishing guidelines.) DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy © Alaska Beacon, 2024 v1.59.8 States Newsroom Fair. Fearless. Free.Breaking: Lawsuit forces U.S. to rethink bird flu response | The Humane Society of the United States Skip to main content The Humane Society of the United States Main navigation Our Fights Our Impact How You Can Help Blog Donate Button Donate Main Menu × Search Humanesociety.org Blog menu Blog menu A Humane World Blog About Kitty Subscribe June 4, 2022 Breaking: Lawsuit forces U.S. to rethink bird flu response BY Kitty Block and Sara Amundson SHARE The U.S. government’s response to bird flu outbreaks involves killing and burying or burning millions of tightly confined birds, which threatens wildlife, habitats, water supplies, air quality and human health. iStock.com When a strain of bird flu sweeps through factory farms, where birds are tightly confined, the current “solution” involves immense cruelty. This is why it’s a genuine milestone in the fight against factory farming that the Humane Society of the United States, Farm Sanctuary and Mercy For Animals just settled a lawsuit against the U.S. Department of Agriculture over its reckless response plan for outbreaks of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza. Factory farms (where virtually all meat, eggs and dairy now come from) are breeding grounds for disease. By packing thousands of stressed animals into cages or sheds, factory farms provide viruses and other pathogens with the perfect conditions to spread and mutate into more dangerous and contagious strains, a process known as amplification. State laws that prohibit cruel, tight confinement like California’s Proposition 12 have an important role to play here, but factory-farming interests are seeking to strip states of their ability to pass such laws. More on that below. In a bird flu outbreak, the current USDA approach involves killing every animal at or near the impacted facility. Often this is done by an exceptionally cruel method called “ventilation shutdown,” which means shutting off a facility’s ventilation system and slowly suffocating conscious birds to death. The government then uses taxpayer dollars to reimburse producers for the cost of restocking their operations with new animals. In 2015, the HSUS proposed a better way: that the agency should require producers re-stocking their facilities after an outbreak to shift to cage-free or other systems that give birds more space and the ability to engage in healthy, natural behaviors. But the USDA decided to stick to an approach that incentivizes re-stocking factory farms with dangerously high numbers of animals, often confined to the point of virtual immobilization. Our lawsuit alleged that the agency’s plan inadequately analyzed how killing and burying or burning millions of tightly confined birds threatens wildlife, habitats, water supplies, air quality and human health. The settlement requires the agency to revisit these issues and conduct a more in-depth analysis of these threats. This is an important and timely development, as currently the U.S. is in the midst of another nationwide bird flu outbreak that has quickly spread to 40 states. Though the USDA agreed that overcrowding animals can amplify influenza, instead of doing anything to discourage it, the agency said that it planned to just “encourage farmers to consider reducing the number of birds in poultry houses as part their best management practices.” Unfortunately, there’s no evidence that this supposed encouragement led to any reduction in cruel and dangerous confinement anywhere, and now six years later the U.S. is enduring of another devastating bird flu outbreak. But thanks to the settlement, the USDA will go back to the drawing board, and nothing is stopping the agency from adopting the anti-confinement incentives the HSUS suggested in 2015. The agency never questioned the efficacy of those incentives; it rejected them without examining whether they may prove effective in limiting the threat of bird flu. This case overlaps with a major legal battle in which the HSUS is currently engaged. We’re defending California’s landmark Proposition 12 in front of the U.S. Supreme Court. The HSUS led the campaign that passed Proposition 12 in 2018, banning the extreme confinement of mother pigs, egg-laying hens and calves used for veal, while prohibiting the sale of pork, eggs and veal from factory farms that cruelly confine animals. Instead of complying with this commonsense and hugely popular reform, the pork industry is trying to get the law overturned. It's obvious to most people that the pork industry’s practice of locking a mother pig in a barren metal cage so tightly that she can’t turn around is cruel. But these cages (known as “gestation crates”) also pose an enormous threat to public health. Confining mother pigs in gestation crates stresses the animals and this suppresses their immune responses. In pig breeding facilities, hundreds or thousands of pigs are confined right next to each other in these crates, helping influenza and other pathogens spread more easily. Just like overcrowding birds, overcrowding pigs risks amplifying influenza, increasing the likelihood of generating a virus that could become the next devastating human pandemic. This is not hypothetical: The 2009 swine flu pandemic jumped from pigs to humans and killed hundreds of thousands of people worldwide. Factory farms that force animals to live in overcrowded, filthy conditions are a massive threat to public health, in addition to being our nation’s largest source of animal suffering. The HSUS will continue to battle intensive farm animal confinement wherever the fight takes us—whether it be in courts, corporate boardrooms, online or the public square. You can join us by adding your name to this action alert. The bird flu lawsuit was prepared and defended by pro bono counsel at the law firm Shearman & Sterling, LLP and the HSUS’s Animal Protection Law team along with co-plaintiffs, Mercy For Animals and Farm Sanctuary. Sara Amundson is president of the Humane Society Legislative Fund. Improving the Lives of Farm Animals About the author Kitty Block is President and CEO of the Humane Society of the United States and CEO of Humane Society International, the international affiliate of the HSUS Read more about Kitty Block Subscribe to the blog Get all of Kitty's latest updates delivered to your inbox. Subscribe Also of interest Photo by Jo-Anne McArthur/Animal Equality Court clears way for lawsuit against USDA policy of rewarding factory farms that spread bird flu Improving the Lives of Farm Animals March 30, 2021 The HSUS Breaking: More experts join forces in key U.S. Supreme Court case for animals Improving the Lives of Farm Animals August 16, 2022 Photo by Tikki Hywood Trust HSUS, HSI lawsuit forces U.S. to act to protect pangolins, world’s most trafficked mammals August 18, 2020 Get HSUS news and action alerts Mobile number Thank you for signing up for text alerts!You will receive text messages with ways to help animals right from your phone. By providing your mobile number, you agree to receive autodialed, recurring text messages from the HSUS with updates and ways you can help animals. Message and data rates may apply. Text STOP to 77879 to opt out, HELP for info. Privacy policy. Terms and conditions. Footer All Our Fights Animals Events News Press Room Blog Shop Stream Podcast Donate One-time and Recurring Membership Matching Gifts Major Gifts and Grants Legacy Giving Vehicle Donation Host a Fundraiser Volunteer About us Our Mission Leadership Governance Financial Information Affiliates Careers Internships Diversity, Equity and Inclusion FAQ Contact Us All Animals magazine Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn YouTube © 2024 The Humane Society of the United States Privacy policy and terms. The Humane Society of the United States is registered as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization. Contributions to the HSUS are tax-deductible to the extent permitted by law. The HSUS's tax identification number is 53-0225390. Transparency in coverage. Footer Right Better Business Bureau Accredited CharityAvian Influenza A(H7N9) virus Discover About FAO News Multimedia Main topics Statistics Members Publications English Share Close Animal health Areas of work Our programmes Animal diseases Highly pathogenic avian influenza Foot-and-mouth disease Situation updates FAO Reference Centres About Application and requirements Reporting News and Events News Stories Events Resources Publications Videos Webinars Tools Avian Influenza A(H7N9) virus situation update 1 June 2022, 17:00 hours; Rome OverviewHazard: Influenza A(H7N9) virus with pandemic potential.Country: China; imported cases in Malaysia (1) and Canada (2).Number of human cases: 1,568 confirmed; 616 deaths (since February 2013).New findings in birds / environment since last update (01 December 2021):0New human cases since last update (01 December 2021): 0 Map 1. Human cases and positive findings in birds or the environment in China Note: Human cases are depicted in the geographic location where they were reported; for some cases, exposure may have occurred in a different geographic location. Centroid geo-coordinates were used for H7N9 positive animal/environment samples where the precise geolocation is unknown. Provinces/municipalities affected (since 2013): Beijing, Chongqing, Shanghai and Tianjin Municipalities; Anhui, Fujian, Gansu, Guangdong, Guizhou, Hebei, Heilongjiang, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Jilin, Liaoning, Qinghai, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Shandong, Sichuan, Taiwan, Yunnan and Zhejiang Provinces; Hong Kong SAR, Macao SAR; Guangxi, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia Hui, Tibet and Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Regions (China); Sabah (Malaysia); British Columbia (Canada).Highly pathogenic virus findings: Since 10 January 2017, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) type H7N9 virus was detected in a total of 66 poultry or environmental samples (46 chickens, 8 peacocks, 2 duck and 10 environmental samples); H7N9 virus isolates from 32 human cases were found to be HPAI virus. Table 1. Number of locations testing positive for H7N9 HPAI virus (n=44) in birds and/or the environment, by province and sampling site as 02 February 2022. Province LBM* Farm Backyard Others** Total Anhui 0 1 0 0 1 Fujian 1 0 0 0 1 Guangdong 22 0 0 0 22 Guangxi 0 1 0 0 1 Hebei 0 1 0 0 1 Heilongjiang 0 1 0 0 1 Henan 0 1 0 0 1 Hunan 3 1 1 0 5 Liaoning 0 1 0 1 2 Inner Mongolia 0 2 0 0 2 Ningxia Hui 0 2 0 0 2 Shaanxi 0 2 0 0 2 Shanxi 0 1 0 0 1 Tianjin 0 1 0 0 1 Unknown 0 0 0 1 1 TOTAL 26 15 1 2 44 *LBM: live bird market; **Others include one airport and one zoo. Situation in animalsOn 27 January 2022, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) issued an announcement listing a new trivalent vaccine (H5N2 + H7N9 virus strains) [reference].On 11 January 2022, MARA issued an announcement listing eight newly registered veterinary products including four inactivated avian influenza vaccines. Two of the new vaccines are recombinant bivalent (H5N6+H5N8 virus strains) vaccines while the two others are trivalent vaccines (H5N6+H5N8+H7N9 virus strains) [reference]. These new vaccines are available since 11 January 2022.Since November 2021, MARA has not published any additional results of the national animal H7N9 surveillance and post-vaccination monitoring . Animal/environmental findings: Since 4 April 2013 around 2500 virological samples from the environment, chickens, pigeons, ducks, turkeys, peacocks, a tree sparrow and a magpie robin tested positive; positives mainly from live bird markets, vendors and some commercial or breeding farms. Table 2. National H7N9 surveillance and post-vaccination monitoring results from January 2020 to September 2021 published by MARA, China Reporting period #serum samples collected from birds Average post-vaccination monitoring immunization rate (target 70%) #virological samples collected from birds and the environment #H7N9 positive virological samples 2020 January 72 845 96.24 17 536 0 February 107 409 94.27 34 501 0 March 127 074 95.05 42 190 0 April 104 650 95.34 24 017 0 May 180 261 95.59 21 961 3 June 221 577 95.77 31 183 0 July 166 193 92.32 43 404 0 August 110 926 96.08 17 053 0 September 106 163 95.67 16 410 0 October 78 070 95.15 11 647 14 November 168 938 95.87 32 425 0 December 302 599 94.21 84 929 0 2021 January 96 733 95.70 31 780 0 February 67 509 94.99 29 836 0 March 78 760 95.77 20 481 0 April 89 500 89.96 17 821 0 May 128 826 94.48 20 759 0 June 213 902 94.70 52 273 0 July 170 840 94.78 36 193 0 August 101 929 95.01 31 747 0 September 102 355 94.21 25 924 0 Source: Published by MARA, China. Note: sample sizes and collection sites can vary significantly from one administrative region to another. Detailed results can be consulted on the official website of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, China [reference]. Figure 1. Number of positive virological samples from birds or the environment, by province and origin as of 02 February 2022 Data include both high and low pathogenic H7N9 viruses. Figure 2. Distributions of low* and highly pathogenic H7N9 virologically positive samples (nLPAI=246; nHPAI=44) Note: * May contain unconfirmed HPAI at the time of publishing. Samples collected from birds or the environment, by sampling location, between October 2016 and 02 February 2022. Samples from the same location and time are grouped. Some data on H7N9 positive virological samples collected during national H7N9 surveillance could not be included due to absence of information on the sampling location and the sample origin. Figure 3. Distributions of low* and highly pathogenic H7N9 virologically positive samples (nLPAI=297; nHPAI=50) Note: * May contain unconfirmed HPAI at the time of publishing. Samples collected from birds or the environment, by sample origin between October 2016 and 02 February 2022. Samples from the same origin, location and time are grouped. Some data on H7N9 positive virological samples collected during national H7N9 surveillance could not be included due to absence of information on the sampling location and the sample origin. Situation in humansSince March 2019, no human cases were reported.For detailed information on human cases, please refer to WHO report. Figure 4. Number of officially reported human cases since February 2013, as of 02 February 2022 Data include both high and low pathogenic H7N9 viruses. Figure 5. Incidence of officially reported human cases by quarter, based on onset date from February 2013 (beginning of period 5) to 02 February 2022 Note: For cases with unknown onset dates from period 5 (n=55), reporting dates were used instead. Both high and low pathogenic H7N9 viruses are included. Each period starts on 1 October and ends on 30 September of the next year. Recent publicationsHe, D., Gu, M., Wang, X., Wang, X., Li, G., Yan, Y., […], & Liu, X. Spatiotemporal Associations and Molecular Evolution of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A H7N9 Virus in China from 2017 to 2021. Viruses, 13(12), 2524. [reference]. In this study, 10 new strains of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H7N9 virus subtype from October 2019 to April 2021 were sequenced. HPAI H7N9 virus subtype was primarily circulating in Northern China since period six (October 2017 – September 2018). HPAI H7N9 virus phylogenies exhibit a geographical structure compatible with high levels of local transmission after unidirectional rapid geographical expansion towards the north of China in 2017. Two major subclades were continually expanding with the viral population size undergoing a sharp increase after 2018 with an obvious seasonal tendency.Tang, H., Kang, J., Shen, C., Wang, Y., Robertson, I. D., Cai, C., […], & Bruce, M. Benefit-cost analysis of a H7N9 vaccination program in poultry in Guangxi, China. Preventive veterinary medicine, 200, 105580. Advance online publication. [reference]. This study was designed to evaluate the economic value of the H7N9 vaccination program in Guangxi by assessing the benefits and costs of the program compared to not vaccinating against H7N9. A benefit-cost analysis was undertaken to evaluate the adoption of a vaccination program against H7N9 in each of three consecutive years from July 2017 to June 2020 with the baseline scenario (the absence of H7N9 vaccination in the 12-month period July 2016 to June 2017). Results demonstrate the significant economic advantage of implementing a vaccination program against H7N9 in Guangxi. FAO actions FAO will hold a webinar entitled Managing HPAI in wild birds on 10 February 2022, at 1 pm Central European time. Registration is available at this link.Report of the WHO Vaccine Composition Meeting – September 2021. [link]Avian influenza report of the OIE/FAO Network of expertise on animal influenzas (OFFLU) covering the period March – September 2021. [link]FAO published the third edition of the Good emergency management practice - The essentials: A guide to preparing for animal health emergencies, freely available at this link. As part of the OIE/FAO Network of Expertise on Animal Influenzas, FAO attended the Zoonotic Influenza Sessions of the WHO Vaccine Composition Meeting held from 2 to 4 March 2021. The report is now available online. [link]WHO developed an online training course entitled Strengthening collaboration between human and animal health sectors for improved health security, freely available. The course covers the Tripartite Zoonosis Guide and associated tools in Module 2. [link]The Tripartite Joint Risk Assessment (JRA) Operational Tool to address zoonotic health threats at the animal-human-environment interface is now available online in all six UN languages. [link]As part of the OIE/FAO Network of Expertise on Animal Influenzas, FAO attended the Zoonotic Influenza Sessions of the WHO Vaccine Composition Meeting held from 29 September to 1 October 2020; Report – October 2020. [link] A paper from FAO entitled “A literature review of the use of environmental sampling in the surveillance of avian influenza viruses” (Hood et al., 2020) was published in the Transboundary and Emerging Diseases journal. [link]Report of the WHO Vaccine Composition Meeting – February 2020. [link]The Tripartite Zoonoses Guide is now available online in all UN languages. [link]FAO published a risk assessment entitled, “Chinese-Origin H7N9 Avian Influenza: Spread in poultry and human exposure”. [reference]A webinar entitled “Pros and cons on AI vaccination” was presented by Leslie Sims on 14 May 2018 with technical support from FAO HQ. A recording of the webinar is available. [link]FAO guidance and risk assessments are available on a dedicated website. [link]Liaise with China and partners, monitor situation, monitor virus evolution, conduct market chain analysis, risk assessment, surveillance guidance and communication. FAO's support to countries FAO continues supporting at-risk countries with surveillance and preparedness for H7N9 incursion FAO is providing surveillance and sampling guidance for South and Southeast Asia Funding to date: US$ 8.1 million mobilized (US$ 6.7 million USAID, US$ 1.9 million TCPs) Next issue: Temporarily discontinued The disease situation updates are produced by the FAO Emergency Prevention System for Animal Health (EMPRES-AH) as part of its mission to increase global disease intelligence. DisclaimerInformation provided herein is current as of the date of issue. Information added or changed since the last H7N9 situation update appears in orange. Human cases are depicted in the geographic location of their report. For some cases, exposure may have occurred in one geographic location but reported in another. For cases with unknown onset date, reporting date was used instead. FAO compiles information drawn from multiple national (Ministries of Agriculture or Livestock, Ministries of Health, Provincial Government websites; Centers for Disease Prevention and Control [CDC]) and international sources (World Health Organization [WHO], World Organisation for Animal Health [WOAH]), as well as peer-reviewed scientific articles. FAO makes every effort to ensure, but does not guarantee, accuracy, completeness or authenticity of the information. The designation employed and the presentation of material on the map do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO concerning the legal or constitutional status of any country, territory or sea area, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers. Contact If interested in a previous issue please send an email to EMPRES-Animal Health specifying the intended use of the document. WeChat Follow us on FAO Organizational Chart Worldwide offices Regional Office for Africa Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean Regional Office for the Near East and North Africa Country Offices Jobs Contact us Terms and Conditions Data protection and privacy Scam Alert Report Misconduct Transparency and accountability © FAO 2024Iraq reports avian influenza outbreak on poultry farm | The Poultry Site About us Contact us Advertise with us Events Our Sites The Poultry Site The Pig Site The Cattle Site The Dairy Site The Beef Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio Porcino Europe Europe Africa South America North America Asia Oceania Menu Home Genetics & breeding Egg layers Meat poultry Health & disease Processing Equipment & innovation Markets & policy Knowledge centre Europe Africa South America North America Asia Oceania About us Contact us Advertise with us Events Our Sites The Poultry Site The Pig Site The Cattle Site The Dairy Site The Beef Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio Porcino Europe Africa South America North America Asia Oceania How can we help you? esc All Articles Sponsors Events Avian influenza Diseases Health & disease Iraq reports avian influenza outbreak on poultry farm 24,060 out of 158,000 birds were affected 3 June 2022 1 minute read By: Global Ag Media Asia Iraq has reported an outbreak of highly pathogenic H5N8 avian influenza on a farm southeast of Baghdad, reported Reuters, citing a report from the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) on Friday. The outbreak last month at the poultry farm in the province of Wasit killed 24,060 birds out of a flock of 158,000, the Paris-based WOAH said, citing a report from its Iraqi delegate. Our Partners Targan Lallemand Lanxess BioZyme Hy-Line International Global Ag Media More from this author More News View all China set for record soybean imports in 2024 Markets & policy Market trends Feed Markets 7 November 2024 2 minute read ForFarmers' UK poultry mill deal with Boparan could harm competition Markets & policy 7 November 2024 2 minute read The acquisition could reduce competition in poultry supply Avian influenza confirmed on UK commercial poultry farm Health & disease Diseases Avian influenza 7 November 2024 1 minute read UK government raises risk status from medium to high Our Partners Targan Lallemand Lanxess BioZyme Hy-Line International Global Ag Media provides a knowledge sharing platform offering premium news, analysis and information resources for the global agriculture industry. Useful Links About us Contact our team Advertise with us Newsletter Terms & Conditions Cookie & Privacy Policy Events Subscribe to our newsletter Subscribe Sign up to our newsletter esc Email Address Country Country Brazil Canada India Indonesia Kenya Nigeria Philippines South Africa United Kingdom United States Afghanistan Åland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Congo, The Democratic Republic of The Cook Islands Costa Rica Cote D'ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czechia Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and Mcdonald Islands Holy See (Vatican City State) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Republic of Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia, Federated States of Moldova, Republic of Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory, Occupied Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Reunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Helena Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and The South Sandwich Islands Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan, Province of China Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States United States Minor Outlying Islands Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Viet Nam Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Postcode/Zip Code Company Industry Position Opt in to another list The Pig Site The Beef Site The Dairy Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio Porcino I would like to sign up to receive email updates from Global Ag Media Sign up to our regular newsletter and access news from across the Global AG Media network © 2000 - 2024 - Global Ag Media. All Rights Reserved | No part of this site may be reproduced without permission. Our Sites The Poultry Site The Pig Site The Cattle Site The Dairy Site The Beef Site The Meat Site The Crop Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio PorcinoTwo Berks County Farms Released From AI Control Area | Farming and Agricultural News | lancasterfarming.com Skip to main content You have permission to edit this article. Edit Close Subscribe Today Mailbox Markets Register Log In My Account Log Out Site search Search Home E-Newspaper Archives Advertising Media Kit E-Newsletters Market Reports Business Directory Weather Farming News News Dairy Livestock Poultry Field Crops Produce Hemp Conservation Organic Ag Business Equipment & Machinery Country Life Family Food & Recipes Antiques & History Mid-Atlantic Horse Youth Gardening Outdoors Fairs & Shows Farmhouse Podcast Buy & Sell Mailbox Markets Classifieds Auctions Polls Merchandise Store Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Lancaster Farming P.O. Box 609 Ephrata, PA 17522 (717) 394-3047 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn TikTok Instagram Site search Search Subscribe Log In My Account Log Out Farming News Country Life Classifieds Auctions Mailbox Markets Two Berks County Farms Released From AI Control Area Share this Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link LancasterFarming e-Newspapers November 11, 2024 54° 54° Two Berks County Farms Released From AI Control Area Staff Report Jun 1, 2022 Jun 1, 2022 Updated Aug 15, 2023 Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email beemore Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link The first two Berks County duck farms have been released from the highly pathogenic avian influenza control areas.Berks 1 and Berks 2, a commercial duck breeder and a commercial duck meat bird operation, were released on May 31. The two farms were confirmed with avian influenza back on May 3.USDA and the state do not publish the names of infected farms to protect privacy. After the control area is released, the infected farms must go through further protocols before they can restock with birds.Pennsylvania offers an online map for farmers to check if they are still in a control area. Pennsylvania has not had a confirmed case of avian influenza since May 23.In Pennsylvania, sick or dead captive birds, whether commercial or backyard fowl, should be reported to the Department of Agriculture at 717-772-2852.Lancaster Farming offers a printable one-page handout with biosecurity recommendations, avian influenza symptoms and numbers to call for reporting a suspected outbreak. Find it at bit.ly/protectyourflock. Newsletter Success! An email has been sent to with a link to confirm list signup. Error! There was an error processing your request. Lancaster Farming News The most important Farming stories delivered to your inbox each week. Please enter a valid email address. Sign up By opting into newsletters you are agreeing to our privacy policy. From Our Partners What To Read Next Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Lancaster Farming's Ongoing Avian Influenza Coverage Highly pathogenic avian influenza is an ongoing problem. Lancaster Farming is tracking outbreaks, providing management information and coverin… More information First Pennsylvania Farms Released From Avian Influenza Control Areas Pennsylvania has begun to lift control areas surrounding farms that were infected with highly pathogenic avian influenza. Berks County Farms Test Positive for Avian Influenza Two commercial duck farms in Berks County have been added to the list of Pennsylvania farms to test positive for highly pathogenic avian influenza. Uvalde Response Holds Up Avian Influenza Aid The House Appropriations Committee was due to consider a $25 million proposal on May 25 to assist poultry farms and businesses recovering from the spring’s avian influenza outbreak, but Republicans decided not to bring up the bill after Democrats sought to add $240 million in public safety spending. Kreider Farms Released From Avian Influenza Control Area Pennsylvania's first farm confirmed with highly pathogenic avian influenza has now been released from the control area. Additional Pennsylvania Farm, First Georgia Farm Test Positive for Avian Influenza Another Berks County, Pennsylvania, duck farm has been confirmed to have highly pathogenic avian influenza. Additionally, a backyard producer in Toombs County, Georgia, has become the first case confirmed in the Peach State. Tags Avian Influenza Control Area Agriculture Lfavianflu Food Farm Bird Berks County Duck Pennsylvania Medicine Berk Sign up for our e-Newsletters! Success! An email has been sent to with a link to confirm list signup. Error! There was an error processing your request. Lancaster Farming News Breaking News Country Life Dairy News Field Crops News Industrial Hemp News Livestock News Mid-Atlantic Horse News Poultry News You must select at least one email list. Please enter a valid email address. Sign up Sections News Farming News Country Life Classifieds Business Directory Auctions Mailbox Markets Ancestry Archives Quick Links Subscribe Submit a Classified Liner Ad Contacts Advertising Media Kit Where to Buy Manage Subscription Merchandise Store CONTACT US LancasterFarming.com 21 W Main St, PO Box 609 Ephrata, PA 17522 Phone: (717) 394-3047 Email: Farming@LancasterFarming.com Follow Us Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube TikTok Pinterest Instagram × Browser Compatibility Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.We recommend switching to one of the following browsers: Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox Copyright © 2024 Lancaster Farming Privacy PolicyTerms of UseCareers ;Worst U.S. Outbreak of Bird Flu in Seven Years Fades in May ​ Skip to content Successful Farming Search Please fill out this field. Magazine Subscribe Manage Your Subscription Get Help Newsletters Sweepstakes Subscribe Search Please fill out this field. News News Business News Crop News Livestock News Machinery News Profiles Technology News Weather News View All Markets Markets Commodity Prices Newswire Market Analysis View All Machinery Machinery All Around the Farm Harvesting Planting Repair and Maintenance Technology Tools Top Shops Tractors Used Farm Equipment View All Crops Crops Carbon Markets Conservation Corn Cover Crops Crop Protection Fertilizers Hemp Soil Health Soybeans Wheat View All Farm Management Farm Management Beginning Farmers Crop Insurance Estate Planning Farmland Finances Programs and Policies View All Livestock Livestock Cattle Dairy Hogs Poultry View All Family Family Education Farm Humor Health and Safety Mental Health Recipes Rural Lifestyle Women in Ag View All About Us Subscribe Magazine Magazine Subscribe Manage Your Subscription Get Help Newsletters Sweepstakes Follow Us News Business News Crop News Livestock News Machinery News Profiles Technology News Weather News Markets Commodity Prices Newswire Market Analysis Machinery All Around the Farm Harvesting Planting Repair and Maintenance Technology Tools Top Shops Tractors Used Farm Equipment View All Crops Carbon Markets Conservation Corn Cover Crops Crop Protection Fertilizers Hemp Soil Health Soybeans Wheat Farm Management Beginning Farmers Crop Insurance Estate Planning Farmland Finances Programs and Policies Livestock Cattle Dairy Hogs Poultry Family Education Farm Humor Health and Safety Mental Health Recipes Rural Lifestyle Women in Ag About Us Subscribe News Business News Worst U.S. Outbreak of Bird Flu in Seven Years Fades in May Avian influenza tends to dissipate with the arrival of consistently warm weather, and the month of May has seen about 780,000 birds lost to the infection. By Chuck Abbott Chuck Abbott The slow-talking son of an Illinois farm family, Chuck Abbott covered U.S. food and agriculture policy in its many forms since 1988, from farm bills (six so far) and crop insurance reform to school lunch, ag research, biofuels and the Dietary Guidelines. Editor of the daily electronic newsletter Ag Insider published by the Food and Environment Reporting Network and contributor to agriculture.com. Successful Farming's Editorial Guidelines Published on May 31, 2022 Close Photo: Getty Images/KARRASTOCK Nearly 38 million birds in domestic flocks have died in outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) from coast to coast since early February, but USDA data suggest the threat is fading. With one day to go in May, losses for the month were on track to be the smallest of the year. A viral disease that spreads best in cold conditions, bird flu typically dissipates with the arrival of consistently warm weather. All the same, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack transferred an additional $400 million to the USDA agency responsible for protecting animal health on Friday. The transfer doubled, to nearly $800 million, the money available for fighting HPAI and indemnifying owners of commercial flocks. "Continuing our nationwide response to highly pathogenic avian influenza is critical to minimizing the impact on our nation's poultry industry," said Undersecretary Jenny Moffitt, whose portfolio includes animal and plant diseases. Egg-laying hens, 28.8 million in all, accounted for three of every four losses to HPAI. The number of layers in the U.S. flock was down by 6 percent compared to a year ago because of bird flu. Often volatile, egg prices at the wholesale level soared to nearly $3 for a dozen Large eggs in the week before Easter, double their price at that point in 2021, but were trending downward. The nationwide wholesale average price was $2.48 last week. A USDA running tally said 780,000 birds in commercial flocks died of HPAI or were culled so far in May, compared to 1.49 million birds in February, 20.96 million in March and 14.73 million in April. Only two outbreaks were reported on egg farms, totaling 151,000 hens in Pennsylvania, during May. Going into the Memorial Day weekend, the most recent large outbreak was a turkey farm in Dakota County, Minnesota, where 57,000 turkeys were being raised for human consumption. The last detection of HPAI during the 2014-15 epidemic, arguably the worst animal disease outbreak in U.S. history, was on June 15, 2015, at an egg farm in Iowa. Some 43 million laying hens and pullets died along with 7.4 million turkeys. "Control measures, along with an increase in warm weather, ultimately interrupted HPAI transmissions, leading to a half of new cases in June 2015," said a USDA report in 2016. "The response effort involved over 3,000 federal, state and contracted personnel, with nearly $850 million obligated for indemnity payments and response activities." HPAI is highly contagious and can wipe out a flock quickly. When the disease is confirmed, agricultural officials cull the infected flock and quarantine nearby poultry farms to try to prevent the disease from spreading. During the 2014-15 epidemic, poultry barns were cleaned and disinfected after the flocks were killed. On average, said the USDA report, it was 111 days from detection of HPAI until a poultry farm was granted approval to restock with new birds. Poultry farmers overwhelmingly chose "the most inhumane method available to kill their flocks," a method called ventilation shutdown plus heat, during February and March when HPAI was discovered, said the anti-cruelty Animal Welfare Institute. "In the current outbreak, killing birds by inducing heat stroke — once considered an option of last resort — has become the default because producers can't destroy massive numbers of their animals fast enough to control the spread of disease." The most common method of culling chickens during the 2014-15 epidemic was to pump carbon dioxide into poultry barns. For turkeys, the common approach was to cover the birds with a water-based foam. The 2016 report said producers needed an average of 15.4 days to depopulate layer flocks "due to flock size and difficult conditions." Was this page helpful? Thanks for your feedback! Tell us why! Other Submit Related Articles USDA Confident of Eradicating Virus, Although Bird Flu Count Keeps Climbing Bird Flu in 7% of Unprotected Farmworkers Exposed to Infected Dairy Cows, Says CDC Secretary Vilsack Discusses Pure Prairie Poultry Closure, Bird Flu Dairy Testing Program Bird Flu Found in Eight Dairy Herds in Utah, 15th State Two Additional Human Cases of Bird Flu Boost U.S. Total to 41 Poultry Workers Treated for Avian Flu Infections in Washington State Bird Flu: 20 People Ill, 300 Herds Infected Since March State and Industry Input Led U.S. Farm Agency to Relax Bird Flu Testing Order for Cows Oregon Identifies 3 Human Cases of Bird Flu in Farm Workers From Washington State U.S. Detects H5N1 Bird Flu in a Pig for the First Time U.S. to Begin Bulk Milk Testing for Bird Flu After Push from Industry Five California Farmworkers Have Mild Cases of Bird Flu, Says State Iowa Culls Over a Million Broiler Chickens Following Legal Roadblocks GOP Lawmakers Demand USDA Responses to Pure Prairie Poultry Situation USDA: Slowdown in Detections Suggests Bird Flu Is Being Contained in Cattle Latest Developments on Avian Flu Virus in Dairy Cattle Successful Farming Newsletters Follow Us News Markets Machinery Crops Farm Management Livestock Family About Us Subscribe Editorial Process Advertise Privacy Policy Careers Terms of Service Contact Us Diversity & Inclusion Successful Farming is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Newsletter Sign Up Newsletter Sign UpInverse relationship identified between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Inverse relationship identified between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections Download PDF Copy By Suchandrima BhowmikReviewed by Benedette Cuffari, M.Sc.Jun 1 2022 The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has imposed operational burdens on infectious disease epidemiology, thus preventing their routine monitoring. Despite these challenges, continuous surveillance of the influenza virus is required for the production of new vaccines each year. The symptoms of both COVID-19 and influenza are quite similar, as both the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and the influenza virus target the respiratory system. A notable difference between these two viruses is that SARS-CoV-2 uses the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor on epithelial and endothelial cells to gain entry, while the influenza virus uses sialic acid groups on surface glycoproteins of epithelial cells. Study: Epidemiological Interactions of Influenza and SARS-CoV-2 within a University Population During Omicron B.1.1.529 Outbreak. Image Credit: Adao / Shutterstock.com*Important notice: medRxiv publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information. A new study published on the preprint server medRxiv* identifies the potential correlations that exist between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections. About the study The current study involved the collection of anterior nasal swabs from both symptomatic and non-symptomatic individuals at separate facilities. Individuals who were experiencing COVID-19 symptoms, as well as those who came in close contact with an individual who was positive for COVID-19, were required to submit their samples at the symptomatic site. A multiplex reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assay was carried out to monitor the incidence of COVID-19, Influenza A, and Influenza B among symptomatic individuals. Study findings A total of 3,065 individuals were tested between November 1, 2021, and February 28, 2022. The first Influenza A case was detected on November 4, 2021, during which the average weekly prevalence rate was 13.62%. Between December 27, 2021, and January 7, 2022, a sharp decrease in Influenza A cases at a rate of 12.5% was observed, while SARS-CoV-2 cases increased at a rate of 3.75%. Notably, the rapid spread of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron B.1.1.529 variant was associated with the reduced incidence of influenza cases. A) Seven-day averages for RT-qPCR testing collected from symptomatic individuals; tests collected, grey, reactive for SARS-CoV-2, blue, reactive for Flu A, red. B) Positivity rate for symptomatic cohort from November 1st, 2021,. to February 28th, 2022; SARS-CoV-2, blue; Flu A. red. C) Cumulative growth rates for seven-day averages of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza incidence in symptomatic cohort from November 1st. 2021. to February 28th, 2022; SARS-CoV-2. blue; Flu A. red. D) Totals of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron (B.1.1.529) variant determination via S-gcnc target failure (SGTF) for symptomatic population from September 14th, 2021, to February 28th 2022; SARS-CoV-2, blue; SGTF, orange, n=172. The current study indicated an inverse relationship between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection cases. Thus, healthcare providers must employ more complete respiratory panels to monitor strain dominance and the prevalence of coinfections with both viruses. *Important notice: medRxiv publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information. Journal reference: Preliminary scientific report. Malampy, R. C., Ganz, T. J., DeOliveira, G. M., et al. (2022). Epidemiological Interactions of Influenza and SARS-CoV-2 within a University Population During Omicron B.1.1.529 Outbreak. medRxiv. doi: 10.1101/2022.05.26.22275641. https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.05.26.22275641v1. Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Medical Condition News | Disease/Infection News Tags: ACE2, Angiotensin, Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2, Assay, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Enzyme, Epidemiology, Flu, Healthcare, Influenza, Omicron, Pandemic, Polymerase, Polymerase Chain Reaction, Receptor, Respiratory, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Transcription, Virus Comments (0) Written bySuchandrima BhowmikSuchandrima has a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) degree in Microbiology and a Master of Science (M.Sc.) degree in Microbiology from the University of Calcutta, India. The study of health and diseases was always very important to her. In addition to Microbiology, she also gained extensive knowledge in Biochemistry, Immunology, Medical Microbiology, Metabolism, and Biotechnology as part of her master's degree. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APABhowmik, Suchandrima. (2022, June 01). Inverse relationship identified between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220601/Inverse-relationship-identified-between-SARS-CoV-2-and-influenza-infections.aspx.MLABhowmik, Suchandrima. "Inverse relationship identified between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220601/Inverse-relationship-identified-between-SARS-CoV-2-and-influenza-infections.aspx>.ChicagoBhowmik, Suchandrima. "Inverse relationship identified between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220601/Inverse-relationship-identified-between-SARS-CoV-2-and-influenza-infections.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardBhowmik, Suchandrima. 2022. Inverse relationship identified between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220601/Inverse-relationship-identified-between-SARS-CoV-2-and-influenza-infections.aspx. Suggested Reading Research identifies respiratory transmission potential of H5N1 virusSeasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsUnraveling the mechanism of Shufeng Jiedu Capsules in influenza treatmentGenetic risk factors for long-COVID uncovered in a large multi-ethnic studyCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.SARS-CoV-2 hijacks host proteins to escape immune clearance Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Medical Device (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × One in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19How effective are face masks against the flu? Will wearing a mask stop me from getting the flu? What can I do to avoid getting sick? - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeHow effective are face masks against the flu? Will wearing a mask stop me from getting the flu? What can I do to avoid getting sick?Share How effective are face masks against the flu? Will wearing a mask stop me from getting the flu? What can I do to avoid getting sick?By Ciara JonesTopic:InfluenzaThu 2 Jun 2022Thursday 2 June 2022Thu 2 Jun 2022 at 7:49pmDisplay captionAs flu cases skyrocket, face masks are needed to help protect people infected with virus from spreading it to others. (Pixabay)abc.net.auews/qld-flu-season-how-effective-are-face-masks-against-influenza/101120326Link copiedShareShare articleFlu season has well and truly arrived in Australia and is shaping to be one of the worst in years as case numbers continue to climb.It can be a nasty illness, and coupled with COVID-19, which is still circulating in the community, it's already putting a strain on the nation's hospital and health services.Some health experts, including Queensland's deputy chief health officer, have called on people to consider wearing face masks in public again to reduce the spread of influenza and COVID. Masks have been an essential tool throughout the pandemic in stopping the spread of the virus – so can they do the same with the flu?Will wearing a mask stop me from getting the flu?Not necessarily.Queensland University of Technology professor of public health and disaster management Gerry FitzGerald said masks can certainly offer some protection in reducing the spread of influenza, but are more effective if you're already infected.Queenslanders are bracing for what looks likely to be an unprecedented flu season. (ABC News: Kym Agius)"The masks that are generally available don't provide a lot of protection to the individual due to their lightweight material," he said."They do help protect people… who have influenza or if they don't know they've got it."When you breathe out, the majority of viral particles that you breathe out are… larger."[When your face is covered], that reduces the likelihood of them [infected people] spreading it to non-infected people."The flu is spread easily, mainly through sneezing and coughing.Professor FitzGerald said masks' effectiveness also depends on what kind you wear and how you wear it.More on that soon.Where should I wear a mask?Face masks are required at all airports and on public transport. (Pexels/Anna Shvets)Professor Fitzgerald said people should certainly wear a mask in the following settings:HospitalsAged care homesDisability facilities AirportsOn public transportIn "congested" areas"Influenza is a less serious disease than COVID-19 but it is nevertheless serious… and it does cause a number of deaths every year," Professor FitzGerald said."So in terms of protection from the flu, in high-risk settings, or where social distancing isn't possible, definitely [you should wear a mask]."The quick answer is – if you're in circumstances where it's difficult to keep a distance from others, it's worth considering wearing a mask."What mask should I wear?N95 masks provide more protection than surgical masks. (ABC Kimberley: Andrew Seaborne)A face mask can be a reusable cloth face mask or a single-use surgical mask, which includes a P2 or N95 mask.For it to be effective, it must cover your nose and mouth and fit snugly under your chin, over the bridge of your nose and against the sides of your face.Surgical masks can block other people's respiratory droplets from being released when a person breathes, talks, coughs or sneezes, however they have some design flaws and should only be worn once."Many of the surgical masks are not designed properly to actually capture and prevent viruses," Professor FitzGerald said.How to book a free influenza vaccine in Queensland Photo shows An image of a woman with a mask getting a vaccine administeredHow to book a free influenza vaccine in Queensland.N95 masks are standard in infection-control hospital wards and high-risk medical environments.Professor FitzGerald said N95 masks do provide more protection but are more challenging to wear."There are higher-grade masks… N95 is the common one… but the difficultly with those is they are a bit harder to breathe through," he said."And they have to be applied carefully and changed frequently."Ultimately, you should wear a mask that fits well and that you can wear properly.A scarf, bandana, face shield, snood or piece of fabric is not considered an acceptable alternative for a mask.What else can I do to protect myself?QUT professor of public health and disaster management Gerry FitzGerald says regular hand washing, physical distancing and keeping rooms well ventilated are also helpful strategies. (Supplied: QUT)Ultimately, when it comes to the flu, experts say vaccination is the single best preventative measure.Queensland, Victoria, Western Australia, South Australia and New South Wales are all offering free influenza vaccinations, in response to rising case numbers."The principal thing people can do is get vaccinated," Professor Fitzgerald said."Everybody should be trying to get their flu vaccine for this year… that will provide the best level of protection."[Qld local edition teaser]While a mask can be used as an extra precaution, frequent hand washing, physical distancing and keeping rooms well ventilated remain effective tools to prevent the flu, COVID and other viral infections."It's about being careful – staying away from congested areas if possible… wearing masks on public transport and high-risk environments… and social distancing," Professor FitzGerald said.Infectious diseases physician Paul Griffin urged people with disabilities and chronic diseases to also wear a mask in public areas and to try and avoid high-risk settings."For example, if there's a plan for a large gathering, trying to hold it outdoors and focus on ventilation… with open windows, air purifiers," Dr Griffin said."Those sort of things to reduce risks."Posted Thu 2 Jun 2022 at 7:49pmThursday 2 Jun 2022 at 7:49pmThu 2 Jun 2022 at 7:49pm, updated Fri 3 Jun 2022 at 2:23amFriday 3 Jun 2022 at 2:23amFri 3 Jun 2022 at 2:23amShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasPhoto shows Three images in a composite including a man in glasses, an man with orange makeup and another man in glassesAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPhoto shows Workplace surveillancePrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesPhoto shows A young solider. Tax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsPhoto shows Richard Boyle speaks to supporters outside court.Related storiesFlu and COVID threaten a double-whammy winter with pleas for Queenslanders to wear masks againTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A young woman in a face maskRelated topicsBrisbaneHendra Virus InfectionInfluenzaTop StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesTax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsJust InLynn Cannon was brutally murdered by estranged partner, now inquest examines police response to call for helpTopic:Domestic Violence18m ago18 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:53amJumbo-sized delivery to get peak-hour police escort to Monarto ZooTopic:Feel Good25m ago25 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:46am'We obviously don't care about losing': Michael Clarke criticises players being rested during series loss to PakistanTopic:Cricket1h ago1 hours agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 6:50amEncouraging more students to do the ATAR recommended by review of WA high school system Topic:Secondary Education1h ago1 hours agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 6:44amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCStaphylococcus aureus specific lung resident memory CD4+ Th1 cells attenuate the severity of influenza virus induced secondary bacterial pneumonia | Mucosal Immunology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature mucosal immunology articles article NB: AS OF JANUARY 1, 2023 THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED WITH ELSEVIER: https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/mucosal-immunology Staphylococcus aureus specific lung resident memory CD4+ Th1 cells attenuate the severity of influenza virus induced secondary bacterial pneumonia Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 30 May 2022 Staphylococcus aureus specific lung resident memory CD4+ Th1 cells attenuate the severity of influenza virus induced secondary bacterial pneumonia Jessica Braverman1 na1, Ian R. Monk1 na1, Chenghao Ge1,2, Glen P. Westall3, Timothy P. Stinear1 & …Linda M. Wakim ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1752-95791 Show authors Mucosal Immunology volume 15, pages 783–796 (2022)Cite this article 2703 Accesses 10 Citations 8 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractStaphylococcus aureus is a major cause of severe pulmonary infections. The evolution of multi-drug resistant strains limits antibiotic treatment options. To date, all candidate vaccines tested have failed, highlighting the need for an increased understanding of the immunological requirements for effective S. aureus immunity. Using an S. aureus strain engineered to express a trackable CD4+ T cell epitope and a murine model of S. aureus pneumonia, we show strategies that lodge Th1 polarised bacterium specific CD4+ tissue resident memory T cells (Trm) in the lung can significantly attenuate the severity of S. aureus pneumonia. This contrasts natural infection of mice that fails to lodge CD4+ Trm cells along the respiratory tract or provide protection against re-infection, despite initially generating Th17 bacterium specific CD4+ T cell responses. Interestingly, lack of CD4+ Trm formation after natural infection in mice appears to be reflected in humans, where the frequency of S. aureus reactive CD4+ Trm cells in lung tissue is also low. Our findings reveal the protective capacity of S. aureus specific respiratory tract CD4+ Th1 polarised Trm cells and highlight the potential for targeting these cells in vaccines that aim to prevent the development of S. aureus pneumonia. Similar content being viewed by others Innate immune responses at the asymptomatic stage of influenza A viral infections of Streptococcus pneumoniae colonized and non-colonized mice Article Open access 18 October 2021 Bacterial-induced or passively administered interferon gamma conditions the lung for early control of SARS-CoV-2 Article Open access 12 December 2023 Limited induction of polyfunctional lung-resident memory T cells against SARS-CoV-2 by mRNA vaccination compared to infection Article Open access 05 April 2023 IntroductionStaphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive bacterium, that persistently colonises up to 30% of the human population. Despite being able to exist as a benign human commensal, S. aureus is also a versatile human pathogen, causing a diverse array of life-threatening infections, including endocarditis, osteomyelitis, necrotizing pneumonia, and septic shock1,2. Pulmonary S. aureus infections are a substantial public health concern; they have a very high case fatality rate and are the leading cause of nosocomial pneumonia and secondary bacterial pneumonia following influenza A virus infection. The clinical management of staphylococcal lung infections is complicated by widespread antibiotic resistance present in this bacterium3, and as antibiotics are currently the only available therapy, treatment failures are becoming increasingly common (10–30% mortality rate)4,5. An effective vaccine against S. aureus, including drug-resistant strains, would save lives and offer a potential solution to the epidemic of antibiotic resistance.To date, all efforts to develop an S. aureus vaccine have been unsuccessful. While antibody-based vaccines targeting polysaccharide or protein antigens are highly protective against diseases caused by many bacterial pathogens (including Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae type b, and Neisseria meningitidis6,7), this type of vaccine has so far proven to be ineffective against S. aureus8. The failure of antibody-based vaccines in the prevention of S. aureus infections has brought into question the immunological requirements for effective S. aureus defence. Evidence from both mouse and human studies support a role for memory CD4+ T cells in the development of protective immunity against invasive S. aureus infections9,10,11,12. Despite the growing evidence demonstrating that memory CD4+ T cells can contribute to protective immunity against S. aureus infections, the subset and polarity of the memory CD4+ T cell pool mediating this bacterial control, and whether these change if the infection is systemic or localised in nature, remains unclear.Memory T cells can be segregated into three subsets: two circulating T cell subsets, termed central (Tcm) and effector memory T cells (Tem), and a noncirculating memory T cell pool that is resident within peripheral tissues (Trm). Resident memory T cells represent a population of self-sustaining memory T cells that are deposited in most organs (brain, intestine, female reproductive tract, salivary glands, lung, skin, and liver)13,14,15,16,17 and have been shown to be an essential component of immune defence against an array of pulmonary viral (influenza, RSV, SARs-CoV-1)18,19,20,21,22 and bacterial infections (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Bordetella pertussis, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Mycobacterium tuberculosis)23,24,25. Marked by the expression of CD69 and, in some cases CD103, these cells orchestrate local recall responses, rapidly gaining effector function26,27 and facilitating the accelerated recruitment of circulating immune cells to the site of infection28,29,30. Here, using an S. aureus strain we engineered to express a trackable CD4+ T cell epitope and a murine model of S. aureus pneumonia31, we set out to map the bacterium specific CD4+ T cell response and identify the subset and polarity of the memory CD4+ T cell pool capable of providing protection against S. aureus pneumonia. Our findings reveal the protective capacity S. aureus specific respiratory tract CD4+ Th1 polarised Trm cells and highlight the potential for targeting these cells in vaccines that aim to prevent the development of S. aureus pneumonia.ResultsRecombinant S. aureus engineered to express HSV-1 glycoprotein D (gD) epitope activates gDT-2 CD4+ TCR transgenic T cellsTo explore the role of CD4+ T cell immunity in the control of S. aureus infection we generated a recombinant S. aureus strain that expresses a CD4+ T cell epitope derived from herpes simplex virus (HSV) glycoprotein D (gD315-327) (Fig. 1a) and tracked the CD4+ T cell response using T cell receptor (TCR) transgenic CD4+ gDT-2 cells which are specific for class II–restricted HSV gD32. This approach was necessary as endogenous S. aureus CD4+ T cell epitopes are currently undefined. We firstly confirmed that the gD expressing S. aureus, referred to hereafter as, JKD6159-gD could trigger gDT-2 CD4+ T cell activation, as measured by an in vitro antigen presentation assay. Splenic dendritic cells (DCs) and carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE) labelled gDT-2 CD4+ T cells were cultured together with varying doses of heat killed JKD6159-gD, or as a control, the parental JKD6159 strain. The expansion of the gDT-2 CD4+ T cells was assessed 60 h post culture by the dilution of the CFSE dye. As shown in Fig. 1b, c, gDT-2 CD4+ T cells divided in a dose dependent manner when cultured with JKD6159-gD bacteria, and importantly, these transgenic T cells remained undivided following exposure to the parental JKD5159 strain. Next, we checked whether DCs sort-purified from the cervical (cLN) and mediastinal (mLN) lymph nodes, which drain the upper and lower respiratory tract respectively, recovered from mice infected intranasally 1–4 days prior with JKD6159-gD, could stimulate CD4+ gDT-2 cell proliferation directly ex vivo. The CD11b+ DC subset isolated from the mLN on days 3–4 post JKD6159-gD infection activated gDT-2 CD4+ T cells directly ex vivo (Fig. 1d–f). This observation is in line with other studies demonstrating that CD11b+ (cDC2) DCs perform most of the class-II presentation33,34. To examine whether JKD6159-gD could activate gDT-2 CD4+ T cells in vivo, CFSE labelled congenically marked (CD45.1+) gDT-2 T cells were transferred into C57BL/6 (CD45.2) mice prior to intranasal JKD6159-gD infection. By day 5 p.i. sizable populations of divided gDT-2 CD4+ T cells (CFSElo) were detected in the spleen, mLN and cLN (Fig. 1g) and these cells where largely IL-17 producing Th17 (Fig. 1h, i).Fig. 1: Recombinant S. aureus engineered to express HSV-1 glycoprotein D (gD) activates gDT-2 CD4+ TCR transgenic T cells.a Schematic of the JKD6159-gD bacteria. A fusion protein (gD-SD) was expressed from the Protein A promoter (Pspa) and secreted from the S. aureus cell via the N-terminal Protein A signal sequence (SS). gD-SD comprises the HSV-1 glycoprotein D epitope (amino acids 315–327) fused to the serine – aspartic acid repeats and LPDTG sortase A motif (cell wall cross linked) from the surface protein ClfA (amino acids 553–933). The construct was integrated into the attB site between the isdB – rpmF genes on the chromosome of JKD6159, yielding strain JKD6159-gD. b, c JKD6159-gD activates gDT-2 CD4+ T cells in vitro. 5 × 104 CFSE labelled gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells and 1 × 104 splenic dendritic cells were cultured with varying doses (103-107 CFU) of heat-killed S. aureus (parental JKD6159 or the recombinant JKD6159-gD strain engineered to express the gD epitope from HSV-1) and the proportion of divided gDT-2 CD4+ T cells was measured 60 h later. b Representative flow cytometry profiles of gDT-2 CD4+ T cells showing levels of CFSE. c The graph depicts the absolute number of divided (CFSElo) gDT-2 CD4+ T cells. Symbols represent the mean ± SEM. Data representative of 3 independent experiments. d–f CD11b+ DCs in the mLN present bacterial antigen following intranasal JKD6159-gD infection. Proliferation of CFSE-labelled gDT-2 CD4+ T cells cultured for 60 h together with CD11b+ and XCR1+ DCs (identified as shown in d) isolated from the (e) cLN or (f) mLN of mice that received an intranasal total respiratory tract (TRT) infection 1–4 days earlier with 108 CFU of JKD6159-gD. Data pooled from three experiments per time point. Symbols represent means ± SEM (two-way ANOVA, Sidak’s multiple comparison). g–i Intranasal infection with JKD6159-gD primes CD4+ Th17 cells. C57BL/6 (CD45.2) mice injected with 1 × 106 CFSE labelled naïve gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells and that received an intranasal infection (TRT) with 108 CFU JKD6159-gD were sacrificed 5 days later and the absolute number of divided gDT-2 CD4+ T cells (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+CFSElo) in the mLN, cLN and spleen was measured. Bars represent the mean ± SEM (n = 5). The result is a combination of 2 independent experiments (h) Representative flow cytometry profiles gated on gDT-2 CD4+ T cells isolated from the mLN showing intracellular levels of IL-17 and IFNγ following a brief in vitro stimulation. i The proportion of CD4+ gDT-2 T cells in the mLN generating IFNγ or IL-17. Bars represent the mean ± SEM (n = 7 mice per group). The result is a combination of two independent experiments (student t test).Full size imageIntranasal infection with S. aureus activates bacterium specific CD4+ effector T cells that fail to convert into respiratory tract tissue resident CD4+ T cell memoryTo track the S. aureus specific CD4+ T cell response mounted following a pulmonary infection, gDT-2 CD45.1+ T cells were transferred into C57BL/6 recipient mice (CD45.2+) prior to an intranasal infection with JKD6159-gD and the number of gDT-2 CD4+ T cells (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+) in both lymphoid and respiratory tissue was measured over time. Intranasal infection with JKD6159-gD resulted in gDT-2 CD4+ T cell activation predominately within the mLN, these cells where then released into the circulation and by day 7 p.i gDT-2 CD4+ T cells were detectable in both the lung and nasal tissue (Fig. 2a–f). gDT-2 CD4+ T cells in the nasal tissue and lung continued to accumulate up until day 14 p.i., at which point numbers of gDT-2 cells in the upper and lower respiratory tract declined, and by day 21 p.i very few gDT-2 CD4+ T cell remained within these tissue compartments (Fig. 2e, f). Subset analysis of the gDT-2 cells in the lung and nasal tissue revealed that a fraction did express the resident memory T cell marker CD69, but these CD69+ gDT-2 CD4+ T cells were not retained within these tissues (Fig. 2g, h). Moreover, a secondary intranasal boost with JKD6159-gD did not significantly improve the size of the memory T cell pool in the circulation or the tissue compartments (Fig S1). These findings are in line with previous studies that show that S. aureus infection evokes poor memory T cell responses35.Fig. 2: Intranasal infection with S. aureus activates bacterium specific CD4+ effector T cells that fail to convert into tissue resident CD4+ T cell memory.a–h Intranasal infection with JKD6159-gD generates poor CD4+ T cell memory. C57BL/6 (CD45.2) mice injected with 5 × 104 naïve gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells and that received an intranasal infection (TRT) with 108 CFU JKD6159-gD were sacrificed at days 5, 7, 14, and 21 post infection. a Representative flow cytometry profiles depict the gating strategy to identify gDT-2 CD4+ T cells (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+) and gDT-2 CD4+ tissue resident memory (Trm) (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+CD69+). The absolute number of total gDT-2 CD4+ T cells in the (b) spleen (c) cLN (d) mLN (e) lung, and (f) nose and the absolute number of gDT-2 CD4+ Trm in the (g) lung and (h) nose was measured. Symbols represent the mean ± SEM (n = 6 mice per time point). The result is a combination of two independent experiments (two-way ANOVA, Sidak’s multiple comparison). i–j Primary infection with S. aureus does not provide protection against secondary S. aureus challenge. Naïve C57BL/6 mice (1o infection) or C57BL/6 mice infected intranasally (TRT) 21 days earlier with 108 CFU of JKD6159 (2o infection) were intranasally infected (TRT) with 108 CFU of JKD6159 and at days 1–3 post infection the bacterial load in the (i) nose and (j) lung was measured. Symbols represent individual mice (n = 7–12 mice per timepoint) and the bars represent the mean ± SEM. The result is a combination of four independent experiments (two-way ANOVA, Sidak’s multiple comparison). Dotted line indicates the limit of detection.Full size imageNext, we checked whether this impairment in the development of a sizable bacterium specific memory CD4+ T cell pool left animals vulnerable to reinfection. Mice infected intranasally with 108 CFU of S. aureus JKD6159 were rested for 21 days and then reinfected via the same route with the same dose of JKD6159 and the bacterial loads in the nose and lung were measured (Fig. 2I, j). The bacterial loads in the nose and lung tissue of re-infected animals matched the bacterial loads present in animals undergoing a primary infection, which suggests a primary infection with S. aureus does not induce protective immunity. Collectively, these data show that primary infection with S. aureus fails to evoke protective immunity and this correlates with an impairment in the persistence of S. aureus specific memory CD4+ T cells along the airways.Bacterium specific memory CD4+ T cells attenuate S. aureus pneumoniaWe next asked, if present in significant quantities, can S. aureus specific CD4+ memory T cells attenuate a pulmonary bacterial infection. To generate animals with a sizable pool of both circulating and respiratory tract resident S. aureus reactive CD4+ memory T cells, we seeded mice with gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells and infected them intranasally with HSV-1; this virus endogenously expresses the gD315-327 epitope and thus will trigger the activation of CD4+ gDT-2 cells. Intranasal infection with HSV-1 resulted in an acute viral infection of the airways, and infectious virus is cleared from this tissue by ~7 days post infection (Fig. 3a, b). Following the resolution of the pulmonary HSV-1 infection large populations of effector gDT-2 CD4+ T cells infiltrated the lung and nasal tissue and at early (day 21 p.i.) and late (day 42 p.i.) memory time points, gDT-2 CD4+ T cells were still detectable in the spleen, nose and lung (Fig. 3c, d). Subset analysis of the memory CD4+ T cells in the lung and nose revealed that the majority of memory CD4+ gDT-2 cells retained in these tissues expressed the CD69 Trm marker (Fig. 3e), were CD44hi but CD103lo, were located in the parenchyma (Fig S2a) and, following a brief in vitro stimulation, synthesized IFNγ (Fig. 3f, g). To test whether these memory gDT-2 CD4+ T cells could confer protection against JKD6159-gD infection, naïve mice, or mice primed 21 days earlier with HSV-1, were challenged intranasally with JKD6159-gD and bacterial loads in the lung and nasal tissue were measured from days 1–7 p.i. While we observed no difference in bacterial loads or clearance rate of S. aureus in the nasal tissue between the two cohorts, the HSV-1 primed group more rapidly eradicated S. aureus from the lung (Fig. 3h, i) and this coincided with a rapid influx of CD4+ memory T cells into the airways (Fig S2b). On day 1 p.i. 10-fold less bacteria were detected in the lungs of HSV-1 primed mice compared to naïve controls. By day 2 p.i. all HSV-1 primed mice had eliminated the bacteria from the lung, while 84% of naïve mice still contained S. aureus in the lung at this time point (Fig. 3i). This enhanced clearance of bacteria from the lung tissue was antigen specific, as when HSV-1 primed mice were challenged with the parental S. aureus strain, which lacks the gD epitope, no attenuation in lung bacterial load was observed (Fig S2c, d). Moreover, when HSV-1 primed mice were challenged with a high dose of JKD6159-gD (4 × 108 CFU), which results in 50% of naïve animals succumbing to infection within 24 h of inoculation, all of the HSV-1 primed animals survived the challenge (Fig S2e). These data show that S. aureus reactive CD4+ memory T cells facilitate the rapid clearance of the bacteria from the lung.Fig. 3: Bacterium specific memory CD4+ T cells attenuate S. aureus pneumonia.a, b Intranasal HSV-1 infection results in acute infection of the upper and lower airways. C57BL/6 mice received an intranasal infection (TRT) with 106 PFU HSV-1 (SC16) and at the indicated days post infection the viral load in the nose and lung was measured. Symbols represent individual mice (n = 5 mice per timepoint) and the bars represent the mean ± SEM. The result is a combination of two independent experiments (c–g) gDT-2 CD4 Trm are deposited in the lung and nose following intranasal HSV-1 infection. C57BL/6 (CD45.2) mice injected with 5 × 104 naïve gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells and that received an intranasal (TRT) infection with 106 PFU HSV-1 (SC16) were sacrificed at day 7, 21, and 42 post infection. c Representative flow cytometry profiles at day 21 p.i. depict the gating strategy to identify gDT-2 CD4+ Trm (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+CD69+) (d) The absolute number of total gDT-2 CD4+ T cells (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+) in the spleen, lung and nose and (e) the absolute number of gDT-2.CD4+ Trm (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+CD69+) in the lung and nose was measured. Symbols represent the mean ± SEM (n = 5–7 mice per time point). The result is a combination of 4 independent experiments. f Representative flow cytometry profiles gated on gDT-2 CD4+ T cells isolated from the lung and spleen showing intracellular levels of IL-17 and IFNγ following a brief in vitro stimulation with gD peptide. g The proportion of CD4+ gDT-2 T cells in the spleen or lung generating IFNγ or IL-17. Bars represent the mean ± SEM (n = 4–5 mice per group). The result is a combination of two independent experiments (one-way ANOVA, Sidak’s multiple comparison). h, i Memory CD4+ gDT-2 cells are protective against pulmonary S. aureus infection. Naïve C57BL/6 mice (Naive) or C57BL/6 mice infected intranasally (TRT) 21 days earlier with 106 PFU of HSV-1 were infected intranasally (TRT) with 108 CFU of JKD6159-gD and at days 1–7 post infection the bacterial load in the (h) nose and (i) lung was measured. Symbols represent individual mice (n = 5–9 mice per timepoint) and the bars represent the mean ± SEM. The result is a combination of two independent experiments (student t test).Full size imageDifferences in T cell homing molecule expression, polarity and pulmonary inflammation following infection with HSV-1 and S. aureus Intranasal infection with HSV-1 results in the recruitment of a sizable pool of effector gDT-2 CD4+ T cells into the lung and nasal tissue and the retention of gDT-2 CD4+ Trm along the respiratory tract. In contrast, the delivery of S. aureus JKD6159-gD via the same route resulted in poor seeding and retention of gDT-2 CD4+ Trm in the lung and nasal tissue. We next explored whether these differences in CD4+ T cell recruitment and retention following infection with these two pathogens could be explained by the development of CD4+ T cells with different polarities and/or the expression of different chemokine receptors required for T cell trafficking into the respiratory tissue. Mice seeded with CFSE labelled gDT-2 CD45.1+ T cells were infected intranasally with either 106 PFU of HSV-1 or 108 CFU of JKD6159-gD. On day 4 p.i., the mLN were recovered and the divided gDT-2 CD4+T cells (CFSElo) were assessed for intracellular IFNγ and IL-17 levels, and the expression of a panel of chemokine receptors/homing molecules known to facilitate T cell trafficking to the lung including, CD62L, CXCR3, and CCR636. Infection with HSV-1 resulted in the generation of predominately IFNγ producing Th1 cells, and assessment of the divided cells (CFSElo) revealed that 78% downregulated CD62L, 5% upregulated CCR6, while 70% upregulated CXCR3 (Fig. 4a–c). In contrast, following infection with JKD6159-gD, activated CD4+ T cells were predominantly IL-17 producing Th17, and of the divided cells, 40% downregulated CD62L, 26% upregulated CCR6, while only 20% upregulated CXCR3 (Fig. 4a–c). Hence infection with S. aureus and HSV-1 triggers the activation of CD4+ T cells with different polarities and varying levels of expression of homing receptors linked to migration into inflamed lung tissue36. An assessment of the expression of a panel of chemokines in lung tissue homogenates of mice on days 2 and 5 post infection revealed that while both S. aureus and HSV-1 infection triggered the expression of CCL4, CXCL9, and CXCL10, by day 5 p.i., only CXCL9, which elicits its chemotactic function by interacting with CXCR3, was still elevated in the lung tissue in both infection models (Fig. 4d, e). We also measured the levels of a panel of inflammatory cytokines/chemokines in lung tissue homogenates by cytometric bead array and observed that while both pathogens initially triggered the production of most of the inflammatory cytokines/chemokines tested, by day 5 p.i., inflammation was largely resolved in the S. aureus infected mice, while several pro-inflammatory molecules (IFNγ, IL-10, IL-12, CXCL1, CXCL10, TNFα) remained significantly elevated in the HSV-1 infected lung tissue (Fig. 4f). These data show that intranasal S. aureus infection evokes transient pulmonary inflammation and the generation of effector CD4+ T cells that express chemokine receptors which do not match the chemotactic profile generated in the S. aureus infected lung tissue. Collectively, this may in part explain the poor recruitment and ultimate retention of S. aureus specific CD4+ T cells in the lung following bacterial infection.Fig. 4: Lung inflammatory profile and CD4+ T cell polarity evoked following pulmonary S. aureus and HSV-1 infection.C57BL/6 (CD45.2) mice injected with 1 × 106 CFSE labelled naïve gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells and that received an intranasal infection (TRT) with either 108 CFU JKD6159-gD or 106 PFU HSV-1 were sacrificed 4 days later and the proportion of divided gDT-2 CD4+ T cells (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+CFSElo) in the mLN expressing CD62L, CXCR3, and CCR6 was measured. a Representative flow cytometry profiles gated on gDT-2 CD4+ T cells isolated from the mLN showing intracellular levels of IL-17 and IFNγ following a brief in vitro stimulation. b Representative flow cytometry profiles gated on gDT-2 CD4+ T cells isolated from the mLN showing the level of expression of the indicated markers (c) Graph shows the proportion of divided cells that are CCR6+, CD62L−, or CXCR3+. Bars represent the mean ± SEM (n = 6–7). The results are a combination of three independent experiments (two-way ANOVA, Sidak’s multiple comparison). d, e C57BL/6 mice were intranasally infected (TRT) with 108 CFU of S. aureus (JKD6159-gD) or 106 PFU HSV-1 and (d) 2 days and (e) 5 days later the expression level of a panel of chemokines in lung tissue homogenates was measured by RT-PCR. Bars represent the mean fold change in expression relative to naïve lung tissue ± SEM (n = 5 mice per group). Data are pooled from two independent experiments (two-way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison). f C57BL/6 mice were intranasally infected (TRT) with 108 CFU of S. aureus (JKD6159-gD) or 106 PFU HSV-1 and 2 or 5 days later the level of a panel of cytokines/chemokines in lung tissue homogenates was measured by cytometric bead array. Symbols represent the mean ± SEM (n = 5 mice per group). Data are pooled from 2 independent experiments (two-way ANOVA, Sidak’s multiple comparison).Full size imageBacterium specific respiratory tract CD4+ Trm limit the severity of influenza virus induced S. aureus pneumoniaThe data in Fig. 3 shows that S. aureus reactive CD4+ memory T cells facilitates S. aureus clearance from the lung. To determine whether circulating memory T cells or pulmonary CD4+ Trm were responsible for this enhanced clearance of S. aureus from the lung tissue, we generated mice with either circulating memory CD4+ T cells or circulating and lung Trm CD4+ T cells and checked whether these animals were protected against pulmonary S. aureus infection. Mice seeded with in vitro activated effector gDT-2 CD4+ T cells were immunised intranasally with gD peptide plus adjuvant (LPS), or alternatively, given adjuvant alone and were then rested for 20 days (Fig. 5a). Measuring the absolute number of gDT-2 memory CD4+ T cells in the spleen and lung 20 days after the final immunisation showed that while both cohorts had similar numbers of memory gDT-2 CD4+ T cells in the spleen, the gD-peptide immunized mice had 8-fold more total gDT-2 CD4+ T cells in the lung (Fig. 5b) and 17.5 fold more gDT-2 CD4+ Trm in this site compared to the cohort that received adjuvant alone (Fig. 5c). This is in line with previous reports that show lung Trm development is significantly boosted by local cognate antigen recognition19,37. Moreover, assessment of the cytokine profile revealed the gD-peptide immunisation also significantly boosted the proportion of IFNγ producing gDT-2 CD4+ T cells in the lung tissue (Fig. 5d, e).Fig. 5: Bacteria specific respiratory tract CD4+ Th1 polarised Trm limit the severity of influenza virus induced S. aureus pneumonia.a–e Intranasal immunisation with gD peptide generates respiratory tract gDT-2 CD4+ Trm. C57BL/6 (CD45.2) mice injected with 5 × 106 in vitro activated gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells were inoculated at day 0 and day 7 via the intranasal route with 1 μg LPS with or without 30 μg gD peptide. a Schematic of the experimental timeline. At day 28 post immunisation the (b) absolute number of total gDT-2 CD4+ T cells (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+) in the spleen and lung and (c) the absolute number of gDT-2 CD4+ Trm (CD4+Va3.2+CD45.1+CD69+) in the lung was measured. Symbols represent individual mice, and the line represents the mean ± SEM (n = 10–13 mice per group). The result is a combination of four independent experiments (two-way ANOVA, Sidak’s multiple comparison). d, e The proportion of CD4+ gDT-2 T cells in the spleen and lung generating (d) IFNγ and (e) IL-17 following a brief in vitro stimulation. Bars represent the mean ± SEM (n = 9 mice per group). The result is a combination of three independent experiments (two-way ANOVA, Sidak’s multiple comparison). f–j Lodging bacterium specific CD4+ Trm along the respiratory tract limits the severity of influenza induced S. aureus pneumonia. Mice generated as described in a and a cohort of naïve animals (Nil) were intranasally infected (TRT) with 104 PFU influenza virus (X31, H3N2) and 2 days later, were infected intranasally (TRT) with 108 CFU of JKD6159-gD. f, g Fluorescent microscopy (x20 magnification) on lung tissue sections of mice on days 2 post S. aureus infection with CD3 (blue), S. aureus (purple) and DAPI staining. h The graph depicts the percentage weight change measured over the course of the experiment. The symbols represent the mean ± SEM (n = 8–9 mice per group). The grey band indicates the day on which S. aureus was administered. The result is a combination of three independent experiments (two-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s multiple comparison) (i, j) The bacterial load in the (i) lung was measured on day 5 post S. aureus infection. Symbols represent individual mice (n = 20–24 mice per group). The result is a combination of seven independent experiments (one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison). The dotted line represents the limit of detection. j Graph depicts the proportion of mice that were colonised at day 5 post bacterial infection (Fisher’s exact test). k, l IFNγ production by bacterium specific CD4+ Trm is required to limit disease severity of influenza induced S. aureus pneumonia. C57BL/6 (CD45.2) mice injected with 5 × 106 in vitro activated gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells or gDT-2 CD45.1+IFNγ KO CD4+ T cells were inoculated at day 0 and day 7 via the intranasal route with 1 μg LPS with 30 μg gD peptide, rested for 28 days and infected intranasally with 104 PFU influenza virus (X31, H3N2) and 2 days later, were infected intranasally (TRT) with 108 CFU of JKD6159-gD. k, l The bacterial load in the (k) lung was measured on day 5 post S. aureus infection. Symbols represent individual mice (n = 4–8 mice per group). The result is a combination of three independent experiments (one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison). The dotted line represents the limit of detection. l Graph depicts the proportion of mice that were colonised at day 5 post bacterial infection (Fisher’s exact test).Full size imageWe next used this model to assess whether circulating and/or tissue resident S. aureus specific memory CD4+ T cells could provide protection against severe S. aureus pneumonia. Similar to observations in the clinic, we show that prior infection with influenza virus can significantly increase pulmonary S. aureus burden and disease severity (Fig S3). To test whether circulating and/or Trm S. aureus specific memory CD4+ T cells could provide protection against influenza induced S. aureus pneumonia, naïve mice, and mice seeded with effector gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells and intranasally immunised as described above with gD peptide and adjuvant (Act. gDT-2 + gD peptide), or adjuvant alone (Act. gDT-2) were infected intranasally with 104 PFU of influenza A virus (X31, H3N2) and 2 days later, were intranasally infected with JKD6159-gD. Assessment of lung tissue sections 2 days following S. aureus infection showed that in comparison to the other cohorts, animals with boosted lung Trm (Act. gDT-2 + gD peptide) had larger numbers of CD3+ cells and fewer S. aureus bacterium present in their lung tissue sections (Fig. 5f, g). Both naïve mice and the Act. gDT-2 cohort displayed very similar weight loss curves, with all animals losing ~20% of their original body weight, which they did not recovery for the duration of the experiment (Fig. 5h). In contrast, mice with boosted numbers of lung gDT-2 Trm (Act. gDT-2 + gD peptide) lost on average only 10% of their original body weight, and by day 7 p.i. had returned to their pre-infection weights.Assessment of the bacterial load in the lung on day 5 post S. aureus challenge revealed that both the naïve and Act. gDT-2 cohort harboured similar bacterial loads and lung colonisation frequencies (85% and 82%, respectively) (Fig. 5I, j). In contrast, mice with elevated lung gDT-2 Trm displayed lower bacterial loads in the lung (350-fold relative to naïve cohort) and at day 5 p.i. only 25% of animals in this cohort remained colonised (Fig. 5I, j). Collectively, these data show that boosting bacterium specific CD4+ Trm along the respiratory tract can significantly reduce the severity of S. aureus pneumonia. Moreover, the lack of protection observed in the Act. gDT-2 cohort implies that circulating S. aureus specific memory CD4+ T cells in the absence of an elevated lung CD4+ Trm compartment, has limited capacity to attenuate severe pulmonary S. aureus disease. The assessment of the immune cell influx into the respiratory tract 1 day following the bacterial challenge revealed that mice with elevated lung gDT-2 CD4+ Trm had a larger pool of neutrophils within the airways in comparison to the non-immunised cohort (Fig S4a). Neutrophils are essential for S. aureus clearance, and CD4+ T cells support neutrophil activation by secreting IL-17, which recruits neutrophils to the site of infection, and IFN-γ, which can boost neutrophil effector functions. We next assessed whether the protection mediated by bacterium specific CD4+ Trm was due to their capacity to boost neutrophil recruitment into the airways. Naïve mice and Act. gDT-2 + gD peptide immunised mice were infected intranasally with 104 PFU of influenza A virus (X31, H3N2) and 2 days later were intranasally infected with JKD6159-gD and administered either anti-Ly6g (1A8) daily to deplete neutrophils, or as a control, given saline (Fig S4b–d). Assessment of the bacterial load in the lung on day 3 post S. aureus challenge revealed that mice with elevated lung gDT-2 CD4+ Trm had a lower bacterial burden compared to unimmunised mice. While neutrophil depletion throughout the bacterial infection resulted in a 10-fold increase in lung bacterial loads within this cohort, this titre was still significantly lower (100-fold) than that observed in the lung of non-immunised neutrophil depleted controls (Fig S4d). These results imply that the protection mediated by bacterium specific lung gDT-2 CD4+ Trm is not solely reliant on their capacity to boost neutrophil recruitment. Interestingly, the protection mediated by the lung gDT-2 CD4+ Trm that we observed was dependent on the capacity of these cells to synthesize IFNγ. This was shown through repeating experiments described above, but instead using IFNγ deficient gDT-2, which convert into lung Trm as effectively as their wildtype counterparts and were predominately Th17 polarised (Fig S5a–e). Here we failed to observe any protection by these locally deposited bacterium specific Trm (Fig. 5k, l). Overall, our findings highlight the potential of targeting lung CD4+ Th1 polarised Trm in vaccines against invasive pulmonary S. aureus infections. S. aureus specific CD4+ memory Th1 cells are present at low frequencies in human lung tissueIn the present study, we show S. aureus reactive Th1 skewed Trm in the lungs of mice can reduce the severity of S. aureus pneumonia. While a high frequency of S. aureus-reactive memory CD4+ T cell has been reported in the blood10,38 and skin39 of healthy patients it is unclear whether these cells also reside in the lung or whether they adopt the required Th1 polarity needed for enhanced bacterial clearance. We next set out to develop an assay to measure the frequency and polarity of S. aureus reactive CD4+ Trm cells in human lung tissue. Many strains of S. aureus produce superantigens (sAgs) that non-specifically activate T-cells, resulting in polyclonal T cell activation and cytokine release40. To avoid sAg interference in our quest to identify S. aureus specific CD4+ T cells, we selected, as a source of antigen, the JKD6159 strain, as it encodes no known superantigens and is the dominant clone of CA-MRSA in Australia,41 and strain Newman, as it produces only one sAg, Staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA), which we deleted (Newman Δsea)42. We validated that these strains were unable to promote non-specific hyperactivation of polyclonal T cells (Fig S6a–c), and then used them in a co-culture assay to measure the frequency and polarity of S. aureus reactive CD4+ Trm cells in human lung tissue. We and others have previously reported that the human lung harbours a large pool of CD4+ Trm (>70% CD45RO+CD4+ T cells in human lung tissue express the Trm marker CD69)43,44,45 (Fig. 6a, b). To measure the proportion of CD4+ Trm in the human lung that were reactive to S. aureus, monocyte derived dendritic cells (moDCs) generated from monocytes purified from lung tissue, were cultured with autologous lung T cells and heat killed S. aureus (JKD6159, Newman Δsea or as a control, the parental Newman strain) in the presence of brefeldin A. The proportion of CD4+ T cells synthesizing TNF, IFNγ or IL-17 were measured by intracellular cytokine staining 18 h later. While exposure to the parental, sAg+ Newman S. aureus strain triggered lung CD4+ memory T cells to non-specifically produce Th1 cytokines (TNF and/or IFNγ), neither of the sAg deficient S. aureus strains resulted in CD4+ T cytokine production above the background levels observed in cultures without bacteria (Fig. 6c, d). These observations imply that the frequency of S. aureus reactive CD4+ T cells in human lung is below the detection limit of this assay, which we show, does have the range to detect CD4+ T cells specific for other respiratory pathogens, such as influenza virus (Fig. 6c, d).Fig. 6: S. aureus reactive CD4+ Trm are present in human lung tissue.a Frequency of CD4 Trm in human lung. a Flow cytometry profiles depicting the level of expression of CD103 and CD69 on memory CD4 (CD45RO+CD4+CD3+) T cells isolated from human lung. b The percentages of antigen experienced (CD45RO+) CD4+ T cells in human lung tissue that express CD103 and CD69. Dots represent individual donors (n = 5 healthy lungs), and bars show mean ± SEM. c–k S. aureus specific CD4+ T cells are present in human lung and are largely Th1 polarised. c Monocyte derived dendritic cells (moDCs) differentiated from monocytes isolated from human lung tissue were cultured 1:1 with purified autologous T cells and either heat killed S. aureus (moi 50) or influenza A virus (H1N1pdm09, moi 10) for 18 h and the proportion of CD4+ T cells producing IFNγ, TNF or IL-17 was measured by intracellular cytokine staining. c Flow cytometry profiles depicting the production of IFNγ and TNF in CD4+ T cells. d The percentage of CD4+ T cells synthesizing IL-17, TNF or IFNγ. Bars represent the mean ± SEM. Data pooled from 6 donors (two-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s multiple comparison). e–k Lung derived moDCs were cultured 1:1 with purified autologous CFSE labelled T cells and heat killed S. aureus (moi 50) for 7 days. Following a brief re-stimulation with heat killed S. aureus, the proportion of T cells producing IFNγ, TNF or IL-17 was measured by intracellular cytokine staining. e Schematic representation of the in vitro S. aureus human lung co-culture assay. f Representative flow cytometry profiles gated on CD4+ T cells. g The absolute number of divided CD4+ T cells on day 7 post culture (h–j) The absolute number of divided CD4+ T cells synthesizing (h) IFNγ (i) TNF (j) IL-17 on day 7 post culture following a brief in vitro restimulation. Symbols represent individual donors. k Pie graphs show the proportion of total cytokine producing cells that are synthesizing IFNγ, TNF or IL-17. Data pooled from four donors. Numbers inside the plots represent and blue outer circle shows the proportion of Th1 producing cells.Full size imageAs the frequency of S. aureus reactive T cells in human lung tissue was too low to directly measure ex vivo, we modified our protocol to expand up S. aureus reactive cells from lung tissue. To do this, lung derived moDCs were exposed to heat killed S. aureus strains and CFSE labelled matched T cells for 7 days. Following a brief restimulation with heat killed bacteria, cytokine production within the expanded T cell pool was measured (Fig. 6e). Once again, exposure of the lung cells to Newman (sAg+) resulted in robust non-specific expansion of the bulk CD4+ T cell pool (100-fold above cultures without bacteria) and significant TNF and IFNγ production (Fig. 6f–j). Exposure to the sAg− strains did result in ~8-fold expansion of total CD4+ T cells and assessment of the polarity of divided (CFSElo) cells revealed that these cells were capable of synthesizing TNF, IFNγ and IL-17 in response to S. aureus restimulation (Fig. 6f–j), with most cells adopting a Th1 profile (Fig. 6k). These data suggest that S. aureus reactive CD4+ memory T cells are present in human lung tissue, albeit at a low frequency, nonetheless following re-exposure to S. aureus these lung bacterium specific T cells can expand to generate both Th1 and Th17 populations.DiscussionInvasive S. aureus infections are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality. The clinical management of these infections is complicated by the presence of widespread antibiotic resistance46. To date, all vaccine candidates against S. aureus, which largely aim at generating high titres of opsonic antibodies against bacteria surface antigens have failed, and correlates of human immunity remain elusive47. For immune-based therapies to provide an alternative to antibiotics in the management of invasive infection, an increased understanding of correlates of protective immunity against S. aureus infection is imperative. Here we show that strategies that lodge Th1 polarised bacterium specific CD4+ Trm in the lung can significantly attenuate the severity of pulmonary S. aureus infections and highlight the potential for targeting these cells in vaccines that aim to prevent the development of S. aureus pneumonia.Trm cells represent a distinct, self-renewing and highly protective population of memory T cells that persist long term in peripheral tissues, commonly at sites of prior infection. Trm cells have been identified in several tissues in mice and humans13,14,15,16,17,43 and rapidly acquire effector function after a secondary encounter with a pathogen. Lung CD4+ Trm have been shown to be provide long term protective immunity against a range of bacterial infections, including B. pertussis24, K. pneumoniae25, and Streptococcus pneumoniae23. In these infection models, bacterial clearance coincided with the reactivation of Th17 polarised CD4+ Trm which accelerated neutrophil recruitment into the airways. While many studies clearly show a role for Th17 polarised CD4+ Trm in the protection against extracellular pulmonary bacterial infections, in the present study we find that IFNγ producing Th1 skewed CD4+ Trm cells contribute to S. aureus defence. Our results are consistent with an elegant study performed by Brown and colleagues that showed the adoptive transfer of in vitro-expanded S. aureus-specific Th1 but not Th17 cells conferred clinical protection against a systemic S. aureus infection10. The protection mediated by IFNγ producing lung CD4+ Trm following bacterial challenge is not due to the ability of these cells to impact neutrophil influx into the airways, hence other modes of action will need to be explored in future studies. One potential mechanism these cells may protect against lung bacterial infections is via boosting alveolar macrophage killing of ingested bacteria. The activation of macrophages can be boosted by IFNγ exposure, which triggers NADPH oxidase activation and augments killing of ingested bacteria48. An example where this mechanism of protection is observed has recently been reported in a Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection model. Inhalation of Mtb results in the deposition of lung Th1 CD4+ Trm cells that release IFNγ in response to Mtb antigen re-exposure49, and this serves to enhances macrophage killing of persisting intracellular Mtb. It is well documented that macrophages facilitate the clearance of pulmonary S. aureus infections and several murine airway S. aureus infection models show macrophage depletion results in significant increases in mortality50 and lung bacterial loads51. Whether IFNγ synthesized by S. aureus-activated lung CD4+ Trm cells is facilitating S. aureus clearance through enhanced macrophage activation, or via an alternative mechanism is an important question that will need to be addressed in future studies.By combining an S. aureus strain expressing a trackable CD4+ T cell epitope and a murine model of S. aureus pneumonia, we show that pulmonary S. aureus infection triggers the activation of bacterial-specific CD4+ Th17 cells, but fails to deposit bacterial-specific CD4+ Trm along the respiratory tract. The poor seeding of lung Trm we observe following pulmonary S. aureus infection may, in part, be explained by a mismatch in the chemotactic gradient generated in the bacteria infected lung and the expression of homing receptors on S. aureus specific effector CD4+ T cells. We show that S. aureus infection generates effector CD4+ T cells that express the chemokine receptor CCR6 but not CXCR3 – a profile consistent with that of Th17 effector T cells. Previous reports show lung CD4+ Trm uniformly express the chemokine receptor CXCR345, the expression of which was important for T cell recruitment into inflamed lung tissue36,52,53. Moreover, assessment of the levels of expression of a panel of chemokines in lung tissue homogenates revealed that by day 5 post S. aureus infection only CXCL9, which elicits its chemotactic function by interacting with CXCR3 was still elevated in the lung tissue. This disparity in chemokine receptor/chemokine gradient may explain the limited recruitment and ultimate retention of effector CD4+ T cells in the lung following S. aureus infection. In addition, the swift sequestration of S. aureus by neutrophils in the airways31 which results in the rapid clearance of bacteria from the lung may limit local antigen availability – a key requirement for boosting lung Trm development21,37. Indeed, many of the pulmonary bacterial infections (B. pertussis, Mtb, K. pneumoniae, and S. pneumoniae) that have been documented to cause the deposition of lung CD4+ Trm, result in high bacterial burdens within the lung tissue for an extended period. The immunological memory formed following primary S. aureus infection provided no protection against a secondary S. aureus challenge, implying primary S. aureus infection triggers the wrong polarity and/or subset of memory T cell needed for protection. This is consistent with our later findings where we show that circulating memory CD4+ T cells have limited capacity to assist in the control of pulmonary S. aureus infection and only bacterium specific lung CD4+ Th1 polarised Trm can significantly attenuate the severity of S. aureus pneumonia.The high rate of recurring S. aureus infections among otherwise healthy individuals who have no known immune deficiencies or risk factors suggests that individuals fail to develop effective protective immunity following natural infection54. The inability to develop effective immunity against S. aureus may be related to the nature of its lifestyle as a colonising opportunistic pathogen. S. aureus asymptomatically colonises the nasal cavity of up to 30% of the human population and generally only causes disease when introduced into a susceptible body site or when hosts are immunologically compromised. Moreover, as S. aureus colonizes up to 50% of infants by 8 weeks of age55, it is feasible that immunity towards this commensal is programmed early in life. Studies using a murine Staphylococcus epidermidis neonatal skin colonization model show that early antigen exposure promotes immunological tolerance and the establishment of commensal specific Tregs56. Early exposure to S. aureus as a commensal may modulate the establishment of T cell-mediated immunity, adversely affecting long-term protection and impacting an individual’s capacity to combat pathogenic infections by this bacterium. Unlike T cells specific for self-antigens which are purged from the T cell repertoire, commensal specific T cells do not undergo negative selection in the thymus and are present in healthy individuals despite the constant presence of their cognate antigens57. While it is important to maintain T cell homeostasis toward commensal antigens, it is also important that these cells can be “called to arms” when a commensal develops into a pathogenic threat.Colonising opportunistic pathogens like S. aureus can acquire or select for resistance to antibiotics, a characteristic driven inadvertently by selective pressure applied by any course of antibiotics taken throughout one’s life. As very few effective bactericidal antibiotic treatment options remain, decolonisation has been proposed as an alternative prophylactic therapy for problematic colonising opportunistic pathogens. Immune-based therapies may be a means to eliminate high-risk opportunistic commensal organisms from the microbiome. Here we show that strategies that lodge Th1 polarised bacterium specific CD4+ Trm in the lung can significantly attenuate the severity of S. aureus pneumonia. Whether approaches that seed S. aureus reactive CD4+ Trm in niches that are considered principal habitats for this commensal bacterium (ie skin or nasal mucosa), can drive and maintain S. aureus decolonisation requires further investigation.S. aureus reactive CD4+ Trm cells are present in human lung tissue and these cells can reactivate following re-exposure to S. aureus to synthesize TNF, IL-17 and to a lesser degree IFNγ. Our findings are consistent with work by Brown et al., who show that S. aureus specific IFNγ producing CD4+ T cells (Th1) are expanded in humans during an S. aureus bloodstream infection10 and Hendricks et al.39, who show that both IFNγ as well as IL-17 producing S. aureus-specific CD4+ Trm are present in the skin of healthy individuals. While we observe a low frequency of S. aureus reactive T cells in human lung tissue, it is estimated that on average, ~3.6% of T-cells (range 0.2%–5.7%) present in human peripheral blood respond to S. aureus extracellular antigens38. This raises an important question, how can humans who harbour such a high frequency of S. aureus specific T cells in their blood be so vulnerable to recurring S. aureus disease? A clue may lie in the type of immunity needed to fend off an S. aureus infection. While circulating memory CD4+ T cells have been shown to be beneficial for controlling systemic blood stream S. aureus infections10, findings generated in the present study reveal that localised S. aureus infections are best combatted by localised immune responses. In humans, the low frequency of S. aureus reactive CD4+ Trm cells in lung tissue may leave individuals susceptibility to pulmonary S. aureus infection, despite high frequencies of circulating S. aureus specific T cells in the blood. Thus, a vaccine that aims to protect against localised invasive S. aureus infections in the heart (i.e., endocarditis) bone (i.e., osteomyelitis), or lung (i.e., pneumonia) should aim to boost bacterium specific CD4+ Th1 polarised Trm in these tissue compartments.A vaccine that prevents infections caused by S. aureus, including drug-resistant strains, will save lives and curb the spread of the bacteria and antibiotic resistance. Our findings reveal the protective capacity S. aureus specific respiratory tract CD4+ Th1 skewed Trm cells and highlight the potential for targeting these cells in vaccines that aim to prevent the development of S. aureus pneumonia. Whether CD4+ Trm cells can safeguard other tissues against invasive S. aureus infections, and whether these Trm, in addition to responding to S. aureus dissemination can also sustain decolonisation, are important questions that will need to be addressed in future studies. The answers may lead to improved vaccines that purge the body of this opportunistic pathogen and in doing so, significantly reduce the risk of invasive S. aureus disease.MethodsEthics statementAll animal experiments were done in accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines of the University of Melbourne and were approved by the University of Melbourne AEC (APP1714249, 2015181). Human experimental work was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki Principles and to the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Code of Practice. Lung samples from deceased organ donors were obtained via the Alfred Hospital’s Lung Tissue Biobank (Supplementary Table 1). Mononuclear cells were isolated and cryopreserved from lungs as previously described43,44. PBMCs were isolated from buffy packs obtained from the Australian Red Cross Life Blood (West Melbourne, Australia). PBMCs were isolated by Ficoll-Paque density-gradient centrifugation and cryopreserved as previously described43,44. All experiments were done in accordance with the Institutional Human Ethics Committee guidelines of the University of Melbourne and were approved by the University of Melbourne Human Ethics Committee (13908, 1852417).Mice, pathogens, and infectionsFemale (6–14-week-old) C57BL/6 (CD45.2), gDT-2.CD45.1, gDT-2.CD45.1.IFNγ KO mice were bred in-house and housed in specific pathogen-free conditions in the Biological Research Facility (BRF) at the Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, the University of Melbourne. All mouse strains used were shown not to carry S. aureus. The gDT-2.CD45.1 CD4 TCR-transgenic mice express a TCR that recognizes the HSV-1 immunodominant determinant gD315-327 and carry the allelic marker CD45.132. Mice were infected intranasally with 104 PFU of influenza A virus X31 (H3N2) in a volume of 30 μl. Mice were infected intranasally with 108 CFU of S. aureus (JKD6159 or JKD6159-gD) in a volume of 10 (upper respiratory tract infection) or 30 μl (total respiratory tract infection). Mice were infected intranasally with 106 PFU of herpes simplex virus (SC16) in a volume of 30 μl.Preparation of S. aureus for intranasal inoculationStreptomycin resistant clones of each S. aureus (Newman, Newman Δsea MSSA(CC8); JKD6159, CA-MRSA(ST93)) were grown as previously described31.Enumeration of S. aureus in organsTo evaluate bacterial load, lung and nasal tissue were harvested into 1 ml PBS, homogenized and serial dilutions of organ homogenates were made, plated onto streptomycin containing brain heart infusion (BHI) agar plates, and incubated overnight at 37 °C.Construction of S. aureus JKD6159-gDPolymerase chain reaction was conducted with Phusion hotstart DNA polymerase (NEB) following manufacturers recommendations, with oligonucleotides purchased from IDT (Supplementary Table 2). A hybrid construct containing the Pspa promoter/signal sequence (SS) of Protein A was fused to the serine/aspartic acid (SD) repeats/Sortase A motif of ClfA. The DNA construct was assembled by SOE-PCR with primers IM860/IMT1; IMT2/IM861 with Newman genomic DNA as template. The product was digested with NcoI/PstI and ligated into complementary digested pIME85 (erythromycin derivative of pIMC85 with the integrase deleted58) yielding pIME85(Pspa-SD). The plasmid was propagated in Escherichia coli strain DC10B-R (EC10B59 with the dcm gene deleted). To insert gD315-327 epitope from HSV into pIME85(Pspa-SD), the Pspa-SS was amplified from Newman genomic DNA with IM860 and the reverse primer IM1315 incorporating the gD epitope. The amplimers were digested with NcoI/SacI and ligated into complementary digested pIME85(Pspa-SD), yielding pIME85(Pspa-gD-SD). The plasmid was co-electroporated60 with the phage integrase expressing pUCɸ85 (Ampicillin/Chloramphenicol marked pUC18 with ɸ85 integrase expressed from Phelp promoter and isolated from IM08B) into JKD6159ΔhsdR ΔhsdRSCC61 and plated onto BHI agar containing 10 μg/ml erythromycin. Transient expression of the integrase in the presence of the AttP containing pIME85 leads to single copy integration of pIME85(Pspa-gD-SD) between rpmF and isdB gene. The stably integrated plasmid was then transduced62 into JKD6159STR with phage 11 yielding JKD6159-gD. The resulting strain was whole genome sequenced with Illumina short reads, which were assembled to the JKD6159 reference genome in Geneious Prime. No SNP or indels were identified and single copy integration was confirmed at the correct location.Construction of SEA deficient S. aureus A deletion construct was amplified by SOE-PCR with primers IM1443/IM1444; IM1445/IM1446, (Supplementary Table 2) the gel extracted AD product cloned into pIMAY-Z by SLiCE and transformed into E. coli IM08B. The sea gene was deleted from NewmanSTR by allelic exchange63. The NewmanSTRΔsea mutant was whole genome sequenced with Illumina short reads, which were assembled to the Newman UoM64 reference genome in Geneious Prime. No SNP or indels were identified.Cytometric bead arrayCytokine/chemokine concentrations in supernatants from homogenized lung tissue was measured using a LegendPlex mouse antiviral response cytometric bead array following manufacturer’s instructions.Real time PCRSingle cell suspensions of lung tissue were washed twice with PBS before RNA extraction by RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Venlo, Netherlands). RNA template was prepared, at equal concentrations, and treated to in-solution deoxyribonuclease I digestion (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). Equal volumes of RNA template were used for each SensiFAST cDNA (complementary DNA) synthesis reaction (Bioline, London, UK) before resuspension of template in equal volumes of ultrapure high-performance liquid chromatography water. Real-time polymerase chain reaction was performed with SensiFAST Lo-ROX SYBR Green (Bioline, London, UK) on Mx3005P (Stratagene, La Jolla, USA). Fold change was calculated relative to the geometric mean of housekeeping gene (GAPDH).Flow cytometry and intracellular cytokine stainingMice were perfused before harvest of the lung and nasal tissue. The nasal tissue, including the nasal cavity, nasal turbinates, and NALTs, was obtained by cutting down the vertical plane of the skull and scraping out the tissues and small bones from both sides of the nasal passages. Lung and nasal tissue were enzymatically digested for 1 h at 37 °C in 3 ml of collagenase type 3 (3 mg ml−1 in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 2% fetal calf serum). Single cell suspensions were surface stained for 25 min on ice with the appropriate mixture of mAbs. The conjugated mAbs were obtained from BioLegend, or Miltenyi Biotec (San Diego, CA) and are listed in Supplementary Table 3. For intracellular cytokine staining, single cells suspensions were incubated for 1 h with either 10−6M gD315-327 (IPPNWHIPSIQDA) peptide or PMA/ION and then cultured for an additional 5 h with Golgi plug (Brefeldin A) at 37 °C in complete RPMI (10% FCS, 2 mM glutamine, 50 mM 2-ME, Pen/Strep) prior to surface staining for 25 min on ice with the appropriate mixture of mAbs and then intracellular staining using a Foxp3 fix/perm kit (ThermoFisher). Samples were acquired using a Becton Dickinson Fortessa III flow cytometer and data analysed using the FlowJo software package (Tree Star, Inc., Ashland, OR, USA).Purification and adoptive transfer of T cellsNaïve gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells isolated from gDT-2 TCR transgenics mice were purified from single cell suspensions prepared from LN and spleen. Cells were purified after a depletion step using rat antibodies against CD11b (M1/70), F4/80, Ter-119, Gr-1 (RB6), MHC class II (M5/114), and CD8 (53-6.7), followed by incubation with anti-rat IgG-coupled magnetic beads (BioMags, Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s protocols. Mice received either 50,000 or 1 × 106 CFSE labelled gDT-2 CD45.1 cells intravenously in a volume of 200 μl.In vitro activation and transfer of effector gDT-2 cellsgDT-2 CD4+ T cells were activated in vitro with 10−6M gD315-327 (IPPNWHIPSIQDA) peptide pulsed splenocytes as previously described17. This protocol resulted in >90% of cells adopting a Th1 polarity.Mice were injected intravenously with 5 × 106 in effectors and at day 0 and 7 post transfer mice were administered intranasally 1 μg lipopolysaccharide with or without 30 μg of gD315-327 peptide in a volume of 30 μl.ImmunohistochemistryPerfused lung tissue, inflated with OCT were immediately embedded in OCT. Frozen sections (14 μm) were cut using a cryostat. Tissue sections were fixed with acetone and blocked in serum-free protein block (DAKO, Santa Clara, CA). Sections were stained with a polyclonal rabbit anti-S. aureus antibody (ThermoFisher, Cat#PA1-7246), anti-mouse CD3(17A2)-Alexa647 and DAPI. The coverslips were mounted in Prolong Gold Antifade medium. Slides were imaged using a Zeiss LSM700 microscope and images were analysed using ImageJ (version 2).Antigen presentation assayDendritic cell isolation: As previously described33, spleen or cervical (cLN) and mediastinal (mLN) lymph nodes recovered from five mice (pooled) were digested with DNAse (Roche) and collagenase (Worthington type 3) to generate single-cell suspensions. Light-density cells were selected using Nycodenz (Nycomed Pharma) (1.077 g/cm3). DCs were further enriched by depletion of unwanted cells with rat antibodies directed against CD3 (clone KT3-1.1), Thy1 (clone T24/31.7), CD45R (clone RA36B2), Ly6C/G (clone RB6-8C5), Ly-76 (Ter119) and anti-rat Ig magnetic beads (BioMags, Qiagen). All DC subsets were then sort purified using a BD Aria III (BD Biosciences) into XCR1+ and CD11b+ subsets.In vitro: 5 × 104 CFSE-labelled gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells were cultured with 1 × 104 sort purified splenic DCs in the presence of 1 μg/ml lipopolysaccharides (LPS) from Escherichia coli (Sigma) with varying doses of heat killed S. aureus (JKD6169 or JKD6159-gD) in complete media (RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% FCS, 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin). T cell proliferation was assessed 60 h later.Ex vivo: 5 × 104 CFSE-labelled gDT-2 CD45.1+ CD4+ T cells were cultured 1 × 104 sort purified cLN or mLN CD11b+ or XCR1+ DCs recovered from mice on days 1–4 post intranasal infection with JKD6159-gD, in complete media (RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% FCS, 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin). T cell proliferation was assessed 60 h later.PBMC/Human lung S. aureus stimulation assayBlood: Monocyte-derived dendritic cells were generated from PBMCs by incubating CD14-enriched monocytes (MojoSort Human CD14+ monocyte isolation kit, Biolegend) for 5 days in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% FCS and 300 U/ml hGM-CSF (Peprotech) and 100 U/ml hIL-4 (Peprotech). moDCs were harvested and 2.5 × 104 cells were co-cultured with 5 × 104 matched CFSE labelled T cells and the indicated dose of heat killed S. aureus. The absolute number of divided cells (CFSElo) was measured following 7 days of culture.Lung: Monocyte-derived dendritic cells were generated from lung by incubating plastic-adherent lung cells for 5 days in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% FCS and 300 U/ml hGM-CSF (Peprotech) and 100 U/ml hIL-4 (Peprotech). moDCs were harvested and co-cultured 1:1 with matched T cells and the indicated dose of heat killed S. aureus or influenza A virus (H1N1pdm09) for 3 h in RPMI with 10% fetal calf serum at which point Brefeldin A (BD GolgiPlug) was added and cells were incubated for a further 18 h and cells were intracellularly stained for cytokine production. In some experiments, lung moDCs were co-cultured with matched CFSE labelled T cells and the indicated dose of heat killed S. aureus for 7 days at which point the cultures we briefly restimulated with heat killed bacteria in the presence of Brefeldin A and the cells were intracellularly stained for cytokine production.Statistical analysisComparison between two study groups was statistically evaluated by unpaired two-tailed t test or Mann–Whitney test. Comparison between more than two groups (single factor) were evaluated using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s or Dunnett’s multiple comparison. Two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s or multiple comparison on log10-transformed values was used to evaluate more than two groups at different time points. In all tests, statistical significance was quantified as *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 8 software. ReferencesWertheim, H. F. et al. The role of nasal carriage in Staphylococcus aureus infections. Lancet Infect. Dis. 5, 751–762 (2005).Article PubMed Google Scholar Turner, N. A. et al. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: an overview of basic and clinical research. Nat. Rev. Microbiol 17, 203–218 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Boucher, H. W. & Corey, G. R. Epidemiology of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Clin. Infect. Dis. 46(Suppl 5), S344–S349 (2008).Article PubMed Google Scholar van Hal, S. J. et al. Predictors of mortality in Staphylococcus aureus Bacteremia. Clin. Microbiol Rev. 25, 362–386 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Inagaki, K., Lucar, J., Blackshear, C. & Hobbs, C. V. Methicillin-susceptible and Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus Bacteremia: Nationwide Estimates of 30-Day Readmission, In-hospital Mortality, Length of Stay, and Cost in the United States. Clin. Infect. Dis. 69, 2112–2118 (2019).PubMed Google Scholar Goldblatt, D. Conjugate vaccines. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 119, 1–3 (2000).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shinefield, H. R. & Black, S. Efficacy of pneumococcal conjugate vaccines in large scale field trials. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 19, 394–397 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Clegg, J. et al. Staphylococcus aureus Vaccine Research and Development: The Past, Present and Future, Including Novel Therapeutic Strategies. Front Immunol. 12, 705360 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lin, L. et al. Th1-Th17 cells mediate protective adaptive immunity against Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans infection in mice. PLoS Pathog. 5, e1000703 (2009).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Brown, A. F. et al. Memory Th1 Cells Are Protective in Invasive Staphylococcus aureus Infection. PLoS Pathog. 11, e1005226 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Utay, N. S. et al. MRSA Infections in HIV-Infected People Are Associated with Decreased MRSA-Specific Th1 Immunity. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005580 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Minegishi, Y. et al. Molecular explanation for the contradiction between systemic Th17 defect and localized bacterial infection in hyper-IgE syndrome. J. Exp. Med 206, 1291–1301 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fernandez-Ruiz, D. et al. Liver-Resident Memory CD8+ T Cells Form a Front-Line Defense against Malaria Liver-Stage Infection. Immunity 45, 889–902 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Masopust, D. et al. Dynamic T cell migration program provides resident memory within intestinal epithelium. J. Exp. Med 207, 553–564 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gebhardt, T. et al. Memory T cells in nonlymphoid tissue that provide enhanced local immunity during infection with herpes simplex virus. Nat. Immunol. 10, 524–530 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hogan, R. J. et al. Protection from respiratory virus infections can be mediated by antigen-specific CD4(+) T cells that persist in the lungs. J. Exp. Med 193, 981–986 (2001).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wakim, L. M., Woodward-Davis, A. & Bevan, M. J. Memory T cells persisting within the brain after local infection show functional adaptations to their tissue of residence. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 17872–17879 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wakim, L. M., Gupta, N., Mintern, J. D. & Villadangos, J. A. Enhanced survival of lung tissue-resident memory CD8(+) T cells during infection with influenza virus due to selective expression of IFITM3. Nat. Immunol. 14, 238–245 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wakim, L. M., Smith, J., Caminschi, I., Lahoud, M. H. & Villadangos, J. A. Antibody-targeted vaccination to lung dendritic cells generates tissue-resident memory CD8 T cells that are highly protective against influenza virus infection. Mucosal Immunol. 8, 1060–1071 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhao, J. et al. Airway Memory CD4(+) T Cells Mediate Protective. Immun. Emerg. Respiratory Coronaviruses. Immun. 44, 1379–1391 (2016).CAS Google Scholar Wu, T. et al. Lung-resident memory CD8 T cells (TRM) are indispensable for optimal cross-protection against pulmonary virus infection. J. Leukoc. Biol. 95, 215–224 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Luangrath, M. A., Schmidt, M. E., Hartwig, S. M., Varga, S. M. & Tissue-Resident Memory, T. Cells in the Lungs Protect against Acute Respiratory Syncytial Virus. Infect. Immunohorizons 5, 59–69 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Smith, N. M. et al. Regionally compartmentalized resident memory T cells mediate naturally acquired protection against pneumococcal pneumonia. Mucosal Immunol. 11, 220–235 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wilk, M. M. et al. Lung CD4 Tissue-Resident Memory T Cells Mediate Adaptive Immunity Induced by Previous Infection of Mice with Bordetella pertussis. J. Immunol. 199, 233–243 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Amezcua Vesely, M. C. et al. Effector TH17 Cells Give Rise to Long-Lived TRM Cells that Are Essential for an Immediate Response against Bacterial Infection. Cell 178, 1176–1188 e1115 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wakim, L. M., Waithman, J., van Rooijen, N., Heath, W. R. & Carbone, F. R. Dendritic cell-induced memory T cell activation in nonlymphoid tissues. Science 319, 198–202 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Park, S. L. et al. Local proliferation maintains a stable pool of tissue-resident memory T cells after antiviral recall responses. Nat. Immunol. 19, 183–191 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schenkel, J. M. et al. T cell memory. Resident memory CD8 T cells trigger protective innate and adaptive immune responses. Science 346, 98–101 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ge, C. et al. Bystander Activation of Pulmonary Trm Cells Attenuates the Severity of Bacterial Pneumonia by Enhancing Neutrophil Recruitment. Cell Rep. 29, 4236–4244 (2019). e4233.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schenkel, J. M., Fraser, K. A., Vezys, V. & Masopust, D. Sensing and alarm function of resident memory CD8(+) T cells. Nat. Immunol. 14, 509–513 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ge, C. et al. Neutrophils play an ongoing role in preventing bacterial pneumonia by blocking the dissemination of S. aureus from the upper to the lower airways. Immunol Cell Biol. 98, 577–594 (2020).Bedoui, S. et al. Cross-presentation of viral and self antigens by skin-derived CD103+ dendritic cells. Nat. Immunol. 10, 488–495 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bedford, J. G. et al. Unresponsiveness to inhaled antigen is governed by conventional dendritic cells and overridden during infection by monocytes. Sci Immunol. 5, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.abb5439 (2020).Pejoski, D. et al. Site-Specific DC Surface Signatures Influence CD4(+) T Cell Co-stimulation and Lung-Homing. Front Immunol. 10, 1650 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, B., Olaniyi, R., Kwiecinski, J. M. & Wardenburg, J. B. Staphylococcus aureus toxin suppresses antigen-specific T cell responses. J. Clin. Invest 130, 1122–1127 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kohlmeier, J. E. et al. CXCR3 directs antigen-specific effector CD4+ T cell migration to the lung during parainfluenza virus infection. J. Immunol. 183, 4378–4384 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zens, K. D., Chen, J. K. & Farber, D. L. Vaccine-generated lung tissue-resident memory T cells provide heterosubtypic protection to influenza infection. JCI Insight. 1, https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.85832 (2016).Kolata, J. B. et al. The Fall of a Dogma? Unexpected High T-Cell Memory Response to Staphylococcus aureus in Humans. J. Infect. Dis. 212, 830–838 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hendriks, A. et al. Staphylococcus aureus-Specific Tissue-Resident Memory CD4(+) T Cells Are Abundant in Healthy Human Skin. Front Immunol. 12, 642711 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xu, S. X. & McCormick, J. K. Staphylococcal superantigens in colonization and disease. Front Cell Infect. Microbiol 2, 52 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Chua, K. et al. Complete genome sequence of Staphylococcus aureus strain JKD6159, a unique Australian clone of ST93-IV community methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. 192, 5556–5557 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xu, S. X. et al. Superantigens subvert the neutrophil response to promote abscess formation and enhance Staphylococcus aureus survival in vivo. Infect. Immun. 82, 3588–3598 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Pizzolla, A. et al. Influenza-specific lung-resident memory T cells are proliferative and polyfunctional and maintain diverse TCR profiles. J. Clin. Invest 128, 721–733 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nguyen, T. H. et al. Influenza, but not SARS-CoV-2, infection induces a rapid interferon response that wanes with age and diminished tissue-resident memory CD8(+) T cells. Clin. Transl. Immunol. 10, e1242 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Oja, A. E. et al. Trigger-happy resident memory CD4(+) T cells inhabit the human lungs. Mucosal Immunol. 11, 654–667 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chambers, H. F. & Deleo, F. R. Waves of resistance: Staphylococcus aureus in the antibiotic era. Nat. Rev. Microbiol 7, 629–641 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fowler, V. G. Jr. & Proctor, R. A. Where does a Staphylococcus aureus vaccine stand? Clin. Microbiol Infect. 20(Suppl 5), 66–75 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Greenlee-Wacker, M. C. & Nauseef, W. M. IFN-gamma targets macrophage-mediated immune responses toward Staphylococcus aureus. J. Leukoc. Biol. 101, 751–758 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Walrath, J., Zukowski, L., Krywiak, A. & Silver, R. F. Resident Th1-like effector memory cells in pulmonary recall responses to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 33, 48–55 (2005).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Martin, F. J., Parker, D., Harfenist, B. S., Soong, G. & Prince, A. Participation of CD11c(+) leukocytes in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus clearance from the lung. Infect. Immun. 79, 1898–1904 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kitur, K. et al. Toxin-induced necroptosis is a major mechanism of Staphylococcus aureus lung damage. PLoS Pathog. 11, e1004820 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Kohlmeier, J. E. et al. The chemokine receptor CCR5 plays a key role in the early memory CD8+ T cell response to respiratory virus infections. Immunity 29, 101–113 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thomas, S. Y., Banerji, A., Medoff, B. D., Lilly, C. M. & Luster, A. D. Multiple chemokine receptors, including CCR6 and CXCR3, regulate antigen-induced T cell homing to the human asthmatic airway. J. Immunol. 179, 1901–1912 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mascitti, K. B., Gerber, J. S., Zaoutis, T. E., Barton, T. D. & Lautenbach, E. Preferred treatment and prevention strategies for recurrent community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus skin and soft-tissue infections: a survey of adult and pediatric providers. Am. J. Infect. Control 38, 324–328 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Peacock, S. J. et al. Determinants of acquisition and carriage of Staphylococcus aureus in infancy. J. Clin. Microbiol 41, 5718–5725 (2003).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Scharschmidt, T. C. et al. A Wave of Regulatory T Cells into Neonatal Skin Mediates Tolerance to Commensal Microbes. Immunity 43, 1011–1021 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sorini, C., Cardoso, R. F., Gagliani, N. & Villablanca, E. J. Commensal Bacteria-Specific CD4(+) T Cell Responses in Health and Disease. Front Immunol. 9, 2667 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Kofoed, E. M. et al. De Novo Guanine Biosynthesis but Not the Riboswitch-Regulated Purine Salvage Pathway Is Required for Staphylococcus aureus Infection In Vivo. J. Bacteriol. 198, 2001–2015 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Monk, I. R., Gahan, C. G. & Hill, C. Tools for functional postgenomic analysis of listeria monocytogenes. Appl Environ. Microbiol 74, 3921–3934 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Monk, I. R., Shah, I. M., Xu, M., Tan, M. W. & Foster, T. J. Transforming the untransformable: application of direct transformation to manipulate genetically Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis. mBio. 3, https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00277-11 (2012).Monk, I. R., Tree, J. J., Howden, B. P., Stinear, T. P. & Foster, T. J. Complete Bypass of Restriction Systems for Major Staphylococcus aureus Lineages. MBio 6, e00308–e00315 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, J. Y. H. et al. Mining the Methylome Reveals Extensive Diversity in Staphylococcus epidermidis Restriction Modification. mBio.10, e02451–19 (2019).Monk, I. R. & Stinear, T. P. From cloning to mutant in 5 days: rapid allelic exchange in Staphylococcus aureus. Access Microbiol 3, https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02451-19 (2021).Monk, I. R., Howden, B. P., Seemann, T. & Stinear, T. P. Correspondence: Spontaneous secondary mutations confound analysis of the essential two-component system WalKR in Staphylococcus aureus. Nat. Commun. 8, 14403 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesFundingThis work was supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) and the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (LMW). Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Jessica Braverman, Ian R. Monk.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, VIC, 3000, AustraliaJessica Braverman, Ian R. Monk, Chenghao Ge, Timothy P. Stinear & Linda M. WakimSchool of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, ChinaChenghao GeLung Transplant Service, Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Department of Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, AustraliaGlen P. WestallAuthorsJessica BravermanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIan R. MonkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChenghao GeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGlen P. WestallView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTimothy P. StinearView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLinda M. WakimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsL.W. designed the project with input from I.M. and T.S.; Experiments and data analysis was performed by L.W., J.B., I.M., C.G.; Clinical samples were provided by G.W.; L.M.W., J.B., I.M., and T.S. contributed to writing and editing of the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Linda M. Wakim.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary informationRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleBraverman, J., Monk, I.R., Ge, C. et al. Staphylococcus aureus specific lung resident memory CD4+ Th1 cells attenuate the severity of influenza virus induced secondary bacterial pneumonia. Mucosal Immunol 15, 783–796 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41385-022-00529-4Download citationReceived: 05 January 2022Revised: 25 March 2022Accepted: 03 May 2022Published: 30 May 2022Issue Date: April 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41385-022-00529-4Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Respiratory tract infections: an update on the complexity of bacterial diversity, therapeutic interventions and breakthroughs Avani PanickarAnand ManoharanSudha Ramaiah Archives of Microbiology (2024) CD4+ T cell memory Marco KünzliDavid Masopust Nature Immunology (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Information Open access publishing About the Editors Contact Press Releases About the Partner For Advertisers Subscribe Publish with us For Authors & Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Mucosal Immunology (Mucosal Immunol) ISSN 1935-3456 (online) ISSN 1933-0219 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedRobust SARS-CoV-2-specific and heterologous immune responses in vaccine-naïve residents of long-term care facilities who survive natural infection | Nature Aging Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature aging articles article Robust SARS-CoV-2-specific and heterologous immune responses in vaccine-naïve residents of long-term care facilities who survive natural infection Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 30 May 2022 Robust SARS-CoV-2-specific and heterologous immune responses in vaccine-naïve residents of long-term care facilities who survive natural infection Gokhan Tut ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0655-232X1, Tara Lancaster ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2872-47941, Megan S. Butler1, Panagiota Sylla1, Eliska Spalkova1, David Bone1, Nayandeep Kaur1, Christopher Bentley1, Umayr Amin ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9933-89141, Azar T. Jadir1, Samuel Hulme1, Morenike Ayodel1, Alexander C. Dowell ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1909-70471, Hayden Pearce ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8380-81221, Jianmin Zuo1, Sandra Margielewska-Davies1, Kriti Verma1, Samantha Nicol1, Jusnara Begum1, Elizabeth Jinks1, Elif Tut1, Rachel Bruton1, Maria Krutikov2, Madhumita Shrotri2, Rebecca Giddings2, Borscha Azmi2, Chris Fuller2, Aidan Irwin-Singer3, Andrew Hayward4, Andrew Copas5, Laura Shallcross ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1713-25552 & …Paul Moss ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6895-19671 Show authors Nature Aging volume 2, pages 536–547 (2022)Cite this article 3226 Accesses 6 Citations 118 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects AgeingInfectionSARS-CoV-2 AbstractWe studied humoral and cellular immunity against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in 152 long-term care facility staff and 124 residents over a prospective 4-month period shortly after the first wave of infection in England. We show that residents of long-term care facilities developed high and stable levels of antibodies against spike protein and receptor-binding domain. Nucleocapsid-specific responses were also elevated but waned over time. Antibodies showed stable and equivalent levels of functional inhibition against spike-angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 binding in all age groups with comparable activity against viral variants of concern. SARS-CoV-2 seropositive donors showed high levels of antibodies to other beta-coronaviruses but serostatus did not impact humoral immunity to influenza or other respiratory syncytial viruses. SARS-CoV-2-specific cellular responses were similar across all ages but virus-specific populations showed elevated levels of activation in older donors. Thus, survivors of SARS-CoV-2 infection show a robust and stable immunity against the virus that does not negatively impact responses to other seasonal viruses. Similar content being viewed by others SARS-CoV-2 specific T cell and humoral immune responses upon vaccination with BNT162b2: a 9 months longitudinal study Article Open access 14 September 2022 Three exposures to the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 by either infection or vaccination elicit superior neutralizing immunity to all variants of concern Article 28 January 2022 Elevated binding and functional antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in infants versus mothers Article Open access 11 August 2023 MainA striking feature of the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has been the high rates of mortality in older people. The biological basis for this observation is unclear but may relate to relative impairment of innate immune or adaptive responses and increased prevalence of comorbidities. Long-term care facilities (LTCFs) provide residential and/or nursing care support for some of the frailest older adults (>65) in the population and as such have proven vulnerable to the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic1. Rates of SARS-CoV-2 infection in LTCFs have varied considerably and a range of factors have been determined that may impact susceptibility to infection2. Mortality rates among older adult residents have been estimated at up to 30% (ref. 3) with factors such as cognitive impairment and extreme aging as notable risk factors3,4,5. Nevertheless, most older people recover from acute SARS-CoV-2 infection and this is dependent on the generation of a functional SARS-CoV-2-specific immune response. This also helps to provide protection against subsequent reinfection and enhances immune responses at the time of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccination. However, studies of staff and residents in LTCFs are difficult to perform and at the current time there is very limited information regarding the nature of the SARS-CoV-2-specific response after natural infection in this setting.Vaccination against COVID-19 has proven highly effective; evidence to date shows that this protective effect is also observed in older adults and frail individuals6,7. As such, LTCF vaccination programs offer the potential to limit the impact of the pandemic in this setting. However, it is also important to determine how the features of natural immunity impact the immune response to vaccination as SARS-CoV-2 serostatus impacts on the response to both single and double vaccination. These studies are required to determine the relative need for booster vaccination, particularly in vulnerable populations where there has been concern about the longevity of vaccine-induced immunity.A further issue of importance relates to the potential impact of SARS-CoV-2 serostatus on heterologous immune responses to other pathogens. Seasonal respiratory viruses such as influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) are a cause of considerable morbidity and mortality in older adults; it is currently unclear if primary SARS-CoV-2 infection, with its associated acute inflammatory response, might act to suppress memory antibody responses against other pathogens. Competition between plasma cells for space within the immunological niche of the bone marrow and their displacement by subsequent infections has been suggested to be a potential mechanism for loss of some antibody responses with aging8. If so, this could have a considerable impact on policy decisions in relation to the annual influenza vaccination strategy. Furthermore, there is increasing concern about the long-term complications of SARS-CoV-2 infection, which may partly reflect a sustained systemic inflammatory profile. This may be of particular importance in older people since many inflammatory markers increase naturally with age in a process that has been termed ‘inflamm-aging’ and is particularly marked in those with chronic health conditions9. To date, there is no information on how SARS-CoV-2 serostatus impacts systemic inflammatory markers in older people in the care home setting.We determined virus-specific and general inflammatory profiles in both staff and residents in the LTCF setting over a 4-month period and related these findings to SARS-CoV-2 serostatus. Overall, robust SARS-CoV-2-specific and heterologous immune responses were observed across the life course, which is encouraging for longer-term health outcomes and responsiveness to COVID-19 vaccination.ResultsSARS-CoV-2-specific antibody responses are higher in residentsBlood samples were collected from 276 staff and residents at England LTCFs between June and November 2020, before the introduction of COVID-19 vaccination on 8 December 2020 (Table 1). Baseline samples were collected between June and July with matched follow-up samples at two and four months later. A total of 163 donors were SARS-CoV-2 seropositive based on nucleocapsid antibody status and 113 were seronegative. The peak time point for primary SARS-CoV-2 infection in LTCFs was April 2020; as such, these time points likely represent time points up to seven months after primary infection.Table 1 Demographics of donorsFull size tableInitial studies focused on the assessment of SARS-CoV-2-specific humoral immunity in the 163 seropositive staff and residents. Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) technology was used to determine the magnitude of spike-specific, receptor-binding domain (RBD)-specific and nucleocapsid-specific antibody responses and data were compared between four age quintiles: <40; 40–64; 65–85; and 85+ years of age (n = 19, 67, 42 and 35, respectively; <65 years represents staff while >65 years represents residents). Serial analysis at two and four months after the initial collection allowed assessment of antibody waning during this period.Spike-specific and RBD-specific antibody responses were both higher in LTCF residents aged 65+ years compared to younger donors with values that were increased by 1.7-times and 2.1-times, respectively (P = 0.004 and P ≤ 0.0001, respectively) (Fig. 1a–d). Nucleocapsid-specific responses were also increased in older adult donors aged 85+ years where they were 2.2-times higher than donors aged <65 years (P = 0.04) (Fig. 1e,f).Fig. 1: Elevated levels of SARS-CoV-2 spike and nucleocapsid-specific antibodies in LTCF residents.a, SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific IgG response in relation to age in seropositive donors (n = 163; two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.11, P = 0.16). The dotted black line indicates the cutoff. b, Mean spike-specific antibody responses at baseline and at the 2- and 4-month follow-up in 4 age groups: <40 (purple, n = 19); 40–64 (blue, n = 67); 65–85 (green, n = 42); and >85 years (orange, n = 35). The error bars indicate the s.e.m. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, **P < 0.001. c, SARS-CoV-2 RBD-specific IgG response in relation to age in seropositive donors (n = 163) (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.11, P = 0.17). d, Mean RBD-specific antibody responses at baseline and at the 2- and 4-month follow-up in 4 age groups: <40 (purple, n = 19), 40–64 (blue, n = 67), 65–85 (green, n = 42); and >85 years (orange, n = 35). The error bars indicate the s.e.m. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, *P < 0.05, ***P = 0.0006, ****P < 0.0001. e, SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid-specific IgG response in relation to age in seropositive donors (n = 163; two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.19, P = 0.01). The dotted black line indicates the cutoff. f, Mean nucleocapsid-specific antibody responses at baseline and at the 2- and 4-month follow-up in 4 age groups: <40 (purple, n = 19); 40–64 (blue, n = 67), 65–85 (green, n = 42); and >85 years (orange, n = 35). The error bars indicate the s.e.m. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, *P < 0.05, ***P = <0.01. g, Correlation between SARS-CoV-2 spike- and nucleocapsid-specific antibody responses in all donors at three time points, baseline (red) (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.26), 2 months after baseline (green) (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.17) and 4 months after baseline (blue) (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.08) (n = 163 individuals with 3 sample collections each were tested). The lines of best fit are shown. All fitted lines were generated using a simple linear regression. a.u., arbitrary unit.Full size imageThe potential importance of antibody waning was next assessed in relation to donor age. Temporal assessment of antibody responses over four months showed that antibody responses against SARS-CoV-2 spike and RBD were stable over time (Fig. 1g). This is encouraging in relation to potential protection against reinfection and supports clinical assessment in relation to the capacity of natural immunity to prevent infection.In contrast, relative waning of antibody responses against nucleocapsid protein was observed in all age groups during the 4 months of study with average values falling by 34% during this time (Fig. 1e–g and Supplementary Table 3). This pattern of enhanced antibody waning against nucleocapsid has been seen in other settings10 and was reflected in spike:nucleocapsid antibody ratio in donors aged >85+ years, which decreased from 2.4-times at baseline to 1.6 times at 4 months of follow-up (P = 0.0003) (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Table 1).SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody responses are comparable to variants of concernWe next investigated the capacity of antibodies from both staff and residents to inhibit the binding of soluble recombinant spike protein to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Importantly, in addition to the prototypic Wuhan sequence, recombinant spike protein from the viral variants of concern (VOCs) B.1.1.7 (Alpha), B.351 (Beta) and P.1 (Gamma) was also incorporated in the assay.Immunosera showed markedly impaired inability to inhibit spike-ACE2 binding for VOCs compared to the parental Wuhan virus (34% s.d.: 21.7%). This was particularly true for the B.351 (16.6%, P ≤ 0.0001) and P.1 (15.4%, P ﻿≤ 0.0001) VOCs while inhibition of B.1.1.7 variant binding (29.4%, P = 0.78) was comparable to Wuhan in both assays (Fig. 2a). Of note, we also observed that this profile of VOC spike inhibition was stable over four months of follow-up, which indicates that the functional activity of antibodies does not decline (Fig. 2a). Furthermore, no differences were observed in relation to the pattern of spike inhibition using serum samples from donors across all ages (data not shown).Fig. 2: Serological inhibition of spike-ACE2 interaction and direct antibody binding to spike/RBD.a, Serological inhibition of spike binding to ACE2. Spike proteins were available from the viral variants Wuhan (purple), B1.1.7 (blue), B.1.351 (green) and P.1 (orange). Sera were obtained from donors after natural infection at baseline and then 2 and 4 months after the baseline sample. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, ****P < 0.0001 (n = 163 individuals with 3 sample collections each were tested). b, Serological binding to SARS-CoV-2 spike from viral variants (Wuhan (purple), B1.1.7 (blue), B.1.351 (green) and P.1 (orange)) after natural infection at baseline. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. NS, not significant (n = 163 individuals with 3 sample collections each were tested). c, Serological binding to SARS-CoV-2 RBD from viral variants (Wuhan (purple), B1.1.7 (blue), B1.351 (green) and P.1 (orange)) after natural infection at baseline. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, ****P < 0.0001 (n = 163 individuals with 3 sample collections each were tested).Full size imageWe next determined direct serum binding to spike proteins from VOCs. Of interest, antibody binding to total spike protein was comparable against all four VOCs indicating that the mutational changes in each VOC did not significantly change the total antibody binding capacity of the spike protein (Fig. 2b). However, serological neutralization of virus binding to ACE2 is mediated primarily through binding to the RBD; binding was substantially reduced against both B.351 (842 a.u. ml−1, P ﻿≤ 0.0001) and P.1 (1,377 a.u. ml−1, P = 0.0003) compared to 5,170 a.u. ml−1 against the Wuhan prototype (Fig. 2c). This profile was in line with the pattern of spike-ACE2 inhibition; again this pattern was both stable over time and across the age groups (data not shown).These data show that the functional capacity of spike-specific antibodies elicited after natural infection is stable over at least four months and is independent of age in the LTCF setting.SARS-CoV-2 infection boosts antibody responses against beta-coronavirusesWe next went on to assess how previous infection with SARS-CoV-2 impacted on the magnitude of the antibody response against other human coronaviruses. The MSD platform was used to assess binding to spike protein from the beta-coronaviruses SARS-CoV-1, HKU1 and OC43 as well as the alpha-coronaviruses 229E and NL63.As anticipated, antibody binding to SARS-CoV-1 was very low in SARS-CoV-2-seronegative individuals but substantially increased in seropositive donors11 due to substantial sequence homology between viruses. This was strongly enhanced in older donors reflecting the elevated SARS-CoV-2-specific response in this age group (r = 0.16, P = 0.03) (Fig. 3a).Fig. 3: IgG antibody responses against beta-coronaviruses are increased in donors with previous SARS-CoV-2 infection.Comparison of antibody responses to coronaviruses in relation to age and SARS-CoV-2 serostatus. Seronegative donors are indicated by black dots (n = 113) and seropositive donors (n = 163) are indicated by red dots. The lines indicate the line of best fit. Mean responses over 4 months of follow-up are shown in 4 age ranges: <40 (purple); 40–64 (blue); 65–85 (green); and >85 years (orange). The error bars indicate the s.e.m. a, SARS-1 spike-specific antibody response in SARS-CoV-2 seropositive donors (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.16, P = 0.03). Right: Stability of response in the age cohorts. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, *P = 0.035, **P = 0.0013, ***P = 0.0003. b, HKU1 spike-specific antibody response (seropositive: two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.10, P = 0.16; seronegative: two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.14, P = 0.13). Right: Stability of response in the age cohorts. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, *P = 0.01, **P = 0.008. c, OC43 spike-specific antibody response (seropositive: two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.11, P = 0.15; seronegative: two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.17, P = 0.06). Right: Stability of response in the age cohorts. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test: seropositive *P = 0.01; seronegative *P ﻿≤ 0.02. d, 229E spike-specific antibody response (seropositive: two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.23, P = 0.003; seronegative: two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.13, P = 0.16). Right: Stability of response in age cohorts. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test: seropositive P = 0.02; seronegative *P ﻿≤ 0.03. e, NL63 spike-specific antibody response (seropositive: two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.06, P = 0.42; seronegative: two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.19, P = 0.03). Right: Stability of response in the age cohorts. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test seronegative *P ﻿≤ 0.02. All fitted lines were generated using a simple linear regression.Full size imageHowever, it was also noteworthy that enhanced antibody binding was observed against both of the endemic beta-coronaviruses in SARS-CoV-2-positive donors (OC43 55,451 a.u. ml−1 versus 31,539 a.u. ml−1, P ﻿≤ 0.0001 and HKU1 16,223 a.u. ml−1 versus 10,083 a.u. ml−1, P = 0.0008) (Fig. 3b,c). Of note, OC43-specific responses were also enhanced in seronegative older people (r = 0.17, P = 0.06), potentially reflecting the impact of recurrent priming from seasonal infection (Fig. 3b,c).Alpha-coronaviruses show less structural homology with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and this may underlie the finding of no increment in serological binding to spike protein in SARS-CoV-2 seropositive donors. However, the serological response to alpha-coronaviruses was again increased in older people before SARS-CoV-2 infection (NL63: r = 0.19, P = 0.03) but this differential was lost after seroconversion (Fig. 3d,e).These findings show that serological responses against both alpha- and beta-coronaviruses increase with age, potentially due to recurrent infections. However, cross-reactive antibody responses are increased after SARS-CoV-2 infection and this effect is both stronger in younger people and more marked for responses against beta-coronaviruses12,13. The relationship of these observations to clinical protection against individual coronaviruses is uncertain at present.SARS-CoV-2 serostatus does not impair antibody responses against other respiratory virusesAcute respiratory infections such as influenza and RSV represent a major and continuous challenge to the health of older individuals; annual vaccination against influenza is recommended in many countries. Protection against infection is mediated primarily through the action of humoral immunity and there is concern that SARS-CoV-2 serostatus may impact on the titer of heterologous immune responses. As such, we next assessed the strength of antibody responses against a range of influenza viral strains in relation to age and SARS-CoV-2 serostatus.SARS-CoV-2 serostatus did not have any influence on the titer of influenza or RSV-specific antibody responses across the different age groups (Fig. 4). Relative antibody titers against influenza were broadly stable across the life course while the serological response against RSV increased with age.Fig. 4: SARS-CoV-2 serostatus does not influence IgG responses to other respiratory viruses.Comparison of IgG responses against respiratory viruses in relation to age and SARS-CoV-2 serostatus. The red dots indicate positive donors (n = 164) and the black dots indicate negative donors (n = 113). Statistical analysis is shown for seropositive and seronegative donors, respectively. a, Influenza A/H7 Shanghai (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.06, P = 0.40; r = 0.03, P = 0.72). b, Influenza B/HA Brisbane (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.12, P = 0.10; r = 0.22, P = 0.15). c, Influenza A/H3 Hong Kong (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.11, P = 0.16; r = −0.02, P = 0.77). d, Influenza B/HA Phuket (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.18, P = 0.81; r = −0.04, P = 0.64). e, Influenza A/H1 Michigan (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.10, P = 0.18; r = −0.01, P = 0.85). f, RSV fusion protein (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.18, P = 0.02; r = −0.29, P = 0.001). All fitted lines were generated using a simple linear regression.Full size imageThese data provide reassurance that previous history of SARS-CoV-2 infection does not impact detrimentally on the profile of immunity against heterologous respiratory viruses such as influenza or RSV.SARS-CoV-2-specific cellular responses are similar across all agesCellular immune responses are likely to play an important role in protection against reinfection with SARS-CoV-2. As such, interferon-γ (IFN-γ) enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot (ELISpot) analysis was next used to determine T cell responses against both a peptide pool from spike protein and a combination of peptides from nucleocapsid, membrane and envelope protein (N/M/E). Analysis was performed in 80 donors and assessed in 3 age groups: <40; 40–64; and 65+ years. The <40 and 40–64 age groups represent staff while the 65+ age group comprises LTCF residents.The magnitude of the ELISpot response against spike peptides was comparable in donors at all ages and was also stable over the four months of follow-up (Fig. 5a–c). In contrast, cellular responses against the N/M/E pool were lower in donors aged under 40 years (36 spot-forming units (SFU) 106) when compared to the 40–64 (129 SFU 106, P = 0.02) and 65+ age groups (167 SFU 106, P = 0.005) (Fig. 5d–f).Fig. 5: SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell responses are observed across the life course and demonstrate IFN-γ, IL-2 and IL-10 production.a, Spike-specific cellular response in relation to age in seropositive donors (n = 80) (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.02, P = 0.82). The dotted black line indicates the cutoff for a positive response. b, Comparison of spike-specific cellular and antibody responses in seropositive donors (n = 80) (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.32, P = 0.003). c, Mean spike-specific cellular responses in the age categories <40 (purple), 40–64 (blue) and 65+ years (green) at 0, 2 and 4 months. The error bars indicate the s.e. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test showed no significance. d, N/M/E-specific cellular response in relation to age in seropositive donors (n = 80) (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = −0.03, P = 0.72). The dotted black line indicates the cutoff for a positive response. e, Comparison of N/M/E-specific cellular and antibody responses in seropositive donors (n = 80) (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.35, P = 0.001). f, Mean N/M/E-specific cellular responses in the age categories <40 (purple), 40–64 (blue) and >65 years (green) at 0, 2 and 4 months. The error bars indicate the s.e. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, *P = 0.02, **P = 0.005. g, IL-2 concentration in ELISpot supernatants in DMSO (blue), spike S1 (red) and N/M/E (green) peptide-stimulated wells (n = 47 individuals tested from the ELISpot supernatants). Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, ****P ≤ 0.0001. h, IL-10 concentration in ELISpot supernatants in DMSO (blue), spike S1 (red) and N/M/E (green) peptide-stimulated wells (n = 47 individuals tested from the ELISpot supernatants). Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, **P ﻿≤ 0.002Full size imageTo further assess the functional profile of SARS-CoV-2-specific cells, we measured the concentration of cytokines in ELISpot eluates using the LEGENDplex technology. Markedly increased concentrations of interleukin-2 (IL-2) and interleukin-10 (IL-10) were seen in both spike- and N/M/E-specific eluates compared to the dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) control (Fig. 5g,h). Spike: IL-2; 110 mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) units ml−1 (control) versus 890 MFI ml−1, P ﻿≤ 0.0001; IL-10: 220 MFI ml−1 (control) versus 330 MFI ml−1, P = 0.002; N/M/E: IL-2; 110 MFI ml−1 (control) versus 1,000 MFI ml−1, P ﻿≤ 0.0001; IL-10: 215 MFI ml−1 (control) versus 380 MFI ml−1, P = 0.0019). No association with age was seen (Extended Data Fig. 1).SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells are present at low frequencyActivation-induced marker assessment was used to determine the magnitude and profile of the SARS-CoV-2-specific immune response after stimulation with viral peptide pools (n = 44) (Extended Data Fig. 2). The magnitude of the SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell response was modest and comparable across age groups (Fig. 6a). In particular, in LTCF staff a median of 0.02% and 0.016% of CD4+ cells demonstrated specificity for N/M/E or spike, respectively. Comparable values in the resident population were 0.018% and 0.008%, respectively. (Fig. 6a), which is comparable with previous reports. Virus-specific CD8+ cells were not detected with this approach14.Fig. 6: SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell response in staff and residents in LTCFs.a, Quantification of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells based on percentage expression of both CD137+ and CD154+ on CD4+ cells after stimulation with N/M/E or spike peptides. DMSO was used as the negative control. Analysis is grouped into staff (<65 years) or residents (>65 years). The black lines indicate the median. Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, **P ≥ 0.002, ****P ≤ 0.0001. b,c, Percentage expression of HLA-DR+ on CD137+CD154+CD4+ cells after stimulation with N/M/E (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.40, P = 0.006; n = 44) or spike peptides (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.36, P = 0.03; n = 33) in relation to age at baseline (b) and at 4 months (c). d, Percentage expression of HLA-DR on bulk unstimulated CD4+ cells in relation to age at baseline (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.63, P ﻿≤ 0.0001; n = 47) and at the 4-month follow-up (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.54, P = 0.0005; n = 38). All fitted lines were generated using a simple linear regression.Full size imageExpression of memory and differentiation markers on the virus-specific pool demonstrated a dominant CD27+CD28+CD127low CD4+ effector phenotype (data not shown). Of note, expression of the activation marker human leukocyte antigen DR isotype (HLA-DR) increased substantially with age on both spike- and N/M/E-specific CD4+ T cells although MFI was stable (spike: r = 0.36, P = 0.03, N/M/E: r = 0.40, P = 0.006) (Fig. 6b,c and Extended Data Fig. 3). A modest increase of HLA-DR expression was also seen on bulk CD4+ cells in relation to age but this was markedly lower than seen on virus-specific cells (Fig. 6d). This profile was present at baseline and was further accentuated on the spike-specific pool at the 4-month time point where a median of 75% of cells in residents expressed HLA-DR compared to 25% of cells in staff (n = 28; P = 0.02) (Fig. 6b,c). CD95 (Fas) expression was similar but increased during follow-up (Extended Data Fig. 4). Expression of CD25, an additional marker of activation, did not show any such relationship with age (data not shown).These data indicate that SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells comprise a small component of the peripheral T cell pool but virus-specific cells in older people showed increased expression of HLA-DR suggesting activation.Serum inflammatory cytokine levels increase with ageAcute primary infection with SARS-CoV-2 increases serum concentration of many inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and IFN-γ. Sustained elevated levels of these proteins have been seen in a subgroup of patients with more prolonged disease. Thus we next assessed systemic cytokine concentrations in relation to SARS-CoV-2 serostatus across the life course.MSD analysis was used to measure the concentrations of IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-2 and IL-10 in plasma samples (Fig. 7 and Extended Data Fig. 5). Concentrations of the inflammatory cytokines IL-6, IFN-γ, IL-2 and TNF-α increased with age in SARS-CoV-2 seronegative donors and likely reflect the established profile of ‘inflamm-aging’9. No further increase with age was seen in SARS-CoV-2 seropositive individuals. As such these findings indicate that previous infection with SARS-CoV-2 does not appear to enhance systemic inflammation of inflamm-aging.Fig. 7: Plasma cytokine concentrations in relation to age and SARS-CoV-2 serostatus.a, IL-2 (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.41, P = 0.0003; r = 0.008, P = 0.93). b, IL-10 (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.20, P = 0.08; r = 0.11, P = 0.28). c, IFN-γ (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.46, P ≤ 0.0001; r = 0.18, P = 0.07). d, TNF-α (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.52, P ≤ 0.0001; r = 0.47, P ≤ 0.0001). e, IL-6 (two-tailed Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.67, P ≤ 0.0001; r = 0.59, P ≤ 0.0001). The black dots indicate seronegative donors (n = 72) and the red dots indicate seropositive donors (n = 93). Statistical analysis assessed concentration in relation to age and is shown for seronegative and seropositive donors, respectively. All fitted lines were generated using a simple linear regression.Full size imageDiscussionThe SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has presented a major challenge to the management of LTCFs with high rates of mortality among older and frail residents. Little is known about the profile of SARS-CoV-2-specific immunity or the potential impact of previous infection on heterologous immunity. In this study, we investigated SARS-CoV-2-specific immune responses in staff and residents of LTCFs and found robust responses against spike protein across all age groups and no negative impact on immunity to other respiratory viruses. These findings are broadly reassuring for future management decisions.Antibody responses against the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and RBD are thought to be critical in the prevention against reinfection. As such we were encouraged to find that antibody responses against spike and RBD were robust in older people. Indeed, antibody titers were increased in people over 65 years of age. Nucleocapsid-specific antibody responses were also higher in LTCF residents. The reasons for this are not clear but may potentially reflect an elevated residual antibody ‘set point’ after enhanced response to higher levels of viral load at the time of primary infection in older individuals. It is also interesting to speculate on the potential relative ongoing exposure to virus for residents and staff although there are no data at present to suggest that this differs markedly. Nevertheless, these findings are in line with the 85% protection against reinfection that is seen in the resident population, a level of protection somewhat higher than the value of 60% in staff15,16.Antibody responses against human endogenous alpha- and beta-coronaviruses show marked waning within the first year after infection and this has led to concern that a similar process may occur after SARS-CoV-2 infection17. Reassuringly, we observed that antibody responses against both spike and RBD were well maintained for at least four months. These data are in line with reports showing stability of spike-specific responses in younger donors18. In contrast, antibody responses against nucleocapsid protein showed significant waning in all age groups and represent a potential future challenge for the identification of individuals with prior natural infection. The physiological importance of the nucleocapsid-specific antibody response in relation to protection against reinfection is somewhat unclear. This profile of differential waning of nucleocapsid- and spike-specific antibody responses has been observed in other cohorts19 and may reflect alternative mechanisms of antigen presentation at the time of primary infection, with spike protein dominant on the viral envelope and nucleocapsid present in high numbers within the virion. Furthermore, retention of spike protein has been demonstrated within the gastrointestinal tract and may serve to drive maintenance and somatic hypermutation of spike-specific humoral responses20.We were also interested in assessing the relative functional activity of antibodies in relation to age. Again, this was comparable in both staff and residents with comparable inhibition of binding of Wuhan virus spike protein to the ACE2 receptor. Inhibition was also assessed against SARS-COV-2 viral VOCs where reduced activity was seen against both the B.1.351 and P.1 variants, in line with previous reports21, but was equivalent in staff and residents. Furthermore, binding inhibition remained stable over four months, indicating maintenance of antibody avidity. It is worth mentioning that seropositive participants were infected in the first wave of the pandemic before any known VOCs; therefore, it is most likely that they were infected with the Wuhan strain.Infection with heterologous viruses such as influenza and RSV is a major health concern for LTCF residents and there is currently no information on how SARS-CoV-2 serostatus may impact on memory responses against these respiratory viruses. This is of note since during the pandemic there has been a low incidence of non-COVID respiratory infections due to social distancing and there is concern that rapid reemergence of influenza and RSV infections may emerge as LTCFs start to reduce use of disease control measures. Infection with viruses such as measles can erode antibody responses against other pathogens22,23, potentially due to displacement of plasma cells within the bone marrow. Again, it was encouraging to see that the breadth and magnitude of the human response against influenza subtypes were entirely comparable across donors irrespective of SARS-CoV-2 infection status. This provides reassurance that residents who have undergone SARS-CoV-2 infection will not show increased vulnerability against seasonal respiratory infections. It will now be of interest to assess the relative response after annual influenza vaccination.The importance of cellular immunity in relation to the protection against SARS-CoV-2 reinfection is uncertain but it is likely that cellular responses play a critical role in protection against severe disease24. Impairment of natural and vaccine-induced cellular immune responses is a feature of immune senescence and it was therefore noteworthy that spike-specific cellular responses were of similar magnitude in both staff and residents. Indeed, cellular responses against nucleocapsid protein were increased in donors aged over 40 years and therefore mirrored the increased profile of humoral immunity against this protein in relation to age. Functional activity was demonstrated by IFN-γ production within the ELISpot assay while IL-2 and IL-10 were also produced by virus-specific T cells. IL-2 production is a characteristic feature of the SARS-CoV-2 cellular response and suggests that the SARS-CoV-2-specific cellular response resides within a moderately differentiated effector pool but is not driven to terminal differentiation. Less is known about the role of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10. Cellular responses against both the spike and nucleocapsid proteins were stable over the four months of follow-up and again concur with data from younger donors14,25.Phenotyping of virus-specific CD4+ T cells indicated a moderately differentiated CD27+CD28+ phenotype, which is consistent with the predominant IL-2 cytokine phenotype. It was notable that expression of the HLA-DR activation marker was markedly increased on T cells from LTCF residents and this increased further over time. This suggests potential ongoing activation of virus-specific cells in older people, possibly due to increased retention of viral antigen; this will be important to assess in longer-term follow-up.Finally, we also measured the serum concentration of several cytokines across the life course and related these to SARS-CoV-2 serostatus. Ongoing clinical data were not available from the cohort and as such we were unable to relate these values to health outcomes. An increase in IL-6 and TNF-α concentration with age was apparent and is widely recognized as a marker of ‘inflamm-aging’26. Importantly, however, viral serostatus did not have any influence on the magnitude of this trajectory indicating that history of previous infection does not accelerate inflammation in this age group.Vaccination has emerged as a highly effective approach to elicit protection against severe COVID-19 infection7. As such it is important to interpret these findings in relation to vaccine responses in this population. Previous natural infection with SARS-CoV-2 strongly enhances spike-specific immune responses after vaccination and our findings likely underlie the 23-fold elevation of peak antibody responses after single vaccination in SARS-CoV-2 seropositive LTCF residents27. These data indicate that short-term vaccine responses in LTCF residents are likely to be comparable to those of younger people. It will be critical to assess if the comparable maintenance of immunity after natural infection translates into a similar profile after vaccination.It is interesting to reflect on these findings in relation to our current understanding of the mechanisms of immune senescence that often limit the quality of adaptive immune responses against pathogens. These are thought to include attrition of the naïve lymphoid pool, accumulation of senescent cells and increased levels of inflammatory mediators. Our findings that the magnitude and functional quality of adaptive responses against SARS-CoV-2 are robust in older people that survive SARS-COV-2 infection is therefore of some interest. It is not likely that cross-reactive adaptive responses against seasonal human coronaviruses contribute significantly to SAR-CoV-2 responses in older people; as such de novo B and T cell clonal responses would be expected to be recruited from the naïve repertoire. Whether or not germline antigen receptors with specificity for coronaviruses have been selected during evolution and may therefore provide a framework for development of high-affinity SARS-CoV-2-specific responses are unclear although the application of prospective antigen receptor sequencing across age groups will be of interest.Potential limitations of our study include the fact that all seropositive donors clearly represent survivors of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection and, since mortality rates were high in the LTCF resident age group, there may have been potential selection bias for donors with the most effective underlying immune function. Additionally, we did not have access to the exact time or severity of primary infection or history of patient comorbidities. Sex did not impact on immune response but information on participant ethnicity was not available.These findings indicate that immune responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection in older adults and potentially frail resident LTCF population are robust and comparable to those seen in younger people. These findings are consistent with similar levels of protection against reinfection in this cohort and provide insight into the potent influence of previous infection on the magnitude of the immune response to COVID-19 vaccination. It is now important to assess how infection status acts to support the longevity of vaccine-induced immune responses and if this should be used as a determinant of the need for multiple vaccine boosters.MethodsSample collectionThe VIVALDI study (ISRCTN14447421) (ongoing) is a prospective cohort study set up in May 2020 to investigate SARS-CoV-2 transmission, infection outcomes and immunity in residents and staff in LTCFs in England that provide residential and/or nursing care for adults aged 65 years and older (https://wellcomeopenresearch.org/articles/5-232/v2 (ref. 28)). Eligible LTCFs were identified by the Care Provider’s Senior Management Team or by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Clinical Research Network. Pseudonymized clinical (vaccination status, PCR test results) and demographic (age, sex, staff member versus resident) data were retrieved for staff and residents from participating LTCFs through national surveillance systems. All participants provided written informed consent for blood sample collection; if residents lacked the capacity to consent, a personal or nominated consultee was identified to act on their behalf.Blood sampling was offered to participants at three time points in June–July, August–September and October–November 2020. This time period was before the national vaccine rollout; therefore, all data assess the immune response to natural infection alone. The anticoagulated (EDTA) sample was sent to the University of Birmingham and the serum tube to The Doctors Laboratory for anti-nucleocapsid IgG testing. Ethical approval for this study was obtained from the South Central-Hampshire B Research Ethics Committee (ref. no. 20/SC/0238).Data linkageAbbott antibody test results were submitted to the COVID-19 Data Store Reference Library (https://data.england.nhs.uk/covid-19/) and linked to routinely held data on age, sex, LTCF and role (staff or resident) obtained through the national SARS-CoV-2 testing program and vaccination status (date and vaccine type) derived from the National Immunisations Management System. These records were linked using a common identifier based on the individual’s NHS number. Individual-level records were further linked to each LTCF using the unique Care Quality Commission location ID, allocated by the Care Quality Commission who regulate all providers of health and social care in the UK.Inclusion criteriaBoth staff and residents were eligible for inclusion if it was possible to link them to a pseudo-identifier in the COVID-19 Data Store. Only those who had been infected in the first wave of the pandemic in the UK or those who had no evidence of being infected were included in this subcohort. Samples from LTCFs that had experienced outbreaks in the first wave were chosen for seropositive samples and LTCFs with no outbreaks were chosen for the seronegative samples. Participants who seroconverted during the four-month follow-up were not included in the analysis. Due to limited PCR testing in the first wave of the pandemic, it was not possible to determine the date of primary infection with SARS-CoV-2; 21 April 2020 was the peak of the first wave for SARS-CoV-2 infection in LTCFs. Past infection with SARS-CoV-2 was defined based on results of Abbott antibody and MSD quantitative test using the thresholds and methods outlined below.Sample preparationSamples were processed within 24 h of reception at the University of Birmingham. Blood was spun at 300 g for 5 min. Plasma was removed and spun at 500 g for 10 min before storage at −80 °C. The remaining blood was separated using a SepMate (STEMCELL Technologies) density centrifugation tube. The resulting peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) layer was washed twice with Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium and frozen in freezing medium (10% DMSO, 90% FCS).Serological analysis of SARS-CoV-2-specific immune responseQuantitative IgG antibody titers were measured against trimeric spike protein. Multiplex MSD assays were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (panels 7 and 13, lot no. K0081681). Briefly, 96-well plates were blocked. After washing, samples were diluted 1:5,000 in diluent and added to the wells with the reference standard and internal controls. After incubation, plates were washed and anti-IgG detection antibodies were added. Plates were washed and were immediately read using a MESO TM QuickPlex SQ 120 system. Data were generated by the Methodological Mind v1.0 software and analyzed with the MSD Discovery Workbench v.4.0 software. The presented data were adjusted for any sample dilution.To assess serological response against the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid, blood samples were tested for the presence of IgG antibodies specific for nucleocapsid protein using the Abbott ARCHITECT system (Abbott), a semiquantitative chemiluminescent microparticle immunoassay. The assay was performed by The Doctors Laboratory. An index value cutoff of 0.8 was used to classify samples as antibody-positive (≥0.8) (refs. 29,30).Quantitative inhibition of ACE2 binding to SARS-CoV-2 spikeQuantitative inhibition of ACE2 binding to trimeric SARS-CoV-2 spike protein from VOCs was measured using the MSD V-PLEX COVID-19 ACE2 Neutralization Kit (SARS-CoV-2 plate 7) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (lot no. K0081681). Briefly, 96-well plates were blocked. After washing, samples diluted 1:10 in the diluent, as well as reference standards, were added to the plate. After incubation, SULFO-TAG Human ACE2 Protein detection protein was added to the plate and incubated for 1 h. Plates were washed before reading immediately using a MESO QuickPlex SQ 120 system. Data were generated by the Methodological Mind software and analyzed with the MSD Discovery Workbench v.4.0 software. The presented data were adjusted for any sample dilution.Quantification of SARS-CoV-2-specific cellular responses by ELISpot analysisPepMix pools containing 15-mer peptides overlapping by 10 amino acids from either SARS-CoV-2 spike S1 or S2, N/M/E protein domains were purchased from Alta Biosciences (University of Birmingham). T cell responses of postvaccination samples to the above peptide mixes were determined using a Human IFN-γ ELISpot PRO kit (Mabtech). Isolated PBMCs were thawed and rested overnight before assay in R10 (RPMI 1640 + 10% FCS + penicillin/streptomycin). Then, 2–3 × 105 PBMCs were stimulated in duplicate with peptide mixes at 1 μg ml−1 per peptide, anti-CD3 and CEFX cell stimulation mix (JPT) as a positive control or DMSO as a negative control for 16–18 h. Supernatants were collected and stored at −80 °C. After the development of plates according to the manufacturer’s instructions, plates were read using the BIOSYS Bioreader 5000. Mean spot counts in DMSO-treated negative control wells were deducted from the means to generate normalized spot counts for all other treated wells. Cutoff values were determined previously﻿14.Cytokine concentrations in the ELISpot supernatants were assayed using a LEGENDplex Human Th Panel (BioLegend) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Data were analyzed using the LEGENDplex Data Analysis Software Suite (BioLegend).Assessment of plasma cytokine levelsMultiplex assays to quantitatively measure levels of ten different cytokines (IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-13 and TNF-α) in the plasma were performed using the MSD V-PLEX Proinflammatory Panel 1 (human) kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (lot no. K0081665). Briefly, 96-well plates were washed before adding serum diluted 1:4 in diluent and calibrators. After incubation, plates were washed and detection antibodies were added. Plates were washed and read immediately using the MESO QuickPlex SQ 120 system. Data were generated by the Methodological Mind software and analyzed with the MSD Discovery Workbench v.4.0 software. The presented data were adjusted for any sample dilution.Cell surface stainingCryopreserved PBMCs were thawed and rested for at least 6 h in filtered R10 medium; 106+ cells were then stimulated with a combined SARS-CoV-2 spike S1 and S2 peptide pool or an N/M/E protein peptide pool at a final concentration of 1 μg ml−1 per peptide or DMSO for an unstimulated control. Purified anti-CD40 antibody was added to the cell suspension at final concentration 1 μg ml−1. Cells were incubated at 37 °C overnight for 16 h. After stimulation, cells were washed (PBS + 5% BSA + 1% EDTA), Brilliant Stain Buffer (BD) was added and cells were surface-stained at 4 °C for 30 min (Supplementary Table 2). Cells were washed and run on a BD Symphony A3 flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and analysis was carried out using FlowJo v.10.7.1.Statistical analysisAll data were blinded to the investigators. Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested. For comparative analysis of two groups a Mann–Whitney U-test was applied. For comparative analysis with three or more groups, an ordinary one-way analysis of variance was used; for multiple comparisons, a Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was used. Pearson rank correlation coefficients were calculated and tested for correlations. All linear regressions were performed using the following equation: Y = a × X + b. Data analysis was performed in Prism v.9.1.0 (GraphPad Software).Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability De-identified test results and limited meta-data will be made available for use by researchers in future studies, subject to appropriate research ethical approval, once the VIVALDI study cohort has been finalized. These datasets will be accessible via the Health Data Research UK Gateway (https://www.healthdatagateway.org/). All other data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. ReferencesGraham, N. S. N. et al. SARS-CoV-2 infection, clinical features and outcome of COVID-19 in United Kingdom nursing homes. J. Infect. 81, 411–419 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Hollinghurst, J. et al. The impact of COVID-19 on adjusted mortality risk in care homes for older adults in Wales, UK: a retrospective population-based cohort study for mortality in 2016–2020. Age Ageing 50, 25–31 (2021).Article Google Scholar Dutey-Magni, P. F. et al. COVID-19 infection and attributable mortality in UK care homes: cohort study using active surveillance and electronic records (March–June 2020). Age Ageing 50, 1019–1028 (2021).Article Google Scholar Atkins, J. L. et al. Preexisting comorbidities predicting severe COVID-19 and mortality in the UK Biobank community cohort. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 75, 2224–2230 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Morciano, M., Stokes, J., Kontopantelis, E., Hall, I. & Turner, A. J. Excess mortality for care home residents during the first 23 weeks of the COVID-19 pandemic in England: a national cohort study. BMC Med. 19, 71 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Pawelec, G. & McElhaney, J. Unanticipated efficacy of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in older adults. Immun. Ageing 18, 7 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Shrotri, M. et al. Vaccine effectiveness of the first dose of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and BNT162b2 against SARS-CoV-2 infection in residents of long-term care facilities in England (VIVALDI): a prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect. Dis. 21, 1529–1538 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Radbruch, A. et al. Competence and competition: the challenge of becoming a long-lived plasma cell. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6, 741–750 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Ferrucci, L. & Fabbri, E. Inflammageing: chronic inflammation in ageing, cardiovascular disease, and frailty. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 15, 505–522 (2018).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gallais, F. et al. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies persist for up to 13 months and reduce risk of reinfection. Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.07.21256823 (2021).Lv, H. et al. Cross-reactive antibody response between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV infections. Cell Rep. 31, 107725 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Dowell, A.C., Butler, M.S., Jinks, E. et al. Children develop robust and sustained cross-reactive spike-specific immune responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nat. Immunol. 23, 40–49 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-021-01089-8Ng, K. W. et al. Preexisting and de novo humoral immunity to SARS-CoV-2 in humans. Science 370, 1339–1343 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Zuo, J. et al. Robust SARS-CoV-2-specific T-cell immunity is maintained at 6 months following primary infection. Nat. Immunol. 22, 620–626 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Jeffery-Smith, A. et al. Antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 protect against re-infection during outbreaks in care homes, September and October 2020. Euro Surveill. 26, 2100092 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Krutikov, M. et al. Incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection according to baseline antibody status in staff and residents of 100 long-term care facilities (VIVALDI): a prospective cohort study. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2, e362–e370 (2021).Article Google Scholar Huang, A. T. et al. A systematic review of antibody mediated immunity to coronaviruses: kinetics, correlates of protection, and association with severity. Nat. Commun. 11, 4704 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Iyer, A. S. et al. Persistence and decay of human antibody responses to the receptor binding domain of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in COVID-19 patients. Sci. Immunol. 5, eabe0367 (2020).Article Google Scholar Tea, F. et al. SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies: longevity, breadth, and evasion by emerging viral variants. PLoS Med. 18, e1003656 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Sonkar, C., Kashyap, D., Varshney, N., Baral, B. & Jha, H. C. Impact of gastrointestinal symptoms in COVID-19: a molecular approach. SN Compr. Clin. Med. 2, 2658–2669 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 variants B.1.351 and P.1 escape from neutralizing antibodies. Cell 184, 2384–2393.e12 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Mina, M. J. et al. Measles virus infection diminishes preexisting antibodies that offer protection from other pathogens. Science 366, 599–606 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Petrova, V. N. et al. Incomplete genetic reconstitution of B cell pools contributes to prolonged immunosuppression after measles. Sci. Immunol. 4, eaay6125 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Cohen, K. W. et al. Longitudinal analysis shows durable and broad immune memory after SARS-CoV-2 infection with persisting antibody responses and memory B and T cells. Cell Rep. Med. 2, 100354 (2021).Article Google Scholar Le Bert, N. et al. SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell immunity in cases of COVID-19 and SARS, and uninfected controls. Nature 584, 457–462 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Alberro, A. et al. Inflammaging markers characteristic of advanced age show similar levels with frailty and dependency. Sci. Rep. 11, 4358 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Tut, G. et al. Profile of humoral and cellular immune responses to single doses of BNT162b2 or ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccines in residents and staff within residential care homes (VIVALDI): an observational study. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2, e544–e553 (2021).Article Google Scholar Krutikov, M. et al. Study protocol: understanding SARS-Cov-2 infection, immunity and its duration in care home residents and staff in England (VIVALDI). Wellcome Open Res. 5, 232 (2020).Article Google Scholar Ainsworth, M. et al. Performance characteristics of five immunoassays for SARS-CoV-2: a head-to-head benchmark comparison. Lancet Infect. Dis. 20, 1390–1400 (2020).Article Google Scholar Bryan, A. et al. Performance characteristics of the Abbott ARCHITECT SARS-CoV-2 IgG assay and seroprevalence in Boise, Idaho. J. Clin. Microbiol. 58, e00941-20 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank the staff and residents in the LTCFs who participated in this study and M. Marshall at NHS England who pseudonymized the electronic health records. This report is independent research funded by the Department of Health and Social Care (COVID-19 surveillance studies). A.H. is supported by Health Data Research UK (grant no. LOND1), which is funded by the UK Medical Research Council, Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, Economic and Social Research Council, Department of Health and Social Care (England), Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish Government Health and Social Care Directorates, Health and Social Care Research and Development Division (Welsh Government), Public Health Agency (Northern Ireland), British Heart Foundation and Wellcome Trust. L.S. is funded by an NIHR Clinician Scientist Award (no. CS-2016-007). M.K. is funded by a Wellcome Trust Clinical PhD Fellowship (no. 222907/Z/21/Z). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, Public Health England or the UK Government Department of Health and Social Care.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsInstitute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UKGokhan Tut, Tara Lancaster, Megan S. Butler, Panagiota Sylla, Eliska Spalkova, David Bone, Nayandeep Kaur, Christopher Bentley, Umayr Amin, Azar T. Jadir, Samuel Hulme, Morenike Ayodel, Alexander C. Dowell, Hayden Pearce, Jianmin Zuo, Sandra Margielewska-Davies, Kriti Verma, Samantha Nicol, Jusnara Begum, Elizabeth Jinks, Elif Tut, Rachel Bruton & Paul MossUCL Institute of Health Informatics, London, UKMaria Krutikov, Madhumita Shrotri, Rebecca Giddings, Borscha Azmi, Chris Fuller & Laura ShallcrossDepartment of Health and Social Care, London, UKAidan Irwin-SingerHealth Data Research UK, London, UKAndrew HaywardUCL Institute for Global Health, London, UKAndrew CopasAuthorsGokhan TutView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTara LancasterView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMegan S. ButlerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPanagiota SyllaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEliska SpalkovaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDavid BoneView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNayandeep KaurView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChristopher BentleyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarUmayr AminView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAzar T. JadirView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSamuel HulmeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMorenike AyodelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlexander C. DowellView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHayden PearceView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJianmin ZuoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSandra Margielewska-DaviesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKriti VermaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSamantha NicolView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJusnara BegumView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarElizabeth JinksView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarElif TutView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRachel BrutonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMaria KrutikovView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMadhumita ShrotriView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRebecca GiddingsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBorscha AzmiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChris FullerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAidan Irwin-SingerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrew HaywardView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrew CopasView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLaura ShallcrossView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPaul MossView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsL.S., A.C., A.H., M.K., G.T. and P.M. conceptualized the study. G.T., A.C.D., P.M. and H.P. conceptualized the method. M.K., B.A., C.F., R.B., G.T., C.B., U.A., S.H., A.T.J., D.B., M.S.B., M.A., E.S., S.M.S., K.V., S.N., J.B., E.J., E.T., M.S., A.I.S., R.G. and J.Z. administered the project. G.T., T.L., M.S.B., E.S., P.S. and N.K. curated and validated the data. L.S., A.H., A.C. and P.M. obtained the funding. G.T., P.M., T.L. and M.S.B. wrote the original draft. All authors reviewed and edited the draft. G.T., T.L., N.K., P.S., M.S.B., A.C.D. and P.M. had full access to the data in the study. P.M. and G.T. have shared responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Gokhan Tut or Paul Moss.Ethics declarations Competing interests L.S. reports grants from the Department of Health and Social Care during the conduct of the study and is a member of the Social Care Working Group, which reports to the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies. A.H. is a member of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group at the Department of Health. The other authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Aging thanks Danny Altmann and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Extended dataExtended Data Fig. 1 IL-10 and IL-2 concentration in ELISpot supernatants at 4 month timepoint and in relation to age.a) IL-2 concentration in ELISpot supernatants in DMSO negative control (blue), S1 (red) and N/M/E (green) peptide-stimulated wells (n = 47 individuals tested from ELISpot supernatants). Two tailed Pearson correlation no statistical significance seen. b) IL-10 concentration in ELISpot supernatants in DMSO negative control (blue), S1 (red) and N/M/E (green) peptide-simulated wells (n = 47 individuals tested from ELISpot supernatants). Two tailed Pearson correlation no statistical significance seen. All fitted lines are generated using a simple linear regression.Extended Data Fig. 2AIM gating strategy to isolate SARS-CoV-2 specific CD4 cells.Extended Data Fig. 3 MFI of HLA-DR expression on virus-specific CD4+ cells in relation to age from spike-specific (Two tailed Pearson correlation r = 0.21 p = 0.34; n = 22) and NME-specific cells (Two tailed Pearson correlation r = 0.23 p = 0.14; n = 42).MFI of HLA-DR expression on virus-specific CD4+ cells in relation to age from spike-specific (Two tailed Pearson correlation r = 0.21 p = 0.34; n = 22) and NME-specific cells (Two tailed Pearson correlation r = 0.23 p = 0.14; n = 42).Extended Data Fig. 4 Percentage of CD95+ expression on SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ cells at baseline and at 4 months follow up in donors aged <65 or 65 + years.a, b) Quantification of CD95+ on CD4+ virus-specific cells after stimulation with N/M/E or spike peptides. Red dots are donors aged <65 years (n = 19) and purple dots are donors aged >65 years(n = 25). Tukey’s multiple comparations test, no significance seen.Extended Data Fig. 5 Plasma IFN-γ and IL-2 concentration in relation to SARS-CoV-2 serostatus and age quartile.a) IFN-γ concentration from SARS-CoV-2 seropositive (red, n = 92) and seronegative (black, n = 72) donors. Tukey’s multiple comparations test no significance seen. b) IL-2 concentration from SARS-CoV-2 seropositive (red, n = 92) and seronegative (black, n = 72) Tukey’s multiple comparations test * p = 0.02 **p = 0.005.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationSupplementary Tables 1–3.Reporting SummaryRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleTut, G., Lancaster, T., Butler, M.S. et al. Robust SARS-CoV-2-specific and heterologous immune responses in vaccine-naïve residents of long-term care facilities who survive natural infection. Nat Aging 2, 536–547 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00224-wDownload citationReceived: 19 August 2021Accepted: 14 April 2022Published: 30 May 2022Issue Date: June 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00224-wShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Associated content Robust heterologous immune responses in older adult survivors of COVID-19 Nature Aging Research Briefing 30 May 2022 Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Journal Metrics About the Editors Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Editorial Policies Content Types Conferences Presubmission inquiries Contact Publish with us Submission Guidelines For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Aging (Nat Aging) ISSN 2662-8465 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingCoronavirus Daily: Covid Is More Lethal to Kids Than The Flu - Bloomberg Skip to content Bloomberg the Company & Its ProductsThe Company & its ProductsBloomberg Terminal Demo RequestBloomberg Anywhere Remote LoginBloomberg Anywhere LoginBloomberg Customer SupportCustomer Support BloombergConnecting decision makers to a dynamic network of information, people and ideas, Bloomberg quickly and accurately delivers business and financial information, news and insight around the world For CustomersBloomberg Anywhere Remote LoginSoftware UpdatesManage Products and Account Information SupportAmericas+1 212 318 2000EMEA+44 20 7330 7500Asia Pacific+65 6212 1000 CompanyAboutCareersDiversity and InclusionTech At BloombergPhilanthropySustainabilityBloomberg LondonBloomberg BetaGender-Equality Index CommunicationsPress AnnouncementsPress Contacts FollowFacebookInstagramLinkedInTwitterYouTube ProductsBloomberg TerminalDataTradingRiskComplianceIndices Industry ProductsBloomberg LawBloomberg TaxBloomberg GovernmentBloombergNEF MediaBloomberg MarketsBloomberg TechnologyBloomberg PursuitsBloomberg PoliticsBloomberg OpinionBloomberg BusinessweekBloomberg Live ConferencesBloomberg RadioBloomberg TelevisionNews Bureaus Media ServicesBloomberg Media DistributionAdvertising CompanyAboutCareersDiversity and InclusionTech At BloombergPhilanthropySustainabilityBloomberg LondonBloomberg BetaGender-Equality Index CommunicationsPress AnnouncementsPress Contacts FollowFacebookInstagramLinkedInTwitterYouTube ProductsBloomberg TerminalDataTradingRiskComplianceIndices Industry ProductsBloomberg LawBloomberg TaxBloomberg GovernmentBloomberg EnvironmentBloombergNEF MediaBloomberg MarketsBloomberg TechnologyBloomberg PursuitsBloomberg PoliticsBloomberg OpinionBloomberg BusinessweekBloomberg Live ConferencesBloomberg RadioBloomberg TelevisionNews Bureaus Media ServicesBloomberg Media DistributionAdvertising BloombergConnecting decision makers to a dynamic network of information, people and ideas, Bloomberg quickly and accurately delivers business and financial information, news and insight around the world For CustomersBloomberg Anywhere Remote LoginSoftware UpdatesManage Contracts and Orders SupportAmericas+1 212 318 2000EMEA+44 20 7330 7500Asia Pacific+65 6212 1000 Sign InSubscribeSearchLive TVMarketsChevron DownEconomicsIndustriesTechPoliticsBusinessweekOpinionMoreChevron DownUS EditionChevron DownMenuSubscribeNewsletterCovid Is Way More Lethal to Kids Than The FluFacebookTwitterLinkedInEmailLinkGiftExpandA child wears a KN95 protective mask for kids.Photographer: Tiffany Hagler-Geard/BloombergFacebookTwitterLinkedInEmailLinkGiftGift this articleShare feedbackNew WindowHave a confidential tip for our reporters? Get in TouchBefore it’s here, it’s on the Bloomberg TerminalBloomberg Terminal LEARN MOREFacebookTwitterLinkedInEmailLinkGiftBy Madison MullerJune 3, 2022 at 7:30 AM EDTBookmarkSaveHere’s the latest news from the pandemic.In the US, nearly six times more kids and teens died from Covid in one year than did from the flu, according to a new analysis of pediatric mortality data.Millions of kids get sick with the seasonal flu each year. But although it can be dangerous — especially for those who are unvaccinated — it's much less lethal than Covid. According to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data, childhood flu deaths during the regular season have ranged from 39 to 199 since 2004. Meanwhile, in 2021 alone, more than 600 children died from Covid-19, according to the analysis done by Jeremy Faust, a professor at Harvard University Medical School and physician at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston. Faust used death data from the CDC to compare Covid deaths during the pandemic to flu deaths over the last decade, to highlight the differences in severity between the viruses in kids.Have a confidential tip for our reporters? Get in TouchBefore it’s here, it’s on the Bloomberg TerminalBloomberg Terminal LEARN MOREHomeBTV+Market DataOpinionAudioOriginalsMagazineEventsNewsMarketsEconomicsTechnologyPoliticsGreenCryptoAIWork & LifeWealthPursuitsBusinessweekCityLabEqualityPursuitsWork ShiftMarket DataStocksCommoditiesRates & BondsCurrenciesFuturesSectorsEconomic CalendarExploreNewslettersExplainersThe Big TakeGraphicsSubmit a TipAbout UsTerms of ServiceDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationTrademarksPrivacy PolicyCareersMade in NYCAdvertiseAd ChoicesHelp©2024 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.Bird flu Illinois: IL DNR says residents can resume using backyard bird feeders, bird baths - ABC7 Chicago 24/7 LiveChicago & Suburban Cook Co.North SuburbsWest SuburbsSouth SuburbsNW IndianaWelcome, Mickeymickey@disney.comManage MyDisney AccountLog Out birdsIllinois residents can again use bird feeders, bathsByABC7 Chicago Digital Team Wednesday, June 1, 2022IL residents can again use bird feeders, bathsIllinois residents can now start using backyard bird feeders and bird baths again starting Wednesday with avian flu concerns mostly passed.CHICAGO (WLS) -- Illinois residents can now start using backyard bird feeders and birdbaths again starting Wednesday.The Illinois Department of Natural Resources had advised residents against putting them out because of an earlier outbreak of the avian flu.The EA HFN1 strain of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) impacted wild and domestic bird species in Illinois, according to the IDNR.SEE ALSO | Bird flu 2022: Hundreds of birds found dead as avian influenza sweeps through Baker's LakeHPAI was first detected in wild Canada geese in Illinois in March. While it had not been detected in songbirds, the IDNR recommended residents take down their bird feeders and baths through the end of May, or until HPAI infections subside in the Midwest.With the spring migration of birds mostly complete, the risk of deadly bird flu spread has now dropped.Report a correction or typoCopyright © 2024 WLS-TV. All Rights Reserved.Related Topics PETS & ANIMALS ILLINOIS FLU OUTBREAK BIRDS NATUREBirdsSchools of dead fish, swarming birds causing a stink in South JerseyFish falls from sky and damages couple's parked TeslaAll 4 piping plover eggs hatch at Montrose Beach3 piping plover eggs hatch at Montrose BeachWatch LiveON NOWTop StoriesMissing woman found dead in suburban woods ID'd, police investigatingMan shot to death while exiting suburban high school with son: policeIL judge shot to death; wife charged in murder, police say1 dead, 16 injured in shooting at Alabama university: officialsCommunity calls on CPD to fire officers on alleged Oath Keepers listElla Jenkins, 'First Lady of Children's Music,' dies at 100 in ChicagoDisney Cruise ship rescues 4 people off sinking catamaran25 escaped monkeys captured in South Carolina, 18 remain on the looseHomeAccuWeatherTrafficLocal NewsChicago & Suburban Cook Co.North SuburbsWest SuburbsSouth SuburbsNW IndianaCategoriesWatchAppsLocal NewsU.S. & WorldI-TeamPoliticsEntertainmentConsumer & BusinessStation InfoAbout ABC7 ChicagoABC7 Newsteam BiosCommunity JournalismTV ListingsABC7 Jobs - InternshipsContests, Promotions & RulesCommunityShowsABC7 LIVE NewscastsWindy City WeekendOur ChicagoOur AmericaAppsFollow Us:HomeWeatherTrafficWatchPhotosAppsChicago & Suburban Cook Co.North SuburbsWest SuburbsSouth SuburbsNW IndianaLocal NewsU.S. & WorldI-TeamPoliticsEntertainmentConsumer & BusinessAbout ABC7 ChicagoABC7 Newsteam BiosCommunity JournalismTV ListingsABC7 Jobs - InternshipsContests, Promotions & RulesCommunityPrivacy PolicyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationChildren's Privacy PolicyYour US State Privacy RightsTerms of UseInterest-Based AdsPublic Inspection FileFCC ApplicationsPrivacy PolicyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationChildren's Privacy PolicyYour US State Privacy RightsTerms of UseInterest-Based AdsPublic Inspection FileFCC ApplicationsCopyright © 2024 ABC, Inc., WLS-TV Chicago. All Rights Reserved.Open Orphan shares up 9% after the company lands £14.7mln influenza deal - its largest single contract | AIM:HVO USA UK USA AU CA MyProactive Feed Alerts Subscriptions Bookmarks Settings Sign In News Browse Latest news Live Market reports OTC Markets Small caps Hemogenyx receives £600,000 institutional boost 03:00 11 Nov Arrow Exploration has brought its fifth Ubaque well online in Colombia 02:57 11 Nov Seeing Machines makes strong first-quarter progress 02:50 11 Nov Pantheon Resources start operations for Megrez well 02:37 11 Nov Pantheon Resources hails ‘great achievements’ in Alaska 02:37 11 Nov Topics Browse Latest news Spotlight All topics... Basic Materials Energy Finance Health Industry & services Mining Retail & consumer Tech Telecoms & Networks Utilities Hemogenyx receives £600,000 institutional boost 03:00 11 Nov Arrow Exploration has brought its fifth Ubaque well online in Colombia 02:57 11 Nov Seeing Machines makes strong first-quarter progress 02:50 11 Nov Pantheon Resources start operations for Megrez well 02:37 11 Nov Pantheon Resources hails ‘great achievements’ in Alaska 02:37 11 Nov Pharma & Biotech Sustainability Cannabis Battery Metals Artificial Intelligence Insights Browse Latest news Deep dive Feature Pantheon Resources hails ‘great achievements’ in Alaska 02:37 11 Nov Imugene seeks to activate immune system of cancer patients to identify and eradicate tumours 23:03 10 Nov Lindian Resources poised to transform Kangankunde into a globally significant rare earths venture 19:40 10 Nov Arizona Gold and Silver Inc. continues the hunt for large, high-grade targets at its projects in the US state 09:00 09 Nov CleanTech Lithium progresses a cleaner way of supplying battery grade lithium from Chile 05:15 09 Nov Companies Browse Latest news Big caps Mid caps Search A-Z Small caps Hemogenyx receives £600,000 institutional boost 03:00 11 Nov Arrow Exploration has brought its fifth Ubaque well online in Colombia 02:57 11 Nov Seeing Machines makes strong first-quarter progress 02:50 11 Nov Pantheon Resources start operations for Megrez well 02:37 11 Nov Pantheon Resources hails ‘great achievements’ in Alaska 02:37 11 Nov Watch Sign Up What are you searching for? Companies News See all companies matching See all news matching FeatureHealth Written by: Ian Lyall About this content Disclaimer No investment advice Share article NO INVESTMENT ADVICE Proactive Investors Australia Pty Ltd ACN 132 787 654 (the Company, we or us) provides you with access to the content set out above, including any news, quotes, information, data, text, reports, ratings, opinions, images, photos, graphics, graphs, charts, animations and video (Content) and this website (the Site) on the terms set out in this disclaimer, together with all other terms and conditions, disclaimers and other notices displayed elsewhere on this Site. It is important for you to know that: (a) none of the Content is, or is intended to be, general or personal advice (b) the principal purpose of the Content is to provide factual information only and to comment on news; (c) the Content does not contain or imply any recommendation or opinion intended to influence your financial decisions, including in respect of any particular security, portfolio of securities, transaction or... FOR OUR FULL DISCLAIMER CLICK HERE About this content × About Ian Lyall Ian Lyall, a seasoned journalist and editor, brings over three decades of experience to his role as Managing Editor at Proactive. Overseeing Proactive's editorial and broadcast operations across six offices on three continents, Ian is responsible for quality control, editorial policy, and content production. He directs the creation of 50,000 pieces of real-time news, feature articles, and filmed interviews annually. Prior to Proactive, Ian helped lead the business output at the Daily... Read more About the publisher Proactive financial news and online broadcast teams provide fast, accessible, informative and actionable business and finance news content to a global investment audience. All our content is produced independently by our experienced and qualified teams of news journalists. Proactive news team spans the world’s key finance and investing hubs with bureaus and studios in London, New York, Toronto, Vancouver, Sydney and Perth. We are experts in medium and small-cap markets, we also keep our community up to date with blue-chip companies, commodities and broader investment stories. This is content that excites and engages motivated private investors. The team delivers news and unique insights across the market including but not confined to: biotech and pharma, mining and natural resources, battery metals, oil and gas, crypto and emerging digital and EV technologies. Use of technology Proactive has always been a forward looking and enthusiastic technology adopter. Our human content creators are equipped with many decades of valuable expertise and experience. The team also has access to and use technologies to assist and enhance workflows. Proactive will on occasion use automation and software tools, including generative AI. Nevertheless, all content published by Proactive is edited and authored by humans, in line with best practice in regard to content production and search engine optimisation. hVIVO PLC(AIM:HVO) View Price & Profile Open Orphan shares up 9% after the company lands £14.7mln influenza deal - its largest single contract Published: 07:25 01 Jun 2022 EDT Shares in Open Orphan PLC (AIM:ORPH, OTC:OPORF) rose 9% after its hVIVO subsidiary landed a £14.7m influenza deal – its largest single contract to date. It is also its first end-to-end contract with the group manufacturing the virus, carrying out the characterisation study and then testing the vaccine. “That is another major milestone for us,” said chief executive Mo Khan, in an interview with Proactive’s Stephen Gunnion. In that chat, he said he expected influenza work to increase as companies race to find a suitable vaccine for the virus. “I think Covid has highlighted the issues with regards to having a viral pandemic and influenza is believed to be the next viral pandemic,” Khan said. “So, we are helping pharmaceutical partners in developing and discovering new drugs and getting them the efficacy data as early as possible so that they know their drug works.” hVIVO’s contract is with an unnamed global ‘top-five’ pharma company, with work expected to get underway in the third quarter. Revenues from the deal will be recognised this year and next. Shares in parent company Open Orphan were up 1.39p, or 9.4% to 16.14p. In the past month, they have advanced 22%. Most read Tech Nvidia joins Dow, surpassing Apple as world’s... 2 days, 12 hours ago Industry & Services Tesla joins $1T market cap club 2 days, 14 hours ago Tech Arm Holdings 'executing crisply' says bullish... 2 days, 21 hours ago Industry & Services Lucid Group shares motor 5% higher after Q3 beat 2 days, 23 hours ago Sign up to receive alerts and news direct to your inbox Sign up for Newsletter Watch Poolbeg Pharma chair discusses shift to executive role; hVIVO share sale Poolbeg Pharma PLC (AIM:POLB, OTCQB:POLBF) chairman Cathal Friel joined Proactive's Stephen Gunnion to discuss his new hands-on role at the company. Stepping up as the executive chairman at Poolbeg Pharma, Friel expressed his intention to replicate the success he achieved with hVIVO, another... on 02/15/2024 Health hVIVO Canary Wharf move to deliver material increase in capacity -... on 09/05/2023 Health Open Orphan's chief financial officer confident of "sustainable... on 10/18/2022 Health Open Orphan's order book reflects booming challenge study market,... on 09/16/2022 Health Open Orphan's CEO talks through name change and a first half 'full... on 09/08/2022 Editor's Picks Movers AppLovin shares surge to record high following strong quarter 3 days, 14 hours ago Tech Nvidia surpasses Apple as world's most valuable company once again 5 days, 10 hours ago Retail & Consumer AMC expected to post decent earnings as focus shifts to debt... 6 days, 11 hours ago Retail & Consumer Amazon results show AWS growth outpacing expectations, but... 1 week, 3 days ago Retail & Consumer Amazon beats Q3 estimates as AWS boosts margins 1 week, 4 days ago Retail & Consumer Amazon's upcoming Q3 earnings puts AWS strength, retail margins in... 1 week, 4 days ago Tech Alphabet tops Q3 projections with Cloud profit surge 1 week, 6 days ago Industry & Services Ford trims full year profit guidance sending shares into reverse 2 weeks ago Mining Copper output down year-on-year in Q3 as analysts foresee looming... 2 weeks ago Industry & Services Boeing's rumored space division sale could net a billion-dollar... 2 weeks ago About Meet the team Contact T&C Work for us Follow us on: Copyright © Proactive Group Holdings Inc, 2024 All Rights Reserved - Proactive North America Inc., Proactive Investors LLC. Market Indices, Commodities and Regulatory News Headlines copyright © Morningstar. Data delayed 15 minutes unless otherwise indicated. Terms of use. linkGreat Falls Tribune Subscription Offers, Specials, and DiscountsGet unlimited access with a subscriptionEssential DigitalOne month freeSubscribe NowWhat's includedUnlimited access to and our apps.The eNewspaper: a digital replica of the newspaper.Add a user to your digital subscription for free.Essential Digital$45 for 1 yearSubscribe NowWhat's includedUnlimited access to and our apps.The eNewspaper: a digital replica of the newspaper.Add a user to your digital subscription for free.Print DeliveryAs low as $1.00Subscribe NowWhat's includedAll the features of Essential DigitalPrint delivery of USA TODAY CrosswordNo commitment required. Cancel anytime.*Offer available to new customers only. All savings based off the regular rate. Read the full Subscription Terms and Conditions.© 2024 www.greatfallstribune.comGeese, skuas, cranes and even foxes: avian flu takes growing toll on wildlife | Global development | The Guardian Skip to main contentSkip to navigationClose dialogue1/3Next imagePrevious imageToggle captionSkip to navigationPrint subscriptionsSearch jobs Sign inIntInternational editionUK editionUS editionAustralia editionEurope editionThe Guardian - Back to homeThe GuardianNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleShow moreHide expanded menuNewsView all NewsWorld newsUS elections 2024UK newsClimate crisisUkraineEnvironmentScienceGlobal developmentFootballTechBusinessObituariesOpinionView all OpinionThe Guardian viewColumnistsCartoonsOpinion videosLettersSportView all SportFootballCricketRugby unionTennisCyclingF1GolfUS sportsCultureView all CultureBooksMusicTV & radioArt & designFilmGamesClassicalStageLifestyleView all LifestyleFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneySearch input google-search SearchSupport usPrint subscriptionsSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsThe Guardian appVideoPodcastsPicturesNewslettersToday's paperInside the GuardianThe ObserverGuardian WeeklyCrosswordsWordiplyCorrectionsSearch input google-search SearchSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsEnvironmentClimate crisisWildlifeEnergyPollution One of the dead birds found by Peter Stronach at Loch Fleet nature reserve, near Dornoch, Scotland. Photograph: Peter StronachView image in fullscreenOne of the dead birds found by Peter Stronach at Loch Fleet nature reserve, near Dornoch, Scotland. Photograph: Peter StronachThe age of extinctionGlobal development This article is more than 2 years oldGeese, skuas, cranes and even foxes: avian flu takes growing toll on wildlife This article is more than 2 years oldOne ecologist counted 160 dead wild birds while walking round a Scottish loch, and figures from other countries are just as worryingThe age of extinction is supported byAbout this contentStephen MossThu 2 Jun 2022 07.30 BSTLast modified on Wed 19 Oct 2022 16.35 BSTShareAs he walked along the shoreline of a Highland loch on a fine May evening, ecologist and wildlife photographer Peter Stronach could hardly believe what he was seeing. The beach was littered with dead and dying birds: male eider ducks, several species of gulls, a gannet, a puffin and no fewer than 26 pink-footed geese, which should by now have been on the way back to their Icelandic breeding grounds.In all, Stronach recorded 72 individual birds of 17 species at Loch Fleet national nature reserve on the east coast of Scotland on that one day, plus many more in the following days.But these birds had not been killed by a passing predator; nor were they the hapless victims of a sudden storm at sea. The cause of these deaths was a highly infectious – and for birds, usually lethal – virus. Avian influenza H5N1 or, as it is more commonly known, bird flu, is back with a vengeance.What really worries Stronach is the range of species he found. “Earlier this spring, we noticed that avian flu was restricted to the geese; but since then it has spread to other wildfowl, raptors and seabirds.”In previous years, it mainly occurred in winter; now, he says, it is affecting the breeding populations of iconic coastal species such as the eider.Elsewhere in Scotland earlier this month about 20 great skuas were found dead or dying on Fair Isle, with more reported from other breeding colonies on the Shetland Isles. This followed a serious outbreak of bird flu in 2021, when hundreds of skuas died.For any species, these deaths are a serious setback, especially at the height of the breeding season. But for great skuas and pink-footed geese, this news is especially troubling. Scotland hosts 60% of the global breeding population of great skuas, and 90% of the world population of pink-footed geese overwinter in the UK. For these two species, both of which are on the amber list of birds of conservation concern, bird flu could pose a serious threat to their long-term future.Bird flu is by no means confined to the UK. In December 2021, an outbreak in the Hula valley, in northern Israel, killed more than 5,000 cranes out of a wintering population of 30,000 birds. In what the Israeli government called “the deadliest wildlife disaster in the nation’s history”, workers wearing hazmat suits were photographed collecting the corpses. After the outbreak, farmers were instructed to slaughter hundreds of thousands of chickens.View image in fullscreenWorkers in hazmat suits dispose of one of the 5,000 cranes killed in December’s bird flu outbreak in Hula valley, Israel. Photograph: Ariel Schalit/APIn Canada, a deadly strain of bird flu has already ravaged the poultry industry, resulting in almost 2 million chickens being killed. Now it has transferred not only to wild birds but mammals too. While the disease is usually confined to waterbirds, this particular strain has attacked crows, jays, gulls, raptors and even young foxes.The US is suffering what looks to become the worst ever outbreak of bird flu – which farmers are blaming on transmission from wild birds. More than 37 million chickens and turkeys have so far been culled, with more to come. If just one bird tests positive, the farmers must destroy the entire flock.As one report noted: “In Wisconsin, lines of dump trucks have taken days to collect masses of bird carcasses and pile them in unused fields. Neighbours live with the stench of the decaying birds.” Even the bald eagle, America’s national bird, has been affected.View image in fullscreenWarning notices tell people not to feed the swans from Jennings Wharf in Windsor, England, after a bird flu outbreak in January. Photograph: Maureen McLean/Rex/ShutterstockCould it also affect humans? The answer is, in very rare cases, yes – usually those, such as farmworkers, who have been in close and prolonged contact with infected domesticated birds. From 2003 to 2021, almost 500 people around the world died after catching the virus.Clearly, bird flu is something we need to take seriously. But Stronach is concerned that the current monitoring and surveillance system is designed to protect commercial poultry firms, and is not really adequate for wild bird populations. “We need urgent research to find out what other species it is found in, and, crucially, the mechanisms by which it is spreading,” he says.How to spot bark beetles and deadly fungus: the UK’s new tree-saving lab needs your helpRead moreHe is especially concerned that if dead birds are not collected after an outbreak, they may be scavenged by buzzards, red kites, gulls and skuas, thus spreading the disease even faster.Anyone who finds a dead or dying wild bird, which they suspect might have the disease, should not touch the corpse; nor should they attempt to rescue it if it is still alive. In the UK, they should immediately report their findings to Defra’s helpline – 03459 335577.Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresExplore more on these topicsGlobal developmentThe age of extinctionBird fluHealthBirdsAnimalsWildlifenewsShareReuse this contentMost viewedMost viewedEnvironmentClimate crisisWildlifeEnergyPollutionNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleOriginal reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morningSign up for our emailHelpComplaints & correctionsSecureDropWork for us Privacy policyCookie policyTerms & conditionsContact usAll topicsAll writersDigital newspaper archiveTax strategyFacebookYouTubeInstagramLinkedInXNewslettersAdvertise with usSearch UK jobsBack to top© 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)Epidemic and emerging disease alerts in the Pacific as of 31 May 2022 - World | ReliefWeb Skip to main content Help Log in ReliefWeb Content Search What are you looking for? Search|t Updates Countries Disasters Organizations Topics Jobs Training Informing humanitarians worldwide 24/7 — a service provided by UN OCHA World + 21 more Epidemic and emerging disease alerts in the Pacific as of 31 May 2022 Format Map Source SPC Posted 31 May 2022 Originally published 31 May 2022 Attachments Download Map (PDF | 239.52 KB) Highlights/updates since the last map was sent on PacNet on 24 May 2022 Diarrhoea Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI): An increase of diarrhea cases have been reported in Majuro starting April 11-17, 2022. Daily review of the electronic medical record also noted increased diagnoses of Acute Gastroenteritis. As of May 22, 2022, 185 cases have met the case definition. The laboratory testing done to date is inconclusive but suggests that E. histolytica may be endemic and Rotavirus may be the causative agent with person-to-person transmission. Confirmatory testing by Hawaii State Laboratory is pending – Source: Diarrhea in Majuro, Republic of the Marshall Islands, – April 11 – May 22, 2022 sent on PacNet on 26 May 2022. Influenza-like illness (ILI): Kiribati: The number of ILI cases reported in Kiribati through the Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System has been decreasing for the past 3 weeks; 290 cases were reported in week 20 in comparison to 1,534 cases in week 17. The red alert is changed to blue on the map*. *- Source: Pacific Syndromic Surveillance Reports for Weeks 19 and 20 (May 02 – 08) sent on PacNet on 13 May 2022. Influenza A Wallis and Futuna: The number of reported ILI cases has been decreasing for the past 3 weeks, signifying a declining phase of the epidemic. The red alert is changed to blue on the map.– Source: personal communication with country officials from the Agence de Santé de Wallis et Futuna on 31 May 2022. Australia: Influenza-like-illness (ILI) activity in the community this year has increased since March. From mid-April 2022, the weekly number of notifications of laboratory-confirmed influenza reported in Australia has exceeded the 5 year mean.To date, 98.7% of notifications of laboratory-confirmed influenza to the NNDSS were influenza A, of which 94.2% were influenza A(unsubtyped), 1.2% were influenza A(H1N1), and 4.7% were influenza A(H3N2). – Source: Australian Influenza Surveillance Report No. 4, fortnight ending 22 May 2022 accessed on 31 May 2022. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) American Samoa: As of 25 May 2022, a total of 6,145 COVID-19 cases and 31 deaths have been reported by the American Samoa Department of Health. – Source: American Samoa Government accessed on 25 May 2022. Australia: As of 30 May 2022, 7,240,295 confirmed cases of COVID-19 including 8,469 deaths were reported in Australia. – Source: Department of Health, Australian Governmentaccessed on 31 May 2022. Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas (CNMI): As of23 May 2022, 11,333 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 34 deaths were reported by CNMI*. *- Source: Commonwealth Healthcare Corporation official facebook page accessed on 31 May 2022. Cook Islands: As of 29 May 2022, 5,657 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 1 death were reported by Cook Islands Ministry of Health. – Source: Te Marae Ora Ministry of Health Cook Islandsaccessed on 31 May 2022. Fiji: As of 30 May 2022, 65,007 cases and 864 deaths have been reported in Fiji. Fiji has also recorded 942 COVID-19 positive patients who died from the serious medical conditions unrelated to COVID-19; their doctors determined that COVID-19 did not contribute to their deaths; therefore these are not classified as COVID-19 deaths. - Source: Fiji Ministry of Health and Medical Services official facebook page accessed on 31 May 2022. French Polynesia: As of 27 May 2022, 73,165 cumulative cases and 649 deaths have been reported in French Polynesia. – Source: Direction de la sante website accessed on 31 May 2022. Guam: As of 27 May 2022, 48,968 confirmed and probablecases and 363 deaths were reported by Guam Department of Public Health and Social Services (DPHSS). – Source : Guam Department of Public Health and Social Services website accessed on 31 May 2022. Hawaii: As of 25 May 2022, 274,495 cases of COVID-19 and 1,451 deaths were reported by Hawaii Department of Health*.*– Source : State of Hawaii, Department of Health websiteaccessed on 31 May 2022. Kiribati: As of 18 May 2022, 3,098 cases of COVID-19 and 13 deaths were reported by the Kiribati Government. – Source: Office of Te Beretitenti official facebook page accessed on 31 May 2022. Nauru: As of 31 May 2022, 3 imported/quarantine COVID-19 cases have been reported by the Nauru Government. There has been no local cases reported.– Source: Nauru Government accessed on 31 May 2022. New Caledonia: As of 31 May 2022, 62,329 COVID-19 cases and 313 deaths have been reported by the New Caledonia Government*. *– Source: Government of New Caledonia websiteaccessed on 31 May 2022. New Zealand: As of 31 May 2022, 1,157,308 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 1,172 deaths were reported by New Zealand Ministry of Health*. *– Source : New Zealand Ministry of Health website accessed on 31 May 2022. Niue: As of 31 May 2022, 9 imported COVID-19 cases have been reported by the Niue Government. There has been no local cases reported.– Source: Niue Government accessed on 31 May 2022. Papua New Guinea: As of 26 May 2022, there have been 44,425 confirmed cases and 651 deaths reported in PNG. \– Source: Papua New Guinea Official COVID-19 Info website accessed on 31 May 2022. Palau: As of 27 May 2022, 5,043 COVID-19 cases and 6 deaths were reported by the Republic of Palau.New reported cases have been declined for the past 14 days. The red alert is change to blue on the map. – Source: Ministry of Health and Human Services, Republic of Palau COVID-19 situation reportaccessed on 31 May 2022. Republic of Marshall Island (RMI): As of 31 May 2022, 14 imported cases have been reported by RMI Ministry of Health and Human Service. There has been no local cases reported. - Source:RMI Ministry of Health and Human services official facebook page accessed 31 May 2022. Samoa:As of 28 May 2022, 13,499 COVID-19 cases and 26 deaths were reported by the Samoan Government.* - *Source: Government of Samoa official facebook page accessed on 31 May 2022. Solomon Islands: As of 10 May 2022, 18,174 cases and 146 deaths were reported by the Solomon Islands government. – Source: COVID-19 Dashboard for Solomon Islands accessed on 31 May 2022. Tonga: As of 28 May 2022, 11,644 cases and 12 deaths have been reported by the Ministry of Health. Source: Ministry of Health Tonga official facebook page accessed on 31 May 2022. Vanuatu: As of 29 May 2022, 9,043 casesand 14 deaths have been reported by the Ministry of Health.– Source: Vanuatu Ministry of Health accessed on 31 May 2022. Wallis and Futuna: As of 31 May 2022, 455 COVID-19 cases and 7 deaths have been reported by the Wallis and Futuna Government. – Source: Wallis and Futuna Government official facebook page accessed on 31 May 2022. COVID-19 Vaccination As of 30 May 2022, a total of 2,663,929 of the 1st dose and 2,232,235 of the 2nd dose has been administered in all 22Pacific Island Countries and Territories (PICTs). MORE information and data visualization products on COVID-19 morbidity, mortality and vaccination in the Pacific Islandscan be accessed on SPC website at https://www.spc.int/updates/blog/2021/03/covid-19-pacific-community-updates. Outside of the Pacific Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): A total of 529,370,026 cases of COVID-19 and 6,289,004 deaths were reported globally as of 31 May 2022.– Source: John Hopkins CSSEaccessed on 31 May 2022 at 4:36 pm Noumea time. Other updates and information on Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) can be accessed at WHO Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) situation reportsand WHO Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Dashboard. Other Information/updates Noenatal tetanus in Vanuatu: On 4 May 2022, a suspected case of Neonatal Tetanus in a 10 days old newborn was notified by the paediatric ward of Northern provincial hospital in Santo to the provincial surveillance officer. On 11 May 2022, the case was reported deceased. For more information please consult Vanuatu Neonatal Tetanus Situation Report 1 posted on PacNet on 24 May 2022. Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) in Australia: As at 25 May 2022, there are 42 human (30 confirmed and 12 probable) cases of JEV in Australia and 5 deaths (Queensland (1), South Australia (1), New South Wales (2) and Victoria (1)). – Source: Australian Government Department of Health accessed on 31 May 2022. Monkey Pox in non-endemic countries: As of 26 May 2022, 257 laboratory confirmed cases, and around 120 suspected cases of monkeypox, have been reported to WHO from 23 Member States that are not endemic for monkeypox virus, across four WHO regions. No deaths have been reported to date. – Source: World Health Organization accessed on 31 May 2022. Acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children - Multi-country: 650 probable cases of acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children have been reported to WHO from 33 countries in five WHO Regions between 5 April and 26 May 2022. The aetiology of this severe acute hepatitis remains unknown and under investigation; the cases are more clinically severe and a higher proportion develops acute liver failure compared with previous reports of acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children. It remains to be established whether and where the detected cases are above-expected baseline levels. – Source: World Health Organization accessed on 31 May 2022. Report details Primary country World Other countries American SamoaAustraliaCook IslandsFijiFrench Polynesia (France)GuamKiribatiMarshall IslandsNauruNew Caledonia (France)New ZealandNiue (New Zealand)Northern Mariana Islands (The United States of America)PalauPapua New GuineaSamoaSolomon IslandsTongaUnited States of AmericaVanuatuWallis and Futuna (France) Source Pacific Community Format Map Theme Health Disaster type Epidemic Language English Share Share this on Facebook Share this on X Post this on LinkedIn Related Content World A New Digital Health Platform for Africa Format News and Press Release Source Africa CDC Posted 11 Nov 2024 Originally published 10 Nov 2024 World The World Station on Water, Environment and Health in Urban Systems Format News and Press Release Source UNU Posted 11 Nov 2024 Originally published 9 Nov 2024 Fiji + 29 more Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W44 2024 (Oct 28-Nov 8) [EN/FR] Format Situation Report Source WHO Posted 11 Nov 2024 Originally published 11 Nov 2024 World Evaluation of the 2016 switch from tOPV to bOPV: Lessons learned and implications for an anticipated bOPV cessation Format Evaluation and Lessons Learned Source GPEI Posted 10 Nov 2024 Originally published 30 Sep 2024 Blog Labs About Us Terms Contact Facebook X LinkedIn Instagram Telegram OCHA Services Related Platforms Humanitarian Action Central Emergency Response Fund Other OCHA Services Financial Tracking Service Humanitarian Data Exchange Humanitarian ID ReliefWeb Response Inter-Agency Standing Committee OCHA website ReliefWeb Virtual OSOCC More OCHA Services Opens in a new window Service provided by United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs UN OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OCHA coordinates the global emergency response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. ReliefWeb's Terms & Conditions. © 2024 all rights reserved.Resurgent COVID-19, Flu and Other Viruses are Pushing New Zealand’s Health System to the Limit Close Menu Facebook X (Twitter) Instagram Facebook Instagram Threads Subscribe Featured News Funding Directory Jobs Events Advertisement Health Security Resurgent COVID-19, Flu and Other Viruses are Pushing New Zealand’s Health System to the LimitBy Matthew Hobbs, Alex Kazemi, and Lukas MarekJune 2, 2022 Credit: Shutterstock, CDC (modified compilation) Share Facebook LinkedIn Reddit Email As Aotearoa New Zealand heads into the colder winter months, the pressures on our health system and staff are growing significantly. On top of the ongoing impact of COVID-19, flu cases have begun to spike. Conditions are also primed for potential outbreaks of other illnesses including measles, whooping cough and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). If we are to weather the coming storm, there will need to be a recommitment to public health measures that slow the spread of respiratory infections, as well as a renewed drive for widespread vaccination. The first wave of Omicron swept through Aotearoa New Zealand in late February and March. Unfortunately, as seen in many other countries, the fall in case numbers has been much slower than the rise, with infections reaching a plateau in all age groups. Hospitalisations for or with COVID-19 are starting to rise towards their previous peak in younger age groups. Case numbers have been driven by a high number of infections in young people between the ages of 10 and 29 years old. But the elderly have borne the brunt of hospitalisations, largely due to the higher risk of severe outcomes for older adults. Age stratification aside, persistent inequities have also left Māori and Pasifika at the sharp end of the outbreak both in terms of cases and severe outcomes. Hospitalisation rates and reinfections are rising in many age groups, mirroring trends seen elsewhere. An unwanted COVID-19 resurgence New Zealand can expect another resurgence of COVID-19 this winter. While 95% of New Zealand has received the second dose of the vaccine, one of the highest rates in the world, fewer have received a booster. We also have lower than optimal levels of childhood vaccination. Long COVID will add a layer of complication for our medical services. A recent report by the US Center for Disease Control (CDC) suggests one in five COVID-19 survivors aged 18 to 64 years old, and one in four survivors aged 65 years and above, experienced at least one condition that might be attributable to previous COVID-19 infection. Despite being labelled as one of this generation’s disability challenges, there is currently no test for long COVID. Worryingly, COVID-19 deaths in Australia have started to trend upwards. Evidence from Australia has shown that the overwhelming majority of people are dying from, not with, COVID-19. There has been a recent increase in COVID-19 related deaths in Australia. Our world in data Winter will bring more than COVID-19 Health professionals are not just worried about COVID-19. The flu and other viruses are also expected to hit hard this year. Thanks to closed borders, managed isolation and quarantine, and lockdowns, the last time New Zealand experienced a flu season was in 2019. We are now more vulnerable to the virus. There has already been a reported surge in Dunedin. In response, the government has made two million vaccines available and has the widened eligibility for people to get vaccinated for free. Unfortunately, there is growing concern that part of the population may not get vaccinated due to immunisation fatigue, or may be unable to due to structural inequities in access to vaccines. As with COVID-19, looking across the Tasman can help us understand what is likely to happen in New Zealand. Much like New Zealand, flu rates in Australia have, until now, been very low due to closed borders. The latest Australian national surveillance for influenza shows a steep rise in rates of the flu, as well as rising hospital and ICU admissions. Lab notifications in Australia for influenza show a steep pre-winter surge nationally, comparable to 2017 and 2019. Vaccination gaps exist for other diseases Before the COVID-19 pandemic even started, our research highlighted declines in childhood immunisation for vaccine-preventable diseases. Public health officials are now noticing further significant declines in routine childhood immunisations. Maintaining high immunisation coverage in the current COVID-19 disease circulating environment. Dr Anna Howe, The Immunisation Advisory Centre, University of Auckland In April, the World Health Organization reported a 79% increase in measles cases in the first two months of 2022. Meaningfully addressing long-standing inequities in childhood vaccination programmes takes on new urgency in the face of these vaccination gaps. Lessons can also be learned from the COVID-19 vaccination programme regarding the success of handing leadership to Māori and Pasifika community providers to improve vaccination rates. The health system is under unprecedented pressure We have long been warned that an underfunded health system might struggle with a seasonal surge in demand. Pressure points have appeared across the country. On May 23, Dunedin Hospital’s COVID-19 ward was at capacity. Two days later, Nelson Hospital also hit capacity limits, leading to temporary ambulance ramping at the emergency department. Canterbury District Health Board, Hawke’s Bay District Health Board, and MidCentral District Health Board have recently urged people to consider alternative care for minor conditions to help alleviate the pressure. Community health providers are also struggling to meet demands. What can you do? During the winter, we spend more time in indoor spaces with inadequate ventilation. We are also becoming more complacent with our mask wearing as policies relax. In the future, vaccines will need to improve. But for now, it’s important to remember that three doses of the COVID-19 vaccine remain effective against hospitalisation even for newer variants, as well as lowering the risk of infection. But there are things we can all do to avoid the worst this winter has to offer, including to: ventilate indoor spaces – especially in crowded roomswear appropriate masks where social distancing is not possible, particularly indoorsget vaccinated against COVID-19, which helps to protect you from the most severe form of COVID-19, as well as protecting others by decreasing transmission. Other routine vaccinations for flu and measles will also be important to consider. Finally, workplaces should continue to support people to stay home and isolate if required. ABOUT THE AUTHORS Matthew Hobbs, Senior Lecturer in Public Health and Co-Director of the GeoHealth Laboratory, University of Canterbury. As a researcher he is interested in modifying environments to improve behaviour/health. His research uses geospatial and population health methods to inform local and national public health policy to reduce health inequities. Most recently he was awarded by the European Association for the Study of Obesity (2019) the New Investigator in Public Health Award which recognizes rising stars in the field of obesity through their wider contributions to public health and it is highly regarded throughout the scientific community. Alex Kazemi, Intensive Care specialist, University of Auckland. Dr. Alex Kazemi has a background in clinical medicine, but is currently pursuing a Masters degree in Public Health at the University of Auckland. He completed his MBBS at Kings College, London, graduating as a doctor in 1996 from Kings College Medical School. Subsequently he completed specialist training in Aotearoa with fellowships in Emergency Medicine and Intensive Care. He worked as an Intensive Care Specialist at Middlemore Hospital, Auckland for ten years. He has interests in use of data analytics for public health and health surveillance as well as in the communication of public health data. Lukas Marek, Researcher and lecturer in Spatial Data Science, University of Canterbury. I received my PhD in 2015 from the Department of Geoinformatics at Palacky University in the Czech Republic. In my thesis, I conducted a nationwide research study on the spatial and spatiotemporal analysis of gastroenteritis. My main research interest is mostly focused on spatial analyses and (geo)visualisation of health- and wellbeing-related data using spatial data science. This article is courtesy of The Conversation. COVID-19 Influenza Nonpharmaceutical Interventions Vaccine News Share. Facebook LinkedIn Reddit Email Previous ArticlePolitics and Pandemic Fatigue Doom California’s Covid Vaccine Mandates Next Article The Bioethics and Biosecurity Aspects of Targeted Wastewater Surveillance Related Stories Lassa Fever Vaccine Study Supports Advancement to Phase I TrialAugust 14, 2024 Promising Results for Preclinical mRNA Avian Flu VaccineMay 23, 2024 Maxwell Biosciences Enters CRADA with USAMRIID to Test Potential TherapeuticsMay 8, 2024 Does the Detection of Influenza D Antibodies in Dogs Pose a Risk to Humans?April 26, 2024 News Scan Biodefense Headlines – 24 October 2024 News Scan October 24, 2024 This edition includes progress on Rwanda’s Marbug outbreak response, a call to establish a National Biosafety and Biosecurity Agency in the U.S., backing for Ebola countermeasure opaganib, and the post-COVID… Upcoming Events Nov 11 November 11 - November 13 Pandemic Preparedness: Achievements, Current Challenges, and New Frontiers Nov 13 November 13 - November 17 ASTMH 2024 – American Society of Tropical Medicine & Hygiene Nov 18 November 18 - November 19 G20 Summit Rio 2024 Dec 9 Virtual Event Virtual Event December 9 - December 10 Enhancing the Resilience of Healthcare and Public Health Critical Infrastructure Dec 10 Virtual Event Virtual Event All day Frameworks Discussion for Assessing Dual-Use Potential in Bioeconomy Research View Calendar Subscribe to Global Biodefense Get the latest news on pathogens and preparedness By signing up, you agree to the our terms and our Privacy Policy agreement. News on pathogens and preparedness for public health emergencies © 2024 Stemar Media Group LLC About Contact Privacy Subscribe Submit Type above and press Enter to search. Press Esc to cancel. Global Biodefense places cookies on your device to enable the best user experience. By using our website, you agree to placement of these cookies. To learn more, read our Privacy Policy.OKPrivacy PolicyStudy shows how stress has a major impact on the immune system's ability to fight infections Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Study shows how stress has a major impact on the immune system's ability to fight infections Download PDF Copy Reviewed Reviewed by Emily Henderson, B.Sc.May 30 2022 Bottom Line: Acute stress can be detrimental to fighting off infection, especially COVID-19, and increases the chance of dying in mouse models. This study is the first to show how specific regions in the brain control the body's cellular immune response while under acute stress and infected with COVID-19 or influenza. More specifically, it demonstrated that acute stress prompts neurons from the region known as the paraventricular hypothalamus to instantly trigger a large-scale migration of white blood cells (immune cells, or leukocytes) from lymph nodes to the blood and bone marrow. This diminishes an immune response to viruses such as COVID-19 and influenza, making the body less resistant to fighting infection and putting it at greater risk of complications and death. Why this is important: This fundamental discovery connecting the brain to the immune system provides a better understanding of how stress affects the body's response to a virus, and why some may be more susceptible to severe illness and worse outcomes. How research was conducted/findings: First, researchers looked at groups of relaxed and stressed mouse models and analyzed their immune systems. Within minutes, mice experiencing acute stress showed big changes in their immune system when compared to the relaxed mouse group. Specifically, stress induced a major migration of immune cells in the body from one location to another. Investigators wanted to explain this phenomenon. Using sophisticated tools such as optogenetics and chemogenetics, the investigators discovered that neurons from the paraventricular hypothalamus were prompting immune cells to migrate from lymph nodes into the blood and bone marrow. Then, researchers went further to analyze how mice in the relaxed and stressed models compared when infected with influenza and COVID-19. They noticed that mice in the relaxed group fared better when compared to the stressed group-;they fought infection better and got rid of the virus more easily. Mice in the stressed group were sicker, had less immunity, and had a higher rate of death from the virus. The investigators also explored how other regions of the brain related to motor function control different types of immune cells traveling from the bone marrow to the blood. Conclusions: Distinct brain regions shape leukocyte distribution and function throughout the body during acute stress in mice. The effect of stress on white blood cells and how it may negatively impact fighting a virus is important to further understand outcomes and find ways to improve immunity. If white blood cells continually enter the bloodstream, this could have implications for cardiovascular health as well. Related StoriesStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsHow gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesWork stress increases risk of unfavorable cardiovascular health measuresWhat this means for clinicians/patients: This study is an important example of how the brain controls inflammation and its link to diminishing an immune response during acute stress. This work may prompt physicians to further look into the mental state of patients, including sleep patterns and stress levels. It may prompt interventions to not just live a healthier and less stressful lifestyle, but help the body better fight infection and improve outcomes. Quotes: "This work tells us that stress has a major impact on our immune system and its ability to fight infections. It raises many questions about how socioeconomic factors, lifestyle, and environments we inhabit control how our bodies can defend themselves against infection," says Dr. Swirski. "Moving forward, we will need to better understand the long-term effects of stress. It will be particularly important to explore how we can build resilience to stress and whether resilience can diminish stress's negative effects on our immune systems." Source:Mount Sinai Health SystemJournal reference:Poller, W.C., et al. (2022) Brain motor and fear circuits regulate leukocytes during acute stress. Nature. doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04890-z. Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Artificial Intelligence, Blood, Bone, Bone Marrow, Brain, Cardiology, Children, covid-19, Diabetes, Ear, Education, Endocrinology, Eye, Gastroenterology, Geriatrics, Health Care, Heart, Heart Surgery, Hospital, Hypothalamus, Immune Response, Immune System, immunity, Inflammation, Influenza, Leukocyte, Lymph Nodes, Medicine, Neurology, Neurons, Neurosurgery, Next Generation, Nursing, Ophthalmology, Optogenetics, Orthopedics, Pulmonology, Research, Sleep, Stress, Surgery, Urology, Virus Comments (0) Download PDF Copy Suggested Reading Masks and smart seating cut COVID-19 risks on flights, review findsUnraveling the mechanism of Shufeng Jiedu Capsules in influenza treatmentStudy uncovers key role of gut microbiota in regulating stress responsesMaternal stress and depression alter infant DNA, with potential lifelong impactCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionResearch identifies respiratory transmission potential of H5N1 virusWork-related stress linked to poor cardiovascular healthSeasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemic Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Endocrinology (Subscribe or Preview) Ophthalmology / Optometry (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Link between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersAs rainy season enters, get your flu shots - BusinessWorld Online Facebook Instagram Linkedin Twitter Youtube Top Stories Corporate Stock Market Banking Economy MARKETS BUYING RATES FOREIGN INTEREST RATES Philippine Mutual Funds Leaders and Laggards Stock Quotes Stock Markets Summary Non-BSP Convertible Currencies BSP Convertible Currencies US Commodity futures Bilang Pilipino The Nation World Opinion Infographics B-Side Podcasts SparkUp Spotlight Labor Property Agribusiness Health Arts & Leisure Technology Velocity Special Features Sports Special Reports BW Launchpad Search BusinessWorld Online Top Stories Corporate Stock Market Banking Economy MARKETS BUYING RATES FOREIGN INTEREST RATES Philippine Mutual Funds Leaders and Laggards Stock Quotes Stock Markets Summary Non-BSP Convertible Currencies BSP Convertible Currencies US Commodity futures Bilang Pilipino The Nation World Opinion Infographics B-Side Podcasts SparkUp Spotlight Labor Property Agribusiness Health Arts & Leisure Technology Velocity Special Features Sports Special Reports BW Launchpad Home Editors' Picks As rainy season enters, get your flu shots Editors' PicksHealth As rainy season enters, get your flu shots June 1, 2022 | 12:05 am PHILIPPINE STAR/ RUSSELL A. PALMA FLU SEASON is upon the Philippines, as the rains come in from June to November. Doctors recommend that people update their flu shots to avoid getting the virus. “After going through waves of a grueling pandemic taking millions of people by surprise, the last thing we need is to head on to a flu season unarmed. As early as now, we must be ready and prepare for any and all eventuality,” said Dr. Donald Ray Josue, vaccines medical director at GSK Philippines, in a press statement. An annual flu vaccine provides protection against the influenza virus, the World Health Organization (WHO) said. This is true even when the circulating virus does not match the vaccine virus. WHO recommends individuals to get a flu shot once a year to ensure protection from flu virus strains. Individuals can get a flu vaccine at the same time they get a coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccine. The flu — or seasonal influenza — is an acute respiratory infection circulated worldwide by the influenza virus types (A and B) that cause it. The flu is different from the common cough and cold in that the former is accompanied by high fever and muscle pains that last for days. The flu is also different from COVID-19, which is caused by a different virus and the symptoms of which include fatigue, loss of smell, and loss of taste, among others. While anyone can get seasonal influenza, there are groups that are more at risk than others: pregnant women; children under 59 months; the elderly; and individuals with chronic medical or immunosuppressive conditions. COVID-19 minimum health protocols of handwashing, face mask wearing, and physical distancing are also effective against influenza viruses, as these spread by contaminated hands, and cough and sneeze droplets spread into the air by infected persons. So is keeping one’s immune system in shape with a healthy diet. According to the Food and Nutrition Research Institute, physical activity and healthy food choices allows one’s immune system to perform at peak physical condition. The institute’s Pinggang Pinoy provides a visual guide that demonstrates the right food group proportions on a per-meal basis for healthy adults: half of the plate should have fruits and vegetables; the other half with energy-giving types of food such as rice and fish. — Patricia B. Mirasol CEDTyClea RELATED ARTICLESMORE FROM AUTHOR More easing likely amid weak growth Debt service bill falls by 61% in September BusinessWorld named Business News Source of the Year LATEST NEWS Asia Pacific Enterprise Awards (APEA) makes grand return to the Philippines after 4-year hiatus November 11, 2024 | 2:00 pm PAGASA monitoring two tropical cyclones outside PAR amid Typhoon Nika November 11, 2024 | 1:12 pm China opposes new Philippine maritime law, vows to protect South China Sea ‘sovereignty’ November 11, 2024 | 11:35 am DigiPlus, BingoPlus Foundation give P37-M aid to families of Typhoon Kristine casualties in largest relief effort to date November 11, 2024 | 10:30 am Japan PM battles for survival in parliament vote as Trump looms large November 11, 2024 | 10:22 am Trump seeks fast appointments; Elon Musk makes endorsement for Senate leadership November 11, 2024 | 10:18 am Bitcoin surges to record high on Trump bets November 11, 2024 | 10:14 am Buddhist Bhutan to build ‘mindfulness city’ to woo investment, create jobs November 11, 2024 | 10:12 am Ukraine’s Zelenskiy says strength must come with diplomacy to achieve peace November 11, 2024 | 10:07 am 15th PHILSME Business Expo unlocks upliftment for Filipino SMEs November 11, 2024 | 10:00 am Timex celebrates 170 years of simply great watchmaking November 11, 2024 | 10:00 am Nika intensifies to typhoon, Signal No. 4 raised in Isabela and Aurora November 11, 2024 | 9:52 am DoST, DTI and DICT join forces for Philippine Startup Week 2024 to ignite Filipino innovation November 11, 2024 | 9:30 am Whoscall launches Christmas campaign to strengthen online security for Filipinos this holiday season November 11, 2024 | 9:15 am More easing likely amid weak growth November 11, 2024 | 12:34 am © 2024 BusinessWorld Publishing. All rights reserved. Read our privacy guidelines Facebook Instagram Linkedin Twitter Youtube Home About BusinessWorld Careers Subscribe Contact Us Top Stories Banking & Finance Corporate Economy The Nation Stock Market World Arts & Leisure Sports Opinion Special Reports Infographics Weekender SparkUp Video PHILSTAR MORE STORIES MAP cites infra precedents for EDSA busway privatization Senator questions DoE power supply outlook for polls Cities urged to build upwards but ditch skyscraper obsession'Quite sad': Disoriented birds, foxes testing positive for avian flu on P.E.I. | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore 'Quite sad': Disoriented birds, foxes testing positive for avian flu on P.E.I. | CBC News LoadedPEI'Quite sad': Disoriented birds, foxes testing positive for avian flu on P.E.I.Hundreds of sick and dead birds — and even some fox kits — have been taken to the Atlantic Veterinary College and tested for avian flu this year.More than 1,000 birds — double the normal amount in a year — have already been tested in 2022Shane Ross · CBC News · Posted: May 31, 2022 2:17 PM EDT | Last Updated: May 31, 2022Fishers on P.E.I. have reported seeing northern gannets swimming in circles. Some have washed up on shore and tested positive for avian flu. (Radio-Canada)Social SharingHundreds of sick and dead birds — and even some fox kits — have been taken to the Atlantic Veterinary College (AVC) in Charlottetown and tested for avian flu this year.The most affected appear to be waterfowl, including a recent rash of gannets and predatory birds, said Megan Jones, an assistant professor at AVC and the regional director of the Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative in Atlantic Canada.She said 23 birds have tested positive, and 16 others are believed to be positive but are pending confirmation at the Canadian Food Inspection Agency's National Centre for Foreign Animal Disease in Winnipeg. Four fox kits have also had a preliminary positive test for avian flu."It's when you think of influenza, of course, you think about respiratory disease, but this virus gets into the brain and also many other organs," Jones said."It's really, it's quite, quite sad. They can get neurological signs so they can have seizures and things. It actually looks a lot like rabies."'Looks a lot like rabies'Employees with P.E.I. Fish and Wildlife have been busy responding to calls from the public, Jones said. They collect the birds and bring them to AVC for testing.Avian flu on P.E.I. prompts heightened awareness of dead wild birds, but some might just be actingAVC has received "well over 1,000" birds for testing so far in 2022, when normally they would receive up to about 600 for a whole year.A fox is seen feeding her kits in Belfast, P.E.I., on May 29, 2022. The avian flu virus can get into the brain and other organs of foxes, says Megan Jones, an assistant professor at AVC and the regional director of the Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative in Atlantic Canada. (Shane Ross/CBC)Many of the calls come from beachgoers who have spotted northern gannets washed up on the shore — birds that have later tested positive for avian flu. Hundreds of the dead gannets have been seen in the Magdalen Islands and western Newfoundland, and dozens in the Souris area, Jones said."Lobster fishers have told me they've seen them swimming in circles in the water ... sort of not able to go in a straight line."No reports of domestic birdsJones said though avian flu appears to be spreading across the country, and has been found or suspected in bald eagles, red tailed hawks, crows, snowy owls, ducks and Canada geese, she has not received any reports of it appearing in domestic or commercial poultry.Not just chickens: In Ontario, bird flu has killed bald eagles, Canada geese — and juvenile red foxesAnyone who sees a bird or animal acting unusual — for example, if it doesn't run or fly away when approached — should contact P.E.I. Fish and Wildlife. For humane reasons, they prioritize birds and animals that are still alive so they can be euthanized, Jones said, but are making every effort to collect the dead ones, as well.ABOUT THE AUTHORShane RossJournalistShane Ross is a journalist with CBC News on Prince Edward Island. Previously, he worked as a newspaper reporter and editor in Halifax, Ottawa and Charlottetown. You can reach him at shane.ross@cbc.ca.Follow Shane Ross on TwitterWith files from Angela WalkerCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowInfluenza cases on the rise: PAHO urges vaccination | Loop Trinidad & Tobago LoginTrinidad & Tobago Jamaica Barbados Cayman Islands Haiti St. Lucia Caribbean NewsLoopTT MenuNewsVideosT&T NewsCrimeEnvironmentPoliticsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsEntertainmentCarnivalLifestyleTravelFoodBusinessEnergySportCPLMatch CentreLoop NoticiasMonday Nov 11 0°CNews (current)VideosTopicsLoopTT MenuNewsVideosT&T NewsCrimeEnvironmentPoliticsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsEntertainmentCarnivalLifestyleTravelFoodBusinessEnergySportCPLMatch CentreLoop NoticiasLocationTrinidad & TobagoJamaicaBarbadosCayman IslandsHaitiSt. LuciaCaribbean NewsMy LoopSign InForgot Password?Create AccountBreaking News TSC stakeholder engagement planned for 2025Teen dies nearly two weeks after accidentMan left in critical condition after drive-by shooting in NewtownCops need help identifying body found in Sangre GrandeLaventille man gunned down, 20 spent shells recoveredMan shot dead in Rio Claro attempting to leave bar'Venom: The Last Dance' tops box office againActor Tony Todd, known for his role in the movie Candyman, dies at 69Man washing van runs to escape bulletsSiparia bar fight ends in choppingMonday Nov 11 0°C T&T News2 min readInfluenza cases on the rise: PAHO urges vaccinationLoop News June 2, 2022 01:24 PM ETPan American Health Organisation (PAHO) Director Dr Carissa Etienne says there has been a recent surge in Influenza cases throughout Central America and Caribbean Regions:During PAHO’s weekly briefing on COVID-19 in the Americas yesterday, Etienne said since the introduction of the SARS-COVID-2, Influenza cases have been exceptionally low in the Region, however the situation started to change in 2022.“The flu virus is circulating again, and not just during the traditional flu season. Mexico and Peru saw higher numbers of influenza cases than they predicted,” she said. Etienne also noted that Argentina, Chile and Uruguay reported more hospitalizations than usual. Chile, Paraguay, Brazil, Ecuador and the Dominican Republic are also amid a Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) surge, particularly in younger children leading to hospitalizations in some cases.“Just as we have responded to COVID-19 we must use all the resources that we have at hand starting with vaccines. The current flu vaccine used in the Southern Hemisphere reflects the strains circulating now and can provide better protection to all at risk,” Etienne said.Etienne also noted while health systems are still recovering from the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, they now face another surge of COVID-19, as cases rose for a sixth consecutive week. She said there was also a growing risk of monkeypox, viral hepatitis and other respiratory infections. According to the Mayo Clinic, Influenza is a viral infection that attacks your respiratory system — your nose, throat and lungs. Influenza is commonly called the flu, but it's not the same as stomach "flu" viruses that cause diarrhea and vomiting.For most people, the flu resolves on its own. But sometimes, influenza and its complications can be deadly. People at higher risk of developing flu complications include:Young children under age 5, and especially those under 6 monthsAdults older than age 65Residents of nursing homes and other long-term care facilitiesPregnant women and women up to two weeks after giving birthPeople with weakened immune systemsPeople who have chronic illnesses, such as asthma, heart disease, kidney disease, liver disease and diabetesPeople who are very obese, with a body mass index (BMI) of 40 or higher. Loop is better in the app. Customize your news feed, save articles for later, view your reading history and more. Click the links below to download the app for Android and IOS. Related Articles COVID-19PAHO: Omicron variant likely to spread in the AmericasDecember 1, 2021 04:41 PM EnvironmentEU, PAHO, UWI conduct climate change & public health perception surveyMarch 12, 2021 12:27 PM COVID-19Lowest number of dengue cases in a decade, says CMONovember 4, 2020 02:34 PMRecent Articles T&T NewsTSC stakeholder engagement planned for 2025 CrimeTeen dies nearly two weeks after accident CrimeMan left in critical condition after drive-by shooting in NewtownMore From EnergyNP refutes employees’ claims; says company is stable The National Petroleum (NP) Company is refuting two articles published in different newspapers which claim that the company is ‘unstable’ and that the employees are ‘calling for the removal of the CEO BusinessRhand Credit Union opens first ‘Smart Branch’ in San Fernando Rhand Credit Union marked a new chapter in its mission to empower members by opening its first branch in San Fernando. This milestone event was part of Rhand’s continued commitment to progress and 40:19 CrimeMan washing van runs to escape bullets Police are investigating a shooting in Port of Spain. The incident took place around 12:30pm yesterday along Minarchy Alley in East Dry River. The victim told police he was washing a panel T&T NewsTobago kicks off cruise season with The Ex Ploris One Tobago has announced the launch of the 2024/2025 cruise season. A media release for the island’s Division of Culture noted that the first call at the Port of Scarborough happened on Tuesday, Novemb T&T NewsGonzales to again act as Attorney General Public Utilities Minister Marvin Gonzales has been given another opportunity to act as Attorney General. This as Attorney General Reginald Armour is out of the country on private business from tod CrimeSiparia bar fight ends in chopping Two men are being treated at the San Fernando General Hospital for chop wounds following a bar fight in Siparia. According to police reports, at 2:30am yesterday, the victims, ages 43 and 42, were Sponsored StoriesRhand Credit Union opens first ‘Smart Branch’ in San Fernando Rhand Credit Union marked a new chapter in its mission to empower members by opening its first branch in San Fernando. This milestone event was part of Rhand’s continued commitment to progress and Brought To You ByRhand Credit UnionStandard stocks up: How to find all your Christmas essentials Decorating for Christmas can be a lot to handle, but Standard is making it easier on their customers with the launch of their Christmas Village at the Mt Hope location. They’ve stocked up on all th Brought To You ByStandard Distributors LtdLEX The Label caters to Caribbean women with new East Gates location Created with every version of the female form in mind, LEX The Label has opened their new location at East Gates Mall in Trincity. LEX’s priority remains key – representing every version of the Car Brought To You ByLex The LabelUnderstanding credit unions: Catering to the nation's diverse needs Whether you need to save, invest or take a loan, Rhand Credit Union has options tailored to your specific needs. In this episode, you'll learn how Rhand ensures that your specific needs are m Brought To You ByRhand Credit Union The Caribbean’s Most Downloaded News AppSign Up For Our NewsletterStay Connected Facebook Twitter Instagram Loop News Advertise with us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Comments Policy About Us Contact Us Submit an Article Cookie PolicyCOPYRIGHT 2020 BY DIGICEL | ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDHome remedies to fight cold and flu symptoms may be comforting, but they're not a cure - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeHome remedies to fight cold and flu symptoms may be comforting, but they're not a cureShare Home remedies to fight cold and flu symptoms may be comforting, but they're not a cureBy Dannielle MaguireTopic:InfluenzaFri 3 Jun 2022Friday 3 June 2022Fri 3 Jun 2022 at 7:20pmDisplay captionDespite vapour rub manufacturers only advising people to apply the ointment to their chest and their throat, some people swear by slathering it on their feet. (ABC News: Dannielle Maguire)abc.net.auews/home-remedies-old-and-flu-vapour-rub-salt-water-honey/101022366Link copiedShareShare articleFlu cases are rising — the latest national data shows cases tripling in just a fortnight — and now we've ticked over to winter, it's likely we'll see a spike in cases of the common cold too. When faced with cold or flu symptoms, many of us have go-to home remedies we insist make a difference to the trajectory of our sickness. But while they may make us feel better, experts are quick to point out that these so-called treatments don't address what's actually making us sick. Looking back at home remedies from last centuryIf you flip through the archives of Australian newspapers and magazines, you'll find a host of weird and wacky suggestions for cold treatments:From The Australian Woman's Mirror, September 29, 1925 (The Australian Woman's Mirror via Trove)From the Australian Woman's Mirror, October 11, 1927. (Australian Woman's Mirror via Trove)From the Australian Woman's Mirror, October 25, 1932. ( Australian Woman's Mirror via Trove)Those clippings may be aged and yellowed, yet their content isn't all that different from the comments in online discussions about non-medical "cures" for colds and the flu. And Royal Australian College of GPs president Karen Price says we're right to be sceptical of them. 'Comfort, not a cure'"Alternative therapies and treatments for coughs and colds need to be considered with caution because there is often no scientific evidence base to support them," Dr Price said.While some things might feel good, they don't actually do anything."Home remedies provide comfort, not a cure," Dr Price says."While some people may benefit from the placebo effect ... the key message is these treatments do not cure, and people shouldn’t rely on them."And Dr Price's sage advice is also reflected in a piece penned by "Le Medecin" in a 1926 edition of the Australian Woman's Mirror:From the Australian Woman's Mirror, November 23, 1926. (Australian Woman's Mirror via Trove)Here are a few home remedies and why they won't actually cure your cold. Vapor rub on feetMany people swear by smearing vapour rub on their feet and then sealing it in with socks. In a post for the Mayo Clinic, general paediatrician Jay Hoecker writes that these topical ointments are all about the smell. One of the most common vapour rubs has three active ingredients, each with very a strong odour:camphor eucalyptus oil menthol Doctors say home remedies may give people a bit of comfort, but they don't cure the infection or virus. (ABC News: Dannielle Maguire)Dr Hoecker says that menthol smell "may trick your brain, so you feel like you're breathing through an unclogged nose". Manufacturers of Vicks VapoRub only advise applying it to the chest and throat — but say nothing about the feet. The throat and chest are very close to the nose, but as your feet are further away, you're less likely to get the benefits from inhaling it. "Please don’t slather your feet with any treatment not designed to go there, because you’re just wasting your money," Dr Price said. Gargling with salt waterDr Price says it won't actually cure the infection, but it can relieve a common cold symptom. "If you have a sore throat, your GP may well advise you to gargle with salt water, as this is known to help ease the discomfort," she said.Salt water can soothe a sore throat, but it won't cure the cause of it. (Flickr: Steve Mileham)Eating certain foodsGarlicThe Cochrane Library, a leading independent body that reviews scientific research, has looked into garlic and the common cold. It said there was "insufficient" clinical trial evidence into the effects of garlic on treating or preventing the common cold. Can taking vitamins and supplements help you recover from COVID?Photo shows A hand holds a number of different capsules and pills. Sales of vitamins are booming in pandemic times. But is there any evidence that vitamin and mineral supplements can protect you from COVID-19 or help you recover from infection?The review, which was last updated in 2014, pointed to one trial which suggested it may help prevent the common cold, but it said more studies were needed to validate the finding. And it's important to note that the keyword there was "prevent" — there's no mention of the word "cure".LemonThe idea here is that boosting your vitamin c levels by eating things like lemon and oranges will help with a cold, but Dr Price is sceptical. "The evidence for vitamin C is also weak," she said."Certainly there seems little benefit in taking it once you have a cold."Many of us up our intake of vitamin C when faced with a cold. (ABC: Bec Whetham)HoneyDr Price says honey may help but, like salt water, it doesn't cure the underlying infection. "Honey can help soothe a cough, but it is important to remember coughing helps clear mucus from lungs," she said"And coughs should disappear with no treatment as the infection clears."You already know what to doFirst off, if you've got cold and flu symptoms, you should get tested for COVID-19.Dr Price's advice about what to do if it's just a cold is something most of us have heard a million times, but it bears repeating. "Stay hydrated, rest, and stay warm if you’re feeling cold," she said. How do I know if I have flu or COVID?Photo shows Woman with respiratory illness, blowing her nose into handkerchief.Borders are open and COVID restrictions have eased and now cases of the flu have gone from "zero-to-full on". So, how do I know if COVID-19 or the flu?She also suggests taking as taking paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease the discomfort of a cough or cold. "The best non-pharmacological interventions for general preventative health are good rest and a good diet, with regular exercise," Dr Price said."When it comes to infectious diseases, such as colds and influenza, I encourage people to consider an influenza vaccination and practice good hand hygiene."And if someone is sick in your household, compassionate isolation of infected persons for the duration of their illness can help to stop the spread."Posted Fri 3 Jun 2022 at 7:20pmFriday 3 Jun 2022 at 7:20pmFri 3 Jun 2022 at 7:20pmShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasPhoto shows Three images in a composite including a man in glasses, an man with orange makeup and another man in glassesAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPhoto shows Workplace surveillancePrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesPhoto shows A young solider. Tax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsPhoto shows Richard Boyle speaks to supporters outside court.Related storiesThe states and territories offering free flu jabsTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A syringe being injected into an arm.Testing for the flu can help you get faster treatment. But why is it so hard to get a RAT for influenza?Topic:ExplainerPhoto shows Woman with mask and sunglasses on walking past other people with masks on waiting for a bus.As flu cases surge, vaccination is being encouraged. So, just how effective is this year's jab?Topic:InfluenzaPhoto shows Sick person lies on couch underneath blanket.Related topicsCoughs and ColdsDoctors and Medical ProfessionalsInfluenzaTop StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesTax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsJust InConvicted killer fugitive allegedly caught in Alice Springs hotel room with senior NAAJA employeeTopic:Legal Profession3m ago3 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 8:09amLynn Cannon was brutally murdered by estranged partner, now inquest examines police response to call for helpTopic:Domestic Violence19m ago19 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:53amJumbo-sized delivery to get peak-hour police escort to Monarto ZooTopic:Feel Good25m ago25 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:46am'We obviously don't care about losing': Michael Clarke criticises players being rested during series loss to PakistanTopic:Cricket1h ago1 hours agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 6:50amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCFree Flu Shots For All Victorians From Tomorrow | Premier Skip to main contentMenu⁠The teamMedia centreContact usSearch⁠HomeFree Flu Shots For All Victorians From TomorrowFree Flu Shots For All Victorians From TomorrowPublished:Tuesday 31 May 2022The Andrews Labor Government is making it easier than ever to get your annual flu shot this year by providing free influenza vaccinations for Victorians throughout June. Cases of flu in Victoria have increased by more than 30 per cent in the past week alone from 10,000 to 15,000, after two years of COVID-19 and reduced international travel led to limited immunity to the common winter virus. To help make getting the jab as easy as possible, more than 3,000 GP clinics and community pharmacies across Victoria will be invited to offer the free flu vaccinations from this Wednesday as part of a $33 million package. The flu vaccination is already free for eligible groups including children under five years, people over 65 years, pregnant women, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and people with increased risk medical conditions. The Labor Government will reimburse GPs and community pharmacies for flu vaccines that are administered to any Victorians that are not usually eligible for free flu shots – so that immunisation providers can continue to use vaccine that they have already purchased. This will mean all Victorians aged six months and over will be eligible for the free flu shot between 1 and 30 June to help boost vaccination coverage as much as possible and avoid more hospitalisations throughout winter. Flu vaccines have already been made available to children aged five years and over from their community pharmacy, taking pressure off GPs and keeping children safe and out of hospital this winter. As part of the push, the Government is also offering $2,000 grants to immunisation providers to help them manage the additional demand – such as rostering on more staff and opening for longer hours. The cold weather also serves as a timely reminder to make sure your child is up to date with all their vaccinations, including their COVID-19 jabs. There is no interval required between receiving a COVID-19 and flu vaccine. Victorians are encouraged to contact their local GP or community pharmacy from tomorrow, Wednesday, 1 June, to book their free vaccine. Anyone with cold and flu symptoms should get tested for COVID-19 and remain at home until their symptoms have resolved – regardless of whether it turns out to be COVID-19 or flu. People who test positive for COVID-19 must isolate for seven days from the date of their result. Quotes attributable to Minister for Health Martin Foley “This will be the first time in two years that we will face a real flu season – we need all Victorians to roll up their sleeves and help protect their loved ones and our health system by getting vaccinated.” “Victorians really took up the call to arms when it came to COVID-19 vaccinations, and we know they can do it again – so we’re removing as many barriers as possible to help boost vaccine coverage.” “Help your family stay safe this winter by getting vaccinated for both the flu and COVID-19, getting tested if you have any symptoms and staying home while unwell.” 220531 - Free Flu Shots For All Victorians From Tomorrow.pdf PDF 144.42 KB (opens in a new window) Share this pageFacebookX (formerly Twitter)LinkedInBack to topThe teamMedia centreContact usConnect with usFacebookInstagramTwitterThe Victorian Government acknowledges Aboriginal Traditional Owners of Country throughout Victoria and pays respect to their cultures and Elders past and present.AccessibilityCopyrightDisclaimerPrivacyContact usPolicies© Copyright State Government of VictoriaVictoria government homeFlu season: Doctors call for free influenza vaccinations | RNZ News Navigation for News Categories New ZealandWorldPoliticsPacificTe Ao MāoriSportBusinessCountryLocal Democracy ReportingComment & AnalysisIn DepthWeather New Zealand health 1 Jun 2022 Flu season: Doctors call for free influenza vaccinations 12:16 pm on 1 June 2022 Share this Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share via email Share on Reddit Share on Linked In Jean Edwards, Reporter Doctors, paediatricians and parents want the government to provide free flu vaccinations for all New Zealanders, particularly young children, as the country heads into the depths of winter. An estimated 1.8 million people - just over a third of the population - are entitled to a free flu vaccine this year under Pharmac's widened eligibility criteria. Photo: 123RF They argue free influenza shots are a cost-effective way of easing the strain on hospitals in cities like Christchurch, where hundreds of people are turning up to the emergency department every day. Pharmac was advised that children under the age of five would benefit from funded flu vaccines this season, but the drug-buying agency said there was not enough supply to widen access this year. Hard-up Christchurch families who cannot afford to pay at least $20 per dose warn they will just have to hope for the best when winter bites. "I feel a bit guilty not getting my kids flu shots, but at the same time, it's that or they eat. We basically live week to week. I think it's the same for a lot of young families," a mother-of-two told RNZ. "It would be better if they were free." An estimated 1.8 million people - just over a third of the population - are entitled to a free flu vaccine this year under Pharmac's widened eligibility criteria. Pregnant women, Māori and Pacific people over 55, over 65s, people with long-term medical conditions like asthma and children aged four and under who have been hospitalised with a respiratory illness are covered. Everyone else must pay for their own flu shot unless the fee is covered by an employer. Papakura Marae Health Clinic GP Dr Matire Harwood said the vaccine was unaffordable for many families. "Cost is a major barrier for people to get the flu vaccination. People struggling already post-Covid and lockdowns with poverty, loss of work, income issues, can't afford $25. That's petrol for a week for them to get to work," she said. "I'd love to see the government expand our current flu vaccination programme." Many Australian states have made flu jabs free for everyone over the age of six months in a June vaccination blitz. Pharmac operations director Lisa Williams said clinical advisers told the agency children under the age of five would benefit from free flu vaccines. "Unfortunately, the quantities of flu vaccine to be brought to New Zealand had already been set for 2022, and there was not enough of the flu vaccine specifically for use in children under three years of age to support widening funded access for them this year," she said. Williams said Pharmac's immunisation advisory committee considered options for wider access to the vaccine at its May meeting. "Options for widening funded access to the influenza vaccine will be assessed and ranked against all other medicines or vaccines also being considered for funding," she said. The government kicked off its flu vaccination campaign in April with Minister of Health Andrew Little fronting up at Te Kāika in Dunedin for his vaccination. Photo: RNZ / Tim Brown Starship Hospital paediatrician Professor Cameron Grant warned the flu could leave children in intensive care or even kill them, but vaccination at least halved the risk of hospital admission. "I think this coming winter is a time of great concern for anyone working in child health in New Zealand," he said. "We're very worried about the potential for measles and whooping cough and influenza. It could be a really, really difficult time. The hospitals are already very stretched." He said New Zealand had higher hospital admission rates for childhood respiratory infections than Australia, England and the United States, yet did not routinely immunise children against influenza. Professor Grant is also in favour of free flu shots for all New Zealanders and wants the vaccine permanently added to the childhood immunisation schedule. "I can only imagine that it's a matter of cost. I don't think there's any scientific justification for it not being on our schedule," he said. At the very least, the Immunisation Advisory Centre's Dr Emma Best said, the flu vaccine should be free for all children under the age of five. "More than half of children hospitalised with influenza haven't actually got an underlying condition, they were previously healthy," she said. "Having a vaccine that costs money is a barrier to families when they're trying to work out their budgets and prioritise. It should be free." Best said high vaccination rates among children helped to protect other members of their whanau and the wider community. Ministry of Health data shows 807,585 people have so far been vaccinated against the flu, or 16 percent of the population. Influenza all but disappeared in New Zealand over the last two years because of border closures and other Covid-19 restrictions, but cases are now on the rise. More than 700 people turned up to Christchurch's Hospital's emergency department last weekend and doctors have seen a further 380 in the days since. Around 30 percent of people were admitted, leaving the hospital at 112 per cent occupancy with more patients than staffed beds and forcing surgery deferrals. Canterbury District Health Board said an average of 200 staff had been off sick with Covid-19 every day for weeks, in addition to high levels of sick leave taken by employees for other illnesses and to care for dependants. Influenza hospitalises thousands of people and around 500 die in a typical year, according to the ministry. Symptoms include fevers, chills, muscle aches, a runny nose, cough and stomach upsets. Tags: health influenza Share this Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share via email Share on Reddit Share on Linked In Copyright © 2022, Radio New Zealand Subscribe to RNZ's Daily Newsletter View latest newsletter Next story in New Zealand Man arrested in investigation into baby's death in Ōtara Related Stories Experts sound warning over upcoming winter and flu season 1 Apr 2022 Experts are warning this winter will be the toughest since the pandemic started with potential for a secondary Covid-19 wave coinciding with the flu season. Experts sound warning over upcoming winter and flu season Long delays likely for non-emergencies at Christchurch and Hawke's Bay hospitals 30 May 2022 More than 700 people were seen at Christchurch Hospital's emergency department over the weekend, prompting a plea for people not to turn up unless it is a genuine emergency. Long delays likely for non-emergencies at Christchurch and Hawke's Bay hospitals Have you got the flu - or Covid-19? 25 May 2022 Cases of the flu are spiking around Australia after the virus was forced underground for two years thanks to tight Covid-19 restrictions. But it's hard to tell the difference between the flu and… Flu cases are spiking, so how do I know if I have Covid-19 or influenza? New Zealand DOC warns government it will lose money investing in Tongariro Chateau repair Hīkoi mō te Tiriti day one: 'Lets make this hīkoi build a nation' Man on trial for murdering Yanfei Bao has accused police of falsifying evidence Gulls are pooping on Christchurch cafés, and no one knows what to do Free lower North Island counselling service facing uncertain future Storm-affected Muriwai residents frustrated with ongoing category changes Get the RNZ app for ad-free news and current affairs Top News stories DOC warns government it will lose money investing in Tongariro Chateau repair Hīkoi mō te Tiriti day one: 'Lets make this hīkoi build a nation' Man on trial for murdering Yanfei Bao has accused police of falsifying evidence Gulls are pooping on Christchurch cafés, and no one knows what to do Free lower North Island counselling service facing uncertain future Subscribe Subscribe to RNZ's Daily Newsletter View latest newsletter New Zealand RSS Follow RNZ NewsWhich states and territories are offering free flu jabs and where do you get one - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeWhich states and territories are offering free flu jabs and where do you get oneShare Which states and territories are offering free flu jabs and where do you get oneTopic:InfluenzaMon 30 May 2022Monday 30 May 2022Mon 30 May 2022 at 7:13amDisplay captionHealth authorities are pleading with Australians to get a flu shot. (Unsplash: Hyttalo Souza)abc.net.auews/where-to-get-free-flu-jabs/101109700Link copiedShareShare articleAfter two years of lockdowns and social distancing the flu has returned with a vengeance.Lab-confirmed cases of the flu were among the worst rates on record in 2017, resulting in 29,000 hospital admissions and 745 deaths across Australia.When the pandemic arrived, the flu all but disappeared as better hygiene measures were adopted and lockdowns limited the population's movements.But now the easing of COVID restrictions means people are out and about, and this has led to a surge in flu cases.Now health authorities are pleading with Australians to get a flu shot to ease the growing pressure on hospitals.And in a move to encourage people to do this, the vaccine is now being offered for free. But its availability differs throughout the states and territories.Who is offering the jab for free?New South Wales will offer a "month-long blitz" of free flu jabs starting June 1 and ending June 30 for anybody over the age of six months of age. Previously the vaccines were available free only to certain high risk groups, but Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant said authorities were concerned by the sharp increase in infections."We strongly urge everyone over six months of age to get a flu shot as soon as possible to protect themselves and their loved ones, as the virus is easily spread and potentially deadly," Dr Chant said.Dr Chant says this virus is easily spread. (AAP: Bianca De Marchi)Queenslanders over the age of six months can get free influenza vaccinations until June 30.The decision was announced last week after an early and intense surge of Influenza A was detected across the state.Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said she had taken the "unprecedented" decision to protect people amid low rates of immunity."We are seeing the impacts on our hospitals and if we don't get a vaccinated community with the flu vaccine, we are going to see escalating numbers in our hospitals," she said.Premier Palaszczuk says the state will face escalating numbers if no action is taken. (AAP: Jono Searle)Western Australians over the age of six months can get a free flu jab from June 1 until June 30.The WA Department of Health's "Free Jab June" initiative was announced by Minister for Health Amber-Jade Sanderson on May 29."We already make vaccinations free for our most vulnerable, but by extending this program throughout June we are making the flu jab more easily accessible to everyone," she said.WA Health Minister Amber-Jade Sanderson says the jab is now accessible to everyone. (ABC News: Jessica Warriner)All South Australians over six months of age can get the flu shot for free until June 30.In a statement, SA Premier Peter Malinauskas said the free vaccines will be available in a program costing the state nearly $5 million."We must do everything we can to ensure as many South Australians as possible are immunised against both COVID and influenza to ease pressure on our hospitals," he said.Previously in SA, only certain groups of people, such as young children and those with medical risk factors were eligible for free flu vaccines.However, due to the unique circumstances, SA will make flu vaccinations free for all residents until June 30.Premier Malinauskas says vaccination will help ease the pressure on the state's hospitals. (ABC News: Che Chorley)As of last week, 171,000 Tasmanians have had a flu shot, and the vaccine is free for anyone aged five and over, but only at Community COVID & Flu Vaccination Clinics.The state government is hoping people coming in for a free flu shot will also get themselves up to date with a COVID shot, as both are available in the same appointment.Victoria, Northern Territory and the ACTAs it stands, the situation is different – or evolving – in Victoria, the Northern Territory and the ACT.The Andrews government is yet to announce a free flu vaccination scheme, but there are strong signs such a program could soon be revealed.The Victorian branch of the Australian Medical Association says it's been in talks with the Victorian government over the past week on a state-wide program.The Victorian president of the AMA, Roderick McCrae, said he would put more pressure on the government if it hasn't announced a scheme by mid-week."I've been in discussions with government about all of the planning stages for the best part of a week and I think that's a reasonable duration and it's really up to the government to determine when they want to make their announcement, but I would be expecting it to be earlier rather than later," Dr McCrae said.The Victorian government is yet to announce a free flu vaccination scheme. (ABC News)However, In the ACT and Northern Territory you are only able to get a free flu jab if you are part of a vulnerable group.In the ACT, that means it is limited to children between six months and five years of age, pregnant women, people 65 and above, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people over six months, and people over six months of age with underlying medical conditions.And in the Northern territory, it's free for Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islanders, vulnerable people and young children.But Australian Medical Association NT president Rob Parker said the territory should look to follow the lead of other regions and offer free flu jabs to residents."Potentially making it free for everybody would encourage more people, so that would be the best thing [to do]," he said.GPs, clinics or pharmacies? Where can I get a free flu shot?NSW Health is urging people to book at GPs and pharmacies to get the jab.How to book your free influenza vaccine in QueenslandPhoto shows An image of a woman with a mask getting a vaccine administeredA free flu shot announcement has driven a "tremendous uptick" in demand across Queensland. Here's how to find an appointment.Pharmacies are now able to provide the vaccine to children aged five and upwards, so families can be vaccinated together.Australian Medical Association NSW president Dr Michael Bonning asked that people be respectful of their GPs and practice staff during the transition to the free flu vaccine program."There is likely to be a lot of respiratory viruses circulating this winter, and we encourage people to ensure they get the flu vaccine and COVID booster vaccine," he said.In Queensland, you can get the jab at a pharmacy or GP (the GP may charge you for the appointment).Bookings for the free vaccine can be made through pharmacists and GPs.While there was some initial concern about whether there would be enough doses to go around, Pharmacy Guild Australia Queensland president Chris Owen said there is a steady stockpile for now."We do have plenty of stock in at the moment, and the wholesalers have stock as well," he said."With the announcement of other states coming on board with free flu [vaccine] programs, the long-term outlook is not so secure."In the long term we don't know where things are going to land," he said.In Western Australia, you can receive the free influenza vaccine at participating community pharmacies and state-led vaccination clinics.This year's flu season could be a double whammyPhoto shows An illustration of a woman wearing a face mask with virus particles in the air around herWhen it comes to COVID, flu and vaccination, what's changed — and what hasn't — since last winter?Other providers such as participating general practices will also be able to provide free influenza vaccinations.Information on locations offering the free flu vaccine during June 2022 is available at rollupforwa.com.auIn South Australia, the free vaccination program has been welcomed by the state's GPs.Immunisation Coalition chair and Adelaide GP Rod Pearce said "everyone benefits from a flu vaccine".The free vaccines will be available from pharmacies and GPs. Children aged between five and nine years will now also be able to receive a vaccine at at a pharmacy.Tasmanians can get free vaccines through a GP and at some local council clinics and pharmacies. You can see the list of clinics and times here.Outside of those clinics, the flu jab is free at GP clinics and pharmacies for: Children aged between six months and five years; All adults aged 65 years and over; Pregnant women (at any stage in your pregnancy); Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people from six months of age; All people over six months of age with chronic medical conditions.People in other groups who don't want to go to a vaccination clinic will have to pay.Posted Mon 30 May 2022 at 7:13amMonday 30 May 2022 at 7:13amMon 30 May 2022 at 7:13am, updated Mon 30 May 2022 at 10:29pmMonday 30 May 2022 at 10:29pmMon 30 May 2022 at 10:29pmShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasPhoto shows Three images in a composite including a man in glasses, an man with orange makeup and another man in glassesAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPhoto shows Workplace surveillancePrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesPhoto shows A young solider. Tax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsPhoto shows Richard Boyle speaks to supporters outside court.Related storiesThis winter will be no normal flu season, thanks to COVIDTopic:ExplainerPhoto shows An illustration of a woman wearing a face mask with virus particles in the air around herWhat you need to know about getting vaccinated against the flu with COVID-19 aroundTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A nurse in a mask holds a vial of flu vaccine.Baby Ivy was too young for a flu jab, now her mum is calling for others to get vaccinatedTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows Five-month-old Ivy Marriott lying on a bed.Related topicsAustraliaInfluenzaVaccines and ImmunityTop StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesTax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsJust InConvicted killer fugitive allegedly caught in Alice Springs hotel room with senior NAAJA employeeTopic:Legal Profession3m ago3 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 8:09amLynn Cannon was brutally murdered by estranged partner, now inquest examines police response to call for helpTopic:Domestic Violence19m ago19 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:53amJumbo-sized delivery to get peak-hour police escort to Monarto ZooTopic:Feel Good25m ago25 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:46am'We obviously don't care about losing': Michael Clarke criticises players being rested during series loss to PakistanTopic:Cricket1h ago1 hours agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 6:50amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCSKNVibes | As COVID-19 cases rise in the Americas, countries also face the threat of seasonal flu, hurricanes, PAHO Director says Javascript Menu by Deluxe-Menu.com All Headlines|NoticesDeathsSchedulesMoviesFerries JobsAutosReal Estate My Account | Contact Us Home > Headlines > NEWS Posted: Thursday 2 June, 2022 at 1:41 PM As COVID-19 cases rise in the Americas, countries also face the threat of seasonal flu, hurricanes, PAHO Director says By: (PAHO), Press Release Health system preparedness is key, whether in response to COVID-19, extreme weather events or influenza Washington, DC, 1 June, 2022 (PAHO) – As countries of the Americas experience an increase in the number of COVID-19 cases for the sixth week running, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) Director, Carissa F. Etienne, has called for additional vigilance as influenza and hurricane seasons begin. Over the past week, countries in the region have reported a 10.4% jump in cases of COVID-19, and a 14% increase in deaths, boding a “double threat of a potential influenza surge alongside a rise in COVID-19 cases, the Director said. Influenza cases have been exceptionally low since COVID-19 began over two years ago, but things have started to change, the Director said during a media briefing today. “The flu virus is circulating again and not just during traditional flu season,” she added. Mexico and Peru have seen higher numbers of influenza cases than expected and Argentina, Chile and Uruguay have reported more hospitalizations than usual due to influenza. Cases of respiratory virus in Chile, Paraguay, Brazil, Ecuador, and the Dominican Republic have also spiked among young children. While most countries have integrated COVID-19 surveillance with efforts to track the influenza virus, Dr. Etienne highlighted that they must build on that capacity “to quickly identify the different respiratory viruses circulating in the Americas.” The PAHO Director also urged people to ensure they are up to date with the flu vaccine as this reflects the strains circulating now and can provide better protection to all at risk. Influenza vaccination campaigns are important every year but even more so this year “as we are facing multiple risks at the same time,” she said. Dr. Etienne also highlighted that while the upcoming influenza season will primarily impact those countries in the southern hemisphere, countries in Central America and the Caribbean must prepare for hurricane season. “It only takes one massive storm to destroy people’s livelihoods, cripple our health systems and lead to countless lives lost,” the PAHO Director said. And with climate change leading to a rise in the frequency and impact of extreme weather events, such as hurricanes and floods, “we must prepare early so we are not caught off guard.” While many countries already have national plans for extreme weather events, Dr. Etienne urged leaders to ensure these are up to date. “Countries should have a detailed understanding of their risk areas, and the likely populations and health facilities which could be affected,” she said. PAHO will continue to support countries to assess risks and address vulnerabilities ahead of time. PAHO’s SMART hospitals program, which focuses on the renovation of health centers in areas vulnerable to natural disasters has also been applied across the region, helping countries withstand volcanic eruptions, hurricanes and the pandemic. “Our wellbeing and that of our societies depend on the resilience of our health systems,” the PAHO Director said. “This is an important lesson from COVID-19 that we cannot ignore,” and one which will be addressed by Heads of State during the upcoming Summit of the Americas in Los Angeles on June 6. The region’s health systems, which are still recovering from the disruptions brought by the pandemic, are not only facing a surge in COVID-19 cases, but are being further tested by the spike in current public health events, including Monkeypox, viral hepatitis and other respiratory infections, said Dr. Etienne. Urgent investment in health is therefore “essential to secure everything that we hope for the future of our region: resilience and security, economic prosperity, and the wellbeing of our people,” she added. Turning to the COVID-19 situation in the region, the Director reported that all subregions except the Caribbean and Atlantic Ocean Islands have seen increases in both cases and deaths – with COVID-19 cases in South America rising by 43.1% and deaths by 21.3% in Central America. Disclaimer This article was posted in its entirety as received by SKNVibes.com. This media house does not correct any spelling or grammatical error within press releases and commentaries. The views expressed therein are not necessarily those of SKNVibes.com, its sponsors or advertisers Copyright © 2024 SKNVibes, Inc. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy Terms of Service ClosePAHO calls for countries to be prepared for threats of seasonal flu, hurricanes - Caribbean News Service Skip to content Nov 11, 2024 Advertise Donate Contact Us News Updates Subscription Caribbean News Service We Know the Caribbean Menu Home News Agriculture Arts Videos Climate Gender Health Tourism Water Youth LGBTQ Death Caricom Court COVID-19 Death Diplomacy Disaster Economy Education Environment Finance Fishing Forests Horticulture Housing Labour Renewable energy Transport BIODIVERSITY BUSINESS Commentary CRIME ENTERTAINMENT POLITICS TRADE UN NEWS CARIBBEAN EVENTS Search for: HomeCaribbean NewsPAHO calls for countries to be prepared for threats of seasonal flu, hurricanes Caribbean News HealthPAHO calls for countries to be prepared for threats of seasonal flu, hurricanes CNS Editor2 years ago06 mins The director of the Pan American Health Organisation (PAHO), Dr Carissa Etienne, Wednesday, called on countries in the Americas, including the Caribbean, to exercise additional vigilance as the influenza and hurricane seasons begin amidst a rise in the number of coronavirus (COVID-19) cases in the region. The Dominican-born PAHO senior official said that over the past week, countries in the region have reported a 10.4 per cent jump in cases of COVID-19, and a 14 per cent increase in deaths, boding a “double threat of a potential influenza surge alongside a rise in COVID-19 cases”. She said influenza cases have been exceptionally low since COVID-19 began over two years ago, but things have started to change. “The flu virus is circulating again and not just during [the] traditional flu season,” she told the weekly news conference. PAHO reported that Mexico and Peru have seen higher numbers of influenza cases than expected and Argentina, Chile and Uruguay have reported more hospitalizations than usual due to influenza. Cases of respiratory virus in Chile, Paraguay, Brazil, Ecuador, and the Dominican Republic have also spiked among young children. Dr Etienne said that while most countries have integrated COVID-19 surveillance with efforts to track the influenza virus, they must build on that capacity “to quickly identify the different respiratory viruses circulating in the Americas.” The PAHO director also urged people to ensure they are up to date with the flu vaccine as this reflects the strains circulating now and can provide better protection to all at risk. Influenza vaccination campaigns are important every year but even more so this year “as we are facing multiple risks at the same time,” she said, noting that while the upcoming influenza season will primarily impact those countries in the southern hemisphere, countries in Central America and the Caribbean must prepare for hurricane season. “It only takes one massive storm to destroy people’s livelihoods, cripple our health systems and lead to countless lives lost,” the PAHO Director said, adding that with climate change leading to a rise in the frequency and impact of extreme weather events, such as hurricanes and floods, “we must prepare early so we are not caught off guard”. Dr Etienne said while many countries already have national plans for extreme weather events, she is urging them to ensure that these plans are up to date. “Countries should have a detailed understanding of their risk areas, and the likely populations and health facilities which could be affected,” she said. PAHO said it will continue to support countries to assess risks and address vulnerabilities ahead of time. PAHO’s SMART hospitals programme, which focuses on the renovation of health centres in areas vulnerable to natural disasters has also been applied across the region, helping countries withstand volcanic eruptions, hurricanes and the pandemic. “Our well-being and that of our societies depend on the resilience of our health systems. This is an important lesson from COVID-19 that we cannot ignore,” she said. The issue is expected to be further addressed during the ninth Summit of the Americas getting underway in the United States on June 6. Dr Etienne said that the region’s health systems, which are still recovering from the disruptions brought by the pandemic, are not only facing a surge in COVID-19 cases, but are being further tested by the spike in current public health events, including Monkeypox, viral hepatitis and other respiratory infections,. She said urgent investment in health is therefore “essential to secure everything that we hope for the future of our region: resilience and security, economic prosperity, and the wellbeing of our people”. Turning to the COVID-19 situation in the region, the PAHO director reported that all sub regions except the Caribbean and Atlantic Ocean Islands have seen increases in both cases and deaths, with COVID-19 cases in South America rising by 43.1 per cent and deaths by 21.3 per cent in Central America. Post navigation Previous: Caribbean universities left out of new UK visa for top graduatesNext: UWI lecturer not expecting any fallout from a boycott of Summit of Americas Related News Police in Antigua charge a man with murder in the stabbing death of a politician CNS Editor14 hours ago 0 COP29: Small Island Nations Seize Historic Opportunity to Push for Bold New Global Climate Finance Goal CNS Editor14 hours ago 0 6.8 magnitude earthquake shakes Cuba after hurricanes and blackouts CNS Editor14 hours ago14 hours ago 0 A Title to Turn the Visitor Into a Lead Use this short paragraph to explain how you will deliver this benefit to the visitor if they decide to work with you. Learn more We Know the Caribbean Facebook-f Instagram Twitter © All Rights Reserved.PAHO: Influenza on the rise again - Trinidad Guardian Trinidad and Tobago Guardian Online JavaScript is disabled in your web browser or browser is too old to support JavaScript. Today almost all web pages contain JavaScript, a scripting programming language that runs on visitor's web browser. It makes web pages functional for specific purposes and if disabled for some reason, the content or the functionality of the web page can be limited or unavailable. Advertise With UsAbout UsListen Watch Login / Subscribe HomeNewsBusinessSportE-PaperFeaturesEnvironmentOpinionTraffic CamerasLifeClassifiedsDeath NoticesCommunityReal EstateAbout UsContact Us HomeNewsSportE-paperBusinessClassifiedsTraffic CamerasOtherEditorial Policies Death Notices Environment Features Opinion Games Subscriptions Real Estate PAHO: Influenza on the rise againby2022060122094220220601PAHO director Dr Carissa EtienneKEVON FELMINEkevon.felmine@guardian.co.ttAl­though pub­lic health mea­sures to com­bat COVID-19 re­sult­ed in a de­crease in in­fluen­za cas­es in 2020, coun­tries in the Amer­i­c­as are re­port­ing in­creas­es in cas­es.Pan Amer­i­can Health Or­gan­i­sa­tion (PA­HO) Di­rec­tor Dr Caris­sa Eti­enne al­so says while health sys­tems are still re­cov­er­ing from the dis­rup­tions caused by the pan­dem­ic, they now face an­oth­er surge of COVID-19, as cas­es rose for a sixth con­sec­u­tive week.Dur­ing PA­HO’s week­ly brief­ing on COVID-19 in the Amer­i­c­as yes­ter­day, Eti­enne said there was al­so a grow­ing risk of mon­key­pox, vi­ral he­pati­tis and oth­er res­pi­ra­to­ry in­fec­tions. Eti­enne said in­fluen­za is again cir­cu­lat­ing, not on­ly dur­ing the tra­di­tion­al flu sea­son.“Many places are fac­ing the dou­ble threat of a po­ten­tial in­fluen­za surge, along­side a rise in COVID-19 cas­es, which will put health­care work­ers, the el­der­ly and preg­nant women at ad­di­tion­al risk. Some coun­tries are fac­ing a triple threat with the ad­di­tion of an RSV wave in chil­dren,” Eti­enne said.Mex­i­co and Pe­ru saw high­er num­bers of in­fluen­za cas­es than they pre­dict­ed. Mean­while, Ar­genti­na, Chile and Uruguay re­port­ed more hos­pi­tal­i­sa­tions than usu­al. Chile, Paraguay, Brazil, Ecuador and the Do­mini­can Re­pub­lic are amid a Res­pi­ra­to­ry Syn­cy­tial Virus (RSV) surge, lead­ing to hos­pi­tal­i­sa­tions in some cas­es. Eti­enne said the same pub­lic health mea­sures for COVID-19 will pro­tect peo­ple against in­fluen­za.“Just as we re­spond­ed to COVID, we must use all the re­sources that we have at hand, start­ing with vac­cines. The cur­rent flu vac­cine used in the South­ern Hemi­sphere re­flects the strains cir­cu­lat­ing now and can pro­vide bet­ter pro­tec­tion to all at risk.”Brazil and Ecuador kicked off their vac­ci­na­tion cam­paigns dur­ing Vac­ci­na­tion Week in the Amer­i­c­as. Fif­teen oth­er coun­tries are launch­ing cam­paigns to reach the el­der­ly, preg­nant women, chil­dren and oth­er vul­ner­a­ble groups. Eti­enne said the re­cent surge rep­re­sents a risk for health sys­tems and au­thor­i­ties should track hos­pi­tal ca­pac­i­ty close­ly.Re­gard­ing COVID-19, the re­gion record­ed 1,087390 cas­es and 4,155 deaths in the last week. It rep­re­sents a 10.4 per cent in­crease in cas­es and a 14.1 per cent climb in fa­tal­i­ties. Eti­enne said all sub-re­gions, ex­clud­ing the Caribbean and At­lantic Ocean is­lands, had in­creased cas­es and deaths.South Amer­i­ca record­ed the high­est jump in cas­es with a 41 per cent in­crease. Cen­tral Amer­i­ca record­ed a 21.3 per cent rise in deaths, the high­est in the re­gion.CLICK FOR MORE NEWS Click HERE to Login Want FREE access to all our content? Sign up HERE!Tagged in: Related articles Sponsored Weather PORT OF SPAIN WEATHER Sponsored Trending RBC defends its credit card limitsIMF wants Govt to end forex restrictionsT&T’s Brain DrainThree teens injured in Ariapita Avenue shootingElderly women struggling with illness, hardship seek urgent helpThree men held for robbing circus in OctoberImbert defends forex restrictions as IMF urges greater flexibilityOne man gunned down, one injured in Rio ClaroTwo men chopped in bar brawlLow turnout at Memorial Day Parade in Port-of-Spain Today's GuardianViewSubscribePublications A duet by Marvin Smith and Vanessa Bushe.Edison BoodoosinghA duet by Marvin Smith and Vanessa Bushe.Edison BoodoosinghMemorable performances in Versi d’Amore 20241111003511Tutor Zaheer Mohammed, left, with trainee Cristiano Benjamin, CCC operations manager Nicole Kistow, VMCOTT CEO Natasha Prince, trainee Jada Belgrave, and CCC programme co-ordinator Lt Curt Jones pose for a photo during the graduation ceremony. Photo courtesy Vanessa Moon Tutor Zaheer Mohammed, left, with trainee Cristiano Benjamin, CCC operations manager Nicole Kistow, VMCOTT CEO Natasha Prince, trainee Jada Belgrave, and CCC programme co-ordinator Lt Curt Jones pose for a photo during the graduation ceremony. Photo courtesy Vanessa Moon 33 auto mechanics graduate from CCC20241103210020Junnel LewisJunnel LewisJunnel Lewis painting her dreams20241027101858Makeda CharlesMakeda CharlesMakeda Charles Using her story to touch survivors of abuse 20241027113816 Created by potrace 1.15, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2017 NewsBusinessSportsLifeOpinionTobago TodayClassifiedsDeath NoticesSubscriptionsReal EstateCategoriesNewsBusinessSportFeaturesOpinionTraffic CamerasDeath NoticesINFORMATIONAbout UsContact UsAdvertise With UsPrivacy PolicySubscriptionsTerms of ServicesDigital MediaThe Big Board Company.Real EstateClassifiedsTELEVISIONCNC3 TelevisionRADIO951 RemixSangeet 106.1 FMSky 99.5FMSlam 100.5 FMVibe CT 105 FMMix 90.1 FM (Guyana)Freedom 106.5 FMAbout Us Guardian Media is the premier provider of multimedia solutions and authoritative insight on news, politics, business, finance, sports, and current affairs. Our brand portfolio includes CNC3, Guardian, TBC Radio Network and The Big Board Company. Contact us Send us an e-mail here or call us at +1-(868)-225-4465 / +1-(868)-235-5668Follow usFlu vaccines may protect against COVID-19 infection, Qatar study finds - Doha News | Qatar Home News Sports Life Health & Technology DN TV Search for: Search Advertise with us Got something to share? Home News Sports Life Health & Technology DN TV Search Search for: Search Search Search for: Search Health & Technology Flu vaccines may protect against COVID-19 infection, Qatar study findsMaha El AkoumJune 4, 20223 minute read Knowing flu jabs can help protect against symptoms resulting from COVID-19 could greatly help the nations who have not been able to compete for vaccines. A study of 30,774 healthcare workers in Qatar in 2020, during the annual influenza vaccination campaign, showed that those who received their flu vaccination were almost 90% less likely to develop severe symptoms following a COVID-19 infection when compared to those who hadn’t been vaccinated. The study was conducted during the months September-December before the national roll-out of the COVID-19 vaccines. Results from this study are in line with previous studies that suggest that “stimulating” the immune system using influenza vaccines (and other vaccines) could help the body defend itself against the COVID-19 virus. Why some vaccines require boosters and others don’t With studies like these, it is often difficult to collect strong evidence on the exact effect of the intervention (the vaccine in this case), as people who are likely to seek vaccinations might be considered more “health conscious”, and so may make other choices that also reduce their risk of being infected. In order to minimise the effect of this potential bias, a team at Weill Cornell Medicine in Qatar led by Laith Jamal Abu-Raddad, an infectious disease epidemiologist, analysed the health records of over 30,000 healthcare workers in Qatar. The rationale behind doing this is that it is more likely for there to be less variation in health-related behaviours amongst this cohort of healthcare workers, than there are in the general population, therefore reducing bias. How was the study conducted? The study was conducted using a matched, test-negative, case-control method that estimated the effectiveness of the influenza vaccine against infection as well as severe COVID-19. The results showed that those who had received the flu vaccine were 30% less likely to test positive for COVID-19, and 89% less likely to develop severe symptoms if they had. A similar study compared the electronic health records of over 37,000 COVID-19 patients from the UK, US and elsewhere. This study matched COVID-19 patients who had received the influenza vaccine to COVID-19 patients who had not received the influenza vaccine. Both patient groups were matched for age, sex, ethnicity and existing health problems and lifestyle factors. The researchers then analysed how often these patients suffered from 15 potentially serious COVID-19-related side effects such as blood clots and respiratory failure and found that patients who had not received the flu vaccine were up to 58% more likely to have a stroke, and up to 45% were more likely to have sepsis. COVID-19 patients who hadn’t received the flu vaccine were also more likely to be admitted into an intensive care unit and tended to have more frequent hospital emergency department visits. Whilst it is clear that the flu vaccine can provide some level of protection against COVID-19, what remains unclear is how long the protection provided by the flu vaccine lasts. Limited protection In Qatar, amongst the study participants who received the influenza vaccine and then contracted COVID-19, these infections usually occurred on average around six weeks following the flu vaccination. This suggests that the protection from infection is not particularly long-lasting. Qatar stresses importance of equal vaccine distribution globally Knowing that the influenza vaccine can help protect against severe symptoms and health complications resulting from COVID-19, even if for a limited period of time, could potentially be of great value to nations who have not been able to compete with high-income countries for vaccines and already have over-stretched healthcare systems. In this setting, the combined burden of the seasonal flu and COVID-19 can further exacerbate the existing crises, and the flu vaccine can help mitigate this. However, the best form of protection against COVID-19 remains to be COVID vaccines. 23 0 23 0 Most ReadGabriel Batistuta and Ajax head coach Farioli to headline Aspire Academy’s Global SummitQatar drawn alongside UAE, Oman and Kuwait in Gulf Cup 2024Intaj exhibition 2024 to spotlight short films from Gaza StripQatar denies reports of withdrawal from Gaza talks and closure of Hamas officeQatar announces preparations for launch of Qatar Social ObservatoryFintech Hackathon winner creates thriving startup community in Doha 23 0 News Politics Business DN Special Reports Opinion Breaking Sports Sports News Qatar 2022 Lifestyle & Culture Travel Events Entertainment Education Health & Technology Health & Wellbeing Health & Technology Sustainability DN TV Featured Videos DN Reports The Round up Profiles In Depth Doha Eats Styled By Reina Bookmarked World cup teams Copyright 2024. All Rights Reserved. Doha News Search for: Search Input your search keywords and press Enter. Total 23 Share wpDiscuzInsertFree flu jabs to be available in NSW from Wednesday amid 'increasing hospitalisations' - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeFree flu jabs to be available in NSW from Wednesday amid 'increasing hospitalisations'Share Free flu jabs to be available in NSW from Wednesday amid 'increasing hospitalisations'By Jean KennedyTopic:Vaccines and ImmunitySun 29 May 2022Sunday 29 May 2022Sun 29 May 2022 at 11:31amDisplay captionFree influenza vaccines will be available in NSW from Wednesday. (ABC News: Freya Michie)abc.net.auews/free-flu-jabs-will-be-available-in-nsw-from-wednesday/101109192Link copiedShareShare articleFree flu jabs will be made available to everyone in New South Wales from Wednesday in what authorities are describing as a "month-long blitz" to combat what is anticipated to be a horror winter for influenza.Key points:There were more than 1,100 reported cases of respiratory infections in NSW last weekPharmacies have been given approval to administer flu vaccines to children aged fiveThe Pharmacy Guild says the "pragmatic move" comes amid a "rapid spread"There has already been a huge surge in flu infections, with more than 1,100 reported cases of respiratory illness in the past week and 150 presentations and admissions to hospitals.Usually only high-risk groups of people are eligible for free flu shots, but the state government has decided to pick up the tab for everyone in a bid to curb the massive rise in infections.They will also be available through pharmacies as well as GPs, to make it easier for people to access vaccinations."We strongly urge everyone over six months of age to get a flu shot as soon as possible to protect themselves and their loved ones, as the virus is easily spread and potentially deadly," NSW Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant said."This is particularly important for those in high-risk groups, such as the elderly and children aged six months to five years."Dr Chant said now was the time to book your flu shot if you are in aged or disability care, over 65 or immunocompromised."We also recommend a COVID-19 winter booster if you are eligible, as both flu and COVID-19 vaccines can be given at the same time," she said.Pharmacies have also been given the approval to administer flu vaccines to children aged five.'Pragmatic move' for better coverageThe Pharmacy Guild said chemists are gearing up for the rollout of the program from June 1 until June 30, and believes supplies of the flu vaccine will no longer be an issue with millions of extra doses made available.Jabs urged as flu cases risePhoto shows Sick person lies on couch underneath blanket.As Australians head into winter with little natural immunity from the flu, and facing the potential risk of a co-infection with COVID-19, experts say getting a flu shot is more important than ever.NSW branch president David Heffernan said offering free flu shots to everyone through pharmacies is a very "pragmatic move"."We're seeing increasing hospitalisations through this influenza-A strain of the virus, and it has come earlier than it usually does," he told the ABC."We often see the peak influenza season to be in the months of July, August, and September, but we've seen a rapid spread now that we've got the borders open to the northern hemisphere's strain of influenza again."With free flu shots, we will be able to get better coverage and herd immunity across the population much faster."Mr Heffernan said on Friday the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) had approved up to 16.8 million additional doses of the flu vaccine, on top of the original 7 million doses.He said patience was key as GPs and pharmacists expect a large uptake in vaccine bookings."We are geared up ready to go and we expect between 1200 to 1400 pharmacies will participate on top of GPs in the community."I know a lot of families will welcome it, especially those under cost of living pressures."Posted Sun 29 May 2022 at 11:31amSunday 29 May 2022 at 11:31amSun 29 May 2022 at 11:31am, updated Mon 30 May 2022 at 12:56amMonday 30 May 2022 at 12:56amMon 30 May 2022 at 12:56amShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasPhoto shows Three images in a composite including a man in glasses, an man with orange makeup and another man in glassesAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPhoto shows Workplace surveillancePrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesPhoto shows A young solider. Tax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsPhoto shows Richard Boyle speaks to supporters outside court.Popular nowWoman dead and child injured after truck crashes into Victorian preschoolTopic:Accidents and Emergency IncidentsPhoto shows The trailer of a truck can be seen in a kindergarten ground.'This isn't the first time': Wimbledon winner calls for respect after journalist's comment about her looksTopic:TennisPhoto shows Barbora Krejcikova looks downDutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasPhoto shows Three images in a composite including a man in glasses, an man with orange makeup and another man in glassesRelated topicsHealthNSWVaccines and ImmunityTop StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesTax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsJust InConvicted killer fugitive allegedly caught in Alice Springs hotel room with senior NAAJA employeeTopic:Legal Profession3m ago3 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 8:09amLynn Cannon was brutally murdered by estranged partner, now inquest examines police response to call for helpTopic:Domestic Violence19m ago19 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:53amJumbo-sized delivery to get peak-hour police escort to Monarto ZooTopic:Feel Good26m ago26 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:46am'We obviously don't care about losing': Michael Clarke criticises players being rested during series loss to PakistanTopic:Cricket1h ago1 hours agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 6:50amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCWhere You Can Get a Free Flu Shot in Australia - Insider Guides International Student Resources × Search Download our guides Your Next Career Preparing and planning Accommodation Money and banking Cost of living Visas Settling in Employment Health and safety Language Life in Australia Studying Exploring Getting around Travel Advertise Where You Can Get a Free Flu Shot in Australia Insider Guides 1 June 2022 Sign up to our newsletter! The newsletter signup widget on posts Name* First Last Email* PhoneThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. By now, you may have heard that rates of influenza (aka the flu) in Australia are the highest they’ve been in the last couple of years. With COVID-19 restrictions easing across the country in recent months, more people are out and about, causing the flu to spread at a rapid rate. In response to this spike in cases, several state and territory governments have launched free flu vaccine campaigns to encourage people to get immunised. So, where can you get a free flu shot? Let’s take a look at a state-by-state breakdown. New South Wales If you’re studying in NSW, you can get a free flu vaccine from 1 June to 30 June 2022. The NSW Government is offering free flu jabs at: GPs (for people aged six months and over) Pharmacies (for people aged five years and over) While flu jabs were previously only free for high-risk groups, the government adjusted its scheme after seeing the increase in infections. Learn more about getting the flu shot in NSW (including how to book in your preferred language). Queensland The Queensland Government is offering free flu shots from 24 May to 30 June 2022 to all residents over the age of six months old. This includes Queenslanders who do not have Medicare, such as international students. “We are seeing the impacts on our hospitals and if we don’t get a vaccinated community with the flu vaccine, we are going to see escalating numbers in our hospitals,” said Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk in regards to the decision. Click here for more information on getting the flu vaccine in Queensland. South Australia Those living in South Australia can get the flu vaccine for free until 30 June 2022 at GPs and pharmacies. On its website, the Government of South Australia names high cases of influenza as the motivation behind the decision. It highlights that, as of 24 May 2022, South Australia has reported 1,195 cases of the flu, compared to 12 cases at the same time last year. Read more about getting the flu shot in South Australia. Tasmania In Tasmania, you can only get the flu jab for free at state government-run clinics from 4 June 2022. At the time of this writing, GPs and pharmacies still charge a fee for the flu vaccine. You can learn more about Tasmania’s free flu vaccine program at this link. Victoria Following the lead of many other states, Victoria announced that it would be offering free flu shots from 1 June to 30 June 2022 to all individuals aged six months and over. On its website, the government shared that it is eager to boost immunisation rates, particularly since influenza rates increased by 30 per cent at the end of May. In Victoria, you can get the flu shot for free at GPs and pharmacies. Click here to learn more about Victoria’s immunisation scheme. Western Australia From 1 to 30 June, Western Australia is supplying free influenza vaccinations for all people who are not otherwise covered by government-funded vaccines. You can get a free flu shot at participating local pharmacies and state government-led clinics. Read more about WA’s free immunisation scheme. The ACT and Northern Territory At the time of this writing, the ACT and Northern Territory have not introduced comprehensive free flu vaccine programs. That means that the only people who are eligible for free flu shots in these territories are those covered under the National Immunisation Program (NIP), which includes: Infants and children aged six months to less than five years of age All persons aged 65 years and over Pregnant people Those with health conditions and medical risk factors All Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged six months and over. flu Flu shot health influenza news public health Insider Guides Insider Guides are high-quality, best practice guides to ensure students are prepared, welcomed, connected and supported in Australia. Related Articles See More American election How Does the American Election Affect Australia? 491 visa More Subclass 491 Visa Nomination Places for Victorian Graduates news New ‘Safer Exchange Sites’ Make Buying and Selling Online Safer in Victoria YouTube Facebook Instagram TikTok INSIDER GUIDES About Us Where to Find Our Guides Advertise Distribute Careers Contact Us Preparing and planning Accommodation Money and banking Cost of living Visas Settling in Employment Health, safety and wellbeing Language Life in Australia Studying Exploring Getting around Travel Insider Guides • Adelaide, South Australia • Copyright 2022 Terms of ServicePrivacy Policy