Influenza A virus reassortment in mammals gives rise to genetically distinct within-host subpopulations | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Influenza A virus reassortment in mammals gives rise to genetically distinct within-host subpopulations Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 11 November 2022 Influenza A virus reassortment in mammals gives rise to genetically distinct within-host subpopulations Ketaki Ganti ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9687-35051, Anish Bagga ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1355-74522, Silvia Carnaccini ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1656-40683, Lucas M. Ferreri1,3, Ginger Geiger ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-4927-80843, C. Joaquin Caceres ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8508-65923, Brittany Seibert3, Yonghai Li4, Liping Wang5, Taeyong Kwon4, Yuhao Li ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2413-09374, Igor Morozov ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9343-54464, Wenjun Ma5,6, Juergen A. Richt ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-7308-56724,6, Daniel R. Perez ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6569-56893,7, Katia Koelle ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0254-61418,9 & …Anice C. Lowen ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9829-112X1,9 Show authors Nature Communications volume 13, Article number: 6846 (2022) Cite this article 7425 Accesses 19 Citations 395 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusVirus–host interactions AbstractInfluenza A virus (IAV) genetic exchange through reassortment has the potential to accelerate viral evolution and has played a critical role in the generation of multiple pandemic strains. For reassortment to occur, distinct viruses must co-infect the same cell. The spatio-temporal dynamics of viral dissemination within an infected host therefore define opportunity for reassortment. Here, we used wild type and synonymously barcoded variant viruses of a pandemic H1N1 strain to examine the within-host viral dynamics that govern reassortment in guinea pigs, ferrets and swine. The first two species are well-established models of human influenza, while swine are a natural host and a frequent conduit for cross-species transmission and reassortment. Our results show reassortment to be pervasive in all three hosts but less frequent in swine than in ferrets and guinea pigs. In ferrets, tissue-specific differences in the opportunity for reassortment are also evident, with more reassortants detected in the nasal tract than the lower respiratory tract. While temporal trends in viral diversity are limited, spatial patterns are clear, with heterogeneity in the viral genotypes detected at distinct anatomical sites revealing extensive compartmentalization of reassortment and replication. Our data indicate that the dynamics of viral replication in mammals allow diversification through reassortment but that the spatial compartmentalization of variants likely shapes their evolution and onward transmission. Similar content being viewed by others Influenza A virus undergoes compartmentalized replication in vivo dominated by stochastic bottlenecks Article Open access 14 June 2022 Rapid evolution of A(H5N1) influenza viruses after intercontinental spread to North America Article Open access 29 May 2023 Discordant phylodynamic and spatiotemporal transmission patterns driving the long-term persistence and evolution of human coronaviruses Article Open access 17 October 2024 IntroductionInfluenza A viruses (IAVs) have a broad host range, with the greatest diversity in wild bird species and established lineages circulating in poultry, swine, humans, and other mammalian hosts1,2. Host range for a given lineage is restricted by species barriers to infection, but occasional spillover events can result in sustained transmission, seeding new lineages3,4. The establishment of novel IAVs in humans is the source of influenza pandemics and has major ramifications for public health and the economy5,6. Reassortment of gene segments between IAVs adapted to distinct host species can give rise to chimeric viruses with enhanced potential for cross-species transfer7. Prominent examples include the reassortant strains that gave rise to 1957, 1968, and 2009 influenza pandemics8,9.Among non-human mammalian species, swine are of particular interest. Transmission of IAV between swine and humans is relatively common, due not only to an extensive interface in agricultural settings, but also to similarities between pigs and humans in the host factors that support viral replication10,11. Swine hosts are also somewhat susceptible to infection with avian IAV, creating the opportunity for co-infection and reassortment of viruses that are typically separated by host species barriers12. For this reason, swine are often referred to as mixing vessels for IAV reassortment13,14. The role of swine in the 2009 influenza pandemic9, and the abundant reassortment that characterizes IAV in swine15,16,17,18,19, offer ample support for this designation. Although the central position of swine in IAV ecology and evolution is well understood10,13,16, the within-host viral dynamics that govern reassortment in this host are less well-characterized.We have previously reported that IAV reassortment occurs frequently in vivo20,21,22,23,24. This prior work focused on easily sampled IAV populations replicating in the upper respiratory tracts of mammals. Recent work has shown, however, that distinct within-host subpopulations can form in different regions of the respiratory tract25. This spatial structure, in turn, can influence viral evolutionary dynamics within and between hosts26,27. Here, we evaluated how genotypic diversity generated through reassortment is shaped by and contributes to viral population structure within the host.We examined within-host diversity generated through reassortment in guinea pigs, ferrets, and pigs. While pigs are an important natural host, guinea pigs and ferrets are well-characterized models for human IAV28,29,30. We find that co-infection at the cellular level is extensive and reassortant viruses are consistently observed. In ferrets, markedly greater viral genotypic diversity is generated in the upper respiratory tract compared to the lower tract. Viral populations at these two sites are furthermore highly dissimilar genetically, revealing strong spatial compartmentalization. Diversity generated through reassortment in swine is generally lower than in guinea pigs and ferrets and, as in ferrets, viral diversity in swine is characterized by extensive spatial compartmentalization. Taken together, our data reveal spatial structure within the mammalian respiratory tract to be a major factor defining the extent of IAV diversity engendered through reassortment.ResultsViral genotypic diversity generated through reassortment in the mammalian nasal tractTo evaluate the viral genotypic diversity generated via reassortment, guinea pigs, ferrets and pigs were co-infected with well-matched parental viruses of the influenza A/Netherlands/602/2009 (NL09; pH1N1) background31. Termed wild type (WT) and variant (VAR), these co-infecting viruses differ by a single synonymous mutation introduced into each gene segment of the VAR virus and distinct epitope tags encoded in the hemagglutinin open reading frame of each virus. In cell culture, these two viruses show comparable fitness (Supplementary Fig. 1). Following the determination of the 50% infectious dose (ID50) of the virus mixture in ferrets and utilizing prior ID50 results in guinea pigs32, reassortment in these species was analyzed at two doses applied intranasally (1 × 102 and 1 × 105 ID50). In pigs, a single dose of 2 × 106 PFU applied both intranasally and intratracheally was used after preliminary tests with lower, intranasal, doses showed that animals were not consistently infected. All inoculated animals supported robust viral replication, as assessed at the nasal site, with titers declining to the limit of detection by days 4–7 post-inoculation (Supplementary Fig. 2).To monitor reassortment in the upper respiratory tract, nasal samples were collected longitudinally, and the genotypes of clonal isolates derived from each sample were determined. The parental origin of each of the eight segments was defined, allowing the identification of all 254 possible reassortant genotypes and both parental genotypes. Here, a genotype is defined as a constellation of eight gene segments, and any nucleotide diversity present is not considered. Reassortment was detected in all samples from all species tested (Supplementary Fig. 3). To characterize the viral diversity generated through reassortment, we calculated the frequency of unique genotypes, frequency of parental genotypes, richness, and Shannon–Weiner diversity for each sample (Fig. 1).Fig. 1: Viral genotypic diversity generated through reassortment in the mammalian nasal tract.Results from guinea pigs are shown in A–D, ferrets in E–H, and swine in I–L. Stacked plots (A, E, I) show frequencies of unique genotypes detected in one representative animal over time. Blue and orange represent the WT and VAR parental genotypes, respectively. The frequency of both parental genotypes combined (B, F, J), richness (C, G, K), and Shannon–Weiner diversity (D, H, L) are each plotted as a function of time. Guinea pigs and ferrets inoculated at high dose (1 × 105 ID50) and low dose (1 × 102 ID50) are indicated with dashed and solid lines, respectively. The distribution of parental genotype frequencies (M), richness (N), and diversity (O) across all time points in each species (guinea pigs n = 12; ferrets n = 12; swine n = 18) is shown with violin plots. Data are presented as violin plots featuring a box plot. The bounds of the box show the first and third quartiles. Whiskers indicate 1.5 times the interquartile range and contain ~99% of the data for a normal distribution. The bounds of the violin plots indicate the minima and maxima of the entire dataset. Differences in richness and diversity between swine and guinea pigs (richness p = 0.00065; diversity p = 0.00014) and between swine and ferrets (richness p = 0.0016; diversity p = 0.0028) were significant. Parental genotype frequencies differed significantly between swine and guinea pigs (p = 0.003) and were not significant between swine and ferrets (p > 0.05). All statistics were derived using one-way ANOVA. Animal silhouettes were generated using BioRender.com.Full size imageIn all three host species, the same reassortant virus is rarely detected across multiple time points (Supplementary Fig. 3), suggesting genotypic loss due to stochastic processes such as drift or disruption through further reassortment. Parental genotypes (WT or VAR), however, are consistently detected in the nasal samples of each animal in least two time points (Fig. 1B, F, J, M). Despite efforts to inoculate with a 1:1 mixture of WT and VAR viruses, VAR was predominant; this could reflect a skewing in the inoculum or fitness advantage of VAR that is only apparent in vivo. Since 21 viral isolates were genotyped from each sample, richness has a maximum value of 21 in our dataset. Richness is often high in guinea pigs and ferrets, with values ranging from 4 to 18, while the range in pigs falls between 3 and 10 (Fig. 1C, G, K, N). Trends in diversity correspond to those of richness (Fig. 1D, H, L, O).In guinea pigs and ferrets, only marginal effects of dose were apparent (Fig. 1, compare dashed and solid lines). Nevertheless, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 4, differences in diversity across doses were significant in both species, with the higher dose yielding higher diversity when all time points were considered together (p = 0.04 in guinea pigs and p = 0.003 in ferrets, ANOVA). Richness was also significantly higher in ferrets receiving a higher dose (p = 0.002, ANOVA).The effects of dose are relevant in interpreting comparisons across species as only a relatively high dose was tested in pigs. Comparison of species across all time points and doses shows significantly higher richness and diversity in guinea pigs and ferrets than in pigs (Fig. 1N, O; p < 0.01, ANOVA). Limiting this analysis to include only animals receiving a high dose of inoculum confirmed these trends (p < 0.005, ANOVA).Overall, these results reveal that the mammalian upper respiratory tract presents an environment with high potential for the generation of viral diversity via reassortment, with modest effects of dose observed and with swine showing lower viral diversity than guinea pigs or ferrets.Viral diversity generated through reassortment is greater in the ferret nasal tract than in the lungsIn mammalian hosts, IAV replication can be distributed throughout the respiratory tract. Using the ferret model, we compared the extent of viral diversity arising through reassortment in upper and lower respiratory tracts. Nasal turbinates and lung tissues were collected on days 1, 2, 3, or 4 from ferrets inoculated with 1 × 102 or 1 × 105 ferret ID50. Viral titers in these samples are reported in Supplementary Fig. 2. Genotyping of viral isolates revealed that the number of unique genotypes detected was routinely higher in nasal turbinates compared to lung at both doses (Fig. 2A–C). Similarly, Shannon–Weiner diversity in nasal turbinates was typically higher than in the lung (Fig. 2D). These differences in both richness and diversity were significant (Fig. 2E, F) (p = 8.6 × 10−5 and p = 0.0014, respectively; paired t test).Fig. 2: Viral diversity generated through reassortment is greater in the ferret nasal turbinates than in the lungs.Pie charts show frequencies of unique genotypes detected in the nasal turbinates (NT) and lung of ferrets inoculated with 1 × 102 FID50 (A) or 1 × 105 FID50 (B). Ferrets shown were analyzed at the following times post-infection: Day 1 (F11, 12, 19, 20), Day 2 (F13, 14, 21, 22), Day 3 (F15, 16, 23), and Day 4 (F17, 18, 24). Blue and orange sections of the pie charts represent VAR and WT parental genotypes, respectively. Richness (C) and diversity (D) are plotted, with observed results (colored points) overlaid on the distribution of simulated data (gray violins) (n = 1000 simulations per ferret). Horizontal lines denote the 95th and 5th percentiles. The distribution of richness (E) and diversity (F) in NT and lungs of all individuals are shown with violin plots (Lung n = 14; Nasal turbinates n = 14). Data are presented as violin plots featuring a box plot. Data are presented as violin plots featuring a box plot. The bounds of the box show the interquartile range and the center of the box shows the 50th percentile. The median is shown by the white dot. Whiskers indicate 1.5 times the interquartile range and contain \(\sim 99\%\) of the data for a normal distribution. The bounds of the violin plots indicate the minima and maxima of the entire dataset. Differences between NT and lungs were significant by both measures (p < 0.01, two-sided paired t test).Full size imageWe hypothesized that the distinct outcomes of co-infection in the upper and lower respiratory tracts were indicative of little viral dispersal between the two sites. To test this hypothesis, we modeled free mixing between the lung and nose by computationally shuffling intact genotypes between the two tissues. We then compared our observed data to the resultant simulated dataset (Fig. 2C, D). This approach revealed that richness and diversity seen in the lungs are low relative to that expected for free mixing, with observed values typically falling below the 5th percentile of simulated results. In contrast, richness and diversity observed in nasal turbinates are typically above the mean. This analysis suggests that the spread of the virus between upper and lower respiratory locations occurs relatively rarely, such that abundant diversity generated through reassortment in the nasal tract does not seed a similarly diverse population in the lungs.Reassortant viral populations in the ferret upper and lower respiratory tracts are distinctExamination of the specific genotypes identified in the nasal turbinates and lungs within a given ferret revealed almost no overlap (Fig. 2A, B). To more rigorously assess this apparent dissimilarity of viral populations, we calculated normalized beta diversity (βn) between pairs of samples33. This dissimilarity metric has a range between 0 and 1, with a beta value of 0 indicating that two samples are identical in their genotype composition, and a beta value of 1 indicating no genotypic overlap. In all ferrets, high beta diversities of >0.5 are seen between nasal turbinate and lung samples of the same animal (Fig. 3A). Indeed, beta diversity values calculated between pairs of samples within and between ferrets indicate that the nasal and lung viral populations within an individual are typically as distinct as populations replicating in different animals (Fig. 3A). To test whether a lack of viral dispersal between anatomical sites could account for this observation, we compared the observed beta diversity to the distribution of beta diversity values obtained from the computational simulation of free mixing outlined above. For most ferrets, observed beta diversity falls above the 95th percentile of the distribution (Fig. 3B). Thus, the highly distinct viral populations seen in nasal and lung tissues are inconsistent with free mixing between these sites. These data further support the notion that virus replicating within the ferret upper and lower respiratory tracts form distinct compartments, with reassortment occurring independently at the two sites.Fig. 3: Reassortant viral populations in the ferret upper and lower respiratory tracts are distinct.Heat map showing normalized beta diversity of viral populations in ferret lung and nasal turbinates (NT) (A). The inset shows a representative comparison between the tissues of ferrets F23 and F21, to indicate the position of NT and lung within the matrix. Normalized beta diversity is plotted in B with observed results (colored points) overlaid on the distribution of simulated data (gray violins) (n = 1000 simulations per ferret). Data are presented as violin plots featuring a box plot. Data are presented as violin plots featuring a box plot. The bounds of the box show the interquartile range and the center of the box shows the 50th percentile. Whiskers indicate 1.5 times the interquartile range and contain \(\sim 99\%\) of the data for a normal distribution. The bounds of the violin plots indicate the minima and maxima of the entire dataset. One star indicates that observed data is above the 95th percentile of the distribution; two stars indicates that observed data is above the 99th percentile. C Immunohistochemistry images of ferret F23 NT and lung sections stained for WT (green) and VAR (red) viruses at day 3 post inoculation. Gray staining marks epithelial cell borders. Yellow coloring in merged images indicates the presence of both WT and VAR HA antigens in the same cell. Zoomed insets of both NT and lung sections are shown with white arrows indicating co-infected cells and yellow arrows indicating singly infected cells. Scale bars are 20 µm. Four fields were analyzed for each tissue section and representative images are depicted here. D Immunohistochemistry images of ferret F24 lung sections stained for nucleoprotein (red) and counterstained with hematoxylin. Scale bars are 20 µm. Four fields were analyzed for each tissue section and representative images are depicted here.Full size imageTo visualize the spatial distribution of co-infecting viruses within ferret tissues, the tagged HA proteins of WT and VAR origin were stained within lung and nasal tissue sections (Fig. 3C). This analysis revealed that microscopic fields that are positive for viral antigen tend to show a high density of infected cells at both tissue sites. Strikingly, most infected cells are positive for both WT and VAR antigens, indicating high levels of viral co-infection within the host, consistent with the robust reassortment observed. The cell types hosting viral antigen in the infected lung tissue were defined based on their morphology and found to comprise ciliated epithelium of the bronchi and bronchioles, goblet cells, cells of the peribronchial/-iolar submucosal glands, and type II pneumocytes within the alveoli (Fig. 3D and Supplementary Data 2). Unfortunately, this analysis could not be performed for nasal turbinate owing to the exhaustion of the samples.Local diversity arising through reassortment is modest within the swine respiratory tractAnalysis of nasal swabs showed limited genotypic diversity in the swine nasal tract. We expanded this investigation of reassortment in pigs by sampling the nasal tract and each of the seven lung lobes of groups of three pigs on day 3 or 5 post-inoculation. Viral titers in these samples are shown in Supplementary Fig. 2. Titers in the nasal tract on day 3 were insufficient to support analysis of reassortment. Genotype frequencies observed from the remaining sites were plotted and overlaid on a schematic of a pig lung (Fig. 4A–F). Although one or more reassortants are detected in all but three of the 45 samples, the viral populations tend to carry high proportions of parental virus. At a minority of sites, a specific reassortant is predominant. Richness is less than 10 for most samples (Fig. 4G) and Shannon–Weiner diversities less than 1.0 are common (Fig. 4H). Thus, overall, the diversity generated through reassortment throughout the swine respiratory tract is moderate. To evaluate the extent to which a lack of viral mixing across the sampled locations limits richness and diversity, we compared the observed results to those expected if viruses mix freely throughout the respiratory tract (Fig. 4G, H). To simulate free mixing, we randomly sampled intact viral genotypes from all those detected within a given pig. The resultant richness and Shannon–Weiner diversity values show wide distributions. However, much of the observed data lies below the 5th percentile of these distributions, suggesting that pockets of low richness and diversity persist locally due to an absence of mixing across anatomical sites. In sum, local genotypic diversity generated via reassortment is modest throughout the swine respiratory tract.Fig. 4: Local diversity arising through reassortment is modest within the swine respiratory tract.Pie charts showing frequencies of unique genotypes present within each lung lobe of a given pig on day 3 (A–C) and the nasal tract and each lung lobe of a given pig on day 5 (D–F) with blue and orange sections representing WT and VAR parental genotypes, respectively. The tissue sites are abbreviated as NA-Nasal; LA-Left Apical; RA-Right Apical; LC-Left Cardiac; RC-Right Cardiac; LD-Left Diaphragmatic; RD-Right Diaphragmatic; IN-Intermediate (accessory). Simulated richness (G) and diversity (H) are plotted, with observed results (colored points) overlaid on the distribution of simulated data (gray violins) (n = 1000 simulations per pig). Data are presented as violin plots featuring a box plot. The bounds of the box show the interquartile range and the center of the box shows the 50th percentile. The median is shown by the white dot. Whiskers indicate 1.5 times the interquartile range and contain \(\sim 99\%\) of the data for a normal distribution. The bounds of the violin plots indicate the minima and maxima of the entire dataset. Horizontal lines denote the 95th and 5th percentiles.Full size imageReassortant viral populations show extensive compartmentalization within the swine respiratory tractExamination of the reassortant viral genotypes identified in swine tissues reveals little to no overlap across locations within an individual animal (Fig. 4A–F). We again used beta diversity to assess the similarity of viral populations in a pairwise and quantitative manner. As seen in ferrets, beta values in pigs were typically high (Fig. 5A and Supplementary Fig. 5). Indeed, viral populations sampled from within a pig were as distinct from one another as those sampled from different pigs (Fig. 5A). To test whether a lack of viral dispersal between anatomical sites could account for this observation, we compared the beta diversity observed for a pair of locations within a pig to the distribution of beta diversity values obtained from a simulation of free mixing between those locations (Fig. 5B and Supplementary Fig. 6). For most pairs of tissues, the observed data are at the high extreme of this distribution, falling within the 95th percentile of the simulated results. Thus, spatial compartmentalization within the swine respiratory tract is extensive.Fig. 5: Reassortant viral populations show extensive compartmentalization within the swine respiratory tract.Heat map showing normalized beta diversity of viral populations in swine lung and nasal tract (A). The inset shows a representative comparison between the tissues of pigs P3 and P6, to indicate the position of each tissue within the matrix. The tissue sites are abbreviated as NA-Nasal; LA- Left Apical; RA- Right Apical; LC-Left Cardiac; RC-Right Cardiac; LD-Left Diaphragmatic; RD-Right Diaphragmatic; IN-Intermediate (accessory). Normalized beta diversity between the left apical and left cardiac lobes is plotted (B) with observed results (colored points) overlaid on the distribution of simulated data (gray violins) (n = 1000 simulations per pig). Data are presented as violin plots featuring a box plot. Data are presented as violin plots featuring a box plot. The bounds of the box show the interquartile range and the center of the box shows the 50th percentile. Whiskers indicate 1.5 times the interquartile range and contain \(\sim 99\%\) of the data for a normal distribution. The bounds of the violin plots indicate the minima and maxima of the entire dataset. One star indicates that observed data is above the 95th percentile of the distribution; two stars indicates that observed data is above the 99th percentile. C Representative immunohistochemistry images of swine (P76) left apical lung section stained for WT (green) and VAR (red) viruses at day 3 post-inoculation. Gray staining marks epithelial cell borders. Yellow coloring in merged images indicates the presence of both WT and VAR HA antigens in the same cell. Zoomed insets of the lung are shown with white arrows indicating co-infected cells and yellow arrows indicating singly infected cells. Scale bars are 20 µm. Four fields were analyzed for each tissue section and representative images are depicted here. D Immunohistochemistry images of swine (P76) left apical lung sections stained for nucleoprotein (red) and counterstained with hematoxylin. Scale bars are 20 µm. Four fields were analyzed for each tissue section and representative images are depicted here.Full size imageTo visualize the spatial distribution of co-infecting viruses within swine tissues, the tagged HA proteins of WT and VAR origin were stained (Fig. 5C and Supplementary Fig. 7). As in ferrets, a high density of infected cells is visible in regions positive for viral antigen and most infected cells are positive for both WT and VAR viruses. Thus, the high levels of viral co-infection observed in ferrets extends to swine. Using a morphologic approach to identify cell types, we found type II pneumocytes within the alveoli and ciliated epithelial cells of the bronchioles and bronchi to be the predominant cell types harboring viral antigen in the lungs (Fig. 5D, Supplementary Fig. 8 and Supplementary Data 2). In nasal turbinates, viral antigen positivity was observed within respiratory and transitional epithelia (Supplementary Fig. 8 and Supplementary Data 2).DiscussionOur experiments reveal the extent to which co-infection at the level of the whole host creates opportunity for reassortment within the host. Abundant opportunity is apparent in the nasal tracts of guinea pigs and ferrets. However, the viral diversity generated through reassortment is more limited in the lungs of ferrets and all tissues sampled in pigs. In addition to relatively little opportunity for reassortment in these tissues, spatial constraints on mixing within the respiratory tract yield localized subpopulations with diminished genotypic diversity. Thus, despite the extensive reassortment seen among swine IAV at a population level, our results reveal only moderate viral diversity generated through reassortment in pigs. Results from guinea pigs and ferrets suggest that opportunity for within-host IAV genetic exchange may be greater in other natural mammalian hosts.In drawing comparisons across the species examined, it is important to consider differences in the protocols applied. Swine were infected both intranasally and intratracheally compared to only intranasal infection in both ferrets and guinea pigs. The delivery of inoculum directly to the lower respiratory tract in swine might be expected to augment potential for WT-VAR co-infection in the lungs. In addition, swine were infected with a single high dose with unknown relationship to the median infectious doses in this species, while ferrets and guinea pigs were each infected with doses of 1 × 102 and 1 × 105 ID50. As measured by plaque assay, the dose applied in pigs is comparable to the high dose used in guinea pigs and approximately 10-fold lower than the high dose used in ferrets. While inoculum dose might be expected to influence the potential for co-infection and propagation of novel variants, the effect of a 103-fold difference in dose in ferrets and guinea pigs were modest. We, therefore, suggest that the more limited diversification through reassortment in pigs is unlikely to be due to protocol differences.Given our use of well-matched parental viruses, the differences in viral genotypic diversity seen between species and between tissues within a species are also unlikely to be driven by selection. Instead, features of viral dynamics in these different environments likely shape the frequency of reassortment and the extent to which reassortants are amplified once formed. Since relatively few reassortants were detected in pigs and in ferret lungs, our data imply that the size of the target tissue may be an important factor. In a large animal such as swine or tissue with extensive surface area, such as lung, the likelihood of cellular co-infection involving genetically distinct variants may be reduced. In addition, viral fitness, the spatial arrangement of target cells, the extent to which permissive cells are interspersed with non-permissive cells, physical barriers to viral spread, and the effectiveness innate responses to infection are all likely to vary with species and across different tissues within a species34,35,36.Although variation in the diversity generated through reassortment is apparent, visualization of viral antigen in infected tissues indicated that cellular co-infection is abundant at all sites examined. Cellular co-infection has previously been reported to be common in vivo37 and is expected owing to the high potential for singular genomes to result in abortive infection38,39 and the potential for direct cell-to-cell spread of viral genetic material40. Nevertheless, the juxtaposition of this result with a predominance of parental-type viruses in many samples is counter-intuitive. While the images of fixed tissue show a snapshot of viral HA protein expression in defined cells at a given time point, viral samples draw from the population of viruses that have accumulated at a particular site over the course of infection. Thus, the prevalence of parental genotypes may reflect their production early after inoculation, when cellular co-infection is less likely to occur22,37. In addition, HA staining does not reveal the relative dosage of WT and VAR genomes in a cell or indicate the genotype(s) of the seven non-HA segments. Both factors would strongly modulate the proportion of progeny genomes from a co-infected cell that is reassortant.The spatial separation of viral subpopulations within an individual has important evolutionary implications. First, reassortment among genetically distinct viruses is less likely to occur when viral dispersal is localized, since all viruses produced from a singly infected progenitor cell will be genetically similar23. Conversely, well-mixed viral populations are more likely to produce reassortants that differ from their parents in biologically meaningful ways. Compartmentalization of variants may be a contributing factor to the lack of reassortment reported in experimentally infected humans41. Second, spatial structure impacts the extent to which a viral population within a host is shaped by selection versus stochastic processes25,42. Spatial barriers create subpopulations, each of which can have a small population size. As such, genetic drift dominates within each subpopulation, with variant frequencies changing over time largely due to chance. This means that both lower and higher fitness variants have the potential to rise to high frequencies within subpopulations. As a result, spatial compartmentalization of populations has the immediate effect of reducing the efficiency of selection. While the strength of selection to purge low-fitness variants is weakened at the level of individual subpopulations, the propagation of slightly deleterious mutants allows a broader exploration of sequence space across the entire viral population that is distributed within the host. This may, in rare cases, lead to the discovery of higher fitness variants that might not evolve as readily in less structured within-host populations.Compartmentalization of viral replication is also expected to shape evolution occurring between hosts. As has been seen in ferrets, transmitted virus is likely to comprise a sub-sample of one specific anatomical location23,27,43. In the context of spatial heterogeneity, this sub-sample will not be representative of the viral population present in the whole host. Thus, within-host spatial structure is expected to contribute to stochastic effects acting between hosts: the transmitted virus will be the virus that was in the right place at the right time, and may not be the most fit genotype present within a host23,27,44,45.Certain limitations in our experimental design are important to consider. Our approach of co-inoculating with well-matched parental strains is designed to maximize potential to detect reassortment. In addition, the gene constellation of the 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus, used in this study, has shown a marked predisposition for reassortment46,47,48. However, natural co-infections will include a wide range of scenarios in terms of relative timing, route and dose of infection, and phenotypes of co-infecting strains. Each of these factors will influence the frequency of reassortment21,22,23,49. In evaluating the extent of overlap between viral genotypes in different anatomical locations, it is important to note that parental viruses are likely seeded throughout the respiratory tract upon inoculation; thus, only reassortant genotypes are informative in assessing the extent of mixing across sites. In addition, if variants are rare (<5%), they would fall below the limit of detection of our assay, which can have potent effects on measured beta diversity. In particular, if a genotype detected in one location is present below the limit of detection in a second location, measured beta diversity would not reflect this commonality and would therefore be erroneously high.IAV reassortment within cells is efficient, such that 256 distinct genotypes are readily formed in a single co-infected cell50. However, within a host, the high potential for reassortment to generate diversity is subject to complex dynamics that define the likelihood of cellular co-infection and the extent to which novel reassortants are propagated. While our data reveal extensive co-infection in vivo and consistent formation of reassortants, species and tissue differences in the extent of reassortment are apparent. Spatial constraints on the dissemination of novel genotypes add to this complexity and are likely to be a major factor in within-host viral evolutionary dynamics.MethodsEthical considerationsAll the animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The studies were conducted under animal biosafety level 2 containment and approved by the IACUC of Emory University (DAR-2002738-ELMNTS-A) for guinea pig (Cavia porcellus), the IACUC of the University of Georgia (AUP A2015 06-026-Y3-A5) for ferret (Mustela putorius furo) and the IACUC of Kansas State University (protocol #4120) for swine (Sus scrofa). The animals were humanely euthanized following guidelines approved by the American Veterinary Medical Association.Cells and cell culture mediaMadin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, a gift from Dr. Robert Webster, St Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN to D.R.P were used for all experiments. A seed stock of MDCK cells at passage 23 was subsequently amplified and maintained in Minimal Essential Medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Atlanta Biologicals) and Normocin (Invivogen). 293 T cells (ATCC, CRL-3216) were maintained in Dulbecco’s Minimal Essential Medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS and PS. All cells were cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. The cell lines were not authenticated. All cell lines were tested monthly for mycoplasma contamination while in use. The medium for the culture of IAV in MDCK cells (virus medium) was prepared by supplementing the basal medium for the relevant cell type with 4.3% BSA and Normocin.VirusesViruses used in this study were derived from influenza A/Netherlands/602/2009 (H1N1) virus (NL09) and were generated by reverse genetics51,52,53. In brief, 293 T cells transfected with reverse genetics plasmids 16–24 h previously were co-cultured with MDCK cells at 37 °C for 40–48 h. Recovered virus was propagated in MDCK cells at a low multiplicity of infection to generate working stocks. Titration of stocks and experimental samples was carried out by plaque assay in MDCK cells. Silent mutations were introduced into each segment of the VAR virus by site-directed mutagenesis of reverse genetics plasmids. The specific changes introduced into the VAR virus were reported previously24,31. NL09 VAR virus was engineered to contain a 6XHIS epitope tag plus a GGGS linker at the amino (N) terminus of the HA protein following the signal peptide. NL09 WT virus carries an HA epitope tag plus a GGGS linker inserted at the N terminus of the HA protein31. For animal challenges, 1:1 mixture of NL09 WT and VAR viruses was prepared using methods described previously24. This mixture was validated in cell culture by quantifying cells positive for HIS and HA tags following infection of MDCK cells, revealing an empirically determined ratio of 0.95:1 (WT:VAR). The same mixture was used for all experiments reported herein.Evaluation of viral replication in cell cultureReplication of NL09, NL09 WT, and NL09 VAR viruses was determined in triplicate culture wells. MDCK cells in 6 well dishes were inoculated at an MOI of 0.05 PFU/cell in PBS. After 1 h incubation at 37 °C, inoculum was removed, cells were washed 3x with PBS, 2 mL virus medium was added to cells, and dishes were returned to 37 °C. A 120 ul volume of culture medium was sampled at the indicated times points and stored at −80 °C. Viral titers were determined by plaque assay on MDCK cells.Animal models and reassortment in vivoFemale, Hartley strain guinea pigs weighing 250–350 g were obtained from Charles River Laboratories and housed by Emory University Department of Animal Resources. Before intranasal inoculation and nasal washing, the guinea pigs were anaesthetized with 30 mg kg−1 ketamine and 4 mg kg−1 xylazine by intramuscular injection. The GPID50 of the NL09 virus was previously determined to be 1 × 101 PFU32. To evaluate reassortment kinetics in guinea pigs, groups of six animals were infected with 1 × 103 PFU (1 × 102 ID50) or 1 × 106 PFU (1 × 105 ID50) of the NL09 WT/VAR virus mixtures. Virus inoculum was given intranasally in a 300 μl volume of PBS. Nasal washes were performed on days 1–6 post-inoculation and titered by plaque assay. Viral genotyping was performed on samples collected on days 1, 2, and 3 or 4 for each guinea pig. Day 3 was used for animals receiving the higher dose since the virus is cleared rapidly in this system and shedding has ceased by day 4.Female ferrets, 20-weeks-old, from Triple F Farms (Gillett, PA) were used. All ferrets were seronegative by anti-nucleoprotein (anti-NP) influenza virus enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Swine Influenza Virus Ab Test, (IDEXX, Westbrook, ME) prior to infection. Five days prior to experimentation, ferrets were sedated, and a subcutaneous transponder (Bio Medic Data Systems, Seaford, Delaware) was implanted to identify each animal and provide temperature readings. Anesthetics were applied via intramuscular injection with ketamine (20 mg kg−1) and xylazine (1 mg kg−1). Infections were performed via intranasal inoculation of 1 mL of virus diluted in PBS. Ferret nasal washes were carried out as follows. Ferrets were anesthetized and 1 ml of PBS administered to the nose was used to induce sneezing. Expelled fluid was collected into Petri dishes and samples were collected in an additional volume of 1 mL PBS. Infected ferrets were monitored daily for clinical signs, temperature, and weight loss. Ferrets were euthanized by intravenous injection of 1 ml of Beuthanasia-D diluted 1:1 with DI water (Merck, Madison, NJ).For determination of ferret ID50, six groups of four ferrets each were inoculated with increasing doses of the NL09 WT/VAR virus mixture (1 × 100.1 PFU, 1 × 100 PFU, 1 × 101 PFU, 1 × 102 PFU, 1 × 103 PFU, and 1 × 104 PFU). Nasal washes were collected daily for up to 6 days and titrated for viral shedding by plaque assay. The ferret ID50 was determined based on results obtained on day 2 and found to be equivalent to 3.2 × 102 PFU.For analysis of reassortment frequency and detection of viral antigen in tissues, ferrets were inoculated with 3.2 × 104 PFU (1 × 102 ID50) or 3.2 × 107 PFU (1 × 105 ID50). After infections, nasal washes were collected daily for up to 6 days and titrated by plaque assay. Viral genotyping was performed on samples collected on days 1, 3, and 5 for each ferret. Necropsies were performed on days 1–4 for the collection of nasal turbinate and lung tissues. A single lung lobe (the left caudal lobe) was sampled from each ferret. Tissue sections collected for virology were disrupted in 1 mL of sterile PBS using the TissueLyser LT (Qiagen, Germantown, MD) at 30 Hz for 5 min twice, in microcentrifuge tubes with 3 mm Tungsten Carbide Beads (Qiagen, St. Louis, MO). Supernatants were clarified by centrifugation and frozen at −80 °C until viral titration. For histology, tissues were submerged in 10% buffered formalin (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and stored at room temperature until evaluation.The pig study was conducted at the Large Animal Research Center (a biosafety level 2+ facility) at Kansas State University in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Agricultural Animals in Research and Teaching of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. To determine virus reassortment and viral antigen in tissues, 18 4-week-old influenza H1 and H3 subtype virus- and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus-seronegative gender-mixed crossbred pigs were randomly allocated into groups. Each pig was inoculated with 2 × 106 PFU of NL09 WT/VAR mixture through both intranasal and intratracheal routes (106 PFU was administered in a 1 ml volume by each of these two routes) under anesthesia as described previously54. Clinical signs for all experimental pigs were monitored daily throughout the experiment. Nasal swabs were collected at 1-, 3-, 5-, and 7-days post infection from each pig. Three infected pigs were euthanized at 3-, 5-, and 7-days post infection. During necropsy, nasal turbinate, trachea, and lung tissues from seven lobes collected from each pig were frozen at −80 °C for virus isolation and fixed in 10% buffered formalin for IHC examination.Quantification of reassortmentReassortment frequencies were evaluated by genotyping 21 clonal viral isolates per sample as described previously50. This analysis was applied to guinea pig nasal washes, ferret nasal washes, swine nasal swabs, ferret tissue homogenates, and swine tissue homogenates. Time points to be examined were chosen based on positivity in all animals in a treatment group. Thus, nasal wash samples from days 1, 2, 3, or 4 were evaluated from guinea pigs while samples from days 1, 3, and 5 were evaluated for swine and ferrets. Ferret tissues collected on days 1, 2, 3, and 4 and swine tissues collected on days 3 and 5 were analyzed.Briefly, plaque assays were performed on MDCK cells in 10 cm dishes to isolate virus clones. Serological pipettes (1 ml) were used to collect agar plugs into 160 μl PBS. Using a ZR-96 viral RNA kit (Zymo), RNA was extracted from the agar plugs and eluted in 40 μl nuclease-free water (Invitrogen). Reverse transcription was performed using Maxima reverse transcriptase (RT; ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The resulting cDNA was diluted 1:4 in nuclease-free water and each cDNA was combined with segment-specific primers (Supplementary Data 3)24,31 designed to amplify a region of approximately 100 base pairs. The amplicon for each segment contains the site of the single nucleotide change in the VAR virus. Quantitative PCR was performed with Precision Melt Supermix (Bio-Rad) using a CFX384 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad). Quantitative PCR data was collected using CFX Manager Software v2.1 (Bio-Rad). Template amplification was followed by high-resolution melt analysis to differentiate the WT and VAR amplicons55. Precision Melt Analysis software v1.2 (Bio-Rad) was used to determine the parental origin of each gene segment based on the melting properties of the cDNA amplicons relative to WT and VAR controls. Each plaque was assigned a genotype based on the combination of WT and VAR genome segments, with two variants on each of eight segments allowing for 256 potential genotypes.Immunohistochemistry and imagingTissue samples from nasal turbinates of ferrets, the right caudal lung lobe of ferrets, and all seven lung lobes of swine were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for at least 24 h before being embedded in paraffin. Nasal turbinates were decalcified prior to being embedded in paraffin. Sections from all the tissues were cut and slides were prepared. The tissues were deparaffinized by warming the slides at 60 °C on a slide warmer for 45 min followed by immersion in xylenes (Sigma) for 25 min. The slides were then immersed in 100% ethanol for 10 min, 95% ethanol for 10 min, and 70% ethanol for 5 min. The slides were then washed by placing them in deionized water for 1 h. Antigen retrieval was performed by steaming the slides in 10 mM citric acid, pH 6.0 for 45 min, followed by washing in tap water and 1× PBS (Corning) for 5 min. The WT and VAR viruses were detected in the tissues using a mouse anti-HA Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen catalog number A-21287; clone 16B12; 1:50 dilution) and mouse anti His Alexa Fluor 555 (Invitrogen catalog number MA1-135-A555; clone 4E3D10H2/E3; 1:50 dilution) while epithelial cell borders were stained using rabbit anti-Na+K+ ATPase Alexa Fluor 647 (Abcam catalog number 198367; clone EP1845Y; 1:100 dilution) at 4 °C overnight. Slides were washed three times in 1× PBS (Corning) and once in deionized water to remove excess antibody. The slides were mounted onto glass coverslips using ProLong Diamond Anti Fade mounting media (ThermoFisher). The images were acquired using an Olympus FV1000 Confocal Microscope at ×60 magnification under an oil immersion objective. The specificity of the antibodies was confirmed by infecting MDCK cells with either the NL09 WT, NL09 VAR, or both viruses for 24 h. The cells were fixed using 4% paraformaldehyde (Alfa Aesar) and stained for HA and His tags using the antibodies as described above (Supplementary Fig. 9).For morphological analysis via IHC, the slides were pre-treated in pH 9.0 buffer at 110 °C for 15 min. Blocking was performed using hydrogen peroxide for 20 min followed by PowerBlock (BioGenex) for 5 min. Slides were washed with PBS thrice and NP antigen was detected using a goat anti-influenza NP polyclonal antibody (abcam catalog number ab155877; 1:1000 dilution) for 1 h. Slides were washed thrice with PBS to remove excess antibody and incubated with a rabbit anti-goat biotinylated IgG (Vector laboratories catalog number BA-5000; 1:5000 dilution) for 10 min. After washing, 4Plus Alkaline Phosphatase Label (BioCare Medical) was added for 10 min. The antigen signal was detected by incubating the slides in Chromogen IP Warp Red stain (BioCare Medical) for 10 min. Haematoxylin counterstaining was performed post-antigen staining.SoftwareFigures were generated using Python 3 v3.1056 and the packages matplotlib v3.6.057, NumPy v1.23.358, pandas v1.5.059, and seaborn v0.12.060. Simulations were conducted in Python 3 v3.10.Analysis of genotype frequencies, richness, and diversityHere a viral genotype is defined as a unique combination of the eight IAV segments, where each segment is derived from either the variant or wild-type parental virus; therefore, there are 28 possible unique genotypes, with two parental genotypes and 254 reassortant genotypes. For any given sample, the frequency of each unique genotype can be calculated by dividing the number of appearances each unique genotype has in the sample by the total number of clonal isolates obtained for that sample.Understanding the distribution of unique genotypes involves using both unweighted and weighted genotype frequency statistics. Genotype richness (\(S\)) does not incorporate genotype frequency and is given by the number of unique genotypes in a sample. Given our sample size of 21 plaque isolates, genotype richness, or the number of distinct genotypes detected in a sample, can range from a minimum of 1 (a single genotype is detected 21 times) to a maximum of 21 (21 unique genotypes detected).Diversity was measured using the Shannon–Weiner index (H), which considers both richness and evenness in the frequency with which genotypes are detected. In our dataset, diversity can range from 0 to 3.04. Shannon–Wiener diversity was calculated as:$$H=-\mathop{\sum }\limits_{i=1}^{S}({p}_{i} * {ln}{p}_{i})$$ (1) where \(S\) is genotype richness and \({p}_{i}\) is the frequency of unique genotype \(i\) in the sample (6).To address whether evaluating 21 plaques per sample for this analysis was sufficient to yield robust results on genotype diversity, we used a computational simulation to test the sensitivity of the measured diversity values to the number of plaques sampled. In these simulations, we calculated the diversity present in samples generated by randomly picking n (out of the possible 21) plaques without replacement. At each sampling effort n, we simulated 1000 samples, with plaque replacement between samples. The results typically show that diversity values increase as n increases, with values asymptoting as n approaches 21, suggesting that further increases in n would not greatly change results and validating the use of 21 plaques (Supplementary Fig. 10).To evaluate the extent to which the spatial dynamics of viral reassortment and propagation shape the overall richness and diversity in a host, we sought to compare the observed richness and diversity at each anatomical site to that which would be expected if virus moves freely among anatomical locations. Thus, to simulate free mixing within the host, we randomly shuffled observed viral genotypes among all sites in a given animal. The average richness and Shannon–Wiener index of the simulated viral populations at each site were then calculated. The 5th and 95th percentiles for the simulated distribution of each animal were calculated and compared to the observed richness and diversity for each of the anatomical sites. If a site’s observed richness and diversity fell below the 5th percentile or above the 95th percentile, then a barrier to the influx or efflux of reassortant genotypes from or to the other sites is suggested.Analysis of beta diversityThe dissimilarity between populations can be measured by beta diversity. For this study, we evaluated beta diversity from a richness perspective, focusing on dissimilarity in the unique genotypes detected and excluding consideration of their frequency. This approach was used to de-emphasize the effects of WT and VAR parental genotypes, which were likely seeded into all anatomical locations at the time of inoculation. We calculate the beta diversity by treating the viral genotypes in two lobes as two distinct populations:$$\beta=\frac{{S}_{1+2}}{\frac{1}{2}({S}_{1}+{S}_{2})}$$ (2) where \({S}_{1+2}\) is the richness of a hypothetical population composed of pooling the viral genotypes of the two lobes while \(\frac{1}{2}({S}_{1}+{S}_{2})\) represents the mean richness of the lobes (7). The beta diversity of a single comparison can be normalized so that it ranges from zero to one:$${{BD}}^{{\prime} }=\frac{{BD}-1}{{{BD}}_{{\max }}-1}{\beta }_{n}$$ (3) where \({{BD}}_{{\max }}\) is the beta diversity calculated by assuming that there are no viral genotypes shared by both lobes (7). A \({{BD}}^{{\prime} }{\beta }_{n}\) closer to one indicates that the lobes’ viral populations are more dissimilar while a \({{BD}}^{{\prime} }{\beta }_{n}\) closer to zero suggests that the lobes have similar unique viral genotypes and overall viral richness. A \({{BD}}^{{\prime} }\) \({\beta }_{n}\)of zero occurs when all unique genotypes present in one lobe are also present in the other.To address whether evaluating 21 plaques per sample for this analysis was sufficient to yield robust results on beta diversity, we again used computational simulations. These simulations were designed to test the sensitivity of beta diversity values to the number of plaques sampled. In these simulations, we again generated plaque data subsets by randomly picking n (out of the possible 21) plaques without replacement. At each sampling effort n, we simulated 1000 samples, with plaque replacement between samples. Beta diversity values were then calculated based on these data subsets, at a given n. The results typically show that \({\beta }_{n}\)values tend to stabilize as n approaches 21, suggesting that further increases in n would not greatly change results and validating the use of 21 plaques (Supplementary Fig. 10). In a subset of cases that involve the nasal sample of Pig 5, however, the relationship between \({\beta }_{n}\) and n is less stable. In sharp contrast to most other samples from Pig 5, the nasal site showed 20 WT parental isolates and one VAR parental isolate. The lung tissues had no WT parental genotypes detected. As a result, each successive plaque draw from the nasal sample increases the probability of detecting the VAR virus and therefore detecting a commonality between the nasal tract and any of the lung lobes. Thus, in situations where two tissue sites have a single, relatively rare genotype in common, the number of plaques sampled has a strong impact on \({\beta }_{n}\) outcomes.To simulate free mixing between two lobes, we randomly shuffled the genotypes between each of the 28 pairwise combinations among pig tissues and the single ferret lung-NT combination and computed the \({{BD}}^{{\prime} }{\beta }_{n}\) for each comparison. Free mixing for all combinations was simulated 1000 times. We reasoned that if compartmentalization was present in the observed dataset, then the dissimilarity values would fall at the high end of the simulated distribution (>95th percentile).Statistical measuresPercentiles were calculated using the percentileofscore method from the SciPy package v1.9.159. Paired t tests and ANOVA tests were performed using the ttest_rel method and the f_oneway method respectively from the SciPy Package v1.9.159.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability Raw data used for the generation of Figs. 1–5 and Supplementary Figures 1–10 are included as Source Data and in Supplementary Data 1–3. Source data are provided in this paper. Code availability Code used for data analysis and simulations is available at: https://github.com/maxbagga/Influenza-A-virus-reassortment-in-mammals-gives-rise-to-spatially-distinct-sub-populations (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7150566)61. ReferencesWebster, R. G., Hinshaw, V. S., Bean, W. J. Jr, Turner, B. & Shortridge, K. F. Influenza viruses from avian and porcine sources and their possible role in the origin of human pandemic strains. Dev. Biol. Stand. 39, 461–468 (1977).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wright, P. F., Neumann, G. & Kawaoka, Y. In Fields Virology. Vol. 1 (ed D. M. & Howley Knipe, P. M.) 1691–1740 (Lippincott-Raven, 2006).Webster, R. G., Bean, W. J., Gorman, O. T., Chambers, T. M. & Kawaoka, Y. Evolution and ecology of influenza A viruses. Microbiol. Rev. 56, 152–179 (1992).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Webster, R. G., Shortridge, K. F. & Kawaoka, Y. Influenza: interspecies transmission and emergence of new pandemics. FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 18, 275–279 (1997).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Taubenberger, J. K. & Morens, D. M. 1918 Influenza: the mother of all pandemics. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 12, 15–22 (2006).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Viboud, C., Miller, M., Olson, D., Osterholm, M. & Simonsen, L. Preliminary estimates of mortality and years of life lost associated with the 2009 A/H1N1 pandemic in the US and comparison with past influenza seasons. PLoS Curr. RRN1153 (2010).Ma, E. J., Hill, N. J., Zabilansky, J., Yuan, K. & Runstadler, J. A. Reticulate evolution is favored in influenza niche switching. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 5335–5339 (2016).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kilbourne, E. D. Influenza pandemics of the 20th century. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 12, 9–14 (2006).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Smith, G. J. et al. Origins and evolutionary genomics of the 2009 swine-origin H1N1 influenza A epidemic. Nature 459, 1122–1125 (2009).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nelson, M. I. & Vincent, A. L. Reverse zoonosis of influenza to swine: new perspectives on the human-animal interface. Trends Microbiol. 23, 142–153 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Woods, G. T., Schnurrenberger, P. R., Martin, R. J. & Tompkins, W. A. Swine influenza virus in swine and man in Illinois. J. Occup. Med. 23, 263–267 (1981).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ma, W. et al. Identification of H2N3 influenza A viruses from swine in the United States. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 20949–20954 (2007).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ma, W., Kahn, R. E. & Richt, J. A. The pig as a mixing vessel for influenza viruses: human and veterinary implications. J. Mol. Genet. Med. 3, 158–166 (2008).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kahn, R. E., Ma, W. & Richt, J. A. Swine and influenza: a challenge to one health research. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 385, 205–218 (2014).PubMed Google Scholar Rajao, D. S. et al. Reassortment between Swine H3N2 and 2009 pandemic H1N1 in the United States resulted in influenza A viruses with diverse genetic constellations with variable virulence in pigs. J. Virol. 91, https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01763-16 (2017).Nelson, M. I. et al. Genomic reassortment of influenza A virus in North American swine, 1998-2011. J. Gen. Virol. 93, 2584–2589 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lam, T. T. et al. Reassortment events among swine influenza A viruses in China: implications for the origin of the 2009 influenza pandemic. J. Virol. 85, 10279–10285 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhou, N. N. et al. Genetic reassortment of avian, swine, and human influenza A viruses in American pigs. J. Virol. 73, 8851–8856 (1999).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ma, J. et al. Virus survival and fitness when multiple genotypes and subtypes of influenza A viruses exist and circulate in swine. Virology 532, 30–38 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ganti, K. et al. Avian influenza A viruses reassort and diversify differently in mallards and mammals. Viruses 13, https://doi.org/10.3390/v13030509 (2021).Tao, H., Li, L., White, M. C., Steel, J. & Lowen, A. C. Influenza A virus coinfection through transmission can support high levels of reassortment. J. Virol. 89, 8453–8461 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tao, H., Steel, J. & Lowen, A. C. Intrahost dynamics of influenza virus reassortment. J. Virol. 88, 7485–7492 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Richard, M., Herfst, S., Tao, H., Jacobs, N. T. & Lowen, A. C. Influenza A virus reassortment is limited by anatomical compartmentalization following coinfection via distinct routes. J. Virol. 92, https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02063-17 (2018).Phipps, K. L. et al. Collective interactions augment influenza A virus replication in a host-dependent manner. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 1158–1169 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Amato, K. A. et al. Influenza A virus undergoes compartmentalized replication in vivo dominated by stochastic bottlenecks. Nat. Commun. 13, 3416 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Richard, M. et al. Influenza A viruses are transmitted via the air from the nasal respiratory epithelium of ferrets. Nat. Commun. 11, 766 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xie, C. et al. A(H1N1)pdm09 influenza viruses replicating in ferret upper or lower respiratory tract differed in onward transmission potential by air. J. Infect. Dis. 225, 65–74 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Belser, J. A., Katz, J. M. & Tumpey, T. M. The ferret as a model organism to study influenza A virus infection. Dis. Model. Mech. 4, 575–579 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Danzy, S., Lowen, A. C. & Steel, J. A quantitative approach to assess influenza A virus fitness and transmission in guinea pigs. J. Virol. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02320-20 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lowen, A. C., Bouvier, N. M. & Steel, J. Transmission in the guinea pig model. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 385, 157–183 (2014).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Phipps, K. L. et al. Seasonal H3N2 and 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza A viruses reassort efficiently but produce attenuated progeny. J. Virol. 91, https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00830-17 (2017).Campbell, P. J. et al. The M segment of the 2009 pandemic influenza virus confers increased neuraminidase activity, filamentous morphology, and efficient contact transmissibility to A/Puerto Rico/8/1934-based reassortant viruses. J. Virol. 88, 3802–3814 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jasinska, W. et al. Chromosomal barcoding of E. coli populations reveals lineage diversity dynamics at high resolution. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 4, 437–452 (2020).Article PubMed Google Scholar Matrosovich, M. N., Matrosovich, T. Y., Gray, T., Roberts, N. A. & Klenk, H. D. Human and avian influenza viruses target different cell types in cultures of human airway epithelium. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 4620–4624 (2004).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar van Riel, D. et al. Novel avian-origin influenza A (H7N9) virus attaches to epithelium in both upper and lower respiratory tract of humans. Am. J. Pathol. 183, 1137–1143 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mifsud, E. J., Kuba, M. & Barr, I. G. Innate immune responses to influenza virus infections in the upper respiratory tract. Viruses 13, https://doi.org/10.3390/v13102090 (2021).Brooke, C. B., Ince, W. L., Wei, J., Bennink, J. R. & Yewdell, J. W. Influenza A virus nucleoprotein selectively decreases neuraminidase gene-segment packaging while enhancing viral fitness and transmissibility. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 16854–16859 (2014).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Brooke, C. B. et al. Most influenza a virions fail to express at least one essential viral protein. J. Virol. 87, 3155–3162 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jacobs, N. T. et al. Incomplete influenza A virus genomes occur frequently but are readily complemented during localized viral spread. Nat. Commun. 10, 3526 (2019).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ganti, K., Han, J., Manicassamy, B. & Lowen, A. C. Rab11a mediates cell-cell spread and reassortment of influenza A virus genomes via tunneling nanotubes. PLoS Pathog. 17, e1009321 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sobel Leonard, A. et al. The effective rate of influenza reassortment is limited during human infection. PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006203 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gallagher, M. E., Brooke, C. B., Ke, R. & Koelle, K. Causes and consequences of spatial within-host viral spread. Viruses 10, https://doi.org/10.3390/v10110627 (2018).Lakdawala, S. S. et al. The soft palate is an important site of adaptation for transmissible influenza viruses. Nature 526, 122–125 (2015).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zaraket, H. et al. Mammalian adaptation of influenza A(H7N9) virus is limited by a narrow genetic bottleneck. Nat. Commun. 6, 6553 (2015).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zwart, M. P. & Elena, S. F. Matters of size: genetic bottlenecks in virus infection and their potential impact on evolution. Annu. Rev. Virol. 2, 161–179 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vijaykrishna, D. et al. Reassortment of pandemic H1N1/2009 influenza A virus in swine. Science 328, 1529 (2010).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mine, J., Uchida, Y., Takemae, N. & Saito, T. Genetic characterization of influenza A viruses in Japanese Swine in 2015 to 2019. J. Virol. 94, https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02169-19 (2020).Gao, S. et al. The genomic evolution of H1 influenza A viruses from swine detected in the United States between 2009 and 2016. J. Gen. Virol. 98, 2001–2010 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar White, M. C. & Lowen, A. C. Implications of segment mismatch for influenza A virus evolution. J. Gen. Virol. 99, 3–16 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Marshall, N., Priyamvada, L., Ende, Z., Steel, J. & Lowen, A. C. Influenza virus reassortment occurs with high frequency in the absence of segment mismatch. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003421 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fodor, E. et al. Rescue of influenza A virus from recombinant DNA. J. Virol. 73, 9679–9682 (1999).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hoffmann, E., Neumann, G., Hobom, G., Webster, R. G. & Kawaoka, Y. “Ambisense” approach for the generation of influenza A virus: vRNA and mRNA synthesis from one template. Virology 267, 310–317 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chutinimitkul, S. et al. Virulence-associated substitution D222G in the hemagglutinin of 2009 pandemic influenza A(H1N1) virus affects receptor binding. J. Virol. 84, 11802–11813 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Richt, J. A. et al. Pathogenic and antigenic properties of phylogenetically distinct reassortant H3N2 swine influenza viruses cocirculating in the United States. J. Clin. Microbiol. 41, 3198–3205 (2003).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wittwer, C. T., Reed, G. H., Gundry, C. N., Vandersteen, J. G. & Pryor, R. J. High-resolution genotyping by amplicon melting analysis using LCGreen. Clin. Chem. 49, 853–860 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Van Rossum, G. & Drake, F. L. Python 3 Reference Manual. (CreateSpace, 2009).Hunter, J. D. Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environment. Comput. Sci. Eng. 9, 90–95 (2007).Article Google Scholar Oliphant, T. E. A guide to NumPy Vol. 1 (Trelgol Publishing, 2006).McKinney, W. Data structures for statistical computing in python. Proc. 9th Python Sci. Conf. 445, 51–56 (2010). Google Scholar Waskom, M. L. seaborn: statistical data visualization. J. Open Source Softw. 6, 3021 (2021).Article ADS Google Scholar Bagga, A. Influenza A virus reassortment in mammals gives rise to genetically distinct within-host sub-populations. GitHub https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7150566 (2022).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Shamika Danzy for their technical assistance. We would like to thank the Emory Division of Animal Resources for their assistance with the guinea pig experiments. We thank Rusty Ransburgh, Baoliang Zheng, Dongchang He, Abaineh Endalew, Daniel Madden, Yuekun Lang for their assistance with the pig experiments. We thank David VanInsberghe for assistance with figure generation. This project was supported by the Emory University Integrated Cellular Imaging Microscopy Core. The research was funded by NIH R01 AI127799 (A.C.L.) and the NIH/NIAID Centers of Excellence in Influenza Research and Response (CEIRR), contract numbers 75N93021C00017 (A.C.L., K.K.), 75N93021C00014 (D.R.P.) and 75N93021C00016 (J.A.R., W.M.), and the AMP Core of the Center of Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (CEZID) from NIGMS under award number P20GM130448 (J.A.R.).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USAKetaki Ganti, Lucas M. Ferreri & Anice C. LowenEmory College of Arts and Sciences, Atlanta, GA, USAAnish BaggaDepartment of Population Health, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USASilvia Carnaccini, Lucas M. Ferreri, Ginger Geiger, C. Joaquin Caceres, Brittany Seibert & Daniel R. PerezDepartment of Diagnostic Medicine and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USAYonghai Li, Taeyong Kwon, Yuhao Li, Igor Morozov & Juergen A. RichtDepartment of Veterinary Pathobiology, and Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USALiping Wang & Wenjun MaSt. Jude Center of Excellence for Influenza Research and Response (SJ-CEIRR), Memphis, TN, USAWenjun Ma & Juergen A. RichtThe Center for Research on Influenza Pathogenesis and Transmission (CRIPT CEIRR), New York, NY, USADaniel R. PerezDepartment of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USAKatia KoelleEmory Center of Excellence for Influenza Research and Response (Emory-CEIRR), Atlanta, GA, USAKatia Koelle & Anice C. LowenAuthorsKetaki GantiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnish BaggaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSilvia CarnacciniView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLucas M. FerreriView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGinger GeigerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarC. Joaquin CaceresView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBrittany SeibertView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYonghai LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLiping WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTaeyong KwonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYuhao LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIgor MorozovView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWenjun MaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJuergen A. RichtView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDaniel R. PerezView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKatia KoelleView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnice C. LowenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsK.G. contributed to the conception of work, experimental design, data acquisition and analysis, and interpretation of data; A.B. contributed to data analysis, model development, and interpretation of data; S.C. contributed to experimental design, data acquisition, and interpretation of data; L.M.F., G.G., C.J.C., B.S., Y.L., L.W., T.K., Y.L., and I.M. contributed to data acquisition; W.M., J.A.R., and D.R.P. contributed to the conception of the work, experimental design, data analysis, and interpretation; K.K. contributed to the conception of the work, data analysis and interpretation; A.C.L. contributed to the conception of work, experimental design, and data analysis and interpretation. All authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Anice C. Lowen.Ethics declarations Competing interests The JAR laboratory received support from Tonix Pharmaceuticals, Xing Technologies, and Zoetis, outside of the reported work. J.A.R. is inventor on patents and patent applications on the use of antivirals and vaccines for the treatment and prevention of virus infections, owned by Kansas State University, KS. The remaining authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Richard Webby and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationPeer Review FileDescription of Additional Supplementary FilesSupplementary Data 1Supplementary Data 2Supplementary Data 3Reporting SummarySource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleGanti, K., Bagga, A., Carnaccini, S. et al. Influenza A virus reassortment in mammals gives rise to genetically distinct within-host subpopulations. Nat Commun 13, 6846 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34611-zDownload citationReceived: 18 February 2022Accepted: 31 October 2022Published: 11 November 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34611-zShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Rapid transmission and tight bottlenecks constrain the evolution of highly transmissible SARS-CoV-2 variants Emily E. BendallAmy P. CallearAdam S. Lauring Nature Communications (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingFlu season already hitting hard across half of the US and children’s hospitals are still feeling the pressure from respiratory illnesses | CNN CNN values your feedback 1. How relevant is this ad to you? 2. Did you encounter any technical issues? Video player was slow to load content Video content never loaded Ad froze or did not finish loading Video content did not start after ad Audio on ad was too loud Other issues Ad never loaded Ad prevented/slowed the page from loading Content moved around while ad loaded Ad was repetitive to ads I've seen previously Other issues Cancel Submit Thank You! Your effort and contribution in providing this feedback is much appreciated. Close Ad Feedback Close icon Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships More Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Watch Listen Live TV Subscribe Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch Edition US International Arabic Español Edition US International Arabic Español Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Follow CNN World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Ad Feedback Flu season already hitting hard across half of the US and children’s hospitals are still feeling the pressure from respiratory illnesses By Deidre McPhillips, CNN 4 minute read Updated 8:50 AM EST, Fri November 11, 2022 Link Copied! Video Ad Feedback Pediatrician explains when children with RSV need to be taken to the hospital 01:48 - Source: CNN Your Health 16 videos Video Ad Feedback Pediatrician explains when children with RSV need to be taken to the hospital 01:48 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback This is why parents should also watch 'Inside Out 2' before school starts 02:11 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Here’s how you should really use a shot glass this summer 01:54 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Why are teens so drawn to social media? Dr. Sanjay Gupta explains 01:44 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback The surprising ways microplastics enter our body 02:33 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback He lost 40 pounds on Mounjaro. Can he maintain it without the drug? 03:14 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback An Alzheimer's patient says intensive lifestyle changes reversed her condition 01:24 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Why avoiding light blue, green swimsuits could be life-saving 02:36 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback 'Never heard it put like that before': Author's remark about weight stuns Dr. Gupta 02:58 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback ‘The most preventable hearing loss:’ Doctor describes common reasons for ear damage 02:54 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Her kidneys failed. Heart, too. A pig was the answer 02:07 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback 'Horrifically painful’: Texas woman says her miscarriage shouldn’t have happened at home 03:09 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Dr. Gupta discovers the results of an Alzheimer’s risk test 01:48 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback What is ultraprocessed food? Nutritionist explains why it can taste different 02:42 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Here's where to find the first approved over-the-counter oral contraceptive 02:11 Now playing - Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Watch a nutritionist explain the food labels behind three everyday foods 02:00 Now playing - Source: CNN See More Videos CNN — About half of the US – 22 states, along with Washington, DC, New York City and Puerto Rico – is reporting high or very high respiratory illness activity, as flu season sweeps through the country weeks earlier than usual. Multiple respiratory viruses are circulating nationwide – including flu, RSV and the virus that causes Covid-19 – and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention tweeted Thursday that flu is contributing to a “significant proportion” of that circulation. A small, sick, crying child, whom the mother wipes with a paper towel ondrooo/Adobe Stock RSV responsible for 1 in 50 child deaths under age 5, study estimates And influenza activity continues to increase: After nearly doubling in the last week of October, the number of flu illnesses, hospitalizations and deaths this season took another significant jump in the first week of November. The CDC now estimates that there have been at least 2.8 million illnesses, 23,000 hospitalizations and 1,300 deaths from influenza as of November 5. The flu is notoriously hard to predict. “Among the people who study flu, there’s a little saying: ‘If you’ve seen one flu season, well, you’ve seen one flu season,’ ” said Dr. William Schaffner, a professor in the Division of Infectious Diseases at Vanderbilt University Medical Center and medical director of the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases. “The implication is that they’re all a little bit different from each other, and that’s certainly the case.” This season, there have been about 5 flu hospitalizations for every 100,000 people, rates typically seen in December or January, CDC data shows. And in the most recent week, about 13% of lab tests – more than 1 in 8 – were positive for influenza, up from 9% the week before. The flu vaccine reduces your chance of severe illness — that is, of being hospitalized or dying — and can reduce your likelihood of contracting the flu at all, says Dr. Leana Wen SDI Productions/Getty Images What you should know about getting a flu vaccine this year, according to an expert Although the numbers are especially high for this time of year, experts say the trends are otherwise following an expected pattern, and the early arrival of flu season doesn’t necessarily mean it will last longer or be more severe. “The picture is pretty consistent across our different pieces of surveillance. There’s nothing there that makes me think that this virus is really different and causing more severe disease than we see typically with flu,” said Lynnette Brammer, an epidemiologist who leads the CDC’s domestic influenza surveillance team. “Flu can cause severe outcomes, but it’s not out of proportion this year compared to previous years. It’s not like we’re seeing a lot of hospitalizations without a lot of illness.” Flu activity has been highest in the South, CDC data shows. Data from Walgreens that tracks prescriptions for antiviral treatments such as Tamiflu suggests hotspots centered in Mississippi and Alabama, spreading from the Gulf Coast area, including Houston and New Orleans, up to Nashville. As flu smolders in the South, RSV is showing early signs of slowing in the region, CDC data shows, even as it continues to ramp up in other parts of the country. Nationwide, nearly 1 in 5 PCR tests for RSV were positive in the first week of November, reaching levels that the South saw a month ago. But in that region, fewer than 1 in 7 tests are now positive for RSV. RSV is a common respiratory virus that can cause serious illness, especially in younger infants, and it’s kept pediatric hospitals more full than usual in recent weeks. Stephen Balka and his son Adrian at the hospital. Rosa Flores/CNN Opinion: The good and bad news on RSV, the newest viral villain in America Despite the improvements in the South, overall burden on pediatric hospitals nationwide has not eased. More than three-quarters of pediatric hospital beds and pediatric ICU beds have been in use for the past few weeks – up from an average of about two-thirds full over the past two years, according to federal data. On Thursday, Dr. Brian Cummings, medical director of the Department of Pediatrics at Mass General for Children, said they’ve seen around 2,000 cases of RSV in October, and more than 1,000 in the first week of November. “It’s been escalating and been quite severe,” Cummings said during a news conference Thursday. Most infections have been treated in urgent care facilities and in the emergency department, and people are sent home, Cummings said. “But even if just 10 percent of those need hospitalization, it creates a lot of stress on health care facilities, and so what we are seeing is we’ve had over 250 hospitalizations for RSV alone on top of the other circulating viruses,” he said. The pediatric ICU is full, Cummings said, and seven patients are waiting to be transferred in. Across the country, the threat of Covid-19, while significantly less than it was a year ago, remains. Nearly 25,000 people were admitted to the hospital with Covid-19 in the first week of November, according to CDC data, a pace that’s forecast to hold steady for the next month, at least. Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Friday from the CNN Health team. As multiple respiratory viruses continue to spread, experts emphasize the importance of vaccination, which is available for two of the three viruses in heavy circulation. But those numbers are lower than ideal. One in 5 people still hasn’t gotten their first Covid-19 vaccine shot, CDC data shows, and less than 10% of the US population has gotten the updated Covid-19 booster. And millions fewer flu vaccines have been distributed this season than at this point in previous years. “You worry when you have an early season that people just haven’t had time to get vaccinated,” Brammer said. “But vaccine is the best tool that we have to prevent these severe outcomes.” Amy Simonson contributed to this report. Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Health Watch Listen Live TV Follow CNN Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Terms of Use Privacy Policy Ad Choices Accessibility & CC About Newsletters Transcripts © 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved. CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.Asia-Pacific workshop on surveillance, prevention and control of zoonotic influenza- Paro, Bhutan Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English العربية 中文 Français Русский Español Português Donate Donate Home Health Topics All topicsABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Resources Fact sheets Facts in pictures Multimedia Podcasts Publications Questions and answers Tools and toolkits Popular Dengue Endometriosis Excessive heat Herpes Mental disorders Mpox Countries All countriesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Regions Africa Americas Europe Eastern Mediterranean South-East Asia Western Pacific WHO in countries Data by country Country presence Country strengthening Country cooperation strategies Newsroom All news News releases Statements Campaigns Events Feature stories Press conferences Speeches Commentaries Photo library Headlines Emergencies Focus on Cholera Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Greater Horn of Africa Israel and occupied Palestinian territory Mpox Sudan Ukraine Latest Disease Outbreak News Situation reports Weekly Epidemiological Record WHO in emergencies Surveillance Operations Research Funding Partners Health emergency appeal International Health Regulations Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee Data Dashboards Triple Billion Progress Health Inequality Monitor Delivery for impact COVID-19 dashboard Data collection Classifications SCORE Surveys Civil registration and vital statistics Routine health information systems Harmonized health facility assessment GIS centre for health Reports World Health Statistics UHC global monitoring report About WHO About WHO Partnerships Committees and advisory groups Collaborating centres Technical teams Organizational structure Who we are Our work Activities Initiatives General Programme of Work WHO Academy Funding Investment in WHO WHO Foundation Accountability External audit Financial statements Internal audit and investigations Programme Budget Results reports Governance Governing bodies World Health Assembly Executive Board Member States Portal Home/ Publications/ i/ item/ Asia-Pacific workshop on surveillance, prevention and control of zoonotic influenza- Paro, Bhutan - Select language - العربية 中文 français русский español português Asia-Pacific workshop on surveillance, prevention and control of zoonotic influenza- Paro, Bhutan 29–31 August 2016 10 November 2022 | Meeting report Download (1.8 MB) Overview Zoonotic influenza is a viral infection transmitted directly or indirectly by infected birds, pigs or horses. There are ongoing outbreaks of various subtypes of avian influenza in several Asian countries that have impacted public health, trade and economy in the affected countries. The epidemiology of avian influenza is complex and new influenza viruses transmissible to humans are evolving from time to time. Most countries in the Asia-Pacific Region are facing enzootic cycle of avian influenza in poultry populations or have high risk of avian influenza incursion from endemic countries.FAO, OIE and WHO supported the Royal Government of Bhutan in hosting a workshop on surveillance, prevention and control of zoonotic influenza, with the aim of sharing experiences and lessons learnt on the prevention and control of avian and other influenzae of public health interest, and enhancing collaboration to improve surveillance at regional and country levels. Different tools developed for risk assessment of influenza, including the Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework, were discussed. Recommendations were made for Member States and partner organizations. This is the comprehensive report of the meeting. WHO Team Bhutan, SEARO region/countries and areas, WHO South-East Asia Editors World Health Organization. Regional Office for South-East Asia Number of pages 39 Reference numbers WHO Reference Number: SEA-WHE-14 Copyright Regions Africa Americas Eastern Mediterranean Europe South-East Asia Western Pacific Policies Cybersecurity Ethics Information disclosure Permissions and licensing Preventing sexual exploitation Terms of use About us Careers Frequently asked questions Library Newsletters Procurement Publications Contact us Report misconduct Privacy policy © 2024 WHOUpdate on Children’s COVID-19 and Routine Vaccination Trends Heading into Winter and as Respiratory Viruses Surge | KFF Home Topics Affordable Care Act COVID-19 Global Health Policy Health Costs Health Misinformation and Trust HIV/AIDS Medicaid Medicare Mental Health Patient and Consumer Protections Private Insurance Racial Equity and Health Policy Uninsured Women’s Health Policy Polling State Health Facts State Health Facts Custom State Reports KFF Health News Social Impact Media Peterson-KFF Health System Tracker Newsroom Newsroom News Releases Events Subscribe to Emails Cite Us/Reprint Media Contacts Join Our Team About Us About KFF From Drew Altman Our People Our Programs KFF Board Contact Us Support Our Work Conference Centers San Francisco, CA Washington, DC The independent source for health policy research, polling, and news. menu The independent source for health policy research, polling, and news. Donate Follow us Email Open Search... Search KFF.org Election 2024 Abortion in the U.S. Health Policy 101 Coronavirus (COVID-19) HomePolicy WatchUpdate on Children’s COVID-19 and Routine Vaccination Trends Heading into Winter and as… Update on Children’s COVID-19 and Routine Vaccination Trends Heading into Winter and as Respiratory Viruses Surge Elizabeth Williams, Jennifer Kates, and Robin Rudowitz Published: Nov 09, 2022 Share this page on Facebook (opens in a new tab) Share this page on X (opens in a new tab) Share this page on LinkedIn (opens in a new tab) Share this page via Email Print this page For updated data on child vaccination trends, including MMR vaccination coverage and vaccine exemption rates, read our latest analysis: Headed Back to School in 2024: An Update on Children’s Routine Vaccination Trends In recent weeks, cases of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) in younger children have surged, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has reported seeing early increases in seasonal flu cases. The CDC notes that the past two years have seen low flu activity, likely meaning reduced population immunity headed into this years’ flu season, especially among young children who have never been exposed to or vaccinated against the flu. Winter could also bring an increase in COVID-19 cases, as the weather gets colder and activities move indoors. While children’s cases of COVID-19 are usually mild, this is not always the case, and children are particularly vulnerable to flu and RSV. The combination of all three could have more serious ramifications for children and also has the potential to overwhelm hospitals. Vaccination against COVID-19 and flu can provide protection; however, COVID-19 vaccination rates have stalled and remain low for younger children and other routine vaccination rates may have been impacted by the pandemic. This policy watch describes recent trends in children’s COVID-19 and routine vaccinations and explores strategies to increase vaccination rates among children as we head into the winter season. COVID-19 vaccine uptake among children has stalled and vaccination rates remain low for young children. As of November 2, 2022, 3.2% of children under age five and 31.8% of children ages 5-11 had completed their primary series, which is the initial doses of a COVID-19 vaccine, most commonly two shots of a mRNA vaccine but can vary by age, immune status, and vaccine product (Figure 1). Uptake is higher among those ages 12-17, at 61.1%. Some of this variation in uptake reflects the amount of time since COVID-19 vaccines were authorized by the FDA for different age groups. The vaccine was first authorized for 16 and 17 year-olds in December 2020 and for 12-15 year-olds in May 2021. It was authorized for 5-11 year-olds in November of 2021 and finally, for children under age five in June of 2022. However, some of it reflects parental views and concerns. KFF’s COVID-19 Vaccine Monitor from September 2022 reported that over half (53%) of parents of children under five and over a third (35%) of parents of children ages 5-11 said they will “definitely not” get their child vaccinated. KFF surveys from July 2022 found parents of young children were concerned about the newness of the vaccine and not enough testing or research, side effects, and worries over the overall safety of the vaccines. Bivalent boosters were recently authorized for children ages five and older, but it is unclear how many children will get the new booster. Children’s vaccination rates for the first booster (no longer authorized) were low. As of November 2nd, 5.3% of children ages 5-11 and 18.2% of children ages 12-17 had received their first booster dose. Completion of the primary series at least two months earlier is required to receive the new bivalent booster; thus, low primary series rates, especially among children ages 5-11, means fewer children are eligible for the new booster. As of November 2nd, 0.5% of children ages 5-11 and 2.6% of children ages 12-17 have received an updated (bivalent) booster dose. While children usually have more mild COVID-19 cases, some children do develop severe illness and some have shown symptoms of long COVID following diagnosis. Boosters combat waning immunity and can help reduce the risk of infection and onward transmission. The pandemic has also led to declines in children’s flu vaccinations, though the impact of the pandemic on other routine vaccinations remains uncertain. While children’s flu vaccination rates from last year’s flu season (2021-2022) were similar to the previous year (2020-2021), they were almost 6 percentage points lower than in 2019-2020, right before the pandemic began. Flu vaccination rates among children vary widely by state and appear to be correlated with COVID-19 vaccination, meaning states with higher uptake of flu vaccination last season also have higher uptake of COVID-19 vaccination, and vice versa (Figure 2). Some public health leaders have expressed concern that COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy may be spilling over to routine child immunizations, and one study found factors impacting COVID-19 vaccine uptake could be impacting flu vaccine uptake. In addition, vaccination rates for other routine childhood vaccines also declined early in the pandemic, and the CDC reports vaccination coverage of all state-required vaccines for children in kindergarten (MMR, DTaP, and varicella) declined slightly by 1% in the 2020-2021 school year (the first full-pandemic school year) compared to the previous school year. Some states and local areas have more recently reported seeing reduced childhood immunization rates. However, CDC data for the most recent two school years are not yet available, and the overall impact on childhood routine vaccination rates remains unclear at this time. There are specific policy considerations for vaccinating young children, and some states have developed successful strategies for increasing vaccination rates among children. States with the highest COVID-19 vaccination rates among children ages 5-11 used incentives, school-based vaccination clinics, parent-friendly websites, and the media to encourage parents to vaccinate their young child. School vaccine mandates can also be used as a tool to increase COVID-19 vaccine uptake among children, but at this time, only a few states have COVID-19 vaccine mandates for school staff or students. Preventive care appointments are also an important component when addressing routine vaccination rates, as some parents may not encounter an offer of a vaccine until they go in for a routine visit to a pediatrician and pediatricians are considered highly trusted sources of information by parents. Recently, the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) voted to add the COVID-19 vaccines to the recommended pediatric immunization schedule that includes the other routine vaccines for children depending on age. This is part of a regular, annual process in which ACIP meets to vote on adding newly recommended vaccines to the child and adult immunization schedules. Because Medicaid covers four in ten children in the U.S., the program can play an important role in facilitating access to COVID-19 and other routine vaccines for children, especially those who are low-income. To increase COVID-19 vaccine uptake, state Medicaid programs and Medicaid managed care plans have undertaken various initiatives, including financial incentives for managed care plans that meet vaccination targets. Other recent federal actions can help increase routine vaccination rates more broadly. Data for children enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP showed a 9% decline in all routine vaccinations when comparing the COVID-19 public health emergency (PHE) period (March 2020 – April 2022) to a pre-PHE period (January 2018 – February 2020), with the largest declines for HPV, hepatitis A, and flu vaccines. Provisions included in recent legislation to bolster Medicaid’s Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) benefit can help more Medicaid-covered children receive all recommended screenings and services, which includes routine vaccinations. Further, the Child Core Set measures, designed to improve the quality of care for children in Medicaid and CHIP, will become mandatory to report in 2024 and track state-level immunization rates for children and adolescents. Children will still be able to access needed COVID-19 vaccines for free following the end of the COVID-19 PHE and even when federal supplies of vaccines run out. While the end of the PHE as well as the depletion of federally-purchased supply could curtail access to some COVID-19 countermeasures like tests and treatments, COVID-19 vaccines, including boosters, will continue to be available for free to all children even when there is no longer any federally-purchased supply remaining or PHE protections in place. Once the supply of government-purchased vaccines runs out, the Vaccines for Children program (VFC) will provide access to COVID-19 vaccines for children who have Medicaid, who are uninsured or underinsured, or identify as American Indian or Alaska Native. While vaccines are free through the VFC program, participating health care providers can charge an administrative fee. Children who are uninsured may be eligible for free or reduced cost off vaccine administration through a community health center. As we head into the winter season, RSV and other respiratory viral infections are surging in young children, flu infections are higher than usual for the time of year, and COVID-19 cases are also expected to rise. At same time, children’s COVID-19 vaccination rates have stalled and remain low, and other routine children’s vaccinations may have also declined since the pandemic began. While most children have mild COVID-19 cases, vaccines can offer protection for children and families as travelling and gatherings ramp up for the holiday season. Various tools, including incentives, outreach, and the media, can be used to increase children’s COVID-19 vaccination rates as well as routine vaccinations more broadly. Topics Coronavirus (COVID-19) Medicaid Tags Vaccines Children Get The Latest On Health Policy Sign Up For Email Alerts Your Email Address Sign Up Topics Affordable Care Act COVID-19 Global Health Policy Health Costs Health Misinformation and Trust HIV/AIDS Medicaid Medicare Mental Health Patient and Consumer Protections Private Insurance Racial Equity and Health Policy Uninsured Women’s Health Policy Sections Polling State Health Facts Graphics & Interactives Charts & Slides KFF Health News Social Impact Media Peterson-KFF Health System Tracker Newsroom News Releases Events Subscribe to Emails Cite Us/Reprint Media Contacts About Us From Drew Altman Our People Our Programs KFF Board Contact Us Support Our Work Join Our Team Privacy Policy Follow Us Email Alerts Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Threads X RSS Feeds YouTube © 2024 KFF Powered by WordPress VIP Citations and Reprints Privacy Policy KFF Headquarters: 185 Berry St., Suite 2000, San Francisco, CA 94107 | Phone 650-854-9400 Washington Offices and Barbara Jordan Conference Center: 1330 G Street, NW, Washington, DC 20005 | Phone 202-347-5270 www.kff.org | Email Alerts: kff.org/email | facebook.com/KFF | twitter.com/kff The independent source for health policy research, polling, and news, KFF is a nonprofit organization based in San Francisco, California.Influenza and COVID-19: What’s in store for the fall/winter respiratory virus season? Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair Model of an influenza virus. Flu season is expected to make a big comeback this year. (NIAID), CC BY Influenza and COVID-19: What’s in store for the fall/winter respiratory virus season? Published: November 10, 2022 6.49pm GMT Sameer Elsayed, Western University Author Sameer Elsayed Professor of Medicine, Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, and Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Western University Disclosure statement Sameer Elsayed does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment. Partners Western University provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR.Western University provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA. View all partners Languages Français English Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger Public health experts in the Northern Hemisphere are predicting a fall/winter respiratory virus season for the ages — one that highlights the importance of global surveillance efforts and vaccines as tools in the fight against influenza (flu) and COVID-19. Making sense of COVID-19’s impact on seasonal flu Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the annual respiratory virus season in northern and southern climates was an epidemic of sorts, one that was characterized by a rapid uptick in the rate of influenza (flu) and of influenza-like illness beginning in mid-fall, peaking in mid-winter and winding down in mid-spring. The previously predictable pattern of influenza activity in the global North and South has become somewhat unpredictable in post-pandemic seasons. In the United States, approximately 36 million infections, 390,000 hospitalizations and 25,000 deaths due to flu were reported during the 2019-20 season. In contrast, minimal influenza activity was noted in 2020-21 while the 2021-22 season saw a four-fold decline in activity compared to pre-pandemic seasons. Implementation of strict public health measures during the COVID-19 pandemic was instrumental in reducing the incidence of flu and flu-like illnesses during the past two respiratory virus seasons in both hemispheres. However, the relaxation of these measures is expected to promote a tidal wave of respiratory virus infections in the weeks to come. These infections include influenza, SARS-CoV-2 and Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV), which often affects children. Influenza in the Southern Hemisphere Microscopic view of influenza B virus particles. (NIAID), CC BY Despite the impact of COVID-19 on global health and the almost negligible level of seasonal influenza activity over the past two years, the Southern Hemisphere experienced a major shift in influenza activity during the 2022 respiratory virus season. In Chile, the season began with a burst of influenza B activity in January, followed by a relative lull in March and April, and then a surge in influenza A that peaked in June. In contrast, Australia’s flu season started in March, had a record peak in June, and was dominated throughout by influenza A. What’s in store for fall and winter? Unlike seasonal influenza, COVID-19 primarily behaves as a pandemic virus, with simultaneous, high-level viral transmission in all parts of the globe. COVID-19 activity may be “seasonal” in some respects, with higher rates of transmission during the fall and winter months when people are indoors more often than not and, consequentially, less socially-distanced. The 2022 Southern Hemisphere experience serves as a harbinger for what to expect during the 2022-23 respiratory virus season in northern climates. In the North, the respiratory virus season is already off to an early and blazing start, particularly in the U.S. and Canada, and appears destined to wreak havoc on health-care systems that are already struggling from the impact of COVID-19. The importance of influenza vaccination Microscopic view of H1N1 influenza virus particles. (NIAID), CC BY Vaccination is one of the most effective public health interventions in our battle against influenza and COVID-19. Recommendations on the composition of flu vaccines are made biannually by the World Health Organization (WHO) several months in advance of the forthcoming respiratory virus season in each respective hemisphere. However, licensing of influenza vaccines generally falls under national jurisdictions. Similar vaccine formulations are approved for use in the U.S., Canada, United Kingdom and other northern countries, and are now widely available. Flu vaccine composition for the 2022-23 respiratory virus season in northern latitudes is based on surveillance of circulating influenza virus strains during the most recent respiratory virus season in the Southern Hemisphere. The WHO has recommended both quadrivalent vaccines (containing four strains) and trivalent vaccines (containing three strains), with no preference given to either formulation. The quadrivalent vaccine contains two inactivated strains of influenza A (H1N1 and H3N2) and two inactivated strains of influenza B. The trivalent vaccine is similar with the exception of having a single inactivated strain of influenza B. How effective are flu shots? You can get the flu jab concurrently with COVID-19 vaccine. (AP Photo/Rogelio V. Solis) Vaccine-mediated protection against influenza infection, severe illness and death has immense public health ramifications, yet is often misunderstood. Vaccine effectiveness varies from one respiratory virus season to another and hinges on several factors, including the degree of vaccine mismatch with circulating strains, the use of high-dose versus standard-dose vaccines, prior influenza illness or vaccination, age, general health status, and public health measures such as social distancing, medical mask use, and travel restrictions. Flu vaccines tend to confer a greater degree of protection against influenza B and influenza A H1N1 subtypes, with a lower degree of effectiveness against the influenza A H3N2 subtype. Research has shown that the effectiveness of standard-dose flu vaccines in preventing severe influenza illness during the 2019-20 U.S. respiratory virus season was highest in young adults (60 per cent), relatively low in middle-aged adults (20 per cent) and modest or negligible in the elderly. High-dose vaccines improve effectiveness to 30 per cent in the elderly. Therefore, people 65 years of age or older should receive a high-dose quadrivalent vaccine. Flu shots should be complemented by other infection control precautions including social distancing, indoor masking and frequent handwashing. Do I really need a flu shot? You can get a flu shot concurrently with a COVID-19 shot. Influenza vaccines are considered safe and effective in virtually all individuals, despite the lack of robust evidence of protection in very young children and the elderly. Their use is akin to protection from wearing seatbelts; you may not necessarily be involved in an accident but if you are, the chances of survival and protection from serious injury are higher with their use than without. During the 2019-20 respiratory virus season in the U.S, influenza vaccination prevented over 100,000 hospitalizations and over 6,000 deaths. Given the expected burden of influenza illness and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the benefits of vaccination will likely be greater during the current respiratory viral season compared to those in the past few years. What is the role of COVID-19 boosters? Microscopic view of the Omicron strain of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles (coloured green) on a human cell. (NIAID), CC BY For COVID-19, the effectiveness of a two-dose primary vaccine series plus a single booster in preventing hospitalization is close to 90 per cent but gradually drops to around 65 per cent over the course of four to five months after the last vaccine dose. Bivalent vaccine boosters may serve as a means of preserving vaccine-induced immunity against newer variants of SARS-CoV-2. COVID-19 vaccines remain part of an effective strategy to counter the next wave of infection. The latest bivalent vaccines manufactured by Pfizer and Moderna are recommended as boosters for individuals with at least two primary COVID-19 vaccinations. The bivalent vaccines are believed to be more effective against the dominant BA.4 and BA.5 Omicron subvariants of SARS-CoV-2 than the original mRNA vaccines, but equal in effectiveness to first-generation bivalent vaccines that target the original strain and the BA.1 Omicron subvariant. The U.S., Canada and Europe have slightly different age-based and time-based eligibility criteria for these boosters. Influenza and COVID-19 are expected to make headway during the current respiratory virus season in northern climates. Vaccination in conjunction with personal protective measures are the best means of staying healthy. Influenza Pandemic Flu Coronavirus RSV Respiratory viruses Flu season Flu shot Flu jab H1N1 influenza COVID-19 SARS-CoV-2 Influenza season COVID-19 vaccines Flu vaccines Listen to this article Booster shot Covid vaccination COVID booster Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationHuman infection with a reassortment avian influenza A H3N8 virus: an epidemiological investigation study | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Human infection with a reassortment avian influenza A H3N8 virus: an epidemiological investigation study Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 10 November 2022 Human infection with a reassortment avian influenza A H3N8 virus: an epidemiological investigation study Pengtao Bao1 na1, Yang Liu2 na1, Xiaoai Zhang3 na1, Hang Fan3 na1, Jie Zhao4, Mi Mu1, Haiyang Li5, Yanhe Wang3, Honghan Ge3, Shuang Li3, Xin Yang3, Qianqian Cui6, Rui Chen2, Liang Gao2, Zhihua Sun2, Lizhen Gao2, Shuang Qiu2, Xuchun Liu2, Peter W. Horby ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9822-15867, Xiubin Li ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6835-63401,8, Liqun Fang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-4981-14833 & …Wei Liu3,9 Show authors Nature Communications volume 13, Article number: 6817 (2022) Cite this article 5227 Accesses 31 Citations 24 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusViral epidemiologyViral infection AbstractA four-year-old boy developed recurrent fever and severe pneumonia in April, 2022. High-throughput sequencing revealed a reassortant avian influenza A-H3N8 virus (A/Henan/ZMD-22-2/2022(H3N8) with avian-origin HA and NA genes. The six internal genes were acquired from Eurasian lineage H9N2 viruses. Molecular substitutions analysis revealed the haemagglutin retained avian-like receptor binding specificity but that PB2 genes possessed sequence changes (E627K) associated with increased virulence and transmissibility in mammalian animal models. The patient developed respiratory failure, liver, renal, coagulation dysfunction and sepsis. Endotracheal intubation and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation were administered. H3N8 RNA was detected from nasopharyngeal swab of a dog, anal swab of a cat, and environmental samples collected in the patient’s house. The full-length HA sequences from the dog and cat were identical to the sequence from the patient. No influenza-like illness was developed and no H3N8 RNA was identified in family members. Serological testing revealed neutralizing antibody response against ZMD-22-2 virus in the patient and three family members. Our results suggest that a triple reassortant H3N8 caused severe human disease. There is some evidence of mammalian adaptation, possible via an intermediary mammalian species, but no evidence of person-to-person transmission. The potential threat from avian influenza viruses warrants continuous evaluation and mitigation. Similar content being viewed by others Characterization of H5N1 avian influenza virus isolated from bird in Russia with the E627K mutation in the PB2 protein Article Open access 03 November 2024 Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b from Peru forms a monophyletic group with Chilean isolates in South America Article Open access 13 February 2024 Rapid evolution of A(H5N1) influenza viruses after intercontinental spread to North America Article Open access 29 May 2023 IntroductionIn recent years, many subtypes of avian influenza viruses (AIVs) have been found to be infectious to mammals and to pose a threat to the health of humans and other animals1,2,3. So far, 11 subtypes of AIVs (mainly H5N1, H5N6, H6N1, H7N7, H7N9, H9N2, and H10N8) have been identified to cause human infections. While there are relatively frequent spillover infections (cases of single infections) with avian influenza virus in humans or other mammals4,5,6,7, only a small proportion of cases have caused epidemics or pandemics in mammalian hosts8. AIV infections in humans can result in a wide spectrum of illness, ranging from conjunctivitis and upper respiratory tract disease to pneumonia and multiorgan failure. Low pathogenic avian influenza A (H7N1, H7N2, H7N3, H9N2, or H10N7) virus infections have caused lower respiratory tract illness that is mild (conjunctivitis or uncomplicated influenza-like illness) to moderate in severity9,10,11. Of great concern are the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses. A (H7) viruses have resulted in conjunctivitis or uncomplicated influenza illness, with only a single fatal case with H7N7 virus infection during an outbreak in the Netherlands12. In contrast, HPAI H5N1 and H7N9 virus infections have resulted in case fatality rates of approximately 53% and 34% respectively13,14.The most ubiquitous hemagglutinin (HA) subtype of influenza A viruses is the H3, with a wide host range shown that includes humans, horses, dogs, cats, seals, poultry, pigs, and wild aquatic birds3,15. An in vitro experiment also demonstrated its potential to establish successful infections in pigs16. However, infection of humans with an H3N8 influenza A virus has not been previously reported. Here we report the human case of infection with H3N8 and describe the epidemiologic, clinical, and genetic features of the case.ResultsClinical features and laboratory abnormalities of the patientThe patient was a 4-year-old boy living with his father, grandparents, brother and sister, who are otherwise healthy, in Shangcai County, Zhumadian City of Henan province, China (Supplemental Fig. 1). On April 5, 2022, he developed a high fever of 39.3 °C (Fig. 1A), with lethargy and anorexia appearing on April 6, and cough was present on April 8. Although treated with antipyretic drugs and other supportive therapy, his condition did not improve and respiratory symptoms worsened. On April 10, day 6 of illness, he was admitted to a local hospital (Hospital A) for treatment. On admission, he had fever, shortness of breath, and severe respiratory signs and symptoms appeared. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit in hospital B (Zhumadian Central Hospital, Zhumadian city of Henan). On admission, physical extermination revealed a body temperature of 39.5 °C, moist rales, and cyanosis of lips, accompanied by bilateral axillary lymphadenopathy. His blood pressure was 135/91 mmHg, tachycardic (pulse rate, 150/min), and transcutaneous oxygen saturation level was 80.0 % with mask oxygen inhalation. Blood gas analysis revealed arterial oxygen partial pressure of 45 mmHg. Blood tests showed leukopenia (2.63 109/L), hyperglycemia (blood sugar level 20.3 mmol/L), hyponatremia (129 mmol/L) and hypocalcemia (1.9 mmol/L) (Fig. 1B and Supplemental Fig. 2). There was decreased concentrations of total protein (50.2 g/L), albumin (30.9 g/L) and elevated concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase (AST, 198 U/L), and adenosine deaminase (ADA, 31.0 U/L) (Fig. 1B and Supplemental Fig. 2). Coagulation tests showed a significant prolongation of prothrombin time (PT, 23.9 s), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT, >170 s), thrombin time (TT, >160 s), and elevated D-dimer (D-D, 5.11 ug/ml) and fibrin degradation products (FDP, 17.36 ug/ml), indicating a coagulation dysfunction (Fig. 1B). NT-proBNP (38.4 pg/ml) and troponin I (<0.012 ng/ml) were normal. High level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH, 1935 U/L), creatine kinase (CK, 804 U/L) and creatine kinase BB (CK-BB, 55.0 U/L) were observed (Supplemental Fig. 2). A chest computed tomographic (CT) scan showed multiple patchy high-density shadows in both lungs, especially in the lower lobe of the right lung and the left lung (Fig. 2A–C). Antigen test for nine respiratory pathogens were all negative. The bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was positive for influenza A by real-time RT-PCR, while negative for the other 13 commonly seen respiratory pathogens. The same sample was simultaneously subject to high throughput sequencing.Fig. 1: Timeline of the clinical course of the patient, identification of causative pathogen and dynamic changes of laboratory indicators during hospitalization.A Timeline of the clinical course of the patient. B Dynamic changes of laboratory indicators during hospitalization. The blue dotted line represents the upper limit of the normal range, and the green dotted line represents the lower limit of the normal range. RBC red blood cell, WBC white blood cell, PLT platelet, NEUT neutrophil count, LYM lymphocyte count, CRP C-reactive protein, ALT alanine transaminase, AST aspartate transaminase, PT prothrombin time, APTT activated partial thromboplastin time, BUN blood urea nitrogen, CREA creatinine.Full size imageFig. 2: Imaging of the patient’s chest.Computed tomographic (CT) scan obtained on day 6 of illness (A–C). CT scan showed multiple patchy high-density shadows in both lungs, especially in the lower lobe of the right lung and the left lung. Chest radiographs showed patchy high-density shadows in both lungs on day 7 of illness (D). After treatment 2 days, the pulmonary shadows were absorbed slightly on day 8 of illness (E) and on day 9 of illness (F). The consolidation shadow in the left lung was more absorbed than before on day 16 of illness (G–I) and day 31 of illness (J–L).Full size imageDue to high fever of 41 °C, and exacerbation of respiratory symptoms, the patient was further transferred to a tertiary hospital in Zhengzhou City (Hospital C). Laboratory investigations revealed leukopenia, hyperglycemia, hyponatremia, liver dysfunction, renal damage, and coagulation dysfunction, which contributed to multiple organ failure and sepsis (Fig. 1). An inflammatory response characterized by elevated interleukin 6 (IL-6, 13.91 pg/mL), interferon-γ (IFN-γ, 45.55 pg/mL), IL-12P70 (5.63 pg/mL) was observed on day 8 after disease (Supplemental Fig. 2), indicating the development of systemic inflammatory response syndrome. The C-reactive protein (CRP) levels shows modest increases on 14-day hospitalization (11.84 mg/L), and peaked on 19-day hospitalization (16.4 mg/L) (Fig. 1B).The respiratory symptoms exacerbated with laboratory abnormalities including platelet, albumin, Na+ remained abnormally low, while γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), APTT, FDP, D-D, CK and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) elevated above normal (Fig. 1B, Supplemental Fig. 2). Pseudomonas aeruginosa was determined by metagenomic next-generation sequencing in BALF on day 8 of disease. The culture efforts however, yielded no positive result. Extensive treatment, including antiviral therapy (Oseltamivir 30 mg twice a day and interferon α1b 30 ug twice a day), antibiotic therapy (linezolid, meropenem, and compound sulfamethoxazole). After administration of mechanical ventilation via endotracheal intubation on day 6 of illness, the blood oxygen saturation values dropped to 55% and blood gas analysis revealed arterial oxygen partial pressure of 36 mmHg. The patient further received veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) on the same day (Supplemental Table 3). Chest radiographs showed patchy high-density shadows in both lungs on day 7 of illness (Fig. 2D). After treatment, the pulmonary shadows slightly diminished (Fig. 2E, F). The consolidation shadow in the left lung gradually diminished on day 16 (Fig. 2G–I) and day 31 of illness (Fig. 2J–L).His condition gradually improved, with ECMO withdrawn on May 3 and mechanical ventilation ceased on May 23. On June 7, the patient recovered and was discharged after 90-day hospitalization with no sequelae reported.Detection and identification of avian influenza A H3N8 virusBy high-throughput sequencing on the BALF collected on April 10, we obtained the whole genome sequence of an influenza A/H3N8 virus (A/Henan/ZMD-22-2/2022(H3N8); GenBank accession number ON342803-ON342810). Phylogenetic analysis revealed ZMD-22-2 as a reassortant H3N8 influenza virus which is distinct from previously reported H3N8 viruses.The most closely related HA gene was in the clade of H3N2 and H3N8 viruses detected in ducks from Guangdong Province (A/duck/Guangdong/F352/2018 (A/H3N2) determined in 2018 with a nucleotide homology of 96.09% (Fig. 3A). The highest similarity of NA segment was to H3N8 viruses in various species of birds in North America in 2014 and Japan in 2016 (Aorthern pintail/Alaska/870/2014 (A/H3N8), with nucleotide homologies of 97.07% (Fig. 3B). The nucleotide homologies of internal genes were closely related to H9N2 viruses that had been identified throughout China and isolated from humans, ducks or wild birds in recent years (Supplemental Fig. 3). This indicates that the virus was a reassortant genotype which had undergone complicated mutation and reassortment events (Fig. 4).Fig. 3: Phylogenetic trees of genes of the A (H3N8) influenza virus.Phylogenetic trees for the full-length HA (A) and NA (B) genes of H3 and N8 subtype influenza viruses. A/Henan/ZMD-22-2/2022(H3N8) virus was indicated with red color.Full size imageFig. 4: Hypothetical reassortment route and segment origins of the A (H3N8) influenza virus.The colors of the segments indicate their origin.Full size imageThe amino acid sequence at cleavage site in HA protein is PEKQTR/GL, indicating that the virus was a low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) virus. Genetic features were evaluated based on a well-accepted correlation between receptor binding characteristics and host specificity of influenza viruses17, i.e., viruses isolated from wild aquatic birds bind strongly to α-2,3 sialyl glycan (SA 2,3) receptor, in contrast, human-adapted influenza viruses recognize and bind SA 2,6 receptors, which predominate in the human respiratory tract. For the H3N8 virus, the residue 226 and 228 of HA gene were glutamine (Q) and glycine (G), respectively (Supplemental Table 4). The key mutation Q226L and G228S in HA protein which rendered a strong binding to SA 2,6 receptors and increased transmission ability by air, are absent, thus indicating limited ability to bind to cells in the human respiratory tract.The mutation of E627K was identified in PB2 gene. This mutation had been associated with increased virulence in mice and was reported to be associated with improved replication of avian influenza virus in mammals17,18,19. Besides, the N30D and T215A mutation in M gene and P42S mutation in NS gene were also observed, which mutations were associated with increased virulence in animal models20,21.Epidemiological investigationsEpidemiological investigation revealed the family had been raising 6 chickens in the back yard, which however, had been killed before the investigation was performed. The patient had intensive contact with a domesticated dog and a cat kept in the household before his illness onset, by feeding and playing with the dog and the cat. Five close-contact family members (grandfather, grandmother, father, eight-year-old brother, and six-year-old sister) who lived together with the patient, and the aunt who had close contact with the patient while he was ill were interviewed. None of them had bred livestock, or reported recent visit to poultry market, the grandfather and brother reported infrequent contact to the dog and cat, although less frequently than the patient. No other significant exposures, i.e., visiting poultry market or exposure to febrile patients were reported. There was a pond 27-m distant from the household of the patient, which wild ducks inhabited, with frequent congregation with the domesticated poultry in the backyard (Supplemental Fig. 1).The molecular test on the 63 animal and environmental samples yielded 10 positive results for the H3N8, all from the patient’s household, including one nasopharyngeal swab of the dog; one anal swab of the cat; surface swabs of the boarding kennels of cat (1), dog (1), and chicken (1); drinking water (1) and food (1) of the dog; swab of the dining table (1), waste bin (1) and cabinet (1). No positive result was obtained in other 53 animal or environmental samples collected in the household (13) or the village (40).No obvious illness was observed for the animals, although the dog was less active than usual and labored breathing as recalled by the family. Biochemistry test revealed elevated level of creatine kinase (CK, 323 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH, 1.29 g/mL) of the dog, Decreased LDH (0.96 g/mL) in the cat (Supplemental Table 5). Nucleotide sequence of full-length HA from the dog and cat were identical to sequence from the patient.Detection for the H3N8, influenza virus (IFV) A, as well as 13 common respiratory pathogens were all negative for throat swabs collected from the 6 close contacts. The follow-up of the close contacts revealed influenza like illness developed until recently. Serological test on serum of the patient collected on April 10 revealed neutralizing antibody (Nab) titer of 1:121 against ZMD-22-2 virus by using a pseudotyped virus-based assay. Positive Nab was also determined from the grandparents of the patient (1:339 and 1:179, respectively) (Supplemental Table 6).DiscussionH3N8 virus is a common subtype of virus detected in wild and domestic ducks22, and it has attracted a high attention because of its cross species transmission from avian to mammals3,23,24. This represented the identification of human infection with H3N8, since its first identification in Florida in 196325. Although the current H3N8 subtype viruses could infect mammalian hosts, the whole genome sequence showed that it is still avian-like virus. The reassortant among different influenza viruses is considered the main mechanism for the emergence of novel virus, such as H5N1, H7N9, and H10N8 which can adapt to mammals and gain the ability to infect humans. In a likewise manner, a multiple reassortant from different origins was displayed for this H3N8 virus. Genetic evolution of the HA revealed a very close relationship with H3 in ducks that circulated in Guangdong, and the NA gene was derived from birds in both North America and Japan lineages. Still, a high similarity of internal gene with the widely circulating H9N2 in China was demonstrated. The pattern of the Chinese sub-lineage mixing with North America and Japanese influenza viruses remained obscure. It’s speculated that a frequent exchange of influenza virus might have occurred due to wild bird migration, or international poultry trade.The field investigation revealed a natural environment that was suitable for the congregating and contact among migratory birds with the local backyard poultry, which can promote the transmission of AIV. Geographically, the village was is located in the East Asian-Australian migratory birds’ flyway and it is one of potential stopovers for migratory birds (Supplemental Fig. 1), rendering a logical postulation of this mixture between wild birds and poultry.It’s notable that H3N8 virus was also detected from the domesticated cat and dog that were in close contact with the patient. Both dogs and cats are known to be susceptible to human influenza and avian influenza strains. Dogs are particularly susceptible to influenza A viruses, including H3N2, H3N8, H5N1, and H6N1.In Asia, respiratory disease caused by influenza virus H3N2 was documented in dogs, and fatal infection with the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) H5N1 has also been reported26. A number of single cases of H5N1 HPAI infections in cats have also been reported in different parts of the world, mainly associated with recent avian outbreaks27. Here we observed the H3N8 infected dog developed mild clinical signs, moreover, laboratory abnormality of elevated LDH was observed, possibly indicating a systematic infection. The infected dog excreted virus not only via the respiratory tract but also possibly via the digestive tract as evidenced by positive detection of H3N8 specific RNA in the drinking water. Therefore, both the respiratory and gastrointestinal routes of infection may cause horizontal transmission among dog, cat and the human being. However, it is not possible to infer the direction of transmission, since both dogs and cats are naturally susceptible to influenza virus strains from other hosts, including birds and mammals. Under current situation, both cat and dog are semidomesticated and may highly likely come in contact with wild birds, ducks in the nearby pond, on the other hand, frequently exposed to human and poultry. Transmission of H3N8 virus into dog and cat further to human, or the otherwise manner can both occur. The potential ability of cat and dog to be a “mixing vessel” of diverse origin influenza strains into reassortant might be indicated. Unfortunately, the lack of poultry specimens from the household of the patient, and the unsuccessful sampling of the duck in the neighboring pond means we cannot firmly establish the original zoonotic source of infection nor determine the genetic sequence of the original virus.There was no evidence of infection in other family members and it is unlikely an outbreaks or epidemics could be induced, due to the biological and ecological barriers of the novel genotype. In line with the epidemiological findings, the genetic characterization revealed that ZMD-22-2 was low pathogenic. On the other hand, the presence of mutations, mainly E627K in PB2 gene and P42S in NS gene, indicated the capacity of this influenza A virus subtype to cross the species barrier, acquire some mammalian adaptations and cause human severe disease.The patient has developed severe respiratory distress syndrome, yet with no other known respiratory coinfection identified. Although we determined the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa by high-throughput sequencing, no bacterial culture was obtained, indicating its minor contribution to the overall disease. On the other hand, antibiotic therapy was started empirically on early hospitalization, aimed toward bacterial secondary infection that commonly occurs in the clinical course of severe pneumonia28. For patients who present without risk factors or signs of bacterial infection, antibacterial use might be unnecessary.The study was subject to a major limitation that no virus isolation was performed due to the biosafety concern, thus the antibody test was performed on a pseudovirus system, and the cross reaction with other H3 influenza cannot be excluded. The biological features of the H3N8 need to be further investigated by experimental approaches. Moreover, based on only one case, our understanding of the clinical aspects of H3N8 infection is rather limited. A full understanding of the clinical spectrum might be proposed based on a large-scale population surveillance.As of preparing the manuscript, an equine influenza (EIV) outbreak caused by H3N8 virus was reported in America29. Although not evolved from AIV, it might be transmitted from horses to dogs or birds. It is therefore important to strengthen the surveillance of H3N8 infections among various animal species, based on which a close monitoring of the viral evolution and timely identification of new human cases could be achieved.MethodsEpidemiological investigations and data collectionIn April 2022, as part of hospital surveillance of febrile patients in Zhumadian Central Hospital, Henan province, China, a febrile pediatric patient with recurrent fever of unknown cause was screened. Following the identification of infection with an avian influenza virus, an epidemiological investigation was performed on the patient and his close-contact family members and relatives using a standard questionnaire, which included demographic information, pre-existing underlying diseases and the exposure history before the onset of illnesses. To infer the possible infection source of the patient, we performed field investigation in the residence of the patient and the village on April 13. Nasopharyngeal swabs, anal swabs, faecal and blood samples were collected from companion animals, livestock and poultry. The collection of specimens for companion animals, livestock and poultry were conducted by a veterinarian. The environmental samples that included the surface swabs, drinking water, sewage, and water in a pool close to the family were also collected. Throat swabs and blood samples were collected from close contacts of the patient, who were also asked to report for fever (≥38 °C) and influenza-like symptoms for seven days since the interview. All infectious materials were handled in a BSL-2 facility under approved protocols according to Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology guidelines. According to the regulations and guidelines of the NHFPC of China, data collection on this patient was part of the routine surveillance and outbreak investigation, and was therefore exempt from the oversight by institutional review board. The patient’s parents gave informed consent. The family members of the patient and all the participating subjects signed consent forms approving the investigation, sample collection and its publication. The procedures were in accordance with the Helsinki declaration of 1975, as revised in 1983.Metagenomic analysis and genome assemblyThe RNA from BALF of the patient were subject to high-throughput sequencing. Briefly, the Viral RNA was extracted using AllPrep DNA/RNA mini kit (Qiagen, Germany) and sequenced using Illumina Nextseq 550 platform. Sequenced data was assembled with the reference sequences in database using CLC Genomic Workbench v21. The sequence alignment and annotation were performed using CLC Genomic Workbench v21.Virus detectionAll the collected samples were tested for 14 respiratory pathogens, including IFV A, IFV B, seasonal influenza H3N2 virus, seasonal influenza H1N1 virus, 2009 pandemic influenza A (pH1N1) virus, H7N9 virus, H5N1 virus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), human rhinovirus (HRV), human parainfluenza virus (HPIV), human adenovirus (HAdV), human coronavirus (HCoV), human bocavirus (HBoV), and human metapneumovirus (HMPV), by real-time PCR/Reverse Transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) (Supplementary Table 1)30. Briefly, the nucleic acid was extracted using QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany). For all IFV positive samples, a pair of universal full-length primers (MBTuni-12 and MBTuni-13) were used to reverse transcribe and amplify all eight segments of the virus genome31. Specific test for the H3N8 was performed by real-time RT-PCR (Supplementary Table 2). Antigen test for nine respiratory pathogens (legionella pneumophila, mycoplasma pneumoniae, Coxiella burnetii, chlamydia pneumoniae, HAdV, RSV, IFV-A, IFV- B, and HPIV) was also performed by using commercial indirect immunofluorescent kit (Vircell SL, Spain) (Supplementary Table 1).Cytokine detectionThe level of 7 cytokines, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, IL-12p70, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), were measured by multiple microsphere flow immunofluorescence methods using the commercial kit (Qingdao Raisecare Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Shandong, China).Phylogenetic analysisThe reference nucleotide sequences were downloaded for phylogenetic analysis. Phylogenetic trees were reconstructed based on maximum likelihood method with nucleotide sequences using IQ-TREE (v1.6.12) with GTR + G as the best-fit substitution model and 1000 bootstrap replicates. MAFFT method was used for sequence alignment.Pseudovirus based neutralization assayThe H3N8 pseudovirus was generated, based on which the pseudotyped virus neutralization assay was measured by the reduction in Luc gene expression32. Briefly, serially diluted samples were incubated with pseudotyped virus in duplicate for 1 h at 37 °C together with the virus control and cell control wells in sextuplicate. Thereafter, 2 × 104 freshly trypsinized Huh7 cells (obtained from Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources) were added to each well of the 96-well plate. After 48 h of incubation at 37 °C with 5% CO2, the RLU was measured in accordance with the instruction manual provided by PerkinElmer (Waltham, MA). The ED50 (median effective dilution) was calculated using the Reed-Muench method.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The sequence data generated in this study have been deposited in the NCBI GenBank database under accession codes ON342803-ON342810. Relevant data that support the findings of this study is publicly available within the paper and its Supplementary Information Files and Source Data file. Raw data are not publicly available and are protected due to data privacy laws, which were used under license for the current study, but are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author and with permission from the data provider (Wei Liu). The request will be responded within 1 week. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesZhu, Y., Qi, X., Cui, L., Zhou, M. & Wang, H. Human co-infection with novel avian influenza A H7N9 and influenza A H3N2 viruses in Jiangsu province, China. Lancet 381, 2134 (2013).Article PubMed Google Scholar Parrish, C. R., Murcia, P. R. & Holmes, E. C. Influenza virus reservoirs and intermediate hosts: dogs, horses, and new possibilities for influenza virus exposure of humans. J. Virol. 89, 2990–2994 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Li, Y. et al. Wild bird-origin H3N8 avian influenza virus exhibit well adaptation in mammalian host. J. Infect. 84, 579–613 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, H. et al. Clinical and epidemiological characteristics of a fatal case of avian influenza A H10N8 virus infection: a descriptive study. Lancet 383, 714–721 (2014).Article PubMed Google Scholar Qi, X. et al. Human infection with an avian-origin influenza A (H10N3) virus. N. Engl. J. Med. 386, 1087–1088 (2022).Article PubMed Google Scholar Huo, X. et al. Severe human infection with a novel avian-origin influenza A(H7N4) virus. Sci. Bull. 63, 1043–1050 (2018).Article Google Scholar Zhu, Q. Y. et al. Fatal infection with influenza A (H5N1) virus in China. N. Engl. J. Med. 354, 2731–2732 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Novel Swine-Origin Influenza AVIT. et al. Emergence of a novel swine-origin influenza A (H1N1) virus in humans. N. Engl. J. Med. 360, 2605–2615 (2009).Article Google Scholar Belser, J. A. et al. Mammalian pathogenicity and transmissibility of low pathogenic avian influenza H7N1 and H7N3 viruses isolated from North America in 2018. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 9, 1037–1045 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Marinova-Petkova, A. et al. Avian Influenza A(H7N2) Virus in Human Exposed to Sick Cats, New York, USA, 2016. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 23, 2046–2049 (2017).Arzey, G. G. et al. Influenza virus A (H10N7) in chickens and poultry abattoir workers, Australia. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 18, 814–816 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Koopmans, M. et al. Transmission of H7N7 avian influenza A virus to human beings during a large outbreak in commercial poultry farms in the Netherlands. Lancet 363, 587–593 (2004).Article PubMed Google Scholar Lai, S. et al. Global epidemiology of avian influenza A H5N1 virus infection in humans, 1997-2015: a systematic review of individual case data. Lancet Infect. Dis. 16, e108–e118 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, Q. et al. Epidemiology of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. N. Engl. J. Med. 370, 520–532 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Anthony, S. J. et al. Emergence of fatal avian influenza in New England harbor seals. mBio 3, e00166–00112 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Solorzano, A. et al. Cross-species infectivity of H3N8 influenza virus in an experimental infection in swine. J. Virol. 89, 11190–11202 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gao, R. et al. Human infection with a novel avian-origin influenza A (H7N9) virus. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 1888–1897 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hatta, M., Gao, P., Halfmann, P. & Kawaoka, Y. Molecular basis for high virulence of Hong Kong H5N1 influenza A viruses. Science 293, 1840–1842 (2001).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Labadie, K., Dos Santos Afonso, E., Rameix-Welti, M. A., van der Werf, S. & Naffakh, N. Host-range determinants on the PB2 protein of influenza A viruses control the interaction between the viral polymerase and nucleoprotein in human cells. Virology 362, 271–282 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Fan, S. et al. Two amino acid residues in the matrix protein M1 contribute to the virulence difference of H5N1 avian influenza viruses in mice. Virology 384, 28–32 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Jiao, P. et al. A single-amino-acid substitution in the NS1 protein changes the pathogenicity of H5N1 avian influenza viruses in mice. J. Virol. 82, 1146–1154 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kaleta, E. F., Hergarten, G. & Yilmaz, A. Avian influenza A viruses in birds–an ecological, ornithological and virological view. Dtsch Tierarzt. Wochenschr. 112, 448–456 (2005).CAS Google Scholar Karlsson, E. A. et al. Respiratory transmission of an avian H3N8 influenza virus isolated from a harbour seal. Nat. Commun. 5, 4791 (2014).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhang, X. et al. PB1 S524G mutation of wild bird-origin H3N8 influenza A virus enhances virulence and fitness for transmission in mammals. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 10, 1038–1051 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Waddell, G. H., Teigland, M. B. & Sigel, M. M. A new influenza virus associated with equine respiratory disease. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 143, 587–590 (1963).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Harder, T. C. & Vahlenkamp, T. W. Influenza virus infections in dogs and cats. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 134, 54–60 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wasik, B. R., Voorhees, I. E. H. & Parrish, C. R. Canine and Feline Influenza. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 11, a038562 (2021).Lassi, Z. S., Imdad, A. & Bhutta, Z. A. Short-course versus long-course intravenous therapy with the same antibiotic for severe community-acquired pneumonia in children aged two months to 59 months. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 10, CD008032 (2017).PubMed Google Scholar Colorado: H3N8 equine influenza linked to outbreak in horses, deaths. http://outbreaknewstoday.com/colorado-h3n8-equine-influenza-linked-to-outbreak-in-horses-deaths-85465/ (2022).Li, Z. J. et al. Etiological and epidemiological features of acute respiratory infections in China. Nat. Commun. 12, 5026 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhou, B. et al. Single-reaction genomic amplification accelerates sequencing and vaccine production for classical and Swine origin human influenza a viruses. J. Virol. 83, 10309–10313 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ning, T. et al. Antigenic drift of influenza A(H7N9) virus hemagglutinin. J. Infect. Dis. 219, 19–25 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThe authors thank all the study subjects and collaborating clinicians for their participation and contribution to the work. This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Funds [81825019, Recipient: W.L.; 81802804, Recipient: B.X.L.]. The funders had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the paper; and decision to submit the paper for publication.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Pengtao Bao, Yang Liu, Xiaoai Zhang, Hang Fan.Authors and AffiliationsThe Eighth Medical Center of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 100091, ChinaPengtao Bao, Mi Mu & Xiubin LiZhumadian Central Hospital, Zhumadian, 463000, ChinaYang Liu, Rui Chen, Liang Gao, Zhihua Sun, Lizhen Gao, Shuang Qiu & Xuchun LiuState Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, 100071, ChinaXiaoai Zhang, Hang Fan, Yanhe Wang, Honghan Ge, Shuang Li, Xin Yang, Liqun Fang & Wei LiuZhumadian Second People’s Hospital, Zhumadian, 463000, ChinaJie ZhaoShangcai Caizhou Hospital, Shangcai County, Zhumadian, 463800, ChinaHaiyang LiDivision of HIV/AIDS and Sex-transmitted Virus Vaccines, Institute for Biological Product Control, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC), Beijing, ChinaQianqian CuiPandemic Sciences Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKPeter W. HorbyThe Third Medical Center of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 100039, ChinaXiubin LiSchool of Public Health, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, ChinaWei LiuAuthorsPengtao BaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYang LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXiaoai ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHang FanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJie ZhaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMi MuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHaiyang LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYanhe WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHonghan GeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShuang LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXin YangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarQianqian CuiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRui ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLiang GaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZhihua SunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLizhen GaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShuang QiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXuchun LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPeter W. HorbyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXiubin LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLiqun FangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWei LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsThe author contributions are as follows. Y.L., P.T.B., P.H., X.B.L., L.Q.F., and W.L. conceived, designed and supervised the study. Y.L., S.F.W., J.Z., H.Y.L., R.C., L.G., Z.H.S., L.Z.G., S.Q., and X.C.L. treated the patient. Y.L., P.T.B., X.A.Z., H.F., S.F.W., J.Z., H.Y.L., R.C., L.G., Z.H.S., L.Z.G., S.Q., X.C.L., and X.Y. gathered data and conducted the epidemiological investigation. X.A.Z., Y.H.W., S.L., and Q.Q.C. did the laboratory tests, P.T.B., X.A.Z., H.F., Y.H.W., H.H.G., and X.B.L. performed the data analyses. P.T.B., X.A.Z., H.F., P.H., X.B.L., L.Q.F., and W.L. wrote the drafts of the manuscript and interpreted the findings. All authors read the manuscript, provided feedback, and approved the final version.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Peter W. Horby, Xiubin Li, Liqun Fang or Wei Liu.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationReporting SummarySupplementary InformationSource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleBao, P., Liu, Y., Zhang, X. et al. Human infection with a reassortment avian influenza A H3N8 virus: an epidemiological investigation study. Nat Commun 13, 6817 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34601-1Download citationReceived: 13 June 2022Accepted: 24 October 2022Published: 10 November 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34601-1Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingAre Flu Shots 'Live Virus' Vaccines or Not? ​ Skip to content Health Search the site GO Please fill out this field. Newsletters Search Please fill out this field. News Conditions A - Z Conditions A - Z Anxiety Coronavirus Type 2 Diabetes Headaches and Migraines Heart Disease View All Nutrition Nutrition Eat Well Nutrition Basics Vitamins and Supplements View All Wellness Wellness Mental Health Fitness Skincare Sexual Health View All What to Buy What to Buy Nutrition & Supplements Oral & Dental Care Sleep Products Over the Counter Skincare View All About Us About Us Editorial Process Medical Expert Board Diversity Pledge Testing and Vetting Products Read More Stay informed with emails from us Search the site GO Please fill out this field. Newsletter Sign Up News Conditions A - Z Anxiety Coronavirus Type 2 Diabetes Headaches and Migraines Heart Disease View All Nutrition Eat Well Nutrition Basics Vitamins and Supplements View All Wellness Mental Health Fitness Skincare Sexual Health View All What to Buy Nutrition & Supplements Oral & Dental Care Sleep Products Over the Counter Skincare View All About Us Editorial Process Medical Expert Board Diversity Pledge Testing and Vetting Products Health Conditions A-Z Infectious Diseases Flu Flu Shots: Are They 'Live Virus' Vaccines or Not? The answer depends on the type of flu shot you receive. By Beth Weinhouse Beth Weinhouse Beth Weinhouse loves being a journalist and learning new things... and then passing that knowledge on to others. A graduate of the Columbia School of Journalism, Beth began her career in print magazines, and has written and/or edited for Prevention, Reader's Digest, Self, Child, Parenting, Travel & Leisure, Town & Country, The Los Angeles Times Magazine, NY Newsday, and many, many more. While she was editorial director of Conceive, the magazine was named one of the 50 Best Magazines in the country by the Chicago Tribune, and won a coveted gold Folio "Eddie" Award for best women's lifestyle magazine. She co-authored (with Leslie Laurence) the book Outrageous Practices: How Medicine Mistreats Women. But this is the digital age, and now Beth writes and edits for a variety of websites, including TheHealthy.com, Survivornet.com, The Global Healthy Living Foundation, and, of course, Health.com. (But print journalism isn't dead. Recently Beth has also enjoyed writing for Real Simple, Columbia Magazine, Virginia Living, and Healthy Together.) When she's not learning new things for work, Beth likes to be out in the world learning new things by travelling, reading, and talking to as many interesting people as she can. health's editorial guidelines Updated on November 11, 2022 Medically reviewed by Steffini Stalos, DO Medically reviewed by Steffini Stalos, DO Steffini Stalos, DO, FCAP, is a pathology and lab medicine physician. She is also the chief medical officer of the lab consultancy firm Blood Associates, LLC. learn more Close In the United States, the flu returns on a yearly basis. If you're putting off your annual flu shot because you're concerned about getting the illness from the virus in the vaccine, that's actually not possible. "[The] flu vaccine has often had a bad rap," Michael Knight, MD, a primary care physician and assistant professor of medicine at George Washington University Medical Faculty Associates in Washington, DC, told Health. "People say, 'My friend got the flu vaccine and then they got the flu the next day.' But the flu vaccines we use can't cause the flu." The confusion may arise, in part, from the different ways these vaccines are developed—so Health asked experts to explain more about flu vaccines, including the types that are available and how they are made. When Should You Get the Flu Shot? Getty Images What Types of Vaccines Are There? According to the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS), there are a number of general vaccine types available: Live, attenuated: Contains a live but weakened version of a virus or bacteriaInactivated: Contains an inactivated version of a virus or bacteriaToxoid: Consists of a weakened toxin that may cause an illnessSubunit, recombinant, polysaccharide, and conjugate: Include parts of the virus or bacteria rather than either in its entiretyMessenger RNA (mRNA): Produces proteins that are designed to initiate an immune response to a virusViral vector: Contains a changed version of another virus (used as a vector) as a method of protection against a virus In particular, live, attenuated vaccines contain a live but weakened version of a virus or bacteria, while inactivated vaccines contain an inactivated version of a virus or bacteria. "Many years ago, when we first started getting flu shots, they were live attenuated virus vaccines," said Dr. Knight. "So if the patient was pregnant or had a weakened immune system, we couldn't give that to them." Consequently, later flu vaccines contained inactivated viruses, which eliminated the chance of getting sick after a flu vaccination. However, though most flu vaccines contain inactivated viruses, there is one flu vaccine that does include a live, attenuated virus per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). How Are Flu Vaccines Made? Inactivated Vaccines The egg-based process to produce the majority of flu vaccines was first developed more than 80 years ago, the CDC explains. The process starts with the CDC or another lab in the World Health Organization Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System. These public health entities provide private manufacturers with the viruses that have been chosen for the season's vaccine, the CDC says. These viruses are then grown in eggs according to very strict regulations established by the US Food and Drug Administration. "The technology was developed in the late 1930s and 40s when scientists first discovered you could grow the influenza virus in chicken eggs," William Schaffner, MD, medical director of the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases and professor of preventive medicine and infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, told Health. "The technology is very elaborate. The eggs have to be especially pure, bred [specifically] on special farms. Those chickens are under cover so that wild birds can't get at them and infect them," said Dr. Schaffner. "And when you consider that we have to produce millions and millions of doses of vaccines, we need a lot of eggs." There's also a more modern way of producing vaccines—growing them in animal cells in very large test tubes, as the CDC points out. Why Does Your Arm Hurt After a Flu Shot? But whichever way the virus is grown, it's produced in very large amounts and then extracted from the eggs or cells. "Then you kill the virus, break it up into pieces," said Dr. Schaffner. "You take the select pieces of the virus that are important in stimulating the immune response, purify that, and that's the vaccine." Dr. Schaffner explained that it's impossible to reconstitute the virus from those pieces, and that's why it's impossible to get the flu from the vaccine. There are special versions of the flu vaccine for people aged 65 and up. These contain the same inactivated virus as the standard dose vaccine. One version of the vaccine for seniors is high-dose, and it contains four times the amount of the inactivated virus as the regular shot. Another version has the same amount of antigen but also has an ingredient called an adjuvant which helps spur the immune system to mount a stronger response. Live, Attenuated Flu Vaccines There is one kind of flu vaccine that does contain a live, weakened virus. That's the nasal mist, which is available for people aged 2 to 49 who are not pregnant and with no serious underlying health conditions according to the CDC. For this vaccine, the CDC explains that the viruses are first grown in eggs just as they are for the injection. But then instead of being killed, the viruses go through a different production process that weakens them. According to the CDC, "The weakened viruses are cold-adapted, which means they are designed to only multiply at the cooler temperatures found within the nose, and not the lungs or other areas where warmer temperatures exist." "It's a miracle of modern science," said Dr. Schaffner. "The viruses are engineered on a molecular level, so they can't multiply at the higher temperature that's just a tiny bit higher in the lung compared to the nose. The viruses are incapable of multiplying at that temperature, so they can't produce influenza at all." What Else To Know About Flu Vaccines All the different flu vaccines available during a specific flu season will protect against the four viruses chosen as most likely to cause problems for that season. Of note, the development period for antibodies to protect you from influenza viruses is about two weeks. Thus, you should aim to get vaccinated by the end of October, according to the CDC, though you may be allowed to get your vaccination as early as July or August if appropriate for your situation. Individuals aged six months or older should be vaccinated, with the exception of specific populations (e.g., children under six months) per the CDC. Additionally, those who have egg allergies can receive flu vaccinations; however, there are two egg-free flu vaccines as of August 2022. Furthermore, people with severe egg allergies (where reactions include more than just hives) would need to be vaccinated under the supervision of a healthcare provider, the CDC says. What Is Flu (Influenza)? A Quick Review There are a few different types of flu vaccines you can get to protect you from the virus each season. Ultimately, if you still have any other concerns about getting your flu vaccine, talk to your healthcare provider for more information and guidance. Was this page helpful? Thanks for your feedback! Tell us why! Other Submit Related Articles Where To Get Free Flu Shots Without Insurance When Is a Good Time To Get a Flu Shot? What Are the Side Effects of the Flu Vaccine? How Many People Die From the Flu Each Year? Why Do You Have Arm Pain After a Flu Shot? When Is Flu Season? Top Months What To Know About Flu Tests—When You Need One, and What To Do if You Test Positive What To Know About Influenza B (Flu) 8 Illnesses That Cause Flu-Like Symptoms That Aren’t the Flu How Contagious Is the Flu? What To Know About Influenza (Flu) What Is the Flu Incubation Period? What Is SIRVA: Symptoms, Causes, Treatment What Are the Long-Term Health Effects of the Flu? What To Know About Influenza A Is the Flu Airborne? Health Newsletters Follow Us News Conditions A-Z Nutrition Wellness About Us Medical Expert Board Editorial Process Diversity Pledge Privacy Policy Product Vetting Terms of Service Careers Advertise Contact Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Health is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Newsletter Sign Up Newsletter Sign UpBlack Vultures Test Positive for Avian Influenza in Montgomery County | Outdoor Alabama Skip to main content Top Nav About Us Contact Us Media News Events Translation Sign Up View More Results Outdoor Alabama Main navigation Licenses License Information Purchase a License All Access License Packages Print a Previously Purchased License Hunting Licenses Freshwater Fishing Licenses Saltwater Recreational Licenses Commercial Licenses & Permits Get A Conservation ID Number License FAQs Collectible License Cards Wildlife Heritage License Hunting Seasons and Bag Limits Game Check and Harvest Record Hunter Education In Alabama Hunting & Wildlife Regulations Hunter Resources Wildlife Management Areas What to Hunt Where to Hunt Special Opportunity Areas Youth Hunting Trapping in Alabama Physically Disabled Hunting and Fishing Trail Transfer of Possession Deer/Turkey Hunter Orange Requirement in Alabama Fishing Freshwater Fishing Creel and Size Limits Saltwater Fishing Creel and Size Limits Tournaments Freshwater Fishing Public Fishing Lakes Saltwater Fishing Saltwater Registry Snapper Check Information Free Fishing Day Electronic BAIT Data Entry Boating Boating Access - Coastal Boating Access - Freshwater Boating/Marine Patrol Canoe Trails Weather, Tides, GPS, River Stages Parks Wildlife Birds Reptiles Mammals Amphibians Invertebrates Nongame Wildlife Program Wildlife Articles Wildlife Management Programs Wildlife Rehabilitation Wildlife-Related Diseases Programs Becoming an Outdoors-Woman Alabama Coastal Restoration Program Coastal Programs Archery in the Schools Law Enforcement Conservation Education Creek Kids at Tannehill Park Waterfowl Stamp Art Contest Hunters Helping the Hungry Forever Wild Outdoor Alabama Photo Contest Photo Contest Exhibit Schedule Outdoor Alabama Academy Outdoor Alabama Wild Eats Research Aquatic Biodiversity Center Cooperative University Research Projects Freshwater Fish Hatcheries Hunter Survey Results Invasive Carp in Alabama Sport Fish Restoration State Wildlife Grants Weeks Bay Reserve Activities 5 Rivers - AL Delta Resource Center Conservation Activities Archery Parks Shooting Ranges State Lands Canoe Trails Weeks Bay Reserve Wehle Nature Center Alabama Birding Trails Indian Shell Mound Park Fall Color Trail Lands Interactive Map 5 Rivers - AL Delta Resource Center Canoe Trails Forever Wild Land Stewardship Education Facilities Public Notices State Lands Enforcement State Parks Weeks Bay Reserve Wehle Facilities CWD CWD In Alabama Latest CWD Information CWD FAQs CWD Sampling CWD Sampling Results CWD Zone map CWD Harvest Movement and Transport CWD Harvest Disposal Processors and Taxidermists CWD Education Videos Menu Main navigation Licenses License Information Purchase a License All Access License Packages Print a Previously Purchased License Hunting Licenses Freshwater Fishing Licenses Saltwater Recreational Licenses Commercial Licenses & Permits Get A Conservation ID Number License FAQs Collectible License Cards Wildlife Heritage License Hunting Seasons and Bag Limits Game Check and Harvest Record Hunter Education In Alabama Hunting & Wildlife Regulations Hunter Resources Wildlife Management Areas What to Hunt Where to Hunt Special Opportunity Areas Youth Hunting Trapping in Alabama Physically Disabled Hunting and Fishing Trail Transfer of Possession Deer/Turkey Hunter Orange Requirement in Alabama Fishing Freshwater Fishing Creel and Size Limits Saltwater Fishing Creel and Size Limits Tournaments Freshwater Fishing Public Fishing Lakes Saltwater Fishing Saltwater Registry Snapper Check Information Free Fishing Day Electronic BAIT Data Entry Boating Boating Access - Coastal Boating Access - Freshwater Boating/Marine Patrol Canoe Trails Weather, Tides, GPS, River Stages Parks Wildlife Birds Reptiles Mammals Amphibians Invertebrates Nongame Wildlife Program Wildlife Articles Wildlife Management Programs Wildlife Rehabilitation Wildlife-Related Diseases Programs Becoming an Outdoors-Woman Alabama Coastal Restoration Program Coastal Programs Archery in the Schools Law Enforcement Conservation Education Creek Kids at Tannehill Park Waterfowl Stamp Art Contest Hunters Helping the Hungry Forever Wild Outdoor Alabama Photo Contest Photo Contest Exhibit Schedule Outdoor Alabama Academy Outdoor Alabama Wild Eats Research Aquatic Biodiversity Center Cooperative University Research Projects Freshwater Fish Hatcheries Hunter Survey Results Invasive Carp in Alabama Sport Fish Restoration State Wildlife Grants Weeks Bay Reserve Activities 5 Rivers - AL Delta Resource Center Conservation Activities Archery Parks Shooting Ranges State Lands Canoe Trails Weeks Bay Reserve Wehle Nature Center Alabama Birding Trails Indian Shell Mound Park Fall Color Trail Lands Interactive Map 5 Rivers - AL Delta Resource Center Canoe Trails Forever Wild Land Stewardship Education Facilities Public Notices State Lands Enforcement State Parks Weeks Bay Reserve Wehle Facilities CWD CWD In Alabama Latest CWD Information CWD FAQs CWD Sampling CWD Sampling Results CWD Zone map CWD Harvest Movement and Transport CWD Harvest Disposal Processors and Taxidermists CWD Education Videos Black Vultures Test Positive for Avian Influenza in Montgomery County Photo by Lisa Comer November 10, 2022 The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) in cooperation with the Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (ADCNR) has confirmed Eurasian H5 Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) in wild black vultures in Montgomery County, Alabama. This is the second confirmation of HPAI in Alabama. In February 2022, a singular case of a wild, hunter harvested American wigeon tested positive in Limestone County. In a statement from the Alabama Department of Agriculture and Industries, State Veterinarian Dr. Tony Frazier said: “We are aware of this detection and are partnering with ADCNR to assist in response. All poultry owners and growers should be reminded to maintain strict biosecurity and to report any sick birds to our office. For more information about poultry biosecurity and how to report sick birds, please go to our website http://www.agi.alabama.gov.” Eurasian H5 HPAI was detected in the United States in January 2022 in South Carolina and has since been detected in 48 additional states, including Alabama. HPAI H5 viruses infect the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts of birds, can spread rapidly, and cause high mortality in infected poultry. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the risk to humans from Eurasian H5 HPAI is low. For more information about the risk of avian influenza to humans, visit www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/h5n1-virus.htm. The USDA monitors for the disease in commercial poultry operations, live bird markets, and migratory wild bird populations. Samples were collected for testing from a publicly reported die-off of black vultures in Montgomery County. Preliminary tests performed at the Mississippi Veterinary Research and Diagnostic Lab discovered the non-negative cases, which were then confirmed positive for H5 HPAI by the APHIS National Veterinary Services Laboratories in Ames, Iowa. Wild birds can be infected with avian influenza without appearing sick. The public should avoid contact with any dead or dying bird. If contact occurs, wash your hands with soap and water and change clothing before having any contact with healthy domestic poultry and other birds. Hunters who handle wild birds should dress game birds in the field when possible and practice good hygiene to prevent any potential disease spread. Remains from processed birds can be buried where the animal was harvested or double bagged and disposed along with normal household waste. The public is encouraged to report dead or dying bird sightings to ADCNR for collection and testing. To report a sighting, call ADCNR’s Wildlife and Freshwater Fisheries Division at (334) 242-3469. For information regarding HPAI and domestic poultry, please contact the Alabama Department of Agriculture and Industries. Contact information is available at www.agi.alabama.gov. ADCNR promotes wise stewardship, management, and enjoyment of Alabama’s natural resources through four divisions: Marine Resources, State Lands, State Parks, and Wildlife and Freshwater Fisheries. Learn more at www.outdooralabama.com. ### Back To News Social Sharing: Share To Facebook Share To Twitter Print Article src="https://www.facebook.comr?id=467475161060988&ev=PageView&noscript=1" /> Main navigation Licenses Hunting Fishing Boating Parks Wildlife Programs Research Activities Lands CWD Footer Sub Menu About Us Privacy Policy & Terms of Use Site Map Contact Us Feedback Translation Resources Official Web Site of Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources © 2024 Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources 64 N. Union Street, Suite 468 - Montgomery, Alabama 36130Be Prepared This Season: COVID-19, FLU, and RSV | Abbott Newsroom INVESTORS OVERVIEW FINANCIALS STOCK INFO RESOURCES NEWS & EVENTS GOVERNANCE NEWSROOM NEWS PRESS RELEASES PRESS CONTACTS HONORS EXPERTS EXECUTIVE TEAM RESPONSIBILITY OVERVIEW SOCIAL IMPACT SUSTAINABILITY ABBOTT FUND SUBSCRIBE Consumers Consumers Healthcare Professionals Healthcare Professionals Careers Overview Working With Us Professionals Students Diversity & Inclusion Benefits FAQS Conferences & Events Search Jobs Careers Overview Working With Us Professionals Students Diversity & Inclusion Benefits FAQS Conferences & Events Search Jobs About Abbott Overview Who We Are Our Heritage Abbott at a Glance Abbott FAQS Contact Us Responsibility Subscribe About Abbott Overview Who We Are Our Heritage Abbott at a Glance Abbott FAQS Contact Us Responsibility Subscribe CONSUMERS HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS CAREERS ABOUT ABBOTT CAREERS INVESTORS NEWSROOM Responsibility Partners Contact SITE MAP POLICIES privacy policy Terms & Conditions Home Newsroom Diagnostics Testing Be Prepared This Season: COVID-19, FLU, and RSV Be Prepared This Season: COVID-19, Flu and RSV Three tips to prepare for the tripledemic season of COVID-19, flu and RSV viruses. Diagnostics Testing|Nov.07, 2022 In music theory, triplets instruct musicians to play three notes within the time it takes to play two notes. And this year, instead of hearing the two notes of COVID-19 and the flu simultaneously for a "twindemic" interlude, we're facing what people have coined a "tripledemic" of COVID-19, influenza (the flu) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections in the U.S. So, what can you do to protect yourself and your loved ones during this viral season? Here are some tips to guide you through the COVID-19, flu and RSV season. Tip 1: Get vaccinated or boosted for COVID-19 and the flu. If you're eligible, vaccines for COVID-19 and the flu may help better protect you from getting seriously sick. The CDC recommends that people 6 months or older complete their primary series vaccines for COVID-19. Boosters are available for eligible people who are 5 years or older. If you're moderately or severely immunocompromised, you may have an increased risk of severe COVID-19 illness. Your vaccine recommendations are separate to make sure you get the level of protection you need to stay safe. All people 6 months and older should get their annual flu vaccine, according to the CDC. If you do get the flu, it's more likely that you won't be as sick when compared to someone who didn't get their flu vaccine. It's estimated that 105,000 flu-related hospitalizations were avoided during the 2019 to 2020 flu season in the U.S. thanks to flu vaccines. Because there is no vaccine for RSV, the CDC recommends practicing good personal hygiene, including washing hands for at least 20 seconds and cleaning frequently touched surfaces. RELATED ARTICLE Flu vs. COVID: How to Tell Them Apart Tip 2: Stock up now for sickness later. When you feel sick, the last thing you want to have to do is make a trip to the pharmacy for the essentials you need to feel better and recover. Also, a trip could increase the possibility of spreading infection to others. Check your medicine cabinet ahead of time to see if you have get-better supplies on hand, including: Over-the-counter pain or fever relieversThermometer to spot fevers quicklyLozenges to soothe sore throatsOral rehydration solution, like Pedialyte, to stay hydratedRapid tests, like BinaxNOW if you are in the U.S. or Panbio COVID-19 Antigen Self-Test if you are outside the U.S., to help rule in or rule out COVID-19TissuesHand sanitizer and household disinfectant RELATED ARTICLE As COVID 19 Variants Evolve We Stay One Step Ahead Tip 3: Exercise caution and cleanliness. People touch their face more than 20 times an hour on average. We also touch common surfaces, such as door handles and countertops, every day. That's why it's important to wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds and be mindful of your eyes, nose, and mouth. A 2020 study about hand hygiene and disease spread in airports found that the spread of a potential pandemic could decrease by up to 69% if people washed their hands more frequently. SARS-CoV-2, influenza and RSV viruses are all considered contagious respiratory diseases. So, if you're heading to a crowded indoor location, consider masking to protect yourself from droplets that could carry either virus. At home, school or work, disinfect surfaces such as counters, doorknobs and light switches to prevent the spread of infection from touching surfaces that can have the virus on it. RELATED ARTICLE Redesigning the Medicine Cabinet With The Home Edit If you're experiencing symptoms of COVID-19, the flu or RSV, stay home. Schedule an appointment to get tested or turn to your stash of at-home COVID-19 tests so you can test without leaving home. A healthcare professional may be able to test for COVID-19, the flu and RSV at the same visit. Abbott offers several diagnostic tools to aid in fast, reliable respiratory virus testing. From our ID-NOW™ rapid system to the Alinity m Resp-4-Plex to the Panbio COVID-19/Flu A&B Rapid Panel test*, we are equipping clinicians with tools to diagnose respiratory viruses quickly and reliably. Fast diagnosis means faster treatment, which is key for time-sensitive antiviral medicines that are different for the flu and for COVID-19. Be respiratory season ready. Taking preventative steps today can bring a bit of peace of mind into your house this virus season. *Panbio COVID-19/Flu A&B Rapid Panel Test is not available in the U.S. and is for professional use. Like this article IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION BinaxNOW The BinaxNOW™ COVID-19 Antigen Self Test is a lateral flow immunoassay intended for the qualitative detection of nucleocapsid protein antigen from SARS-CoV-2 from individuals with or without symptoms or other epidemiological reasons to suspect COVID-19 infection when tested twice over three days with at least 24 hours (and no more than 48 hours) between tests. This test is authorized for non-prescription home use with self-collected direct anterior nasal (nares) swab samples from individuals aged 15 years or older or adult collected anterior nasal (nares) swab samples from individuals aged two years or older. The BinaxNOW™ COVID-19 tests have not been FDA cleared or approved. They have been authorized by the FDA under an emergency use authorization. They have been authorized only for the detection of proteins from SARS-CoV-2, not for any other viruses or pathogens, and are only authorized for the duration of the declaration that circumstances exist justifying the authorization of emergency use of in vitro diagnostics for detection and/or diagnosis of COVID-19 under Section 564(b)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(b)(1), unless the declaration is terminated or authorization is revoked sooner. For serial testing, the BinaxNOW COVID-19 Antigen Tests should be performed twice over 3 days, at least 24 hours (and no more than 48 hours) apart. For symptomatic use, a single test can be used. PANBIO COVID-19 ANTIGEN SELF TEST The Panbio COVID-19 Self-Test is not approved for use in the US. Panbio COVID-19/Flu A&B Rapid Panel test The Panbio COVID-19/Flu A&B Rapid Panel test is a professional use test and is not approved for use in the US. ID NOW COVID-19 Test The ID NOW™ COVID-19 product has not been FDA cleared or approved. It has been authorized by the FDA under an emergency use authorization for use by authorized laboratories and patient care settings. The test has been authorized only for the detection of nucleic acid from SARS-CoV-2, not for any other viruses or pathogens, and is only authorized for the duration of the declaration that circumstances exist justifying the authorization of emergency use of in vitro diagnostic tests for detection and/or diagnosis of COVID-19 under Section 564(b)(1) of the Act, 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(b)(1), unless the authorization is terminated or revoked sooner. Alinity m Resp-4-Plex: The Alinity m Resp-4-Plex is an Rx Only, In Vitro Diagnostic Use Device Under the FDA Emergency Use Authorization. This product has not been FDA cleared or approved, but has been authorized for emergency use by FDA under an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for use by laboratories certified under the Clinical Improvement Amendments of 1988 (CLIA), 42 U.S.C. § 263a, that meet requirements to perform moderate or high complexity tests. This product has been authorized by FDA under an EUA for use by authorized laboratories certified under CLIA to perform moderate or high complexity tests. This product has been authorized only for the detection and differentiation of nucleic acid from influenza A, influenza B, Respiratory Syncytial Virus and SARS-CoV-2, not for any other viruses or pathogens. The emergency use of this product is only authorized for the duration of the declaration that circumstances exist justifying the authorization of emergency use of in vitro diagnostics for detection and/or diagnosis of COVID 19 under Section 564(b)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(b)(1), unless the declaration is terminated or the authorization is revoked sooner. MOST READ READ MORE Healthy Heart Nov. 20, 2023 Smallest Mechanical Heart Valve Saved her Life Baby Sadie received the world's smallest mechanical heart valve, and her life instantly changed. Today, she's a spunky 9-year-old. READ MORE Nutrition, Health and Wellness Dec. 06, 2017 Gentle Stretches to Help Lower Back Pain These gentle stretches can temporarily relieve pain and stiffness from too much sitting. Make them a part of your routine for a healthy and strong back. READ MORE DIABETES CARE Aug. 11, 2017 5 Sugar Substitute Ideas for People With Diabetes A sugar substitute allows diabetics to have their cake and eat it, too. Here are five options. READ MORE Strategy and Strength June 24, 2024 Abbott Enters U.S. Consumer Biowearables Market With Lingo and Libre Rio Recent FDA clearance of two new over-the-counter continuous glucose monitoring systems broadens Abbott’s leading position in biowearables. GET MORE Tips Healthy Living Diagnostics COVID-19 CONSUMERS HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS CAREERS ABOUT ABBOTT SUBSCRIBE INVESTORS NEWSROOM RESPONSIBILITY PARTNERS CONTACTS SITE MAP GLOBAL WEBSITES POLICIES TERMS & CONDITIONS PRIVACY POLICY CONSUMER HEALTH DATA PRIVACY POLICY myAbbott Privacy Preferences ADVERTISING PREFERENCES pageURL eventType Submit FOLLOW ABBOTT © 2024 Abbott. All Rights Reserved. Please read the Legal Notice for further details. Unless otherwise specified, all product and service names appearing in this Internet site are trademarks owned by or licensed to Abbott, its subsidiaries or affiliates. No use of any Abbott trademark, trade name, or trade dress in this site may be made without the prior written authorization of Abbott, except to identify the product or services of the company. YOU ARE ABOUT TO EXIT FOR ANOTHER ABBOTT COUNTRY OR REGION SPECIFIC WEBSITE Please be aware that the website you have requested is intended for the residents of a particular country or region, as noted on that site. As a result, the site may contain information on pharmaceuticals, medical devices and other products or uses of those products that are not approved in other countries or regions. The website you have requested also may not be optimized for your specific screen size. DO YOU WISH TO CONTINUE AND EXIT THIS WEBSITE? YES NOFlu: When Spillovers Spill Over | Think Global Health Toggle side menu Go to homepage Share this page Share on X Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share via Email Go to homepage Close menu Enter a search term Submit Environment Poverty Trade Governance Food Urbanization Aging Gender Migration Data Visualization Recommendations Research & Analysis Series Interviews About This Site Submission Guidelines Newsletter Enter your email address Submit Thanks for signing up. Visit cfr.org Follow us on Twitter Toggle side menu Flu: When Spillovers Spill Over Share on Facebook Share on X Share on LinkedIn Copy link Toggle side menu Go to homepage Environment Flu: When Spillovers Spill Over The high risk of H5 influenza in North America this fall A woman feeds gulls along the Hudson River shore during a winter storm in Nyack, New York, on January 29, 2022. REUTERS/Mike Segar by Ellen P. Carlin, Claire J. Standley, Erin M. Sorrell November 9, 2022 Share on Facebook Share on X Share on LinkedIn Copy link The United States is experiencing one of the largest animal outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in its history, with origins in North America that trace back almost a year. In December 2021, the H5N1 virus of Eurasian lineage was detected on the North American continent in a multi-species exhibition bird farm in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, and within months was reported in at least ninety-nine wild bird species, commercial poultry, and even mammals, including bobcats, red foxes, coyotes, skunks and seals. And now, for the first time in the United States, a human has contracted the virus. The United States is experiencing one of the largest animal outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in its history As of this writing, more than 49 million birds from commercial and backyard flocks have been affected across forty-three U.S. states. Commercial poultry farms have culled their infected animals to reduce economic losses—a lesson learned during the 2014-15 flu outbreak that resulted in the loss of 50 million commercial birds at an estimated cost of $1.3 billion. Case counts and distributions in wild birds have been equally astounding. Department of Agriculture surveillance efforts in 2022 have detected HPAI in wild birds in almost every state in the continental United States, plus Alaska. Active surveillance has found more than 3,300 infected wild birds. This extensive transmission through wild avian species is more pronounced than in previous U.S. epizootics, or animal epidemics; in the 2014-2015 outbreak, fewer than 100 wild birds tested positive for H5, primarily along the Pacific Flyway, one of four major North American migration routes for birds, especially waterfowl. Affected species in this outbreak range from the relatively abundant Canada goose and wild turkey to the more vulnerable bald eagle and snowy owl. How many of these birds are actually symptomatic is difficult to determine, as detections often occur opportunistically through the sampling of dead birds and hunter harvests. Mortality in wild species is varied with some species like gulls, terns, geese, and raptors experiencing higher than usual rates, while songbirds are relatively unaffected, even asymptomatic. The variation in morbidity and mortality makes this virus even harder to track. A fox stands in snow near a highway in Niagara Falls, New York, on February 13, 2022. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri This outbreak stands apart not only because of its impact on wild birds, but because of its effect on mammals. From a captive endangered Amur leopard in New York to dozens of wild red foxes across the continent, and hundreds of harbor seals in Maine—and even a dolphin in Florida. This diversity of mammal cases also contrasts with the 2014-2015 H5 epidemic, where investigations into cross-species spillover risks failed to identify any infections in marine mammals that were being monitored. Avian Flu's Spillover to Humans Most notably, perhaps, the 2022 season is exceptional for leading to the first confirmed human case of H5N1 in the United States. This spillover occurred in an incarcerated person in Colorado exposed through involvement in culling domestic poultry infected with the virus. The individual reported mild symptoms and fully recovered, but given high case fatality rates—ranging from 50-80 percent since the first confirmed human case in 1997—any confirmed case warrants concern. Prior to this case, the CDC reported tracking over 2,500 individuals with known exposures to H5N1-infected poultry, with none resulting in infection. As of November 4, 2022, a total of 868 human cases of infection with H5N1 and 456 deaths have been reported globally from 21 countries. Most recently, two human cases were reported in poultry workers in Spain following an outbreak on a single farm. Highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza A (HPAI H5N1) virus emerged in geese in Asia around 1996 and spread in wild and domestic avian species throughout Europe and Africa. By 2005, HPAI H5N1 claimed responsibility for die-offs in wild birds in East Asia and into Europe and has since repeatedly infected wild birds across the globe. In 2014, a new lineage of HPAI H5N1 (referred to as 2.3.4.4) was found to infect but not always kill wild birds, providing the virus ample opportunity to spread into North America for the first time. This lineage has been dominant in outbreaks globally, including what we have seen so far in 2022, which has also involved some localized reassortment of lower-pathogenicity Eurasian and North American lineages. A pressing question is whether these recent reassortments may be, in part, responsible for the apparent increased transmissibility of the virus to mammals, or if mammalian cases are merely the result of greater spread and opportunity for exposure. What needs to be determined, and quickly, is the "where." In what intermediate host is the reassortment happening? 456 Deaths As of November 4, 2022, there were 868 human infections with H5N1 and 456 deaths reported globally, in 21 countries Each time one species transmits the virus to another, it constitutes a spillover event. These myriad spillovers—among wild bird species, from wild birds to domestic birds, across birds to mammals, and from animals to humans—raise serious concerns about the potential for further adaptation and evolution of this influenza lineage and the continued risk associated with avian migration. Understanding which species among these many hosts may be helping the virus adapt is crucial for targeted surveillance and mitigation efforts. The annual southern migration of wild birds across various flyways in the late summer and into the fall poses a major risk for continued spread and further spillover, threatening not only wild species but the commercial industry yet again. While the 2014-15 outbreak's spread in commercial poultry was attributed to human movement between affected farms, the 2022 cases have been closely linked to migratory birds' interactions with farms. H5N1 HPAI was reported throughout this past summer in scavenging birds and waterfowl as well as in backyard flocks and commercial producers, indicating a virus that was—and remains—widely present. Despite this, the outbreak has received limited media or political attention (other than warnings about the likely cost of Thanksgiving turkeys) during this period of COVID-19 transition, escalating inflation, and midterm elections. While surveillance networks are on high alert and teams in Canada and the United States are poised for surge testing, it is critical that we aggressively prepare for continued adverse impacts. Keeping a Wary Eye on Avian Flu in Europe This risk is not limited to the United States. Europe experienced an atypical persistence of the virus in wild birds over the spring and summer months leading to mass mortalities in seabird colonies on the coasts of the North Atlantic and North Sea. These outbreaks resulted in official HPAI notifications from fifteen countries this summer. The information we have on the genetic makeup of these viruses from the European Reference Laboratory (EURL) indicates that circulating strains are heterogeneous in their genetic makeup compared with viruses from previous epidemic waves. This suggests that there are a variety of H5 sub-types present in colonies migrating over continental and transcontinental flyways this autumn. On November 8, 2022, egg producers in the UK warned of possible shortages due to farmers leaving the industry and/or reducing their flock size in response to immense costs and uncertainty caused by the spread of avian influenza. Flyways from Europe cover parts of west, central, and southern Africa. As with Western Hemisphere flyways, these routes carry attendant risks of spillover exposure and infection throughout their range. Just this year, Guinea reported its first ever confirmed outbreaks of HPAI H5N1 in poultry, which killed over 120,000 birds through disease or culling and led to one suspected human infection. South Africa has reported at least twenty-eight penguin deaths (since August) among 3,000 birds in Capetown's Boulders Beach penguin colony, a popular tourist area. Countries that once had little concern for local transmission of HPAI to commercial poultry should consider mechanisms for enhanced surveillance at key stopover locations and be on alert for potential spillover to people. Ducks at a duck farm in Bourriot Bergonce, France, after France ordered a massive culling of ducks in three regions affected by a severe outbreak of bird flu, on January 7, 2017. REUTERS/Regis Duvignau The task at hand presents a variety of challenges. A fraction of cases are actually reported and there will be a range of observed lethality in various species, complicating surveillance and epidemiology. There remains the natural challenge that the planet harbors many species capable of being infected and traveling great distances, increasing the chance of spillover. Avian viruses can, and will, mutate and adapt over time, potentially allowing the virus to expand this host range. In addition, genetic reassortment—the combining of two or more influenza viruses into a potential novel strain—is a legitimate possibility with ample precedent among wild and domestic species. Enhancing Flu Surveillance Across Animal and Human Sectors While some level of risk of spillover from avian influenza is ever-present, there are actions we can take and systems we can fortify to be vigilant. First, we must enhance monitoring and testing of wild migratory birds domestically and globally. Wild bird surveillance is challenging, and historically, the U.S. wildlife surveillance budget for this work has been far smaller than the task requires. Framing the risk as an emerging disease in wild aquatic birds–the natural reservoir for all influenza viruses–may be necessary to justify the resources required. We have a chance now in the Northern Hemisphere to scale up surveillance during and after the southern migration and we should take it. Funding should not be our limitation to preventing spillover. However, consistent funding and data collection alone are inadequate. In the United States, there are known inadequacies in data sharing and information integration between local, state, and federal public health authorities. Specifically, we must link wild bird surveillance and testing to notification systems at state and local levels, including the private sector to reach the poultry industry. This same approach applies to any country that has experienced or has ongoing HPAI outbreaks. Countries new to HPAI that lack influenza reporting systems should utilize surveillance and reporting systems for nationally notifiable diseases to detect and respond quickly to HPAI cases. For zoonotic diseases like influenza, developing or strengthening systems in one sector will not be sufficient. We must link databases across levels (local, subnational, national, and regional) and sectors (environment, agriculture, health, and private industry), taking a One Health approach. Then we can begin to take measures to prevent transmission among domestic poultry to minimize industry losses, and to reduce spillover risks to humans and other mammals. Such efforts also need to be complemented with epidemiological and laboratory research to better characterize transmission dynamics in all susceptible animal populations, and with work oriented toward a more comprehensive understanding of spillover risk. Maintenance of current levels of funding, surveillance, notification systems, and research won't be enough to ward off the next outbreak. A bald eagle lands on a fallen tree along the shores of Boundary Bay in Delta, British Columbia, near Vancouver, just north of the Canada-U.S. border. REUTERS/Andy Clark Ellen P. Carlin is a veterinarian and the founder of Parapet Science & Policy Consulting, an animal and public health firm. Claire J. Standley is an associate professor with the Center of Global Health Science and Security, with faculty appointments in the Department of Microbiology & Immunology and the Department of Global Health at Georgetown University. Erin M. Sorrell is a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security and an associate professor at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. Influenza Global Health Avian Flu North America Share on Facebook Share on X Share on LinkedIn Copy link Sign up for our weekly newsletter to stay up to date. Your email Submit Thank you for signing up! Look for your next weekly newsletter in your inbox. Most Popular A Stillbirth Every 10 Seconds Illustrating Change: Diversity in Medical Textbooks Epilepsy and the Rising Risk of Burns The Costs of Targeted Advertising on Children and Mental Health Related Environment U.S. Voters Disenfranchised by Climate Change by Karen Florini, Alice C. Hill Electoral planning needs to envision increasingly severe extremes that disrupt the casting and counting of ballots Environment Hurricanes, Climate Change, and Cardiovascular Disease by Ethan Katznelson, Dhruv Kazi As climate change advances, intense hurricanes disrupt critical services and increase risk of cardiovascular disease Environment Extreme Heat and Domestic Violence in Mexico by Ricardo Regules-García, Jessie Pinchoff, Ana Ruth Escoto Castillo, Ana Cristina Gómez-Ugarte Currently, no gender or climate policy addresses the links between climate events and risk of violence Environment Mexico's Shared Fate in the Absence of Trees by Angelica F. Recierdo Increased violence and illegal deforestation of Mexico's Michoacán risks environmental and human health Most Popular A Stillbirth Every 10 Seconds Illustrating Change: Diversity in Medical Textbooks Epilepsy and the Rising Risk of Burns The Costs of Targeted Advertising on Children and Mental Health Subscribe to our newsletter Stay up to date with the latest trends in global health Enter your email address Submit Thanks for signing up Look for our next weekly newsletter in your inbox. About This Site Submission Guidelines Visit cfr.org Follow us on Twitter ©2024 Council on Foreign Relations. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy and Terms of Use.Influenza hospitalizations at highest level in ten years, predicting a severe U.S. flu season Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Influenza hospitalizations at highest level in ten years, predicting a severe U.S. flu season Download PDF Copy By Benedette Cuffari, M.Sc.Reviewed by Danielle Ellis, B.Sc.Nov 6 2022 On November 4, 2022, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) published their weekly Influenza Surveillance Report for Week 43 (October 23, 2022, to October 29, 2022). With a cumulative hospitalization rate of 2.9/100,000 cases, which amounted to a total of 4,326 patients hospitalized during Week 43, influenza infection and hospitalization rates continue to increase at an alarmingly fast and early rate this year. Image Credit: ESB Professional / Shutterstock.com Early and high flu hospitalization rates As of the publication of this report, over 1.6 million flu cases were reported in the U.S. for the 2022-2023 influenza season. Of these cases, 13,000 patients have required hospitalization and 730 people have died from the flu. Some of the most affected regions of the U.S. include Southeast and South-Central states such as South Carolina, Tennessee, Georgia, Mississippi, Texas, North Carolina, Alabama, and Virginia. Maryland, New York City, and Washington D.C. are also reporting high levels of influenza-like illnesses at rates that are significantly higher than those reported at the same time last year. We’re seeing the highest hospitalization rates going back a decade.” The threat of a ‘triple-demic’ Like the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), which has also been infecting an increasing number of children at an unseasonably early rate as compared to previous years, influenza cases remained relatively placid throughout the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. This is largely because lockdowns and other preventative measures that were implemented throughout the pandemic prevented many from being exposed to these and other respiratory viruses. In addition to the already high rates of RSV and flu, COVID-19 cases are also expected to surge this year as a result of the transition of more people indoors and the continual emergence of new escape variants of the causative severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Taken together, the circulation of these three viruses this season may lead to a ‘triple-demic,’ which will likely increase the burden on already strained healthcare systems. Despite the added pressure of these new hospitalizations in some states, adequate supplies of personal protective equipment (PPE) and ventilators remain available for their immediate use. How to protect yourself this winter The U.S. CDC recommends that all people over the age of six months get vaccinated against both influenza and SARS-CoV-2 viruses. Related StoriesResearch links COVID-19 vaccines to temporary facial palsy in over 5,000 patientsResearch identifies respiratory transmission potential of H5N1 virusGenetic risk factors for long-COVID uncovered in a large multi-ethnic studyCurrent evidence suggests that the influenza vaccine for this year comprises influenza A(H3N2) viruses that are genetically and antigenically similar to currently circulating strains, thus indicating that these vaccines should offer sufficient protection against severe disease and/or infection. An increasing number of influenza A(H1N1) viruses, which are also included in the yearly influenza vaccine, have also been reported nationally. Similarly, a new COVID-19 bivalent messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) vaccine booster dose has been approved for use in anyone over the age of five in the U.S. This booster vaccine dose appears to offer protection against severe disease following infection with both the ancestral SARS-CoV-2 strain, as well as the currently dominant Omicron BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants. Despite the availability of these vaccines, the uptake this year has been relatively low. In fact, about five million fewer flu vaccine doses have been administered so far this year as compared to the same time last year in the U.S. Similarly, as of October 12, 2022, only about 11.5 million Americans had received the updated COVID-19 booster dose. In addition to the importance of vaccination against both the flu and SARS-CoV-2, people should also continue to practice good hygiene including frequent handwashing, covering coughs and sneezes, staying home when sick, and avoiding close contact with symptomatic individuals. Certain antiviral medications are also available to treat patients with severe illness following infection with either of these viruses. Currently, the CDC recommends that anyone with confirmed or suspected influenza infection who is at a higher risk for complications and/or is hospitalized to be immediately administered influenza antivirals. Some of the most common antivirals that may be used to treat influenza infection in the U.S. include oseltamivir or baloxavir. Similar recommendations have been given for treating patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection who are at an increased risk for severe illness and meet current eligibility requirements to receive these agents. Currently, ritonavir and remdesivir have been successfully used to ameliorate mild to moderate COVID-19 in at-risk patient populations. Sources: Weekly U.S. Influenza Surveillance Report (FluView) [Online]. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/index.htm. CDC reports highest early flu hospitalization rate in decade [Online]. Available from: https://www.aha.orgews/headline/2022-11-04-cdc-reports-highest-early-flu-hospitalization-rate-decade. Flu season off to a fierce start in U.S. with hospitalizations at 10-year high [Online]. Available from: https://www.msn.com/en-us/health/other/flu-season-off-to-a-fierce-start-in-us-with-hospitalizations-at-10-year-high/ar-AA13Mkvr. Flu hospitalizations at highest level in a decade, health officials say [Online]. Available from: https://justthenews.comation/flu-hospitalizations-highest-level-decade-health-officials-say. U.S. Flu Hospitalizations Highest in 10 Years, Officials Say [Online]. Available from: https://www.usnews.comewsop-news/articles/2022-11-04/u-s-flu-hospitalizations-highest-in-10-years-cdc-says. Increase Respiratory Virus Activity, Especially Among Childre, Early in the 2022-2023 Fall and Winter [Online]. Available from: https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/2022/han00479.asp. Posted in: Child Health News | Men's Health News | Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Women's Health News | Disease/Infection News | Healthcare News Tags: Children, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Flu, H1N1, H3N2, Healthcare, Hygiene, Influenza, Omicron, Oseltamivir, Pandemic, Personal Protective Equipment, PPE, Remdesivir, Respiratory, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Ribonucleic Acid, Ritonavir, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Vaccine, Virus Comments (0) Written byBenedette CuffariAfter completing her Bachelor of Science in Toxicology with two minors in Spanish and Chemistry in 2016, Benedette continued her studies to complete her Master of Science in Toxicology in May of 2018. During graduate school, Benedette investigated the dermatotoxicity of mechlorethamine and bendamustine; two nitrogen mustard alkylating agents that are used in anticancer therapy. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APACuffari, Benedette. (2022, November 06). Influenza hospitalizations at highest level in ten years, predicting a severe U.S. flu season. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20221106/Influenza-hospitalizations-at-highest-level-in-ten-years-predicting-a-severe-US-flu-season.aspx.MLACuffari, Benedette. "Influenza hospitalizations at highest level in ten years, predicting a severe U.S. flu season". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20221106/Influenza-hospitalizations-at-highest-level-in-ten-years-predicting-a-severe-US-flu-season.aspx>.ChicagoCuffari, Benedette. "Influenza hospitalizations at highest level in ten years, predicting a severe U.S. flu season". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20221106/Influenza-hospitalizations-at-highest-level-in-ten-years-predicting-a-severe-US-flu-season.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardCuffari, Benedette. 2022. Influenza hospitalizations at highest level in ten years, predicting a severe U.S. flu season. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20221106/Influenza-hospitalizations-at-highest-level-in-ten-years-predicting-a-severe-US-flu-season.aspx. Suggested Reading Could vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Study reveals how COVID-19 affected the spread and evolution of seasonal influenzaOne in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19New CDC report highlights disparities in flu hospitalization and vaccinationSeasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsPublic trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the US Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive health Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsNew discovery reveals how mutant RAS genes drive tumor growthTargeted degradation of Pin1 shows promise for pancreatic cancer treatmentFrailty increases a person's risk of dementia, study findsDiscrimination may drive postpartum weight retention in Black womenResearchers develop new antibody with potential to treat several types of cancer Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Genetics (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Unraveling the mechanism of Shufeng Jiedu Capsules in influenza treatmentDon't Forget About the Flu | Cleaning & Maintenance Management Advertisement Topics Business & Management Carpet Facility Management Hard Floors Health & Safety Infection Control Products Restrooms Technology & Trends Training Follow CMM Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Get Your CMM Magazine Subscription Sign up for the CMM Newsletter Join ISSA News Magazine Resources Videos Industry Research Sponsored Content Directory Coronavirus Education Certifications / Standards Follow CMM Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Get Your CMM Magazine Subscription Sign up for the CMM Newsletter Join ISSA Events ISSA Show Industry Events Follow CMM Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Get Your CMM Magazine Subscription Sign up for the CMM Newsletter Join ISSA ISSA Media Follow CMM Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Get Your CMM Magazine Subscription Sign up for the CMM Newsletter Join ISSA Contact Subscribe Don’t Forget About the Flu How to gear up for what could be the first real influenza season in two years by Doug Flaig Cold and Flu Season Street Sign Since 2020, COVID-19 has arguably been the nation’s biggest health concern. The highly contagious airborne virus can make people very ill and has an extremely high mortality rate. To keep from catching it, people began washing their hands religiously, distancing themselves socially, sanitizing their surroundings regularly, and racing to be vaccinated as soon as shots were available. However, there’s another dangerous respiratory virus that’s been around much longer than COVID-19. In fact, from the fall of 2019 through the spring of 2020, this virus infected approximately 35 million people, killing about 20,000, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). That virus is influenza—more commonly called the flu. The effects of COVID-19 on the flu With all the attention given to COVID-19, the dangers of the flu have been somewhat ignored the past couple of years. Yet, since the viruses are transmitted in similar ways, measures to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, including disinfecting and sanitizing, have drastically reduced the number of flu cases. According to the CDC, there were only 2,038 cases and 700 flu-related deaths reported during the 2020–2021 flu season, compared to the 35 million cases and 20,000 deaths from the previous flu season. But as the pandemic waned and the preventative measures in place to protect us against COVID-19 were relaxed, those numbers began to rise. The CDC estimates that between 8 million and 13 million people have contracted the flu since 2021, with as many as 14,000 dying from the disease. Health officials are preparing to see numbers rise again for the 2022–2023 season and are reminding people that they need to get their annual flu shot to protect themselves and slow community-wide spread. Help slow the spread Vaccinations are just part of the battle against the flu. It’s also important to reduce the amount of the virus in our surroundings. Infected people spread the flu by coughing, sneezing, and touching surfaces. According to a report by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), influenza viruses can survive on hard surfaces like stainless steel and plastic for 24 to 48 hours. On soft surfaces like cloth, paper, or tissue, they survive between 8 to 12 hours. Many commercial cleaning companies added disinfecting and sanitization services to their offerings during the pandemic to reassure their clients they were doing everything possible to fight COVID-19. With coronavirus continuing to pose a risk and the flu season approaching, these services are more important now than ever. Fighting the flu Since flu viruses are relatively fragile, your company’s standard cleaning and disinfecting practices are likely sufficient to remove them, provided cleaning staff are using the correct products in the right way. Make sure your cleaning products are rated and approved for killing the flu virus by checking the list M provided by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). If it’s been a while since you checked it, new products might have been added. The EPA list might also contain more effective green products that you hadn’t considered. All your cleaning technicians should be trained in the correct way to use these products. No matter how effective the solutions might be, if they’re not left on surfaces for the proper amount of time or used according to the manufacturer’s instructions, they can’t do their job. When cleaning, pay extra attention to high-touch surfaces including doorknobs, light switches, stair rails, elevator buttons, and faucet handles. Continue a healthy relationship Although your clients might not be as worried about flu season now as they were pre-pandemic, they still want their facilities to be clean and disinfected. Keeping their facility free of viruses will reassure the well-being of your clients and potentially reduce the numbers of employees who call in sick this flu season—something that could negatively affect a company’s bottom line. It will also bring them peace of mind, ensuring a continued healthy relationship with your company. Posted On November 9, 2022 Click here to join the ISSA LinkedIn group to talk and network with nearly 50,000 industry peers worldwide. Join Doug Flaig Doug Flaig is the president of Stratus Building Solutions, a janitorial services franchise organization. Flaig has spent over 20 years in the world of multi-unit retail (Dunkin’ Donuts, Burger King, 7- Eleven stores, and Wetzel’s Pretzels) overseeing hundreds of franchise retail locations. Prior to joining Stratus Building Solutions, he served as chief operating officer with Safe Facility Services, a janitorial services provider headquartered in Thousand Oaks, California. Advertisement Share Article Topics Health and Safety Infection Control Tags Cross-Contamination Disinfection health and safety Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement CMM Newsletter Get the CMM Daily News enewsletter delivered directly to your inbox. Also in Health and Safety October 1, 2024 Ronnie Phillips The Missing Step in Handwashing September 24, 2024 Ryan Kupperman 2024 Sees Rise of New and Improved PPE Industry September 10, 2024 Carlos Albir Jr. Conquer Dust With Regular Cleaning August 9, 2024 Health First—Cleaning for Health Versus Appearance and Smell Sponsored in Health and Safety November 3, 2023 Sponsored by TRUCE Software Safety: The Dirty Secret of the Cleaning & Maintenance Industries July 17, 2023 Sponsored by PDI Core Concepts of Disinfection July 21, 2022 Video: Hand Hygiene and Understanding Hand Sanitizers December 15, 2021 CMM Webinar: Enhancing Facility Image—Beyond Appearances Recent News CDC Offers Revised Guidance for Bird Flu Prevention Based on New Study Findings November/December Cleanfax Digital Issue Now Available EPA Updates Ventilation Guidance for Home, School, and Work A Regional Idaho Health Department Banned From Administering COVID-19 Vaccines Previous Article A Step-by-Step Plan for IAQ Next Article ’Tis the Season…for Norovirus Back to All Articles Don’t Forget About the Flu Share Article Subscribe to CMM 10275 W. Higgins Road, Suite 280, Rosemont, IL 60018 USA 847-982-0800 cmmonline/at/issa.com Get Your CMM Magazine Subscription Sign up for the CMM Newsletter Join ISSA View the Latest CMM Magazine Edition November/December 2024 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Sister Publications About Magazine Newsletters Events Contact Us Advertise Privacy Policy © 1998- ISSA. All rights reserved.US flu levels climb as RSV swamps kids' hospitals | CIDRAP Skip to main content University of Minnesota Main navigationMain content University of Minnesotahttp:/win-cities.umn.edu/612-625-5000 Go to the U of M home page Main navigation News Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Podcasts Newsletters About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us About Search CLOSE Search Support Menu US flu levels climb as RSV swamps kids' hospitals Lisa Schnirring | News Editor | CIDRAP News Influenza, General Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) Share Copied to clipboard US flu activity surged higher last week, with half of the states now reporting very high or high flu activity. The increase comes as respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections continue to overwhelm pediatric hospitals in some states and COVID-19 activity tracks slightly higher.Steady early-season flu riseIn an update posted yesterday in advance of the Veterans Day observance, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said the worst hot spots are still the south and southeastern regions, followed by the south-central West Coast and the middle Atlantic regions.Most flu markers showed notable rises, including the overall percentage of respiratory specimens that tested positive for flu, which jumped from 9% to 12.8% last week. Outpatient visits for flulike illness—which can reflect activity from other respiratory viruses—rose from 4.3% to 5.5% last week.Meanwhile, 25 states reported very high (16) or high (9) activity, up from 19 the previous week.Flu hospitalizations last week were at their highest level for this point in the season since the 2010-2011 season, with the highest rates in seniors and children as old as 4.Three more pediatric flu deaths were reported, bringing the season's total to five. Two of the three viruses were subtyped—one was 2009 H1N1 and the other was H3N2.Influenza A continues to dominate, with H3N2 making up about 75% of subtyped viruses. CDC testing results on a subset of H1N1 and H3N2 viruses suggest that the strains in the current flu vaccines are a good match.RSV stresses hospitals, prompts state responsesLast week, the CDC urged Americans to take steps to protect against a surge in respiratory virus activity, which continues to fill pediatric hospitals.For example, in Michigan, officials from C.S. Mott Children's Hospital in Ann Arbor said the hospital is 100% full, with health providers grappling with an unprecedented surge in respiratory infections, the Detroit Free Press reported. Emergency department wait times are hours long, and some elective procedures have been cancelled.And in Delaware, the Delaware Healthcare Association sent a request to pediatric nurses to help with an already severe strain on hospitals, which it said is a proactive step, according to Delaware Online, the website of the Wilmington-based the News Journal.Last week, Maryland's Governor Larry Hogan detailed state efforts to prepare for more cases along with possible flu and COVID surges, and today, the health department launched an RSV website to monitor cases and educate the public on the disease and its risk factors.Colorado's Governor Jared Polis today signed an order that extends the state's COVID emergency declaration and includes RSV, flu, and other respiratory viruses. The order allows state agencies to continue to access state and federal funds for recovery efforts, respond to public health changes, and support the healthcare system with staffing and other preparations.US COVID levels up slightlyMeanwhile, the nation's COVID activity has increased slightly over the past week, according to CDC data. The agency postponed its regular updates until Nov 14, due to Veterans Day.Weekly cases have been very slowly rising since the end of October. Meanwhile, deaths are still declining and the 7-day average for new COVID hospitalizations reflects a very slight rise. Related news Previous Next Study shows varied impact of flu in US, with up to 29,000 hospital cases in a season Stephanie Soucheray RSV vaccine, antibody treatment could reduce ICU encounters Stephanie Soucheray Genomic surveillance tracks RSV evolution, identifies mutations in Minnesota Mary Van Beusekom RSV vaccine effective in preventing hospitalizations in older Americans Stephanie Soucheray Survey: Only a quarter of US adults concerned about RSV, down from 35% in 2023 Mary Van Beusekom Survey: Only a quarter of US adults concerned about RSV, down from 35% in 2023 Mary Van Beusekom CDC: 35% flu vaccine efficacy in South America may predict similar for US season Mary Van Beusekom Only 56% of US infants protected by RSV vaccine, antibody Stephanie Soucheray This week's top reads Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Overall, the risk of developing 28 out of 36 long-COVID symptoms lessened when vaccines were effective. Stephanie Soucheray California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases In related developments, the USDA reported more dairy cow and poultry outbreaks, as Los Angeles Country announced its first H5 wastewater detection. Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Since a spillover in October 2023 the novel reassortment has replaced the older clade in Cambodia's poultry. Lisa Schnirring MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Among 12- to 17-year-olds, 90% of those with MIS-C were unvaccinated. Stephanie Soucheray CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows The CDC now recommends testing and prophylactic Tamiflu use in asymptomatic workers exposed to sick animals. Lisa Schnirring Four cases of sexually transmitted fungal infection reported in New York The infections were caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes type VII (TMVII), a sexually transmitted fungus that causes ringworm. Chris Dall Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science The greatest levels of trust were seen among men, those with university degrees and high median outcomes, and those who had lost someone to COVID-19. Mary Van Beusekom Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Over half of participants (57%) reported a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Stephanie Soucheray Cases top 50,000 in Africa's mpox outbreak In other outbreak developments, medical groups announce a vaccine allocation plan and a vaccine trial to begin in pregnant women and in children younger than 2. Lisa Schnirring WHO unveils priority pathogen list for urgent vaccine development The report also spotlights the urgency of vaccines for pathogens such as group A Streptococcus and Klebsiella pneumoniae, which are increasingly resistant to antimicrobials. Lisa Schnirring Our underwriters Unrestricted financial support provided by Principal Underwriter Leading Underwriter Major Underwriter Supporting Underwriter Become an Underwriter Help make CIDRAP's vital work possible Support Us Home Editorial policy Search news Contact Us CIDRAP - Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy Research and Innovation Office, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN Email us © 2024 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights Reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer Research and Innovation Office | Contact U of M | Privacy Policy Newsletter subscribe Get CIDRAP updates Choose newsletters Select all Daily Headlines Antimicrobial Stewardship Newsletter Chronic Wasting Disease Newsletter Flu Vaccine Roadmap Newsletter Resilient Drug Supply Newsletter Email Email Format html text News Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Podcasts Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Newsletters About About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us DonateDistinct immunological and molecular signatures underpinning influenza vaccine responsiveness in the elderly | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Distinct immunological and molecular signatures underpinning influenza vaccine responsiveness in the elderly Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 12 November 2022 Distinct immunological and molecular signatures underpinning influenza vaccine responsiveness in the elderly Peggy Riese ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6796-67801 na1, Stephanie Trittel ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9719-91611 na1, Manas K. Akmatov2,3, Marcus May ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7513-42444, Jana Prokein5, Thomas Illig5, Christoph Schindler4, Birgit Sawitzki ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8166-85796,7, Yassin Elfaki ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6628-30808, Stefan Floess ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9904-40948, Jochen Huehn ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8071-13798,9, Adrian J. Błażejewski10, Till Strowig ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0185-14592,9,10,11, Esteban A. Hernandez-Vargas12, Robert Geffers ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4409-016X13, Bowen Zhang14,15, Yang Li ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4022-734114,15,16, Frank Pessler2 na1 & …Carlos A. Guzmán1 na1 Show authors Nature Communications volume 13, Article number: 6894 (2022) Cite this article 5501 Accesses 7 Citations 21 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Adaptive immunityComputational modelsInfluenza virusVaccines AbstractSeasonal influenza outbreaks, especially in high-risk groups such as the elderly, represent an important public health problem. Prevailing inadequate efficacy of seasonal vaccines is a crucial bottleneck. Understanding the immunological and molecular mechanisms underpinning differential influenza vaccine responsiveness is essential to improve vaccination strategies. Here we show comprehensive characterization of the immune response of randomly selected elderly participants (≥ 65 years), immunized with the adjuvanted influenza vaccine Fluad. In-depth analyses by serology, multi-parametric flow cytometry, multiplex and transcriptome analysis, coupled to bioinformatics and mathematical modelling, reveal distinguishing immunological and molecular features between responders and non-responders defined by vaccine-induced seroconversion. Non-responders are specifically characterized by multiple suppressive immune mechanisms. The generated comprehensive high dimensional dataset enables the identification of putative mechanisms and nodes responsible for vaccine non-responsiveness independently of confounding age-related effects, with the potential to facilitate development of tailored vaccination strategies for the elderly. Similar content being viewed by others Influenza vaccination reveals sex dimorphic imprints of prior mild COVID-19 Article 04 January 2023 Baseline innate and T cell populations are correlates of protection against symptomatic influenza virus infection independent of serology Article 17 August 2023 Transcriptome signatures preceding the induction of anti-stalk antibodies elicited after universal influenza vaccination Article Open access 10 December 2022 IntroductionSeasonal influenza infections represent a global health threat with up to 3–5 million cases of severe illness annually leading to a large death toll and economic burden1,2,3,4. The elderly are one of the population groups at particularly high risk to develop severe disease, resulting in a huge number of hospitalizations and deaths. Currently, vaccination represents the most effective tool to contain seasonal outbreaks, which is especially recommended for risk groups. Unfortunately, vaccine responsiveness amongst the elderly is lower than in younger adults5,6. A population-based study in Scotland comparing individuals aged <65 with individuals aged >65 years revealed vaccine effectiveness against PCR-confirmed influenza cases of 60% versus only 19%, respectively7. Consequently, vaccines tailored to the specific needs of the elderly were developed to overcome the age-dependent reduced immune function. Fluad is an inactivated subunit vaccine adjuvanted with MF59C.1, an oil-in-water emulsion of squalene. It was shown to be superior to non-adjuvanted and high-dose antigen vaccines8,9,10,11. Studies aiming at elucidating the mechanisms underlying influenza vaccine responsiveness have usually compared immune responses in adults and elderly individuals, thereby primarily highlighting the setbacks of the aged immune system and completely neglecting to address effects within one age group12,13. This bias represents an important weakness, since such studies are not designed to elucidate immune mechanisms discerning between both elderly vaccine responders and non-responders. Thus, they are designed mainly to unravel age-related immunological deficiencies rather than other disguised mechanisms. Moreover, clinical trials investigating new or improved influenza vaccine formulations or vaccination strategies commonly focus on humoral immune responses as primary or secondary endpoints, to fulfill approval requirements. In-depth studies aiming at understanding the complex immunological mechanisms in their entirety are often missing. To overcome this bottleneck, in-depth immune profiling of human blood-derived lymphocytes, focused on addressing immunological and molecular aspects crucial for the initiation of protective adaptive immunity, is an emerging approach to evaluate the quality of vaccine-induced immune responses14. Systems vaccinology approaches, based on gene expression data, were used to identify predictive signatures for responsiveness to influenza or yellow fever vaccines, thereby demonstrating the usefulness of gene expression profiles as predictors for the response to vaccination15,16,17,18. In this context, a gene set enrichment-based approach proved valuable for overcoming the problem that subunit vaccines induce only small changes in gene expression profiles as well as the statistics-based selection of predictive genes not considering their biological impact19. This procedure led to the identification of gene signatures related to the proliferation of B cells that could predict antibody responses to influenza vaccination. Studies on adult influenza vaccinees further showed early signatures predicting later antibody titers as well as vaccine-induced signatures that were valid for various seasons and for diverse populations, including adults, elderly and diabetic individuals20,21. However, despite these crucial incremental insights, studies assessing differential vaccine responses or identifying predictive signatures for vaccine responsiveness within the group of the elderly are still largely missing. Such data, explaining inadequate immunity besides age-related factors, are urgently needed to improve vaccine efficacy in the elderly, since immune senescence does not necessarily explain the differences between aged vaccine responders and non-responders. Immune senescence is characterized by phenotypic and functional age-dependent alterations of different immune cell populations22,23. In addition to age-related immune senescence, individual cells can become exhausted, e.g., due to chronic stimulation. Replicative senescence, as characterized by loss of CD28 expression and expression of CD57, and functional exhaustion, marked by low responsiveness, are two manifestations of cell exhaustion that might also skew vaccine responsiveness24,25,26.Besides the “classical” B and T cell populations, additional subsets are known to shape adaptive immune responses. T follicular helper (TFH) cells are essential for the initiation of B cell responses and thus represent another potential target for innovative vaccination strategies aimed at boosting humoral immunity27,28. The contribution of antigen-specific TFH cells was shown to be important for mucosal antibody responses to a live attenuated influenza vaccine. Furthermore, individuals harboring higher numbers of dysfunctional TFH cells show weaker vaccine responsiveness29,30. Besides the importance of functional immune activation, regulatory cells are crucial for the maintenance of balanced immune responses31,32,33. With regard to human circulating regulatory T (TREG) cells, no significant age-related changes in the frequencies were observed, and findings on functional properties are conflicting34. However, in the field of HIV vaccines, a correlation of TREG cells and vaccination efficacy is evident and targeting TREG cells is also moving into focus for the development of improved vaccines against other infectious diseases35,36,37. Regulatory B (BREG) cells were also shown to positively correlate with viral load, as well as to play a role in suppression of B and T cell responses in HIV and HBV patients38,39,40,41. However, in an HBV vaccination study, no correlation between IL-10-secreting BREG cells and the serological response to the vaccine was found, thus their potential role during influenza infection as well as after vaccination remains elusive42.The constantly evolving areas of multi-omics and mathematical modeling further boost research aiming at optimizing vaccination strategies by exploiting datasets from vaccinees20,21,43,44. Multi-omics-based approaches allow a comprehensive analysis considering various crucial aspects of the immune system. Our work is aimed to apply such multi-omics approach to influenza-specific vaccine responsiveness in the elderly, upon vaccination with Fluad45.Here we present a biphasic prospective population-based study dissecting molecular and immune cell signatures of immune cell subpopulations by multi-parametric flow cytometry and multi-omics, including single-cell RNA sequencing and bulk transcriptome analysis, coupled to mathematical modeling. The study focus is the identification of critical parameters beyond immune aging to enable an assessment of the immune network in elderly individuals who are either vaccine responders or non-responders. The results show that in contrast to what was expected, poor vaccine responsiveness is not characterized by common age-dependent effects but is rather dictated by suppressive immune mechanisms, as confirmed by early immunological and genomic indicators. The identification of these mechanistic differences is instrumental for the development of tailored subgroup-stratified strategies to overcome poor vaccine-induced immunity.ResultsIdentification and subgrouping of vaccinees into responders and non-respondersSerum samples, derived from vaccinees at baseline and 21 or 70 days post influenza vaccination, were tested separately for antibodies against the three vaccine antigens (A/California/7/2009 (H1N1) pdm09, A/Texas/50/2012 (H3N2) and B/Massachusetts/2/2012 for the 1st study, and A/California/7/2009 (H1N1) pdm09, A/Switzerland/9715293/2013 NIB88 (H3N2) and B/Brisbane/9/2014 for the 2nd study. Using the HAI test, vaccine responders and non-responders were classified considering the fold increase of the titer detected on day 21 or 70 as compared to day 0. The evaluation of responses against the individual antigens revealed that in both seasons the responsiveness was considerably greater against the H3N2 antigen (1st study = 73.5%; 2nd study = 86.5 %) than against the H1N1 (58.8% and 51%) and B (32.4% and 63%) antigens (Fig. S1A)46. In both seasons, non-responders showed higher pre-vaccination HAI titers for all single-vaccine antigens as compared to triple responders (Table S3). In the first study, six triple non-responders (17.6%) and seven triple responders (20.6%), and in the second study, 10 triple non-responders (5%) and 71 triple responders (35.5%) were identified out of 34 and 200 vaccinees, respectively (Fig. 1). The two identified extreme groups of triple responders and triple non-responders, responding to all or none of the antigens, respectively, were used for the subsequent analyses to facilitate a clear-cut approach for assessing immune characteristics correlating with vaccine responsiveness or non-responsiveness (see Table S1 for additional background information on the cohort). The two independent study cohorts allowed the discovery and generation of a mechanistic hypothesis (1st study) and the independent validation of that hypothesis (2nd study) to identify immune mechanisms differing between responders and non-responders. The two-study design further facilitates ruling out a potential season-specific bias resulting from changes in vaccine composition, a unique feature of influenza vaccines. However, the degree of responsiveness of the volunteers to other vaccinations is unknown. Thus, it is impossible to discriminate whether putative identified defects in non-responders are influenza vaccine-specific or rather defects leading to a universal non-responsiveness to vaccination.Fig. 1: Stratification of vaccinees.Serum samples derived from vaccinees at baseline and 21 or 70 days after vaccination in the seasons 2014/15 and 2015/16 were used for quantification of influenza antigen-specific antibodies (HAI assay). Venn diagrams depict overlapping responses against the three vaccine antigens (1st study n = 34, 2nd study n = 200 biologically independent samples). Adapted from ref. 46, copyright by the co-author F.P. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageImmune activation identified by serum profilingAiming at a broad immunological assessment of triple vaccine responders and non-responders, serum samples derived from the vaccinees before (day 0) and after vaccination (either day 1 or 3, day 7, day 21, and day 70) were subjected to bead-based flow cytometry immune profiling. In total, 65 cytokines in 165 samples (17 responders and 16 non-responders, 5 time points each) were profiled. In the context of this panel, 31 serum factors associated with the activation of innate and adaptive immune cells, inflammatory and anti-inflammatory processes could be quantified. The analyzed factors show a differential regulation in responders vs. non-responders already before vaccination (day 0) (2nd study, Fig. 2A; 1st study Fig. S1B). A direct comparison of responders vs. non-responders revealed an overall stronger induction of soluble factors in triple vaccine responders at the indicated time points post-vaccination (2nd study, Fig. 2B; 1st study Fig. S1C). Here, most identified factors are induced more strongly in responders than in non-responders, thus indicating an enhanced vaccine-induced immune activation in the responder group. All identified factors were subsequently used for a pathway analysis using the Pathview online tool. Here, an automated pathway annotation was calculated for each time point comparing vaccine responders and non-responders. The identified factors were assigned to the cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction pathway and the chemokine signaling pathway with p values <1 at all analyzed time points (blue = higher in non-responders, orange = higher in responders; Fig. 3A, B). Responders show a vaccine-induced activation of components belonging to the cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction pathways early (3 days) post-vaccination (Fig. 3A). The waning of this effect is apparent starting from 7 days post-vaccination (Fig. 3B). Non-responders, on the other hand, appear to maintain activation throughout all analyzed time points.Fig. 2: Serum profiling of vaccine responders and non-responders reveals differentially regulated factors.Cryopreserved serum samples derived from the triple responders and non-responders at all analyzed time points were subjected to a bead-based flow cytometric measurement based on Luminex technology. A Heat map showing the ratio of cytokine concentrations detected before vaccination in responders vs. non-responders. B Heat map depicting the ratio of vaccine-induced serum factors (fold increase over day 0) for triple vaccine responders as compared to non-responders. Orange represents values that show a higher response in responders as compared to non-responders, blue indicates a higher response in non-responders, 2nd study, n = 10 responders, n = 10 non-responders, biologically independent samples). Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageFig. 3: Pathway analysis of serum factors identified in samples derived from responders and non-responders (see Fig. 2).A 3 days post-vaccination and B 7 days post-vaccination (Pathview online tool). Input data = log2 values of day X/day 0. Orange indicates factors showing a higher response in responders, blue indicates factors showing a higher response in non-responders (day 3 p = 0.96, day 7 p = 0.99). P value calculated by GAGE.Full size imageTriple responders display solid T cell activation independent of seasonal variationTo address the activation status and functionality of diverse T cell subsets, PBMCs were re-stimulated with a mixture of the corresponding vaccine antigens and analyzed by flow cytometry. CD4+ T cells derived from triple responders displayed significantly higher frequencies of IFNγ+ CD4+ and TNFα+ CD4+ T cells 6/7 days post-vaccination as compared to non-responders (1st study: Fig. 4A). Likewise, the frequency of IL-2+ CD4+ T cells was significantly higher 6/7 and 21 days post-vaccination. The analysis of multifunctional CD4+ T cells (producing IFNγ, TNFα, and IL-2) revealed that triple responders harbored a higher frequency of triple, double and single functional CD4+ T cells secreting IFNγ, TNFα, and IL-2 at all analyzed time points (1st study: Fig. 4A spider plots and Fig. S2A). The analysis of CD8+ T cell populations revealed significantly elevated frequencies of IFNγ-, TNFα-, and IL-2-secreting CD8+ T cells in triple responders as compared to triple non-responders 21 days post-vaccination (Fig. 4B). Enhanced frequencies of IFNγ- and TNFα-secreting CD8+ T cells in triple responders were also evident 6/7 days post-vaccination. The comparison of the vaccinees with respect to multifunctional CD8+ T cells (secreting IFNγ, TNFα, and IL-2) revealed no meaningful differences (1st study: Fig. 4B spider plots and Fig. S2A).Fig. 4: Enhanced functionality of T cell populations in vaccine triple responders.Cryopreserved PBMCs isolated from triple responders and non-responders were re-stimulated with the vaccine antigens overnight, stained for surface antigens and intracellular cytokine production and analyzed by flow cytometry. Frequencies of IFNγ+, TNFα+, and IL-2+ A CD4+ T cells (IFNγ day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0134, TNFα day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0092, IL-2 day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0130, IL-2 day 21 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0088), B CD8+ T cells (IFNγ day 21 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0234, TNFα day 0 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0130, TNFα day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0252, TNFα day 21 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0041, IL-2 day 21 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0245). Violin plots represent the data subtracted for background functionality (1st study, n = 12 (6 non-responders and six responders, biologically independent samples, single missing values, see Source Data file). Violin plots show the mean and the quartiles as dashed and dotted lines, respectively. The shape indicated the data distribution. Asterisks denote statistical significance as calculated by Two-way ANOVA based on nominal p values (uncorrected Fisher’s LSD) comparing triple vaccine responders and non-responders at each time point. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageData from the 2nd study confirmed the higher functional fitness of CD4+ T cells of responders shown by increased frequencies of IFNγ- and TNFα-secreting CD4+ T cells especially early after vaccination (Fig. S2C, D). Furthermore, in triple responders elevated frequencies of IL-2+ CD4+ T cells were observed 21 days post-vaccination. With regard to CD8+ T cell functionality, enhanced frequencies of IFNγ and IL-2-secreting cells were observed in responders as compared to non-responders 1/3 days post-vaccination (Fig. S2C, E). These functional differences between vaccine responders and non-responders were confirmed by a single-cell RNA sequencing approach (n = 6, three responders vs. three non-responders, 2nd study). In non-responders, IFNγ secretion is mainly confined to the identified NK cell cluster at all analyzed time points, whereas responder-derived cells show a strong vaccine-induced IFNγ secretion additionally within various CD4+ and CD8+ T cell clusters with a special focus on CD8+ TCM cells (Fig. 5A). A similar pattern is observed for TNFα-secreting cells. In the non-responders, most of these cells are found in the NK and some CD4+ T memory (TM) cell clusters. Strikingly, in the responders, these clusters only harbor few TNFα-secreting cells, whereas naïve and TM cells show a robust activation. IL-2 secretion is quite low in non-responders and higher mainly within the CD4+ T cell clusters in the responders.Fig. 5: Vaccine responders show an activated T cell phenotype.A Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis of re-stimulated PBMCs before and 7 days post-vaccination (2nd study n = 6, three responders and three non-responders, biologically independent samples). The color indicates the expression density of the indicated cytokines. B Frequencies of IFNγ+, TNFα+, and IL-2+ central memory (CM, CD45RA-CCR7+) CD4+ T cells (TNFα day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0465, IL-2 day 0 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0212, IL-2 day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0311, IL-2 day 21 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.04785) and effector memory (EM, CD45RA−CCR7−) CD4+ T cells (IFNγ day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0220) (1st study, n = 6 non-responders, and n = 6 responders, biologically independent samples, single missing values). Asterisks denote statistical significance as calculated by Two-way ANOVA based on nominal p values (uncorrected Fisher’s LSD) comparing triple vaccine responders and non-responders at each time point. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageThe observed functional discrepancy between CD4+ T cell subsets analyzed from vaccine responders and non-responders is mirrored by the frequencies of TH1, TH2, and TH17 cells according to the expression of CXCR3 and CCR6 (Fig. S2B). The TH1 (CD4+CXCR3+CCR6-) and TH2 (CD4+CXCR3−CCR6−) cell populations derived from vaccine responders but not from non-responders expand upon vaccination, peaking 6/7 days after the immunization, returning later to baseline levels. In contrast, significantly lower frequencies of TH17 (CD4+CXCR3-CCR6+) cells were observed in responders with respect to non-responders at early time points in both studies (day 0 and 6/7 post-vaccination).The stimulationecall of antigen-specific memory CD4+ T cells, derived from previous influenza infections or vaccinations, was assessed by the frequencies of cytokine-secreting central memory (CM) and effector memory (EM) T cell populations (CD45RA- CCR7+ and CD45RA- CCR7-, respectively). Significantly higher frequencies of IFNγ+ and TNFα+ CD4+ TCM cells were detected in triple responders than in triple non-responders 6/7 days post-vaccination (1st study, Fig. 5B). Triple responders also displayed significantly elevated frequencies of IL-2+ CD4+ TCM cells 6/7, 21 and 70 days post-vaccination. The functional analysis of CD4+ TEM cells revealed significant differences regarding IFNγ-producing CD4+ T cells on day 6/7 post-vaccination. Higher frequencies were found in triple responders, whereas TNFα- and IL-2-secreting CD4+ TEM cells were only marginally increased (Fig. 5B). The results gained from the 2nd study confirm this overall higher functionality of central and effector memory cells derived from triple vaccine responders (Fig. S2F). These data clearly depict that triple responders not only develop a stronger initial T cell response following influenza vaccination, but also an enhanced vaccine-induced antigen-specific memory response as compared to vaccine non-responders.The senescence of immune cell populations in the elderly is described as crucially affecting their functional properties. Interestingly, the frequency of senescent CD4+ and CD8+ T cells did not differ between triple vaccine responders and non-responders before or after vaccination (Fig. S3A 1st study and S3B 2nd study). The functionality of senescent CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, however, differed between triple vaccine responders and non-responders, showing an overall enhanced vaccine-induced functionality (IFNγ and TNFα secretion) in triple responders, as compared to non-responders. These findings highlight that an enhanced functionality of T cell populations derived from triple vaccine responders is not only inherent to effector cells, but also to senescent CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Thus, the progression of functional, but not phenotypic immune senescence, might differentiate vaccine responders and non-responders.High frequencies of regulatory T cells correlate with poor vaccine responsivenessTREG cells play a crucial role by controlling the activity of a wide variety of immune cells. To assess their potential contribution to the observed differences in responsiveness, cryopreserved PBMC samples derived from responders and non-responders were analyzed ex vivo for the frequency and absolute cell number of TREG cells. At baseline as well as 3 days post-vaccination, triple vaccine non-responders harbored significantly more TREG cells (CD4+CD127lowCD25+FOXP3+) as compared to triple vaccine responders (1st study, Fig. 6A). This tendency remains stable at all assessed time points. The analysis of the tSNE further highlights the differences in the fingerprints of the TREG cell population in responders and non-responders. The assessment of the absolute TREG cell numbers supports a higher number of vaccine non-responders at early time points (1st study, Fig. S4A). However, the identification of TREG cells by flow cytometry is controversially discussed with regard to the applied gating strategy47,48. Thus, we performed an additional analysis for the unequivocal identification of TREG cells, the assessment of the methylation state of the TREG cell-specific demethylated region (TSDR), which confirmed the higher TREG cell frequencies in triple non-responders as compared to responders 3 days post-vaccination (1st study, Fig. 6B). The values derived from TSDR and FACS analyses show a significant correlation. The PBMC samples from the 2nd study further confirmed this association by flow cytometry as well as TSDR analysis, since enhanced frequencies of TREG cells were also observed in non-responders 3 days post-vaccination (Fig. S4B). Thus, the reduced functionality of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in triple non-responders might be ascribed to higher frequencies of TREG cells. A tSNE analysis of samples derived from responders and non-responders 3 days post-vaccination distinctly showed differences in the TREG cell compartment (Fig. 6C). The compiled plot shows all CD3+CD4+ T cells with the CD127lowCD25+FOXP3+ TREG cell population highlighted in purple. The purple gate comprises TREG cells as indicated in the compiled plot, highlighting the differences between responders and non-responders. TFH cells represent an additional critical factor for the stimulation of efficient humoral responses after vaccination. Frequencies of TFH cells were by trend higher in responders than in non-responders at all analyzed time points (Fig. S4A 1st study and B 2nd study). The mutual evaluation of TREG cells and TFH cells was performed by calculating the ratio of TREG/TFH using values normalized to day 0, thus giving a ratio of the vaccine-mediated impact. Here, TREG cells dominated the response in triple non-responders 3 days post-vaccination, whereas the TFH increase was higher in responders at this time point (Figs. 6D, S4C). At later time points, these ratios shifted with an increased TREG response in responders, leading to a convergence of ratios 70 days post-vaccination. These data highlight the presence of a suppressive immune phenotype in non-responders at baseline and early after vaccination that might account for the hampered responsiveness.Fig. 6: TREG and TFH cells as important factors for vaccine-induced immune responses.Cryopreserved PBMCs isolated from vaccine triple responders and non-responders were stained for surface antigens and intranuclear expression of FOXP3 ex vivo and analyzed by flow cytometry. A Frequencies of TREG cells (CD4+CD127lowCD25+FOXP3+) assessed by flow cytometry (1st study, n = 5 and n = 7 non-responders and responders, respectively, biologically independent samples, single missing values, see Source Data file, day 0 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0390, day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0030). Plots show representative tSNE analyses of triple non-responders and responders with the expression density of FOXP3 highlighted (blue = low expression, red = high expression). B Frequencies of TREG cells assessed by TSDR analysis and correlation with TREG cells assessed by flow cytometry before, 3 and 70 days post-vaccination (1st study, n = 5 and n = 7 non-responders and responders, respectively, biologically independent samples, Spearman correlation). C Plot (left) depicting the tSNE analysis of 4 triple non-responders and 4 triple responders (gray) with manually gated TREG cells highlighted and gated accordingly (CD3+CD4+FOXP3+ = purple). tSNE plots of non-responders and responders depicted in pseudo colors indicating low (blue) and high (red) cell densities 3 days post-vaccination. D Mean values of TREG and TFH cell frequencies at the indicated time points post-vaccination normalized to day 0 (1st and 2nd study, n = 10 non responders and n = 15 responders, biologically independent samples). Violin plots show the mean and the quartiles as dashed and dotted lines, respectively. The shape indicated the data distribution. Asterisks denote significant nominal p values as calculated by two-way ANOVA or Mixed-effects analysis for data sets with missing single values (uncorrected Fisher’s LSD, see Source Data file) comparing triple vaccine responders and non-responders at a given time point Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageMathematical modeling of vaccine-induced T cell responsesA mathematical model to represent the “expansion” of cell compartments, describing vaccine-induced kinetic changes with regard to their population size, was used to compute a combination of different events happening in the blood compartment 7 days post-vaccination e.g., proliferation, migration, and differentiation. The modeling analysis of data from the 2nd study derived from the first week post-vaccination revealed that triple responders present expansion rates of cell populations (cells/day) higher than triple non-responders within different cell sub-compartments (at least two folds higher, Fig. 7A). In particular, the expansion of the CD8+ T cell compartment (stimulated and unstimulated) is significantly higher in the triple responders. Interestingly, although not statistically significant, the only cell compartment exhibiting a higher cell expansion in the triple non-responders were TREG cells, possibly explaining the observed limited cell expansion rates as well as the described reduced functionality. Data derived from the first study is not shown due to insufficient statistical power.Fig. 7: Predictive potential of data on T cell functionality.Data derived from the flow cytometric analysis was subjected to mathematical modeling approaches. A A linear model to compute the expansion rates (cells/day) during the first week post-vaccination was computed in responders and non-responders. The bars represent the average fold change increase in expansion rates of responders with respect to non-responders (Ag+CD8+ p = 0.002, CD8+ p = 0.049). B Considering a multiclass naïve Bayes model, the AUC is presented to highlight marker candidates to differentiate between responders vs. non-responders. Asterisks denote significant values as calculated by a two-sample two-tailed t-test and a two-tailed Wilcoxon rank sum test comparing triple vaccine responders and non-responders at the indicated time point.Full size imageIn the search for early predictors distinguishing triple responders and non-responders, we further employed the area under the curve (AUC) for ROC curves based on the classic logistic model as well as a multiclass naïve Bayes model. During the first week post-vaccination, TREG cells (CD3+CD4+FOXP3+) harbored the highest predictive value (AUC approximately 0.9) with respect to the other cell compartments, thus substantiating the hypothesized role of TREG cells as a driving force that determine influenza vaccine responsiveness (Fig. 7B).Impaired memory B cell responses confirm hampered humoral immunity in vaccine non-respondersThe functional relevance of antigen-specific antibodies used to stratify the vaccinees was confirmed by the qualitative assessment of antibody functionality according to the microneutralization (MN) titer (1st and 2nd study, Fig. 8A). A significant positive correlation of the HAI and the MN titers was found for the H1N1 and H3N2 strains contained in the vaccine formulation, as well as a clear trend for the B strain. As for pre-vaccination HAI titers, pre-vaccination MN titers were in general higher in triple non-responders (Table S3). Regarding the B cell populations contributing to antibody secretion, the memory and transitional B cells as well as plasmablasts were assessed by flow cytometry upon antigen re-stimulation. Triple-vaccine responders showed significantly higher frequencies of all three cell types as compared to non-responders (Figs. 8B, S5A). Herein, significant differences were detected for transitional B cells, 3 and 6/7 days post-vaccination as compared to baseline. These findings confirm the severe deficiencies in the humoral compartment in vaccine non-responders. In addition to the described suppressive phenotype in non-responders shaped by enhanced frequencies of TREG cells, significantly increased frequencies of regulatory B (BREG) cells were also found in non-responders but not in responders upon vaccination (2nd study, Fig. 8C; 1st study, Fig. S5B). The differences were most striking at later time points post-vaccination. Overall, these results suggest that impaired antibody responses might be shaped by both suppressive regulatory T and B cells.Fig. 8: B cell responses in vaccine responders and non-responders.Frozen sera derived from vaccinees 21 days after vaccination in the two seasons were used for quantification and qualification of humoral immune responses by HAI and MN assays, respectively. A Correlation of the HAI and MN titer. The shown data is derived from the 1st and the 2nd study (n = 33 biologically independent samples). Asterisks denote significant relationships as calculated by Spearman correlation (two-tailed). Cryopreserved PBMCs isolated from vaccine triple responders and non-responders were stimulated with the vaccine antigens and stained for surface antigens identifying B memory B cells (CD27+CD19+CD3-), transitional B cells (CD24hiCD38hiCD19+CD3-, day 3 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0039, day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0386) and plasma blasts (CD20-CD38+CD27+CD19+CD3-). Heat maps show the means of frequencies (% of CD19+CD3- B cells) of re-stimulated samples (2nd study, n = 6 non responders and n = 7 responders, biologically independent samples). C Fold increase of BREG cells (IL-10+CD24+CD38+CD19+CD3-) at the indicated time points as compared to day 0 (2nd study, n = 6 non responders and n = 7 responders, biologically independent samples, day 6/7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0199, day 21 triple non-responders vs. responders p < 0.0001, day 70 triple non-responders vs. responders p < 0.0001). Columns represent the mean ± SEM of data from re-stimulated samples with individual values depicted as dots. Asterisks denote significant values as calculated by Two-way ANOVA without correction for multiple comparisons (uncorrected Fisher’s LSD) comparing triple vaccine responders and non-responders at a given time point. n.s. = not significant. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageIdentification of different transcriptomic fingerprints in vaccine responders and non-respondersThe above data distinctly showed increased cellular and humoral functionality in vaccine triple responders, whereas triple non-responders harbored a rather suppressive phenotype characterized by enhanced frequencies of TREG and BREG cells. To gain a comprehensive view of functional differences on the transcriptional level, single-cell RNA sequencing experiments were performed. For this, cryopreserved PBMCs isolated from 6 selected triple responders and non-responders vaccinated in the 2nd study were re-stimulated with a mixture of the vaccine antigens and subsequently analyzed. In total, transcriptomes of PBMCs derived from 12 samples (3 responders and 3 non-responders at day 0 and day 7) were profiled.The annotation of cell clusters identified naïve CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations, including memory subsets, B cells as well as NK cells according to the expression of signature genes (Fig. 9A, C). The comparison of data derived from responders (R) and non-responders (NR) before (D0, light green/blue) and 7 days post-vaccination (D7, dark green/blue) clearly revealed different patterns and expression profiles (Fig. 9B, Fig. S6A, B). Cell clusters ascribed to CD4+ as well as CD8+ T cells, e.g., IFNγ+ CD8+ T cells, as well as B cell populations, e.g., CD38+ CD19+ plasma blasts, were predominant in responders (Fig. 9C). The analysis of the relative cell counts (rel. counts [%]) revealed significantly elevated numbers of naïve CD8+ and CD4+ T cells in responders at day 7 as compared to non-responders (Fig. 9D). Interestingly, profound differences were also observable for NK cells with significantly higher counts detected in non-responders at both time points.Fig. 9: Single-cell RNA sequencing of samples derived from vaccine responders and non-responders.Cryopreserved PBMCs were re-stimulated with the vaccine antigen mixture and subjected to sorting for CD45+ cells prior to further measurements. A Identified clusters and B comparison of cells derived from responders and non-responders according to the time point of sample drawing (light green/blue = responderson-responders day 0, dark green/blue = responderson-responders day 7 post-vaccination). C Gene signatures identifying the cells within the clusters. D Cell abundancies (rel. counts [%]) of identified cell populations, significant changes between responders and non-responders at either D0 or D7 were marked. n = 6 (three responders (R)hree non-responders (NR), at baseline (D0) and 7 days post (D7) vaccination, biologically independent samples). The lower and upper hinges of the box plots correspond to the first and third quartiles (the 25th and 75th percentiles). The central line represents the second quartiles (the 50th percentiles). The upper whisker extends from the hinge to the largest value. The lower whisker extends from the hinge to the smallest value. Statistically significant differences were calculated by Dirichlet-multinomial regression adjusted with the Benjamini–Hochberg method (CD8+ naïve T cells day 7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0001, CD4+ naïve T cells day 7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.005, NK cells day 0 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0001, NK cells day 7 triple non-responders vs. responders p = 0.0047).Full size imageTo expand the findings of the scRNA analysis, a bulk RNA-seq analysis of whole blood, taken at baseline and 1/3, 7, 21, and 70 days (V1–V5, respectively) post-vaccination was performed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEG) discriminating vaccine responders and non-responders (Fig. 10A, B, Fig. S6C, D). A total of 664 genes were differentially expressed. These can be further grouped into six clusters of co-regulated genes according to their appearance after time (Fig. 10A). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using GO-Terms “Biological Process” revealed that critical immune processes are becoming more activated in responders, like “B cell receptor signaling pathway”, “Intestinal immune network for IgA production”, “Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum”, “Cell cycle”, “T cell activation” and “B cell activation” (Fig. 10B).Fig. 10: Functional analysis of differentially expressed genes in responder transcriptomes (bulk genome sequencing).A The heatmap displays the top 500 ranked differentially expressed genes among responders (n = 10 biologically independent samples) and non-responders (n = 10 biologically independent samples) at different time points (V1=green, V2=purple, V3=orange, V4=yellow, V5=blue) based on adjusted p values (Benjamini-Hochberg). A generalized linear model (GLM) is applied to detect statistical differences at gene level. A z-score based color range (red-white-blue) is used to show relative gene expression (high – median – low). Genes showing similar expression profiles are clustered into five gene sets (horizontal color bars). B Each gene set is applied to gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using the following databases: GO, KEGG and Reactome. Only pathways (terms) with corrected p values below 0.05 are displayed. Terms are connected among each other to create a larger module based on their functional known interrelations using ClueGo app (part of cytoscape visualization tool)116,117. Color-filled sections in circles (terms) represent the ratio of genes detected and genes belonging to the corresponding term.Full size imageIn addition, a comparison of the fecal microbiota composition in the groups of triple responders and non-responders was performed using 16S rRNA analysis of the V4 region. No specific clustering during analysis of β-diversity and a similar α-diversity between the groups was observed (Fig. S8A, B). Furthermore, a similar abundance of all bacterial families present in the intestinal community of the investigated participants was detected (Fig. S8C).DiscussionDespite availability of vaccines tailored for an aged immune system, unacceptably high percentages of influenza vaccine non-responders are still observed in the elderly. This bottleneck will persist even for the foreseeable next generation of universal vaccines. In fact, this roadblock goes beyond aspects related to the identification of antigens conferring broader responses, immune senescence, and immune imprinting. Why do certain individuals within the same demographic group, sharing similar antigenic challenges and health status respond to vaccination whereas others do not? What are the key commonalities and differences? This knowledge gap on the underlying mechanisms represents the true roadblock to the development of vaccines against influenza and other pathogens tailored for the elderly. Using a two-seasonal clinical research approach, which combines serological, flow cytometric and genomic readouts coupled to a bioinformatics analysis, we contribute to answering these questions.To gain a global unbiased understanding of the mechanisms dictating vaccine efficacy independently of age-related immunological shortcomings, an in-depth immune profiling of elderly responding or not to vaccination is indeed crucial. With regard to influenza vaccination, it is essential to keep in mind that vaccines need to be adapted from season to season due to viral evolution. This represents a major hurdle for the implementation of systems vaccinology approaches and/or the establishment of the significance of a hypothesis derived from clinical studies. Thus, to assess the universal value of identified mechanisms or predictive nodes, it is critical to validate hypotheses or candidate targets derived from one study using samples obtained from a comparative cohort vaccinated in another season. Thus, our 1st study was established as a test bed to identify putative players and to generate hypotheses on potential mechanisms, whereas the 2nd study was structured to validate those hypotheses using a larger cohort. This approach led us to an overall conclusion: non-responsiveness is characterized by a suppressive immune phenotype. The overarching regulatory framework and interconnected nodes emerging from our study offer several molecular intervention targets to adapt, refine and tailor vaccination strategies for the elderly.The classification of vaccinees into polar groups of triple responders and triple non-responders that facilitated the subsequent analysis was carried out according to the EMA guidelines. Although the vaccine used was especially approved for use in the elderly, the response rates were comparatively low. In both seasons, approximately one-third of the vaccinees responded to none or only one of the vaccine antigens, demonstrating that even a vaccine specifically tailored to the elderly can provide a false perception of the level of conferred protection.Vaccine efficacy depends on the individual responsiveness of the vaccinees, highlighting the importance of individualizing or at least stratifying approaches targeted to poor responders in high-risk groups49. Age, gender, underlying co-morbidities, co-infections, vaccination history, and influenza immune imprinting are described as key factors biasing vaccine-induced immunity. In fact, preexisting immunity to influenza is one major determinant of vaccine responsiveness50,51,52. Immunological imprinting by the first influenza viruses encountered by an individual appears to be a major driving force for antibody responses against drifted or new viruses or vaccine antigens53,54. In this regard, influenza infections encountered in childhood permanently shape responses, thereby affecting the outcome of vaccinations later in life. Consequently, all vaccinations later in life are indeed booster vaccinations and have to be assessed accordingly. Our study of a more demographic homogeneous elderly group contributes to reduce biases caused be previous encounters. Interestingly, individuals stratified as non-responders received influenza vaccinations more frequently in previous years as compared to responders (information derived from medical questionnaire, see Table S1). This is in line with a systemic meta-analysis reporting that repeated vaccination attenuates vaccine effectiveness55. According to the theory of antigenic sin, vaccination history might contribute to differences in vaccine responsiveness. Therefore, the vaccination history of each individual could be one of the parameters to be taken into account for the stratification of vaccinees. Furthermore, co-morbidities (e.g., obesity/metabolic dysfunction, heart or lung diseases) can also affect responsiveness to vaccination56,57,58,59,60,61. Here, our data showed that self-reported diabetes is associated with reduced humoral immunity to influenza vaccination46. This personal immunological baggage is particularly heavy in aged individuals, like those profiled here.The implementation of multilayer integration strategies to dissect complex processes is facilitated by continuous technological advancement62. Systems biology-driven approaches combining multi-omics big data coupled to bioinformatics and artificial intelligence emerged as key tools for unbiased identification of the involved nodes63,64. The combination of immunologic, genetic, and transcriptional data allowed identification of host genetic factors contributing to influenza vaccine responsiveness65, as well as generating a computational framework for predictive models66. Thus, we selected this powerful unbiased approach rather than a hypothesis-driven one. In fact, most knowledge on vaccine-induced immunity in the elderly is derived from mouse models, but the direct translation of these results to humans is disputable. The aging process of mice does not directly reflect the one of humans, particularly considering the different life spans. Furthermore, the comorbidities and medications found in elderly humans, which crucially impact the immune system, cannot be appropriately modeled in mice. The same is true for other aspects, such as influenza immune imprinting and genetic variation. In this regard, naïve rather than pre-infected mice are frequently used for research studies, although primed mice would more closely resemble the situation of the elderly, who were exposed multiple times to the influenza virus and vaccines during their life. This crucially relevant knowledge gap was specifically addressed in our study, by immune profiling of well-defined human cohorts.The comparison of the soluble mediators present in serum samples derived from vaccine triple responders and non-responders showed a differential activation of signaling pathways associated with innate and adaptive immune activation as well as pro- and anti-inflammatory responses, e.g., activation of cytokine receptor signaling and chemokine signaling. Before vaccination, non-responders showed a strong, presumably unspecific immune activation that might account for the observed dampened vaccine-induced T-cell functionality. The resulting lower vaccine-induced immune activation is in line with earlier findings describing that reduced humoral responses correlate with reduced T cell functionality in the elderly, especially IFNγ secretion, upon vaccination against Japanese encephalitis67. In this regard, the efficient activation of T cells in the elderly after vaccination requires approaches that aim at promoting T cell functionality in the context of a senescent immune system, such as incorporation of suitable adjuvants68,69. The MF59C.1-adjuvanted influenza vaccine used in this study (Fluad) represents one of such approaches, and was shown to efficiently reduce influenza-related severe disease outcomes among the elderly8,11. The different frequencies of TREG and TFH cells detected in responders and non-responders before and early after vaccination point towards a repressive immune response in non-responders and highlight the potentially crucial role of these cell populations for vaccine efficacy. Thus, their interplay appears as an important determinant of vaccine responsiveness in the elderly. With regard to influenza vaccination, TREG cells were shown to participate in the downregulation of vaccine-induced antibody responses in healthy adults and it was proposed that their modulation can improve vaccine responsiveness70. This observation is in line with earlier findings showing that TREG cells are responsible for a poor response in cancer and HIV vaccination trials71. In agreement with this, an explorative biomarker study after vaccination of middle-aged adults with a tetravalent meningococcal vaccination showed that higher pre-vaccination frequencies of naïve CD4+ T and TREG cells correlate with poor vaccine responsiveness, thereby rendering TREG cells as potential early biomarkers for vaccine responsiveness72. Suppression of TREG cell responses in predicted vaccine non-responders might facilitate efficient immune activation, resulting in improved vaccine-induced immunity. In this line, therapeutic inhibition of TREG cell functionality has been described for the treatment of oncological malignancies73,74. Interestingly, TFH cells were reported as predictors for influenza vaccine-induced antibody responses in adults but not in the elderly75. However, this study compared samples derived from adults and elderly individuals, whereas differences between responders and non-responders within the elderly were not assessed. Thus, an algorithm based on the number, functional properties, and ratios of TREG and TFH cells might represent an improved predictor for vaccine-induced immunity, especially but not exclusively in the elderly. Unfortunately, the performed transcriptomic bulk and single-cell analyses did not yield a sequencing depth allowing an assessment of TREG and TFH cells, which was due to the low abundancies of these cell populations.The assessment of B cells further contributed to understanding the functional differences between vaccine responders and non-responders. A lack of memory populations, especially plasmablasts, together with enhanced numbers of suppressor BREG cells characterize the fingerprint of non-responders. This is in accordance with the detected impaired immune responses. Plasmablasts are critical for recall responses and reduced quantities of vaccine-specific antibodies are the major reason for poor vaccine efficacy76,77. Regulatory T and B cells were described to negatively impact cellular responses to the pandemic H1N1 influenza vaccine in HIV-infected children and youths78. Thus, although regulatory responses are essential for a balanced and efficient immunity, the enhanced frequencies of BREG cells detected in non-responders upon vaccination might further contribute to an overall suppressive immune phenotype.Vaccine-non-responsiveness amongst the elderly will also be strongly affected by immune senescence67,79,80,81. Higher frequencies of senescent T cells commonly correlate with reduced vaccine efficacy in studies in which immune function in elderly and young adults was compared82. However, a differential advancement of phenotypic senescence, as detected by means of CD28 and CD57, does not correlate with vaccine responsiveness in this study. This is in contrast with an earlier publication describing an association of enhanced CD8+CD28null cell frequencies with a poor responsiveness to influenza vaccination in the elderly83. However, the use of a non-adjuvanted vaccine (Vaxigrip) in the reported study might in part explain the differences. On the other hand, the functional analysis of senescent T cells confirmed the existence of functional differences between vaccine responders and non-responders with the former showing a higher cytokine secretion upon vaccination. The secretion of cytokines by senescent T cells is not surprising, since the markers CD28-CD57+ are used to identify cells showing replicative senescence rather than exhaustion24. In fact, differential replicative senescence or functional exhaustion in influenza vaccine responders and non-responders seems to contribute to vaccine efficacy84. Furthermore, the observed differences in functionality might represent one facet of the immune senescence process, thus indicating a higher degree of immune senescence in the non-responders as compared to the responders. A similar observation was made in the context of an elderly influenza vaccination cohort, where incomplete vaccine responders showed signs of accelerated T cell aging85. However, it would be important to gather information on responsiveness to other vaccines in order to dissect general vs. vaccine-specific effects. Furthermore, vaccination history appears as a critical discriminating parameter between influenza vaccine responders and non-responders. This points towards the theory of antigenic sin (i.e., immune imprinting) as an additional factor. Regardless of the underlying mechanisms behind non-responsiveness, it is still important to identify potential intervention targets to improve vaccine efficacy in this subpopulation. Underlying chronic inflammation might additionally contribute to a differential functional senescence in responders and non-responders. In the elderly, a higher rate of chronic inflammation is common and its impact on the immune system is termed inflammaging86. In this context, the impact of persistent cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections on vaccine efficacy is controversially discussed87,88,89,90,91. In the presented study, no correlation between CMV sero-status and vaccine responsiveness was observed46. Nevertheless, CMV is not the only chronic infection commonly found in the elderly, and vaccine responsiveness could be affected by any of them. The individual medical history and medications, as well as the nutritional status and the microbiome might additionally skew the analyzed immune responses92,93,94,95. However, here, the microbiome of vaccine triple responders and triple non-responders did not show any significant differences that might account for the differential responsiveness, with no clustering, and similar diversities and abundances of bacterial families.As an additional determinant, gender-specific differences in the elicited immune responses should be considered. In the 1st study, female participants dominated the responder group (five out of six individuals), whereas amongst the non-responders both genders were equally represented. In the 2nd study, both groups were nearly equal in composition. In general, females show stronger antibody responses, more adverse effects, and a higher vaccine efficacy upon influenza vaccination as compared to male vaccinees96,97,98. These differences are mainly ascribed to the effects exerted by the sex hormones. Binding of steroids to their receptor directly influences the secretion of cytokines as well as T and B cell functionality. While testosterone dampens immune responses against influenza, estradiol can stimulate antibody production97. However, as estradiol levels decrease with age, this effect is described to be diminished99. These differences, described for a variety of vaccines besides influenza (e.g., BCG, MMR, and yellow fever), highlight that immunization approaches should consider very carefully the gender-factor100.Despite all the listed unknown variables individually affecting immune responses, the described analyses distinctly highlight functional differences with regard to cellular and humoral immune responses in vaccine responders and non-responders in the elderly group. However, the scRNA seq results clearly show that, although all responders display better functionality, the responses are individually different. Out of the analyzed responders, each shows an individual functional fingerprint, thereby highlighting that the limited effector mechanisms defining vaccine responsiveness (i.e., HAI or MN titers) do not result from a uniform or identical immune response pattern, but rather from the integration of a complex, pleomorphic and individual fingerprint. Nevertheless, the detailed and comprehensive analysis of non-responders revealed a potential overarching intervention point for future vaccine designs: the key regulatory modules responsible for immune contraction and limitation of overshooting responses. Partial attenuation of these mechanisms appeals as a promising approach to promote protective immune responses in poor responders after vaccination. Considering the dynamics of the observed differences, assessment of TREG and TFH cell frequencies and/or related functional biomarkers at baseline or early post-vaccination could contribute to a rapid identification of vaccine non-responders.MethodsThe performed study complies with all relevant ethical regulations. The execution of the study as well as the use of the sampled human material was approved by the ethics committee of Hannover Medical School. The documentation of all findings adheres to the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) reporting guideline for cohort studies.Study population and sample preparationWe conducted a biphasic prospective population-based study during 2014/2015 (1st study) and 2015/2016 (2nd study)45,46. Briefly, 65–80-year-old participants (n = 34 1st study, n = 200 2nd study) were recruited from the general population of Hannover, Germany. The recruitment was performed by taking two independent non-overlapping random samples from the population registry office, so that no participant was included in both studies. We pursued this strategy to be able to confirm the findings from the first study by the results obtained with a completely independent demographically comparable second cohort. All participants provided written informed consent that study data can be used for scientific purposes. Participants received an expense allowance of 25€ covering e.g., public transportation to the study site. The representativeness of these random population-based samples was verified by a non-participant survey101. Participants were subjected to a detailed medical interview and physical exam and then vaccinated with Fluad. Blood samples were taken before vaccination (i.e., day 0) and day 1 or 3, day 6 or 7, day 21, and day 70 post-vaccination. Whole blood (PAXgene® tubes for RNA stabilization), plasma, serum, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs; isolated via Ficoll separation for the 1st study or CPT tubes for 2nd study from whole blood) were cryopreserved and stored until further use. Sample numbers for each assay are given in Table S2.Antigens and viral preparationsAccording to the formulation of the Fluad vaccine in the respective seasons, the following antigens or infectious viral particles were used for the hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assay, the microneutralization (MN) assay, and the antigen-specific stimulation of PBMCs for the flow cytometric analysis: H1N1 A/California/7/09 NYMC-X181 (both seasons), H3N2 A/Texas/50/2012 NYMCX-223 (season 2014/15), H3N2 A/Switzerland/9715293/2013 NIB88 (season 2015/16), B/Massachusetts/02/2012 NYMCBX-51B (season 2014/15), and B/Brisbane/9/2014 (season 2015/16). Infectious virus preparations (NIBSC, UK) were propagated in the chorioallantoic cavity of 10-day-old embryonated eggs for 48 h at 37 °C (H1N1 and H3N1) or 35 °C (B strain)102.HAI assay to classify vaccine responders and non-respondersTo determine HAI titers, serum samples were treated with receptor-destroying enzyme (RDE) at a ratio of 1:4 (1 volume serum and 4 volumes of RDE). Samples from day 0 (before vaccination) and day 21 post-vaccination were used. In the only two cases where no bio sample was available for day 21, serum from 70 days post-vaccination was used. Samples were kept at 37 °C overnight and the reaction was stopped by 30 min incubation at 56 °C. Samples were mixed with the same volume of 0.9% NaCl and frozen at −20 °C until further use. For the HAI assay, serial dilutions of the serum samples were mixed with standardized concentrations of the respective vaccine antigen and incubated with turkey-derived red blood cells. The HAI titer was defined as the highest serum dilution that still resulted in inhibition of hemagglutination. According to the European Medicines Agency (EMA), a post-vaccination titer of ≥40 for vaccinees with a pre-vaccination titer <10 or a ≥ 4-fold increased post-vaccination titer in vaccinees with a pre-vaccination titer ≥10 was considered as positive responsiveness to vaccination and a correlate of protection103. We defined triple responders and non-responders as those showing a sero-conversion to all three vaccine antigens or none, respectively.Cytokine profiling using serum samplesThe cytokine profiling was performed with serum samples using the Immune Monitoring 65-Plex Human ProcartaPlex™ Panel (Invitrogen™/Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, serum samples and controls were incubated with the magnetic beads (65 populations with binding sites for the 65 analytes, respectively). Bound analytes were subsequently detected by sequential incubation with detection antibodies and PE-conjugated streptavidin. Samples were measured on a Luminex™ 200 instrument and downstream analysis was performed using the provided software (ProcartaPlex Analyst 1.0). For the further analysis, analytes which were quantifiable in more than three donors of both groups (n = 31) were included. For the presentation of the values detected before vaccination (Fig. 2A), responder values were divided by the mean non-responder values at day 0. For the analysis of post-vaccination results (Fig. 2D), all values were divided by the respective day 0 value in order to assess the vaccine-induced impact and normalize for differences observed before vaccination. Subsequently, responder ratios were divided by the non-responder mean ratios for each considered time point, thereby yielding the factor for the comparison of responders and non-responders.For the pathway integration and visualization, logarithmic (log2) values of the ratio to the respective day 0 value were analyzed using the Pathview online tool104,105. For calculating the log2 values, 0 was set to 1 in order to facilitate the conversion. Analyte information was translated into Entrez gene IDs. Responder values were treated as controls and non-responder values as samples for performing an unpaired comparison. The pathway selection was set to “auto” giving a pathway selection based on GAGE for statistical selection106.Antigen re-stimulation and flow cytometry analysisCryopreserved PBMCs were thawed, rested for 2 h, and co-stimulated with purified anti-human CD28 and CD49d at a concentration of 10 µg/ml. For antigen re-stimulation, cells were stimulated with a mixture of the individual monovalent vaccine antigens for the respective season at a concentration of 2.5 µg/each antigen. After 4 h of incubation, brefeldin A and monensin (5 µg/ml) were added to the cells to prevent the secretion of cytokines and receptor internalization and incubated overnight. Cells were stained for flow cytometric analysis using the following antibodies: CD4 (PE-Cy7, L200, Cat.-No. 560909, dilution 1:200), CD19 (APC-Cy7, SJ25C1, Cat.-No. 560177, dilution 1:100), CD14 (APC-Cy7, MΦP9, Cat.-No. 560180, dilution 1:100), CD45RA (FITC, HI100, Cat.-No. 555488, dilution 1:100) and CD57 (PE, NK-1, Cat.-No. 560844, dilution 1:100) from BD (New Jersey, USA); CD4 (BV510, OKT4, Cat.-No. 317444, dilution 1:100), CD8 (BV650, RPA-T8/A700, SK1, Cat.-No. 344730, dilution 1:200), CCR7 (BV785, G043H7, Cat.-No. 353230, dilution 1:100), CD28 (PE-Cy5, CD28.2, Cat.-No. 302910, dilution 1:100), CD24 (BV605, ML5,Cat.-No. 311124, dilution 1:50), IFNγ (A700, 4S.B3, Cat.-No. 502520, dilution 1:200), TNFα (BV605, Mab11, Cat.-No. 502936, dilution 1:200), IL-2 (PB, MQ1-17H12, Cat.-No. 551383, dilution 1:100), IL-10 (PE-Dazzle594, JES3-19F1, Cat.-No. 506812, dilution 1:200), CD127 (BV605, A019D5, Cat.-No. 351334, dilution 1:50 / BV711, A019D5, Cat.-No. 351328, dilution 1:200), CD25 (BV650, BC96, Cat.-No. 302634, dilution 1:50), ICOS(BV421, C398.4A, Cat.-No. 313524, dilution 1:100), CXCR5 (PE-Cy7, J252D4, Cat.-No. 356924, dilution 1:300) and FOXP3 (FITC, 206D, Cat.-No. 320112, dilution 1:100) from BioLegend (San Diego, USA); FOXP3 (AF647, 206D, Cat.-No. 320113, dilution 1:100) from eBioscience/ ThermoFisher Scientific (Massachusetts, USA); and CD3 (BUV395, SK7, Cat.-No. 564001, dilution 1:200), CD19 (A700, HIB19, Cat.-No. 557921, dilution 1:200), CD27 (PerCP-Cy5.5, M-T271, Cat.-No. 560612, dilution 1:100), CD38 (PE-Cy7, HB7, Cat.-No. 335825, dilution 1:100) and CD20 (PE-Cy5, 2H7, Cat.-No. 555624, dilution 1:100) from BD (Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, USA). For surface staining, cells were incubated with the antibody mixture prepared in PBS for 30 min at 4 °C in the dark. For intracellular and intranuclear staining, cells were permeabilized using the Cytofix/Cytoperm kit (BD) or the FOXP3 staining kit (eBioscience), respectively, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Antibodies were diluted in the respective wash buffer. The samples were acquired at a BD Fortessa flow cytometer using the Diva software and analyzed using FlowJo. Missing values in the shown data sets arose due to sample availability (e.g. sampling time points, amount of frozen PBMCs) or samples/values were excluded due to processing or measurement inconsistencies. Missing single values are indicated in the Source Data file. For the Stochastic neighbor embedding (t-distributed) analysis (tSNE), compensated samples were randomly down-sampled with regard to the number of acquired cells. This was accomplished by using the respective plug-in to reduce the event rate to 3000 events per individual sample per time point. This was done in order to exclude any bias resulting from the inclusion of different cell numbers. The reduced samples were labeled, concatenated and the tSNE analysis was performed using the respective plug-in. The resulting data were plotted with intensities for the depicted markers. The statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (version 6.0 and 8.4.3 for Windows, GraphPad Software, La Jolla, California USA, www.graphpad.com) applying student’s t-test and two-way ANOVA in combination with the uncorrected Fisher’s LSD test or Mixed-effects analysis in cases with missing values. The uncorrected Fisher’s LSD test is a follow-up test of an ANOVA and represents a set of individual t tests, thus not correcting for multiple comparisons.Analysis of the TREG‐specific demethylated region (TSDR)For the sorting of CD4+ T cells, PBMCs were labeled with anti-CD3 (AF488, UCHT1, Cat.-No.300415, dilution 1:200) and anti-CD4 (AF647, RPA-T4, Cat.-No. 300520, dilution 1:200) conjugates (BioLegend). Dead cells were excluded using the LIVE/DEAD™ Fixable Near-IR Dead Cell Stain Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Cells were sorted as living CD3+CD4+ cells. DNA was subsequently extracted from sorted cells using the DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Afterward, the extracted DNA was concentrated using DNA Clean & Concentrator™−10 (Zymo Research, Irvine, USA). Bisulfite conversion was performed as described earlier107. Methylation‐specific real‐time PCR was performed as recently described108,109, using a minimum of 60 ng bisulfite‐treated genomic DNA. Results are reported as percentage of T cells with demethylated TSDR.Bulk transcriptome analysisFor the bulk transcriptome analysis, whole blood samples frozen in PAXgene™ tubes (BD) were used. The “PAXgene Blood miRNA Kit” (Qiagen) was used for the purification of miRNA and total RNA. The quality and integrity of the resulting total RNA were controlled on Agilent Technologies 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies; Waldbronn, Germany). 100 ng total RNA was depleted for rRNA and globin by using the QIAseq® FastSelectTM RNA Removal Kit (Qiagen). The RNA Sequencing library was prepared with NEBNext® Ultra™ II Directional RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (New England Biolabs). The libraries were sequenced on Illumina NovaSeq 6000 using NovaSeq 6000 S2 Reagent Kit (100 cycles, paired-ended run) with an average of 50 × 106 reads per RNA sample.Single-cell RNA sequencingFor the single cell analysis, cryopreserved PBMCs derived from three responders and three non-responders taken before and 7 days post-vaccination were thawed and re-stimulated with the antigen mixture as described above for the flow cytometry approach. Subsequently, CD45-expressing cells were sorted and loaded into a well on a 10× Chromium Single Cell instrument (10x Genomics). The cDNA libraries were constructed using the 10× Chromium™ Single cell 5′ Library Kit according to the manufacturer’s original protocol. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 2 × 50 paired-end kits using the following read length: 26 bp Read1 for cell barcode and a unique molecular identifier (UMI), 8 bp I7 index for sample index and 89 bp Read2 for transcript. Cell Ranger 3.0.1 (http://10xgenomics.com) was used to process the Chromium single cell 5′ RNA-seq output. First, “cellranger mkfastq” demultiplexed the sequencing samples based on the 8 bp sample index read to generate fastq files for the Read1 and Read2, followed by extraction of 16 bp cell barcode and 10 bp UMI. Second, “cellranger count” aligned the Read2 to the human reference genome (GRCh38) using STAR. Then, aligned reads were used to generate a data matrix only when they had valid barcodes and UMI and when they mapped to exons without PCR duplicates. Valid cell barcodes were defined based on UMI distribution.Data normalization and clustering of single-cell study: UMI count matrices were imported to R/Seurat package v3.1 for downstream analyses. For quality control, we excluded genes that were expressed in less than three cells. We further excluded cells with more than 15% mitochondrial reads, less than 100 or more than 3000 expressed genes and more than 10,000 detected transcripts. LogNormalization in Seurat package was applied before downstream analysis. The original gene counts for each cell were normalized by total UMI counts, multiplied by 10,000 (TP10k) and the log-transformed by log10 (TP10k + 1). Subsequently, the data was scaled, centered, and regressed against the number of detected transcripts per cell to correct for heterogeneity associated with differences in sequencing depth. After correction, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed based on the 2000 most variable features identified using the vst method implemented in Seurat. The cells were then clustered using the Louvain algorithm based on the first 20 “PCA” dimensions with a resolution of 0.4. For two-dimensional data visualization, we performed UMAP also based on the first 20 “pca” dimensions. Cell population annotation was based on the respective clustering results combined with data-driven classification from SingleR and expression of known marker genes110.Differentially expressed (DE) genes in scRNA-seq: DE tests were estimated using FindMarkers/FindAllMarkers functions in Seurat v3.1 with the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. For each comparison, unless specifically described, genes that were expressed at least 10% in the tested group and had Bonferroni corrected P values ≤0.05 were regarded as significantly differentially expressed (DE) genes. Cluster or sub-group marker genes were identified by applying DE tests for upregulated genes between cells in one cluster/sub-group to all other clusters in the tested dataset.Quantification of the percentages of cell populations in the PBMC scRNA-seq data: To compare shifts in the PBMC compartment of responder and non-responder volunteers, the percentages of the cellular subsets, as identified by clustering and cluster annotation explained above for the two-time points of scRNA-seq datasets (D0 and D7), of the total number of PBMC in each dataset were quantified per sample and visualized together in boxplots. To determine the statistical significance of differences in cell proportions between the responders and non-responders, a Dirichlet regression model (R/DirichletReg package) was used accounting for compositional dependencies (e.g. non-independence)111,112. Considering the proportions of all cell types sum to 1 in each sample, we used the Dirichlet-multinomial regression model to test for the differences in proportion of each cell type between sample type (responder vs. non-responder) or sample time (day 0, day 7), while accounting proportions of all other cell types as dependencies. This analysis was performed based on the scripts provided in ref. 112. The p values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure.Mathematical modelingThe expansion rates were modeled using the absolute cell numbers of different cell types in the group of responders and non-responders at day 0, day 3, and/or day 6. The MATLAB 2016a function (fit) was employed to fit linearly (y = mx + b) the first increase observed between day 0 and 3 in each cell type, allowing to record the slope for each vaccinee. Note that this term is broadly defined as “expansion”. However, this term can be a combination of different events happening in the blood compartment after vaccination, e.g. proliferation, migration, and differentiation. The area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC)113,114,115 is computed. Here, the higher the AUC, the better the model is at distinguishing between responders and non-responders with a value of 1 describing a model with an outstanding discrimination. Two-tailed tests were used to assess the significance between-group differences: the two-sample t-test (MATLAB function ttest2) and the Wilcoxon rank sum test (MATLAB function ranksum).Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability Source data are provided with this paper. RNA sequencing data sets that support the findings of this study are available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE211368 (bulk RNA sequencing) and https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE211560 (scRNA sequencing). The microbiome sequencing data set is available from https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB56539. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesDe Cock, K. M., Simone, P. M., Davison, V. & Slutsker, L. The new global health. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 19, 1192–1197 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar (WHO), W.H.O. http://www.who.int/influenza/en/.Kovacs, G. et al. Medical and economic burden of influenza in the elderly population in central and eastern European countries. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 10, 428–440 (2014).Article Google Scholar de Francisco Shapovalova, N., Donadel, M., Jit, M. & Hutubessy, R. A systematic review of the social and economic burden of influenza in low- and middle-income countries. Vaccine 33, 6537–6544 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar Lambert, N. D., Ovsyannikova, I. G., Pankratz, V. S., Jacobson, R. M. & Poland, G. A. Understanding the immune response to seasonal influenza vaccination in older adults: a systems biology approach. Expert Rev. Vaccines 11, 985–994 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lang, P. O. et al. Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in aging and older adults: comprehensive analysis of the evidence. Clin. Interv. Aging 7, 55–64 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Simpson, C. R. et al. Trivalent inactivated seasonal influenza vaccine effectiveness for the prevention of laboratory-confirmed influenza in a Scottish population 2000 to 2009. Euro Surveill. 20, 21043 (2015).Tsai, T. F. Fluad(R)-MF59(R)-adjuvanted influenza vaccine in older adults. Infect. Chemother. 45, 159–174 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar O’Hagan, D. T., Ott, G. S., De Gregorio, E. & Seubert, A. The mechanism of action of MF59—an innately attractive adjuvant formulation. Vaccine 30, 4341–4348 (2012).Article PubMed Google Scholar Gasparini, R., Amicizia, D., Lai, P. L., Rossi, S. & Panatto, D. Effectiveness of adjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccines (Inflexal V (R) and Fluad (R)) in preventing hospitalization for influenza and pneumonia in the elderly: a matched case-control study. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 9, 144–152 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Domnich, A. et al. Effectiveness of MF59-adjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccine in the elderly: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Vaccine 35, 513–520 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wiedermann, U., Garner-Spitzer, E. & Wagner, A. Primary vaccine failure to routine vaccines: why and what to do. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 12, 239–243 (2016).Article Google Scholar Furman, D. et al. Apoptosis and other immune biomarkers predict influenza vaccine responsiveness. Mol. Syst. Biol. 9, 659 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Furman, D. & Davis, M. M. New approaches to understanding the immune response to vaccination and infection. Vaccine 33, 5271–5281 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Querec, T. D. et al. Systems biology approach predicts immunogenicity of the yellow fever vaccine in humans. Nat. Immunol. 10, 116–125 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pulendran, B. Systems vaccinology: probing humanity’s diverse immune systems with vaccines. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 12300–12306 (2014).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pulendran, B., Li, S. & Nakaya, H. I. Systems vaccinology. Immunity 33, 516–529 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cortese, M., Sherman, A. C., Rouphael, N. G. & Pulendran, B. Systems biological analysis of immune response to influenza vaccination. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med., https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a038596 (2020).Tan, Y. et al. Gene signatures related to B-cell proliferation predict influenza vaccine-induced antibody response. Eur. J. Immunol. 44, 285–295 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nakaya, H. I. et al. Systems biology of vaccination for seasonal influenza in humans. Nat. Immunol. 12, 786–795 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nakaya, H. I. et al. Systems analysis of immunity to influenza vaccination across multiple years and in diverse populations reveals shared molecular signatures. Immunity 43, 1186–1198 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Goronzy, J. J. & Weyand, C. M. Understanding immunosenescence to improve responses to vaccines. Nat. Immunol. 14, 428–436 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Duraisingham, S. S. et al. Systems biology of vaccination in the elderly. Curr. Top. Microbiol Immunol. 363, 117–142 (2013).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Xu, W. & Larbi, A. Markers of T cell senescence in humans. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18081742 (2017).Larbi, A. & Fulop, T. From “truly naive” to “exhausted senescent” T cells: when markers predict functionality. Cytometry A 85, 25–35 (2014).Article PubMed Google Scholar Wherry, E. J. & Kurachi, M. Molecular and cellular insights into T cell exhaustion. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 486–499 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Crotty, S. T follicular helper cell differentiation, function, and roles in disease. Immunity 41, 529–542 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Linterman, M. A. & Hill, D. L. Can follicular helper T cells be targeted to improve vaccine efficacy? F1000Research 5, https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.7388.1 (2016).Aljurayyan, A. et al. Activation and induction of antigen-specific t follicular helper cells play a critical role in live-attenuated influenza vaccine-induced human mucosal anti-influenza antibody response. J. Virol. 92, https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00114-18 (2018).Pallikkuth, S. et al. Dysfunctional peripheral T follicular helper cells dominate in people with impaired influenza vaccine responses: results from the FLORAH study. PLoS Biol. 17, e3000257 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Josefowicz, S. Z., Lu, L. F. & Rudensky, A. Y. Regulatory T cells: mechanisms of differentiation and function. Annu Rev. Immunol. 30, 531–564 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Richert-Spuhler, L. E. & Lund, J. M. The immune fulcrum: regulatory T cells tip the balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory outcomes upon infection. Prog. Mol. Biol. Transl. Sci. 136, 217–243 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rosser, E. C. & Mauri, C. Regulatory B cells: origin, phenotype, and function. Immunity 42, 607–612 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Fessler, J., Ficjan, A., Duftner, C. & Dejaco, C. The impact of aging on regulatory T-cells. Front. Immunol. 4, 231 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ndure, J. & Flanagan, K. L. Targeting regulatory T cells to improve vaccine immunogenicity in early life. Front. Microbiol. 5, 477 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar de Wolf, A. et al. Regulatory T cell frequencies and phenotypes following anti-viral vaccination. PLoS One 12, e0179942 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Boer, M. C., Joosten, S. A. & Ottenhoff, T. H. Regulatory T-cells at the interface between human host and pathogens in infectious diseases and vaccination. Front. Immunol. 6, 217 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Siewe, B. et al. Regulatory B cell frequency correlates with markers of HIV disease progression and attenuates anti-HIV CD8(+) T cell function in vitro. J. Leukoc. Biol. 93, 811–818 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Siewe, B. et al. Regulatory B cells inhibit cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activity and elimination of infected CD4 T cells after in vitro reactivation of HIV latent reservoirs. PLoS One 9, e92934 (2014).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Liu, Y. et al. IL-10-producing regulatory B-cells suppressed effector T-cells but enhanced regulatory T-cells in chronic HBV infection. Clin. Sci. 130, 907–919 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Dai, Y. C., Zhong, J. & Xu, J. F. Regulatory B cells in infectious disease. Mol. Med. Rep. 16, 3–10 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bolther, M. et al. Levels of regulatory B cells do not predict serological responses to hepatitis B vaccine. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 14, 1483–1488 (2018).Article Google Scholar Yan, Q. Systems biology of influenza: understanding multidimensional interactions for personalized prevention and treatment. Methods Mol. Biol. 662, 285–302 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sherman, A. C., Mehta, A., Dickert, N. W., Anderson, E. J. & Rouphael, N. The future of flu: a review of the human challenge model and systems biology for advancement of influenza vaccinology. Front. Cell Infect. Microbiol 9, 107 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Akmatov, M. K. et al. Establishment of a cohort for deep phenotyping of the immune response to influenza vaccination among elderly individuals recruited from the general population. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 13, 1630–1639 (2017).Article Google Scholar Akmatov, M. K. et al. Self-reported diabetes and herpes zoster are associated with a weak humoral response to the seasonal influenza A H1N1 vaccine antigen among the elderly. BMC Infect. Dis. 19, 656 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bending, D. et al. Hypomethylation at the regulatory T cell-specific demethylated region in CD25hi T cells is decoupled from FOXP3 expression at the inflamed site in childhood arthritis. J. Immunol. 193, 2699–2708 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tatura, R. et al. Quantification of regulatory T cells in septic patients by real-time PCR-based methylation assay and flow cytometry. PLoS One 7, e49962 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lewnard, J. A. & Cobey, S. Immune history and influenza vaccine effectiveness. Vaccines 6, https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines6020028 (2018).Ellebedy, A. H. Immunizing the immune: can we overcome influenza’s most formidable challenge? Vaccines 6, https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines6040068 (2018).Reber, A. J. et al. Preexisting immunity, more than aging, influences influenza vaccine responses. Open Forum Infect. Dis. 2, ofv052 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rosendahl Huber, S. K. et al. Immunogenicity of influenza vaccines: evidence for differential effect of secondary vaccination on humoral and cellular immunity. Front. Immunol. 9, 3103 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Monto, A. S., Malosh, R. E., Petrie, J. G. & Martin, E. T. The doctrine of original antigenic sin: separating good from evil. J. Infect. Dis. 215, 1782–1788 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, J. et al. Persistent antibody clonotypes dominate the serum response to influenza over multiple years and repeated vaccinations. Cell Host Microbe 25, 367–376.e365 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jones-Gray, E., Robinson, E. J., Kucharski, A. J., Fox, A. & Sullivan, S. G. Does repeated influenza vaccination attenuate effectiveness? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Respir. Med., https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(22)00266-1 (2022).Castrucci, M. R. Factors affecting immune responses to the influenza vaccine. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 14, 637–646 (2018).Article Google Scholar Honce, R. & Schultz-Cherry, S. Impact of obesity on influenza A virus pathogenesis, immune response, and evolution. Front. Immunol. 10, 1071 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Schanzer, D. L., Langley, J. M. & Tam, T. W. Co-morbidities associated with influenza-attributed mortality, 1994-2000, Canada. Vaccine 26, 4697–4703 (2008).Article PubMed Google Scholar Sheridan, P. A. et al. Obesity is associated with impaired immune response to influenza vaccination in humans. Int J. Obes. 36, 1072–1077 (2012).Article CAS Google Scholar Andersen, C. J., Murphy, K. E. & Fernandez, M. L. Impact of obesity and metabolic syndrome on immunity. Adv. Nutr. 7, 66–75 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Painter, S. D., Ovsyannikova, I. G. & Poland, G. A. The weight of obesity on the human immune response to vaccination. Vaccine 33, 4422–4429 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Henney, A. M. The promise and challenge of personalized medicine: aging populations, complex diseases, and unmet medical need. Croat. Med. J. 53, 207–210 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ibrahim, R., Pasic, M. & Yousef, G. M. Omics for personalized medicine: defining the current we swim in. Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 16, 719–722 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen, R. & Snyder, M. Promise of personalized omics to precision medicine. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med. 5, 73–82 (2013).Article PubMed Google Scholar Franco, L. M. et al. Integrative genomic analysis of the human immune response to influenza vaccination. Elife 2, e00299 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tsang, J. S. et al. Global analyses of human immune variation reveal baseline predictors of postvaccination responses. Cell 157, 499–513 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wagner, A. et al. Age-related differences in humoral and cellular immune responses after primary immunisation: indications for stratified vaccination schedules. Sci. Rep. 8, 9825 (2018).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kim, C., Fang, F., Weyand, C. M. & Goronzy, J. J. The life cycle of a T cell after vaccination—where does immune ageing strike? Clin. Exp. Immunol. 187, 71–81 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Weinberger, B., Herndler-Brandstetter, D., Schwanninger, A., Weiskopf, D. & Grubeck-Loebenstein, B. Biology of immune responses to vaccines in elderly persons. Clin. Infect. Dis. 46, 1078–1084 (2008).Article PubMed Google Scholar Wang, S. M., Tsai, M. H., Lei, H. Y., Wang, J. R. & Liu, C. C. The regulatory T cells in anti-influenza antibody response post influenza vaccination. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 8, 1243–1249 (2012).Article CAS Google Scholar Brezar, V. et al. T-regulatory cells and vaccination “pay attention and do not neglect them”: lessons from HIV and cancer vaccine trials. Vaccines 4, https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines4030030 (2016).van der Heiden, M. et al. An explorative biomarker study for vaccine responsiveness after a primary meningococcal vaccination in middle-aged adults. Front. Immunol. 8, 1962 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Chae, W. J. & Bothwell, A. L. M. Therapeutic potential of gene-modified regulatory T cells: from bench to bedside. Front. Immunol. 9, 303 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Abu-Eid, R. et al. Selective inhibition of regulatory T cells by targeting the PI3K-Akt pathway. Cancer Immunol. Res. 2, 1080–1089 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Herati, R. S. et al. Circulating CXCR5+PD-1+ response predicts influenza vaccine antibody responses in young adults but not elderly adults. J. Immunol. 193, 3528–3537 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sasaki, S. et al. Limited efficacy of inactivated influenza vaccine in elderly individuals is associated with decreased production of vaccine-specific antibodies. J. Clin. Investig. 121, 3109–3119 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Palm, A. E. & Henry, C. Remembrance of things past: long-term B cell memory after infection and vaccination. Front. Immunol. 10, 1787 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Weinberg, A. et al. High proportions of regulatory B and T cells are associated with decreased cellular responses to pH1N1 influenza vaccine in HIV-infected children and youth (IMPAACT P1088).Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 9, 957–968 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Kumar, R. & Burns, E. A. Age-related decline in immunity: implications for vaccine responsiveness. Expert Rev. Vaccines 7, 467–479 (2008).Article PubMed Google Scholar Aspinall, R., Del Giudice, G., Effros, R. B., Grubeck-Loebenstein, B. & Sambhara, S. Challenges for vaccination in the elderly. Immun. Ageing 4, 9 (2007).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dorrington, M. G. & Bowdish, D. M. Immunosenescence and novel vaccination strategies for the elderly. Front. Immunol. 4, 171 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lord, J. M. The effect of ageing of the immune system on vaccination responses. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 9, 1364–1367 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Saurwein-Teissl, M. et al. Lack of antibody production following immunization in old age: association with CD8(+)CD28(-) T cell clonal expansions and an imbalance in the production of Th1 and Th2 cytokines. J. Immunol. 168, 5893–5899 (2002).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vicente, R., Mausset-Bonnefont, A. L., Jorgensen, C., Louis-Plence, P. & Brondello, J. M. Cellular senescence impact on immune cell fate and function. Aging Cell 15, 400–406 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Carre, C. et al. Endoplasmic reticulum stress response and bile acid signatures associate with multi-strain seroresponsiveness during elderly influenza vaccination. iScience 24, 102970 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fulop, T. et al. Immunosenescence and Inflamm-aging as two sides of the same coin: friends or foes. Front. Immunol. 8, 1960 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Merani, S., Pawelec, G., Kuchel, G. A. & McElhaney, J. E. Impact of aging and cytomegalovirus on immunological response to influenza vaccination and infection. Front. Immunol. 8, 784 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Derhovanessian, E. et al. Cytomegalovirus-associated accumulation of late-differentiated CD4 T-cells correlates with poor humoral response to influenza vaccination. Vaccine 31, 685–690 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Trzonkowski, P. et al. Association between cytomegalovirus infection, enhanced proinflammatory response and low level of anti-hemagglutinins during the anti-influenza vaccination–an impact of immunosenescence. Vaccine 21, 3826–3836 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Furman, D. et al. Cytomegalovirus infection enhances the immune response to influenza. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 281ra243 (2015).Article Google Scholar den Elzen, W. P. et al. Cytomegalovirus infection and responsiveness to influenza vaccination in elderly residents of long-term care facilities. Vaccine 29, 4869–4874 (2011).Article Google Scholar Sagawa, M., Kojimahara, N., Otsuka, N., Kimura, M. & Yamaguchi, N. Immune response to influenza vaccine in the elderly: association with nutritional and physical status. Geriatr. Gerontol. Int. 11, 63–68 (2011).Article PubMed Google Scholar Hara, M., Tanaka, K. & Hirota, Y. Immune response to influenza vaccine in healthy adults and the elderly: association with nutritional status. Vaccine 23, 1457–1463 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nakaya, H. I. & Bruna-Romero, O. Is the gut microbiome key to modulating vaccine efficacy. Expert Rev. Vaccines 14, 777–779 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Valdez, Y., Brown, E. M. & Finlay, B. B. Influence of the microbiota on vaccine effectiveness. Trends Immunol. 35, 526–537 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Voigt, E. A. et al. Sex differences in older adults’ immune responses to seasonal influenza vaccination. Front. Immunol. 10, 180 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Klein, S. L. & Pekosz, A. Sex-based biology and the rational design of influenza vaccination strategies. J. Infect. Dis. 209, S114–S119 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fischinger, S., Boudreau, C. M., Butler, A. L., Streeck, H. & Alter, G. Sex differences in vaccine-induced humoral immunity. Semin Immunopathol. 41, 239–249 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Potluri, T. et al. Age-associated changes in the impact of sex steroids on influenza vaccine responses in males and females. NPJ Vaccines 4, 29 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Klein, S. L., Marriott, I. & Fish, E. N. Sex-based differences in immune function and responses to vaccination. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 109, 9–15 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Akmatov, M. K. et al. Motivations for (non)participation in population-based health studies among the elderly—comparison of participants and nonparticipants of a prospective study on influenza vaccination. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 17, 18 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Brauer, R. & Chen, P. Influenza virus propagation in embryonated chicken eggs. J. Vis. Exp., https://doi.org/10.3791/52421 (2015).Trombetta, C. M., Perini, D., Mather, S., Temperton, N. & Montomoli, E. Overview of serological techniques for influenza vaccine evaluation: past, present and future. Vaccines 2, 707–734 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Luo, W., Pant, G., Bhavnasi, Y. K., Blanchard, S. G. Jr. & Brouwer, C. Pathview Web: user friendly pathway visualization and data integration. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, W501–W508 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Luo, W. & Brouwer, C. Pathview: an R/Bioconductor package for pathway-based data integration and visualization. Bioinformatics 29, 1830–1831 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Luo, W., Friedman, M. S., Shedden, K., Hankenson, K. D. & Woolf, P. J. GAGE: generally applicable gene set enrichment for pathway analysis. BMC Bioinform. 10, 161 (2009).Article Google Scholar Olek, A., Oswald, J. & Walter, J. A modified and improved method for bisulphite-based cytosine methylation analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 24, 5064–5066 (1996).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Appel, H. et al. Synovial and peripheral blood CD4+FoxP3+ T cells in spondyloarthritis. J. Rheumatol. 38, 2445–2451 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wieczorek, G. et al. Quantitative DNA methylation analysis of FOXP3 as a new method for counting regulatory T cells in peripheral blood and solid tissue. Cancer Res. 69, 599–608 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Aran, D. et al. Reference-based analysis of lung single-cell sequencing reveals a transitional profibrotic macrophage. Nat. Immunol. 20, 163–172 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Maier, M. J. DirichletReg: Dirichlet Regression for Compositional Data in R. epubwu:4077 (2014).Smillie, C. S. et al. Intra- and inter-cellular rewiring of the human colon during ulcerative colitis. Cell 178, 714–730.e722 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Griner, P. F., Mayewski, R. J., Mushlin, A. I. & Greenland, P. Selection and interpretation of diagnostic tests and procedures. Principles and applications. Ann. Intern. Med. 94, 557–592 (1981).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kung-Yee Liang, S. L. Z. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models. Biometrika 73, 13–22 (1986).Article MathSciNet MATH Google Scholar Agresti, A. Categorical Data Analysis. Book Series: Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics, https://doi.org/10.1002/0471249688 (2002).Shannon, P. et al. Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 13, 2498–2504 (2003).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bindea, G. et al. ClueGO: a Cytoscape plug-in to decipher functionally grouped gene ontology and pathway annotation networks. Bioinformatics 25, 1091–1093 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThe work was funded by iMed, the Helmholtz Association’s Cross Programme Initiative on Personalized Medicine and by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2155 “RESIST” – Project ID 390874280. Y.L. was supported by an ERC Starting Grant (948207) and the Radboud University Medical Centre Hypatia Grant (2018) for Scientific Research. T.S. is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy - EXC 2155 - project number 390874280. CiiM and TWINCORE are joint ventures between the Hannover Medical School and the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research. We thank Blair Prochnow for critical proofreading of the manuscript.FundingOpen Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Peggy Riese, Stephanie Tritte, Frank Pessler, Carlos A. Guzmán.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment Vaccinology and Applied Microbiology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Inhoffenstraße 7, 38124, Braunschweig, GermanyPeggy Riese, Stephanie Trittel & Carlos A. GuzmánResearch Group Biomarkers for Infectious Diseases, TWINCORE Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Medicine, Feodor-Lynen-Straße 7, 30625, Hannover, GermanyManas K. Akmatov, Till Strowig & Frank PesslerDepartment Epidemiology and Health Care Atlas, Central Research Institute of Ambulatory Health Care, Salzufer 8, 10587, Berlin, GermanyManas K. AkmatovCenter for Clinical Trials (ZKS), Early Clinical Trial Unit, Hannover Medical School, Feodor-Lynen-Straße 15, 30625, Hannover, GermanyMarcus May & Christoph SchindlerHannover Unified Biobank, Hannover Medical School, Feodor-Lynen-Straße 15, 30625, Hannover, GermanyJana Prokein & Thomas IlligInstitute of Medical Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Augustenburger Pl. 1, 13353, Berlin, GermanyBirgit SawitzkiBerlin Institute of Health (BIH), Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Anna-Louisa-Karsch-Straße 2, 10178, Berlin, GermanyBirgit SawitzkiDepartment Experimental Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Inhoffenstraße 7, 38124, Braunschweig, GermanyYassin Elfaki, Stefan Floess & Jochen HuehnCluster of Excellence RESIST (EXC 2155), Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, GermanyJochen Huehn & Till StrowigDepartment Microbial Immune Regulation, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Inhoffenstraße 7, 38124, Braunschweig, GermanyAdrian J. Błażejewski & Till StrowigCentre for Individualised Infection Medicine (CiiM), Feodor-Lynen-Straße 7, 30625, Hannover, GermanyTill StrowigDepartment of Mathematics and Statistical Science, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, 83844–1103, USAEsteban A. Hernandez-VargasRG Genome Analytics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Inhoffenstraße 7, 38124, Braunschweig, GermanyRobert GeffersDepartment of Computational Biology for Individualised Medicine, Centre for Individualised Infection Medicine (CiiM), Feodor-Lynen-Straße 7, 30625, Hannover, GermanyBowen Zhang & Yang LiTWINCORE Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, Feodor-Lynen-Straße 7, 30625, Hannover, GermanyBowen Zhang & Yang LiDepartment of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, 6525, GA, Nijmegen, the NetherlandsYang LiAuthorsPeggy RieseView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarStephanie TrittelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarManas K. AkmatovView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMarcus MayView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJana ProkeinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarThomas IlligView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChristoph SchindlerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBirgit SawitzkiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYassin ElfakiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarStefan FloessView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJochen HuehnView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdrian J. BłażejewskiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTill StrowigView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEsteban A. Hernandez-VargasView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRobert GeffersView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBowen ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYang LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFrank PesslerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCarlos A. GuzmánView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsP.R. and S.T. planned and performed experiments, performed the analysis, accessed and verified the data and wrote and revised the original draft and final manuscript. M.K.A. participated in the study design and oversaw/performed data management. J.P., T.I., M.M., and C.S. were responsible for the bio banking of the obtained samples, collection and management of clinical data, and provided the infrastructure for performing the study. BS performed the methylation-sensitive PCR. Y.E., S.F., and J.H. performed the T.S.D.R. analyses and analyzed the data. A.J.B. and T.S. performed the microbiome analysis. E.A.H.-V. performed the mathematical modeling analyses. R.G., B.Z., and Y.L. performed the scRNA Seq experiments and analyzed the data. J.P., J.H., M.K.A., B.Z., and Y.L. revised the manuscript. F.P. and C.A.G. planned the study, oversaw all analyses, secured funding and critically revised the original draft and final manuscript. All authors approved the final version.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Peggy Riese.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Amy Lee and Suryaprakash Sambhara for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationReporting SummarySource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleRiese, P., Trittel, S., Akmatov, M.K. et al. Distinct immunological and molecular signatures underpinning influenza vaccine responsiveness in the elderly. Nat Commun 13, 6894 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34487-zDownload citationReceived: 20 October 2021Accepted: 26 October 2022Published: 12 November 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34487-zShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Insights into vaccines for elderly individuals: from the impacts of immunosenescence to delivery strategies Yingying HouMin ChenRongsheng Tong npj Vaccines (2024) Distinct baseline immune characteristics associated with responses to conjugated and unconjugated pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines in older adults Sathyabaarathi RavichandranFernando Erra-DiazDuygu Ucar Nature Immunology (2024) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyAge-induced prostaglandin E2 impairs mitochondrial fitness and increases mortality to influenza infection | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Age-induced prostaglandin E2 impairs mitochondrial fitness and increases mortality to influenza infection Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 09 November 2022 Age-induced prostaglandin E2 impairs mitochondrial fitness and increases mortality to influenza infection Judy Chen ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-5469-66191,2, Jane C. Deng1,2,3, Rachel L. Zemans ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3537-98691,3, Karim Bahmed4,5, Beata Kosmider4,5, Min Zhang6, Marc Peters-Golden ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9768-02621,2,3 & …Daniel R. Goldstein ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6695-979X1,2,7 Show authors Nature Communications volume 13, Article number: 6759 (2022) Cite this article 7583 Accesses 15 Citations 162 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects AgeingInfectionInfluenza virus AbstractAging impairs the immune responses to influenza A virus (IAV), resulting in increased mortality to IAV infections in older adults. However, the factors within the aged lung that compromise host defense to IAV remain unknown. Using a murine model and human samples, we identified prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), as such a factor. Senescent type II alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) are overproducers of PGE2 within the aged lung. PGE2 impairs the proliferation of alveolar macrophages (AMs), critical cells for defense against respiratory pathogens, via reduction of oxidative phosphorylation and mitophagy. Importantly, blockade of the PGE2 receptor EP2 in aged mice improves AM mitochondrial function, increases AM numbers and enhances survival to IAV infection. In conclusion, our study reveals a key mechanism that compromises host defense to IAV, and possibly other respiratory infections, with aging and suggests potential new therapeutic or preventative avenues to protect against viral respiratory disease in older adults. Similar content being viewed by others Premature aging effects on COVID-19 pathogenesis: new insights from mouse models Article Open access 24 August 2024 Gasdermin D promotes influenza virus-induced mortality through neutrophil amplification of inflammation Article Open access 29 March 2024 Severity of neonatal influenza infection is driven by type I interferon and oxidative stress Article 09 November 2022 IntroductionInfluenza A virus (IAV) remains a serious health burden that disproportionately affects older individuals. Most young people who contract IAV only experience mild to moderate symptoms, but older individuals (≥65 years of age) experience higher rates of susceptibility, mortality, and complications such as secondary bacterial infections1,2. For example, 86% of the deaths due to 2017–2018 seasonal IAV infections in the United States (US) occurred in individuals 65 years or older3, even though this age group is only 13% of the total US population4. Compounding this issue, the three classes of anti-IAV medications: adamantanes, neuraminidase inhibitors, and cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitors, exhibit limited effectiveness in older individuals5,6. Overall, the susceptibility of older individuals to IAV is of increasing concern as the average age of the world’s population continues to rise across the globe7.Alveolar macrophages (AMs) are airway and airspace resident macrophages that maintain lung homeostasis and respond rapidly to respiratory pathogens. The importance of AMs in controlling IAV infection is exhibited by the rapid weight loss, increased tissue damage, and poor survival in IAV-infected murine models of genetic AM deficiency or pharmacological AM depletion8,9. Adoptive transfer experiments in which AMs isolated from young mice are transferred into aged mice and vice versa show that the aging-associated transcriptomic differences in AMs before infection are driven by the local aged lung microenvironment10. However, the specific factors within the aged lung that contribute to the aging-associated defects of AMs remain unknown, thereby precluding our ability to target the underlying signals.Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is a immune-modulating lipid and prior studies, including our own, have found that PGE2 levels are increased in the lung with aging in mice11,12. However, it is not clear if aging elevates PGE2 levels human lungs. PGE2 is associated with various inflammatory conditions including rheumatoid arthritis13 and cancer14, as well as infections including IAV infection15. However, the key clinically relevant question of whether PGE2 is a causal factor in the aged lung contributing to compromised host defense to viral infection remains unanswered.Cellular senescence is a hallmark of aging16 that is characterized by the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), in which senescent cells secrete inflammatory mediators such as cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors, at steady state17,18. As senescent cells accumulate with age, increased production of SASP factors contribute to the low-grade, chronic inflammation associated with aging19,20. Although the majority of known SASP factors are proteins, emerging evidence indicates that lipids also contribute to SASP21,22. However, it remains unclear whether senescence within the lung contributes to elevated PGE2 levels with aging. Moreover, the identity of cell type(s) that contribute to age-elevated PGE2 either independently or in response to viral infection are unknown.Here, we tested our hypothesis of whether age-elevated PGE2 is a critical factor that impairs host defense to IAV infection. We show that senescent type II alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) are a major contributor to age-associated elevations of PGE2 in the lung before and after IAV infection in mice. We also show that PGE2 increases in the lung with age in humans. We reveal that PGE2, through the EP2 receptor, limits AM proliferation and mitochondrial fitness with aging. Critically, we show that blocking the EP2 receptor improves survival of aged, but not young, mice to lethal IAV infection. Our study has revealed a novel pathophysiological cross talk between type II AECs and AMs via elevated PGE2 that impairs host defense to IAV with aging.ResultsType II AECs are a primary source of PGE2 in the aged lungPrior studies, including our own, have shown that PGE2 is increased in the aged lung, specifically within the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), in non-infected mice11,12. However, cellular sources driving the age-associated increase of PGE2 remain unknown. To identify which lung cell type(s) secrete(s) PGE2 with aging, we initially utilized a scRNA-seq dataset (Tabula Muris, GEO GSE109774)23 to identify the cell types that highly express the enzymes COX1 and COX2, both critical, rate-limiting enzymes of PGE2 production24,25. COX1 is encoded by the gene Ptgs1 and COX2 is encoded by the gene Ptgs2. Our initial query showed that epithelial cells exhibited high expression of both genes (Supplementary Fig. 1a). To determine if type I or type II alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) are potent PGE2 producers, we re-analyzed publicly available scRNA-seq data of AECs (GEO GSE113049) and found that type II AECs express ~5.5-fold higher transcript levels of Ptgs1 and ~8.5-fold higher transcript levels of Ptgs2, relative to type I AECs (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Therefore, we considered type II, rather than type I, AECs as potential contributors to PGE2 levels with aging. Given that myeloid immune cells are known secretors of PGE226,27,28, we also considered that AMs, lung resident myeloid cells, as candidate contributors to the overproduction of PGE2 with aging. The localization of both type II AECs and AMs at the alveolar surface make them prime candidates to account for the excess PGE2 levels found in the BALF of aged mice.We isolated and cultured both AMs and type II AECs from non-infected young (2–4 months of age) and aged (18–22 months of age) female C57BL/6 mice. Following 2 days of culture, we collected the cell culture medium and measured PGE2 by ELISA. We found that type II AECs produced PGE2 at 3 orders of magnitude higher than AMs regardless of host age (Fig. 1a). Importantly, type II AECs from aged mice produced ~2-fold more PGE2 than type II AECs from young mice (Fig. 1a). Type II AECs isolated from young and aged mice had similar rates of viability and apoptosis following cell culture (Supplementary Fig. 1c, d), indicating that the differences in PGE2 levels are not due to culture viability differences. These results suggest that type II AECs, but not AMs, are a major source of PGE2 in the BALF at steady state, and aging increases the production of PGE2 by type II AECs.Fig. 1: Type II AECs are a primary source of PGE2 in the aged lung.a, b Primary type II AECs and AMs were isolated from young and aged C57BL/6 mice and then cultured ex vivo. Cell culture medium was collected after 2 days and analyzed by ELISA for PGE2. a Basal PGE2 secretion by primary type II AECs and AMs in culture. n = 7 for Young AECs, n = 4 for young AMs, n = 6 for Aged AECs, n = 5 for Aged AMs. b Primary type II AECs were isolated from young and aged C57BL/6 mice and were infected ex vivo with PR8 IAV (MOI = 0.1). Cell culture medium was collected following 2 days of culture and analyzed for PGE2 via ELISA. n = 5 for Young -IAV, n = 8 for Young +IAV, n = 6 for Aged -IAV, n = 6 for Aged +IAV. c PGE2 from the BALF of young (2–4 months) and aged (18–22 months) female C57BL/6 mice infected with 400 pfu of PR8 IAV intranasally measured at 0, 1, 3, 6 and 8 days post infection (dpi). n = 6 for young 1 dpi. n = 7 for aged 1 dpi. n = 8 for aged 1 dpi. n = 9 for young 0 dpi and young 6 dpi. n = 10 for young 8 dpi. n = 11 for aged 3 dpi. n = 12 for young 3 dpi. n = 13 for aged 8 dpi. n = 15 for aged 6 dpi. For panels a–c, statistical significance analyzed by ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test, error bars represent SEM and each point represents a biological replicate. d PGE2 levels were measured from the BALF of 22 healthy human subjects. The correlation between ln-normalized PGE2 levels and age was calculated using simple linear regression. The p value of the slope was calculated based on the null hypothesis of slope = 0 and the alternative hypothesis of slope ≠ 0. Each point represents one biological replicate. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageWe next determined if IAV infection increases PGE2 production by type II AECs and whether aging exacerbates the phenotype. Hence, we cultured type II AECs isolated from either young or aged mice, infected the AECs ex vivo with IAV at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 for 2 days and subsequently measured PGE2 in the culture medium via ELISA. Importantly, IAV led to increased PGE2 production by ~1.5-fold in aged type II AECs, and infected type II AECs from aged mice producing ~2-fold higher levels of PGE2 as compared to infected type II AECs isolated from young mice (Fig. 1b).We next examined how aging and IAV infection impacts PGE2 levels within the BALF in vivo. Hence, we infected young and aged female C57BL/6 mice with 400 plaque forming units (pfu) of H1N1 A/PR/8/34 IAV intranasally (i.n.) as 400 pfu is the lethal dose 70% (LD70) in aged mice (Supplementary Fig. 1e, survival tracked up to 15 days post infection (dpi)) and collected the BALF at 0, 1, 3, 6, and 8 dpi for the PGE2 ELISA. Prior to infection (i.e., 0 dpi), aged mice exhibited ~2-fold higher levels of PGE2 as compared to young mice (Fig. 1c) and at 8 dpi aged mice exhibited a ~3-fold increase of PGE2 in the BALF as compared with infected young mice (Fig. 1c). Overall, these ex vivo and in vivo results demonstrate that aging upregulates PGE2 secretion within the lung both in the presence and absence of IAV infection.We next determined whether the age-enhanced levels of PGE2 in the BALF is a genotype- or sex- specific phenomenon, by measuring PGE2 in the BALF of young (6 months) and aged (22 months) male non-infected UM-HET3 mice, a 4-way crossed outbred mouse strain used by the National Institute on Aging Interventions Testing Program29. Similar to the female C57BL/6 mice, the aged male UM-HET3 exhibited a ~3-fold increase of PGE2 within the BALF compared to the young mice (Supplementary Fig. 1f).To determine if BALF PGE2 levels increase with aging in humans, we analyzed PGE2 levels in BALF collected from 22 healthy human patients (Supplementary Table 1). Using simple linear regression, we found a positive correlation between age and PGE2 levels in the BALF (Fig. 1d). Taken together, these results indicate that increasing PGE2 levels in the BALF with aging is a conserved finding across sex, genotype, and species.Senescence increases PGE2 by type II AECsNext, we sought to determine a cellular mechanism by which aging increases PGE2 production by type II AECs, and focused our attention on senescence as a possible mechanism. To determine if senescence increases PGE2 secretion by type II AECs and if PGE2 is a SASP factor within the lung, we first characterized whether type II AECs from aged mice exhibit features of senescence. We found that type II AECs from aged mice exhibited a ~2–3-fold increased secretion of two SASP factors, IL-6 and TNF-α, as compared to type II AECs from non-infected young mice (Fig. 2a, b). Type II AECs from young mice had undetectable levels of the senescence marker p21, whereas type II AECs from aged mice exhibited high expression of p21 (Fig. 2c). Overall, these results show that type II AECs isolated from aged mice exhibit evidence of senescence.Fig. 2: Senescence increases PGE2 by type II AECs.a, b Primary type II AECs and AMs were isolated from young and aged C57BL/6 mice and then cultured ex vivo. Cell culture medium was collected after 2 days and analyzed by ELISA for secreted factors. a IL-6 secreted by primary type II AECs in culture. b TNF-α secreted by primary type II AECs in culture. n = 8 for young AEC and n = 6 for Aged AEC. c Primary type II AECs isolated from young and aged C57BL/6 mice were lysed and analyzed for p21 expression by Western blot. n = 6/group. For panels a–c, statistical significance analyzed by Mann–Whitney, error bars represents SEM and each point represents a biological replicate. d Primary type II AECs isolated from young C57BL/6 mice were irradiated with increasing levels of radiation (0, 5, 10, or 15 Gy) to induce senescence. Cell culture medium was collected and analyzed for PGE2 levels by ELISA. n = 6/group. e Primary type II AECs isolated from young and aged C57BL/6 mice were treated with D&Q (20 nM/5 µM) for 48 h. Cell culture medium was collected and analyzed for PGE2 by ELISA. PGE2 levels were normalized to the cellular protein levels of adherent, live type II AECs. n = 7 for Young control, Young D&Q, and Aged control. n = 5 for Aged D&Q. For panels d and e, statistical significance analyzed by ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test, error bars represent SEM and each point represents a biological replicate. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageTo determine if senescence increases PGE2 secretion, we irradiated type II AECs isolated from young mice with either 0, 5, 10, or 15 Gy of radiation to induce a senescent phenotype within the cells30. The levels of p21 in type II AECs increased with increasing doses of radiation, confirming the induction of a senescence phenotype (Supplementary Fig. 2a). We then measured PGE2 in the cell culture medium of the radiated type II AECs by ELISA and found increasing PGE2 production with increasing irradiation, correlating with p21 expression (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. 2b).To determine the necessity of senescence for PGE2 overproduction in type II AECs with aging, we cultured type II AECs from young and aged mice with dasatinib and quercetin (D&Q), a combination senolytic treatment that depletes senescent cells31,32. D&Q treatment reduced p21 expression in type II AECs from aged mice as measured by western blotting, validating our approach (Supplementary Fig. 2c). We then measured secreted PGE2 levels in the culture medium and normalized the results based on total protein levels of live, adherent type II AECs. The senolytic D&Q treatment reduced PGE2 secretion of type II AECs from aged mice by ~5.5-fold (Fig. 2e). However, the D&Q treatment did not significantly alter PGE2 secretion of type II AECs from young mice, as expected.Taken together, these results suggest that PGE2 is a SASP factor produced by senescent type II AECs, and that senescent type II AECs are a major producer of PGE2 in the lung with aging.Blocking PGE2 signaling via the EP2 receptor increases AM numbers in aged miceWe next examined the in vivo consequences of age-elevated PGE2 levels in the lung. Of the four PGE2 receptors, EP2 and EP4 have been shown to be upregulated on AMs during IAV infection15. In particular, PGE2 signaling through the EP2 receptor regulates AM functions such as phagocytosis of bacteria33, toll-like receptor expression34, and production of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3)35 and in vitro proliferation capacity11. Based on this and our results thus far, we hypothesized that age-elevated PGE2 levels reduce AM numbers and function in a way that primes aged animals to IAV infection. It has been previously shown that aging reduces the number of AMs in female C57BL/6 mice8, and we first confirmed that this phenotype is generalizable to young and aged male UM-HET3 mice (Supplementary Fig. 3a).We next investigated whether PGE2 signaling affects AM numbers in vivo, by blocking PGE2 signaling via intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of an antagonist against the EP2 receptor36 daily for 7 days, followed by the enumeration of AMs (defined as CD45+ CD11c+ SiglecF+) from the BALF by flow cytometry. This treatment reduced PGE2-induced cAMP, a downstream molecule of the PGE2 receptors14, in the lungs (Supplementary Fig. 3b), validating our approach. Blocking PGE2 signaling through the EP2 receptor significantly increased total AM numbers by ~1.3-fold in aged mice (Fig. 3a). In contrast, blocking the EP2 receptor in young C57BL/6 mice did not alter total AM numbers (Supplementary Fig. 3c). These results show that excessive PGE2-EP2 signaling is a major factor that limits AM numbers in the aging lung.Fig. 3: Blocking PGE2 signaling via the EP2 receptor increases AM numbers in aged mice.a–c Aged (18–22 months) C57BL/6 mice were given 7 daily i.p. injections of an EP2 antagonist. Concurrently, BrdU (0.8 mg/mL) was given in the drinking water ad libitum. AMs (i.e., CD45+ CD11c+ SiglecF+) were then collected from the BALF and analyzed by flow cytometry for BrdU incorporation, indicating proliferation, and Annexin V staining, indicating apoptosis. a Total cell count of lavaged AMs. n = 6/group. b Percentage of AMs that are BrdU+. n = 5/group. c Percentage of AMs that are Annexin V+. n = 6/group. d–f Aged mice were given clodronate-loaded liposomes to deplete resident AMs prior to an adoptive transfer of CFSE+ WT or EP2 KO AMs as depicted in (d). e, f AMs were analyzed by flow cytometry 4 weeks following transfer for CFSE dilution, a marker of proliferation n = 6/group. f Representative histogram of CFSE MFI. For panels a–e, statistical significance analyzed by Mann–Whitney, error bars represent SEM and each point represents a biological replicate. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageIncreased proliferation and/or reduced apoptosis could explain the increase in AM numbers seen with the EP2 receptor blockade. Using BrdU to label proliferating cells37, we found that blocking the EP2 receptor in aged mice led to a ~2-fold increase in the percent of BrdU-positive AMs compared to the vehicle control (Fig. 3b). On the other hand, Annexin V staining for apoptotic cells revealed that EP2 receptor blockade does not affect AM apoptosis in aged mice (Fig. 3c).To determine if the EP2 antagonist, which was given systemically, increased AM proliferation in an AM-dependent manner, we gave aged mice clodronate-loaded liposomes i.n. to deplete resident AMs and then performed an adoptive transfer of CSFE-labeled C57BL/6 WT AMs or AMs deficient of the EP2 receptor (EP2 KO) (Fig. 3d). Four weeks following the transfer, we analyzed the proliferation of the transferred AMs as measured by CFSE dilution. We observed that the EP2 KO AMs had higher rates of proliferation compared to the WT AMs within aged mice (Fig. 3e, f). Overall, these results show that PGE2 limits AM numbers with aging, via the EP2 receptor, by reducing AM proliferation and without altering apoptosis.To determine if aging alters the expression of the EP2 receptor on AMs, we re-analyzed a publicly available RNA-seq dataset (GEO GSE134397) of sorted AMs from young and aged mice10. The trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) normalized counts from the RNA-seq dataset showed no age-associated differences in expression of the EP2 receptors on AMs on a transcriptomic level (Supplementary Fig. 3d), indicating that the differential response to EP2 antagonism in young versus aged mice is independent of altered expression of the EP2 receptor and is instead likely to reflect the higher levels of PGE2.PGE2 signaling impairs the mitochondrial fitness of AMsReduced mitochondrial function, specifically the inhibition of the electron transport chain and oxidative phosphorylation, has been shown to limit proliferation in a variety of cell types such as intestinal stem cells38, Jurkat cells39, vascular smooth muscle cells40, and human colon cancer cells HCT11641. In addition, PGE2 has been shown to limit oxidative phosphorylation in human monocyte-derived macrophages27. Hence, we hypothesized that a plausible mechanism underlying the effect of PGE2 on AM proliferation might be reduction of mitochondrial fitness and energetic output. To test this, we collected AMs from EP2 antagonist or vehicle-treated aged mice and measured their mitochondrial mass via MitoTracker, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) via MitoSOX, and mitochondrial membrane potential via tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM) staining. Our results indicate that blocking the EP2 receptor reduced mitochondrial mass (Fig. 4a), mitochondrial ROS (Fig. 4b), and mitochondrial membrane potential (Fig. 4c) of AMs in aged mice. Similarly, in ex vivo culture of AMs isolated from young C57BL/6 mice, PGE2 treatment increased MitoTracker staining for mitochondrial mass by ~1.3-fold (Fig. 4d). Analyzing the mitochondria of AMs isolated from young and aged mice by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) also showed that the area per mitochondria in AMs also increases with age (Fig. 4e, f).Fig. 4: PGE2 signaling impairs the mitochondrial fitness of AMs.a–c Aged C57BL/6 mice were given EP2 antagonist or vehicle daily for 7 days. AMs were collected from the BALF, stained with a MitoTracker DeepRed to measure mitochondrial mass n = 4/group, b MitoSox to measure mitochondrial ROS n = 5/group, or c TMRM to measure mitochondrial membrane potential n = 6/group. The mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) was quantified. d AMs from young mice were cultured with 1 µM of PGE2 or vehicle. Cells were stained with MitoTracker DeepRed and analyzed by flow cytometry. n = 5 for RPMI only and n = 6 for 1 µM PGE2. For panels a–d, statistical significance analyzed by Mann–Whitney, error bars represent SEM and each point represents a biological replicate. e, f AMs were collected from the BALF of young and aged C57BL/6 mice and imaged. e Area of the mitochondria. Statistical significance analyzed by Mann–Whitney. n = 100 mitochondria/group. From top to bottom, the dashed lines in the violin plots represent upper quartile, median, and lower quartile. f Representative TEM images. Mitochondria indicated with small white triangles. g, h AMs from MitoQC mice were analyzed by flow cytometry. Mitophagy index was calculated based on the ratio between the mCherry and GFP signals. Mitophagy indexes were normalized within experiments to the control (i.e., young mice or vehicle). g AMs from young (2–3 months) and aged (22–25 months) non-infected MitoQC mice. n = 9 for Young AMs and n = 7 for Aged AMs. h AMs from non-infected MitoQC (9–10 months) mice, given daily injections of either EP2 antagonist or vehicle for 7 days. n = 14 for Veh Control and n = 11 for EP2 Antg. i–l AMs were cultured for 24 h with 1 µM PGE2 or vehicle. OCR and ECAR were analyzed by a Seahorse xFe96 analyzer. i OCR measurements. j Basal OCR measurements. k Maximal OCR measurements. l ECAR measurements. For panels i–l, n = 21 for Veh Control and n = 18 for 1 µM PGE2. For panels g, j, k, statistical significance analyzed by Mann–Whitney, error bars represent SEM and each point represents one biological replicate. For panels i and l, statistical significance analyzed by ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test and error bars represent SEM. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageA possible avenue by which PGE2 could increase mitochondrial mass of AMs is by decreased mitophagy, leading to the accumulation of damaged mitochondria. Mitophagy is the autophagic recycling of damaged mitochondria42, and is known to be dysregulated with aging43. However, how aging affects mitophagy in AMs is unknown. To determine if aging alters mitophagy of AMs, we utilized a mitophagy reporter mouse model, known as the MitoQC mice. MitoQC mice express a pH-sensitive GFP and mCherry mitochondrial marker. Under neutral pH, both the mCherry and GFP fluoresce, but within the acidic environment of the autolysosome the GFP fluorescence is quenched, allowing for the in vivo detection of mitophagy at a single-cell level44. We analyzed AMs obtained from young (2–3 months) and aged (22–25 months) C57BL/6 MitoQC mice by flow cytometry. The mitophagy index was then calculated based on the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of mCherry divided by the MFI of GFP, and the results normalized to control conditions (i.e., AMs from young mice, or AMs from vehicle control treated mice). We found that AMs from aged MitoQC mice exhibited a reduced mitophagy index compared to AMs from young MitoQC mice (Fig. 4g). To determine if PGE2 is an age-associated factor that limits mitophagy in AMs, we treated middle-aged (i.e., 9–10 months) non-infected MitoQC mice with seven daily doses of the EP2 antagonist to block PGE2 signaling and detected increased mitophagy in AMs in vivo (Fig. 4h). Overall, these results indicate that aging, via elevated PGE2, restricts mitophagy in AMs, which could potentially lead to an accumulation of damaged mitochondria, hence increased mitochondrial mass.The accumulation of damaged mitochondria could lead to dysregulated cellular metabolism and impaired mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation has been shown to limit proliferation in a variety of cell types38,39,40,41. To understand how PGE2 affects cellular metabolism in AMs, we measured the oxygen consumption rate (OCR), a readout of oxidative phosphorylation, and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR), a readout of glycolysis, in AMs isolated from young mice and cultured with PGE2 via a Seahorse assay (Agilent)45. The addition of PGE2 reduced the OCR over the course of the assay (Fig. 4i), including reductions in both the basal OCR (Fig. 4j) and the maximal OCR (Fig. 4k). In addition, PGE2 also restricts the ECAR of AMs (Fig. 4l). Overall, these results suggest that PGE2 restricts both oxidative phosphorylation and glycolysis of AMs, to impair mitochondrial homeostasis and energy generation in AMs, and ultimately reduce AM proliferation.We also employed an immortalized murine AM cell line, MH-S46,47 which showed similar mitochondrial changes as primary AMs in response to PGE2. We first noted that MH-S cells increased mitochondrial ROS (Supplementary Fig. 4a, b), increased mitochondrial membrane potential (Supplementary Fig. 4c, d), and reduced proliferation when cultured with PGE2 (Supplementary Fig. 4e). These findings are compatible with our in vivo results in which EP2 antagonism decreased mitochondrial ROS, decreased mitochondrial membrane potential in AMs (Fig. 4b, c), and increased AM cell numbers (Fig. 3a). We then employed the MH-S cell line in the Seahorse assay, which revealed that PGE2 lowered OCR and ECAR of MH-S cells, which is similar to our findings with the primary AMs (Supplementary Fig. 4f–i).Prophylactic blockade of PGE2 signaling through the EP2 receptor improves survival to IAV infection in aged miceAMs are crucial for host defense against respiratory viruses such as IAV8,9. Our results thus far suggest that PGE2 limits AM numbers in non-infected aged mice. Therefore, we hypothesized that blocking PGE2 signaling using a 7-day prophylactic course of the EP2 antagonist in aged mice prior to infection, thereby boosting AM numbers (Fig. 3a), would improve survival to lethal IAV infection (Fig. 5a). Indeed, we found that prophylactic EP2 antagonist treatment significantly increased survival in aged IAV-infected mice from ~15% (vehicle control) to ~50% (EP2 antagonist) (Fig. 5b, survival tracked up to 16 dpi).Fig. 5: Prophylactic blockade of PGE2 signaling through the EP2 receptor improves survival to IAV infection in aged mice.a, b Aged (18–22 months) female C57BL/6 mice were given 7 daily i.p. injections of the EP2 antagonist starting 7 days before infection or 11 daily i.p. injections of the EP2 and EP4 antagonists starting 7 days before infection. The mice were then infected with 400 pfu of PR8 IAV intranasally as depicted in (a). Survival of mice (b) was tracked daily. n = 14 for Veh Control, n = 6 for EP2 Antg, and n = 9 for EP2 + EP4 Antg. c, d Aged mice were given clodronate-loaded liposomes followed by an adoptive transfer of WT or EP2 KO AMs. 4 weeks following the adoptive transfer, the mice were given EP2 antagonist or vehicle control for 7 days prior to infection with 400 pfu of PR8 IAV intranasally as depicted in (c). Survival of mice (d) was tracked daily. n = 8 for WT AMs+EP2 Antg. n = 9 for EP2 KO AMs+ Veh Control and WT AMs + Veh Control. n = 10 for EP2 KO AMs+ EP2 Antg. For panels b and d, survival differences were statistically determined by two-tailed Gehan–Breslow–Wilcoxon test. Schematics created in BioRender. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageIAV infection upregulates both the EP2 and EP4 receptors on AMs15. However, a 7-day prophylactic blockade of the EP4 receptor, unlike the 7-day prophylactic blockade of the EP2 receptor, did not increase survival in aged mice infected with IAV (Supplementary Fig. 5a, b, survival tracked up to 15 dpi). To investigate potential synergy between the EP2 and EP4 receptor blockades, we administered both the EP2 and EP4 receptor antagonists prophylactically from 7 days pre-infection and to 4 dpi (days −7 to +4) to aged mice and infected the mice intranasally with IAV (Fig. 5a). Under this dosing regimen, aged mice treated with the dual EP2/EP4 antagonists exhibited a significant increase in survival versus those treated with vehicle control; however, there were no survival differences between the aged mice given the EP2 antagonist treatment alone versus the dual EP2/EP4 receptor antagonists (Fig. 5b). Thus, dual blockade treatment does not provide additional therapeutic advantages compared to the single EP2 blockade treatment.To investigate if the EP2 antagonism improved aged mice survival to IAV infection in an AM-dependent manner, we employed an AM adoptive transfer model in which aged mice, following clodronate-liposome depletion of resident AMs, were given either WT or EP2 KO AMs. Following AM transfer, the mice were given either the EP2 antagonist or vehicle control prior to lethal IAV infection (Fig. 5c). The EP2 antagonism did not improve survival in aged mice transferred with EP2 KO AMs compared to those given vehicle control (Fig. 5d). However, EP2 antagonism improved survival in aged mice transferred with WT AMs, suggesting that the EP2 antagonism improves survival in an AM-expressed EP2-dependent manner (Fig. 5d). In addition, vehicle-treated aged mice given EP2 KO AMs showed a 2-fold increased survival compared to vehicle-treated aged mice given WT AMs, again indicating that the lack of PGE2 signaling through the EP2 receptor on AMs is sufficient to improve aged mice survival to IAV (Fig. 5d)In contrast to aged mice, young C57BL/6 mice treated prophylactically with the EP2/EP4 antagonist (Supplementary Fig. 3c) and infected with a lethal dose of IAV (i.e., 800 pfu, doubled the dose given to aged mice) failed to exhibit improved survival (Supplementary Fig. 5d, survival tracked up to 13 dpi). These results are compatible with our observation that EP2 blockade failed to increase AM numbers in non-infected young mice (Supplementary Fig. 3c). Therefore, excessive PGE2 signaling via EP2 compromises survival to IAV in an age-dependent manner.We next examined if EP2 blockade could alter the clinical response to IAV in aged mice when the blockade is administered during active infection to model a therapeutic solution rather than a prophylactic one. To this end, we began administration of 7 daily i.p. injections of the EP2 antagonist, or vehicle control, starting on the day of infection in aged C57BL/6 mice (Supplementary Fig. 5e). We found no differences in survival between the treated and control aged mice in this scenario (Supplementary Fig. 5f, survival tracked up to 16 dpi).Prophylactic blockade of PGE2 signaling through the EP2 receptor reduces influenza viral load and disease severity in aged miceGiven that prophylactic EP2 receptor blockade increased survival of aged mice following IAV infection, we next examined if EP2 antagonism affected viral load. To monitor viral load, we treated aged C57BL/6 mice prophylactically with the EP2 antagonist or vehicle for 7 days, infected them with IAV, and measured the viral protein hemagglutinin (HA) in lung homogenates at various time points throughout the infection. EP2 antagonism significantly reduced viral HA protein levels by ~2-fold compared to the vehicle control at both 4 and 6 dpi (Fig. 6a). Similar to our observations that EP2 antagonism increased total AM cell numbers in non-infected aged mice, we observed an increase in AM cell numbers in BALF of EP2 antagonist-treated mice over the course of infection (Fig. 6b). Linear regression analysis showed that the viral load, as measured by HA protein levels, negatively correlated with AM numbers in the BALF during IAV infection (Supplementary Fig. 6a).Fig. 6: Prophylactic blockade of PGE2 signaling through the EP2 receptor reduces influenza viral load and disease severity in aged mice.Aged female C57BL/6 mice were given the EP2 antagonist or vehicle control by daily i.p. injection for seven days followed by intranasal (i.n.) infection of PR8 H1N1 as shown in Fig. 5a. Lung homogenate and BALF samples were collected over the course of the infection. a PR8 H1N1 IAV protein hemagglutinin (HA) measured in the lung homogenate on 2, 4, and 6 dpi by ELISA. n = 6/group. b AMs cell count in the BALF at 0, 2, 4, and 6 dpi. n = 6/group. c Albumin measured in the BALF on 2, 4, and 6 dpi. n = 7 for 2 dpi groups. n = 6/group for 4 dpi groups. n = 5/group for 6;dpi groups. TNF-α (d), IL-6 (e), IFN-β (f), and IL-10 (g) measured from the lung homogenate on 2, 4, 5, 9 dpi. For panels d–g, n = 6/group for 2 dpi groups and 4 dpi groups. n = 5/group for 6 dpi groups. n = 8/group for 9 dpi groups. For panels a–g, statistical significance analyzed by multiple Mann–Whitney tests with FDR correction, error bars represent SEM, and each point represents a biological replicate. h Representative images and scoring of H&E stained lungs at collected at 4 dpi along with quantification of histological score. n = 4 for Mock. n = 6 for Veh Control. n = 7 for EP2 Antg. Statistical significance analyzed by ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test, error bars represent SEM and each point represents a biological replicate. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageAs PGE2 is a lipid known to regulate several immune cell types48,49, we characterized how prophylactic blockade of the EP2 receptor affects immune cell accumulation into the lung and BALF following IAV infection using flow cytometry (gating strategy shown in Supplementary Fig. 6b). Within the lung tissue, we observed no differences in the number of CD45+ hematopoietic (Supplementary Fig. 6c), CD4+ T cells (CD3+CD4+CD8-) (Supplementary Fig. 6D), CD8+ T cells (CD3+CD4-CD8+) (Supplementary Fig. 6e), B cells (CD45+ B220+) (Supplementary Fig. 6f) and AEC II cells (CD45-EpCAM+) (Supplementary Fig. 6g). We also found no differences in neutrophil numbers in the BALF between EP2 antagonist vs. vehicle control treated groups (Supplementary Fig. 6h).EP2 blockade reduced lung damage, inferred from a reduced level of albumin in the BALF, a marker of lung damage, at 4 dpi as compared to control (Fig. 6c). Aged mice treated with the EP2 antagonist exhibited ~2–3-fold reductions in the levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 (6 and 9 dpi) and TNF-α (6 dpi) (Fig. 6d, e). We also observed higher levels of the anti-viral cytokine interferon (IFN)-β in the EP2 antagonist-treated mice at 6 dpi (Fig. 6f). Mice begin to recover from infection and resolve the inflammation in the lungs at 9 dpi, and we found that the EP2 antagonist-treated mice exhibited a ~1.75-fold increase in the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10 at 9 dpi (Fig. 6g), indicating that the EP2 antagonist-treated mice are better able to resolve the inflammation within the lungs than vehicle-treated counterparts. Mice treated with the EP2 antagonist also showed reduced histological evidence of inflammation at 4 dpi (Fig. 6h). Overall, these data indicated that the prophylactic EP2 antagonist treatment in aged mice leads to reduced viral load, inflammatory cytokines, and subsequent lung damage following infection.DiscussionThe dysregulation of the immune system with age, called immunosenescence, contributes to increased morbidity and mortality to respiratory pathogens, including IAV50. While the effects of immunosenescence on adaptive immunity are well-studied, the effects of immunosenescence on resident innate immune cells are less well understood50,51. Here, we show that the overproduction of PGE2 with aging compromises host defense to IAV infection by impairing AMs, lung resident macrophages that are critical to both lung homeostasis and host defense52. Importantly, we show that blocking PGE2 signaling in aged, but not young, mice increase AM numbers prior to infection, and subsequently enhances the survival to lethal IAV infection. Our study demonstrates that blocking PGE2 signaling via inhibiting the EP2 receptor is sufficient to increase AM numbers via increased proliferation in non-infected aged mice and protects aged mice from lethal IAV infection by augmenting innate immune defense and inflammation resolution. This could explain several observations of our study, including that the EP2 receptor blockade in aged mice reduced viral burden, reduced inflammatory cytokines, increased anti-viral IFN-β levels, reduced markers of lung tissue damage, and importantly increased survival to lethal IAV infection with aging. Overall, our data suggest that the prophylactic EP2 receptor blockade improves host defense against IAV with aging.Thus, age-elevated PGE2 is detrimental to host immunity against IAV infection. While our study focuses on the effects of PGE2 in the lung on AM-mediated immunity, we cannot exclude the effects of other age-associated factors within the lung that may also impair host defense against IAV, which require future investigations.We identified senescent type II AECs as a major cellular source of PGE2 in the aged lung. Our study suggests that with aging, senescent type II AECs communicate aberrantly with AMs via excessive PGE2 secretion, which impairs AM mitochondrial function and proliferation, graphically illustrated in Fig. 7. While the canonically studied SASP factors are proteins such as cytokines, chemokines and growth factors, there is growing evidence that non-protein factors, such as lipids, are included in SASP21,22,53. Our study, along with others, suggest that PGE2 is a lipid SASP factor. We show that the removal of senescent cells, via senolytic treatment, in type II AECs from aged, but not young, mice reduced PGE2 secretion. The failure of senolytics to reduce PGE2 secretion of type II AECs from young mice may be explained by the lack of senescence, as measured by p21 expression and low secretion of IL-6 and TNF-α, in these cells.Fig. 7: Aging leads to pathological communication between AECs and AMs via PGE2 secretion.Top: with youth there are low secreted concentrations of PGE2 by type II AECs which remain below the level that would negatively impact AM mitochondrial function. Hence, there are sufficient AM numbers to maintain homeostasis and provide host defense to influenza infection. Bottom: with aging, senescent type II AECs secrete increased levels of PGE2 that subsequently limit AM proliferation and mitochondrial function, thereby reducing AM numbers. Consequently, host defense to influenza viral infection is compromised. Schematics created in BioRender.Full size imageSenescence modulates the secretome of cells in a context-dependent and cell type-dependent manner. We identified PGE2, IL-6, and TNF-α as part of the secretome of senescence type II AECs. However, there are numerous additional factors such as inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, immune-modulating factors, and growth factors that may also contribute to the secretome of senescent type II AECs54,55. Future investigation is needed to characterize the SASP secretome of type II AECs and how these factors modulate AMs and host defense against pulmonary infections with aging.Interestingly, PGE2 induces and maintains senescence in fibroblasts56 and CD8+ T cells57. In addition, PGE2 can signal in an intracrine manner by acting on intracellular EP receptors56. Whether PGE2 participates in a positive-feedback loop with the senescence phenotype in type II AECs, or other cells in the lung, requires future investigation.In the current study, we show that PGE2 increases in the BALF with aging in both mice and humans. Importantly, there is variability in the expression of PGE2 in humans with age. Little is known about how PGE2 levels is regulated in the BALF in humans, but studies have shown that cigarette smoke and nicotine exposure can modulate PGE2 levels in the lung11,58. The majority of PGE2 studies in humans have taken measurements from the plasma or serum. For example, plasma PGE2 levels correlate with C-reactive protein levels, type II diabetes, and plasma glucose levels in humans59. Whether or not factors that impact PGE2 levels in the plasma also impact PGE2 levels in the lung are not known. Future translational studies are needed to understand how PGE2 expression is modulated in the BALF in humans with aging, and also to identify the factors that contribute to the variability of PGE2 expression. Also given the complexities of the human immune system with aging, future studies will be required to determine the clinical impact of increased PGE2 levels in the lungs with aging.Our results suggest that PGE2 restriction of AM proliferation likely impairs self-renewal of AMs within the aged lung. Our study, however, does not exclude the possibility of increased recruitment of monocytes into the airways and their differentiation into AMs when blocking EP2 signaling in aged mice, thus contributing to the increased number of AMs. However, since monocytes are typically recruited to the lung under inflammatory conditions rather than at steady state, we do not suspect that monocyte recruitment is a major contributor to the increased AMs identified prior to infection in our model60,61. In addition, blocking the EP2 receptor may reduce monocyte recruitment into the airways as studies using EP2 deficient mice show that PGE2-EP2 signaling is necessary for monocyte recruitment following myocardial injury62. In addition, the EP2 antagonist has a pharmacological half-life of less than 10 h in rodents36, therefore the antagonist is cleared systemically prior to the recruitment of monocytes into the lung, which occurs around 1 day post IAV infection63. Also, our prior work has shown that PGE2 impairs AM proliferation in vitro11. Thus, we believe that the increased number of AMs in aged mice given the EP2 antagonist is due to increased proliferation of AMs rather than recruitment of monocytes; however, further studies are necessary to understand how PGE2 regulates monocyte recruitment and differentiation into AMs.We found that whereas EP2 receptor blockade increased AM numbers in non-infected aged mice, it failed to do so in non-infected young mice. Young mice, who have lower PGE2 levels relative to aged mice, may already have optimized PGE2 levels so that EP2 blockade is ineffectual at increasing AM numbers. We have previously shown that AMs are both critical to survival and limit lung injury following IAV infection in mice with aging8. In addition, we have shown that with aging AMs are further depleted post IAV infection8. Hence, it is likely that 7 days of prophylactic treatment of EP2 blockade sufficiently boosted AM numbers to improve outcomes after IAV infection in aged mice, whereas starting EP2 blockade on the day of infection likely did not provide sufficient time to increase AM numbers during IAV infection.Our study also indicates that PGE2 perturbs the metabolic health of AMs via mitochondrial dysfunction, a hallmark of aging16. To our knowledge, our results show for the first time that PGE2 impairs mitophagy through the EP2 receptor. It remains possible that PGE2 also impacts mitochondrial health in AMs independently of its effects on mitophagy. Whether PGE2 restricts mitochondrial health, via mitophagy or other mechanisms, in other immune cells, and the possible physiological consequences thereof, will require future investigation.It is unlikely that the role of PGE2 in lung aging uncovered here is specific to IAV infection and we expect that our findings will readily extend to other respiratory infections such as SARS-CoV-2, as aging is a prominent risk factor for severe COVID-19. Interestingly, COVID-19 severity is positively correlated with PGE2 serum levels64. In addition, infecting Calu-3 cells, a human lung epithelial cell line, with SARS-CoV-2 induced PGE2 production64; similar to our finding that IAV infection increases PGE2 levels in the lungs in vivo, and promotes PGE2 production by primary type II AECs ex vivo. Besides respiratory viruses, AMs also play critical roles in the immune defense against respiratory bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus65,66,67. The limiting of AM cell numbers by increased PGE2 in the lungs of older adults may play a role in the high incidence of pneumonia and pneumonia-related morbidity in older adults68,69,70. In addition to proliferation, PGE2 has been shown to limit AM phagocytosis, killing of bacteria and the expression of the toll-like receptor 433,34. These may represent additional mechanisms by which age-enhanced PGE2 levels in the lungs limit AM-mediated immunity to IAV or other respiratory pathogens, which will be revealed through future study.In conclusion, our study has revealed that age-associated overproduction of PGE2 in the lung, largely by senescent type II alveolar epithelial cells, impairs AM mitochondrial function, cellular proliferation, and reduces total AM cell numbers. This limits the ability of AMs to defend against IAV infection. Our study introduces new potential therapeutic targets—namely senescent type II AECs, their production of PGE2 and the EP2-mediated signaling in AMs—to reduce the burden of IAV, and possibly other respiratory viruses such as coronaviruses, in older adults.MethodsStudy approvalAll animal experiments were approved prior to the initiation of the study and were carried out in accordance with the University of Michigan Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The use of de-identified lungs was provided by BK under protocol #23201 at Temple University USA. These samples were provided by the Gift of Life Program of Philadelphia, USA. Please note that informed consent is obtained from families of donors who have agreed to gift the family member’s organs to the Gift of Life Program of Philadelphia, USA. Also note that the IRB at Temple University has determined that as the human samples from the Gift of Life Program of Philadelphia are de-identified, the research from these samples is considered non-human subject research.MiceYoung (2–4 months) and aged (18–22 months) female C57BL/6N mice were obtained from Charles Rivers and the National Institute of Aging rodent facility at Charles Rivers. Male UM-HET3 mice were kindly gifted by Dr Richard Miller at the University of Michigan. The male UM-HET3 mice were aged at the Glenn Center on Aging at the University of Michigan. MitoQC mice were donated from the lab of Dr Ian Ganley at the University of Dundee and originally generated by Taconic Artemis44. The MitoQC mice were then bred and housed within the animal facility at the North Campus Research Complex at the University of Michigan. Male and female EP2 KO (Ptger2 KO, Jackson Laboratory, strain #004376), on the C57BL/6 background, were obtained from the lab of Dr Marc Peters-Golden at the University of Michigan. All mice were maintained on a 12-h light-dark cycle with free access to food and water within a specific-pathogen-free facility. Mice were monitored for at least 1 week after arrival to our facilities for signs of stress and/or disease. Animals that displayed evidence of infection or illness prior to influenza infection were excluded from the study.PGE2 receptor antagonists in vivoThe EP2 antagonist PF-04418948 (catalog #15016) and the EP4 antagonist ONO-AE3-208 (catalog #14522) were purchased from Cayman Chemical. Mice were given daily doses of 10 mg/kg EP2 and/or 10 mg/kg EP4 antagonist(s) by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections. For experiments treating mice with the EP2 and EP4 antagonists starting on the day of influenza infection, mice were given daily injections on day 0 to day +7 post infection. For experiments treating mice with the EP2 and EP4 antagonists both prior to and during influenza infection, mice were given 11 total daily injections starting on day −7 pre infection and up to day +4 post infection. For experiments treating mice with the EP2 antagonist prior to influenza infection, mice were given daily injections on day −7 to day 0 pre infection.VirusStocks of the VR-95 Influenza A/PR8/34 H1N1 were purchased from ATCC.In vivo influenza infectionMice were anesthetized with isoflurane and instilled with 400 pfu of influenza A virus in 40 µL PBS or 40 µL PBS vehicle control. Mice were euthanized after loss of 30% of their pre-infection body weight.In vitro influenza infectionCells were infected with an MOI = 0.1 of influenza virus diluted in cell culture medium for 48 h.Sample collection and preparationBronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF): the BALF was collected by lavaging the lungs twice with 1 mL of cold sterile PBS. Cells in the BALF were resuspended into FACS buffer (PBS + 2 mM EDTA + 4% FBS) for flow cytometry staining or RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% FBS and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin for ex vivo culture.Lung homogenate: lungs were homogenized using a TissueLyser II (Qiagen). Following, the samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was collected.Lung single-cell suspension: lungs were digested with 1 mg/mL Collagenase D (Roche, COLLD-RO) and 10 U/mL DNase (Roche, 04536282001) for 45 min at room temperature with agitation. After digestion, the lungs were minced and passaged through a 100 µm cell strainer. To remove red blood cells, cells were incubated with red blood cell lysis buffer (BioLegend, 420301) for 3 min.Flow cytometryCells were obtained from the BALF, single-cell suspension of lungs or cell culture. Flow cytometry was performed using the ZE5 Cell Analyzer (BioRad) of the Flow Cytometry Core at the University of Michigan. Analysis of flow cytometry data was performed using FlowJo (version 10.8.0).Mitochondrial analysis: live cells were stained with MitoTracker DeepRed RM (ThermoFisher, M22426) to measure mitochondrial mass, tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM) (ThermoFisher, T668) to measure mitochondrial membrane potential, and MitoSOX (ThermoFisher, M36008) to measure mitochondrial ROS, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.Staining: cells were stained with a live/dead viability dye according to manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher, L34966). Next, Fc blocking was performed by incubation with anti-CD16/32 antibody for 20 min (BioLegend, 101320). Following, cells were stained with the desired surface markers and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 25 min. Cells were washed twice and resuspended in FACS buffer until analysis.Antibodies: APC: BrdU (BD, cat# BD552598, dilution 1:50), CD45 (BioLegend, cat# 103112, clone 30-F11, dilution 1:100), Ki67 (BioLegend, cat# 6524065, clone 16A8, dilution 1:100); APC-eFluor 780: CD8 (eBioScience, cat# 14-0081-82, clone 53-6.7, dilution 1:100); Brilliant Violet 421: CD11b (BioLegend, cat# 101236, clone M1/70, dilution 1:100), CD3 (BioLegend, cat# 100228, clone 17A2, dilution 1:100), EpCam (BioLegend, cat# 118225, clone G8.8, dilution 1:100); Brilliant Violet 605: B220 (BioLegend, cat# 103244, clone RA3-6B2, dilution 1:100), Ly6G (BioLegend, cat# 127639, clone 1A8, dilution 1:100), CD11c (BioLegend, cat# 117334, clone N418, dilution 1:100); Brilliant Violet 750: SiglecF (BD, cat# BDB747316, clone E50-2440, dilution 1:100); Brilliant Violet 785: MHC II (BioLegend, cat# 107645, clone M5/114.15.2, dilution 1:100), FITC: Annexin V (R&D Systems, cat# 4830-01-K, dilution 1:100); PE: F4/80 (BioLegend, cat# 123110, clone BM8, dilution 1:100), SiglecF (BD, cat# BDB552126, clone E50-2440, dilution 1:100); PE-Cy7: CD4 (Invitrogen, cat# 25-0041-82, clone GK1.5, dilution 1:100); PE-eFluor 610: CD11c (Invitrogen, cat# 61-0114-82, clone N418, dilution 1:100).MH-S cell cultureMH-S cells, an immortalized mouse alveolar macrophage cell line46, were obtained from ATCC (ATCC, CLR-2019) and grown in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% FBS, 0.05 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, and 100U/mL penicillin/streptomycin. For PGE2 stimulation assays, cells were cultured with 1 µM PGE2, 10 µM PGE2, or vehicle control, for 24 h.Isolation and culture of type II AECsAECs were isolated by magnetic associated cell sorting (MACS) by negative selection of CD45+ (Miltenyi, cat#130-052-301, dilution 10 µL per 10 million cells) and CD31+ (Miltenyi, cat#130-097-41, dilution 10 µL per 10 million cells) cells and followed by positive selection of CD326+ cells (Miltenyi, cat# 130-118-075, clone caa7-9G8, dilution 5 µL per 10 million cells). This method typically yields approximately 85% purity of prosurfactant-C+ cells as measured by flow cytometry. Isolated type II AECs were cultured with DMEM/F12 medium containing 10% FBS, 1.25 g BSA, 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin, and 1x Insulin-Transferrin-Selenium (Gibco, 41400045). Type II AECs were seeded in tissue culture plates coated with gelatin-based coating solution (Cell Biologics, 6950).To deplete senescent cells, type II AECs were cultured with 20 nM dasatinib (Sigma, SML2589) and 5 µM quercetin (Sigma, Q4951) or 200 nM dasatinib and 50 µM quercetin for 48 h.Seahorse assaySeahorse experiments were conducted using a Seahorse XFe96 Analyzer (Agilent). Four basal readings were taken prior to the addition of the electron transport chain inhibitors in Agilent’s mitostress test: 1.5 µM oligomycin, 1 µM FCCP, and 0.5 µM rotenone and antimycin A (Agilent, 103708). Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) data were normalized to cell count. Seahorse experiments were repeated three times.BrdU in vivoBrdU (Biogems, 5911439) was given to mice in their drinking water ad libitum for a total of 7 days. BrdU was dissolved in the drinking water at a concentration of 0.8 mg/mL and the BrdU water was refreshed every 48 h.Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)TNF-α (88-7324-22), IL-6 (88-7064-88), IFN-γ (88-7314-22) and IL-10 (88-7105-22) ELISA kits were purchased from Invitrogen; albumin ELISA kits were purchased from Abcam (ab108792); cyclic AMP (581001) and PGE2 (514010) ELISA kits were purchased from Cayman Chemical; IFN-β ELISA (42410) kits were purchased from pbl Assay Science; Influenza A/PR/8/1934 hemagglutinin (SEK11684) ELISA kits were purchased from SinoBiological, and PGE2 (MBS266212) ELISA kits were purchased from MyBioSource. All ELISAs were performed according to manufacturer’s directions. Each sample was analyzed with at least two dilutions and with two technical replicates per dilution.ImmunoblottingType II AECs were isolated from young and aged mice as described above. Cells were lysed using cold RIPA buffer (Sigma, 89900) containing 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, P8340) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, P5726). Samples were denatured and reduced using NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (ThermoFisher, NP0007) and reducing agent (ThermoFisher, NP0009) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Lysates were electrophoresed on 4–12% gradient Bis-Tris gel (ThermoFisher, NP0322BOX) and transferred to 0.2 micron PVDF membranes (ThermoFisher, IB401001). The membranes were cut based on the expected molecular weight of proteins of interest prior to incubation with antibodies. The cut membranes were blotted for p21 (Santa Cruz, cat# sc-6246, clone F-5, dilution 1:200) and the loading control GAPDH (Cell Signaling Technology, cat# 2118S, clone 14C10, dilution 1:1000) or β-tubulin (Cell Signaling Technology, cat# 2146, dilution 1:1000). Blots were imaged using a BioRad ChemiDoc XRS+.HistologyLung samples were fixed with 10% phosphate buffered formalin. Samples were submitted to the In Vivo Animal Core at the University of Michigan for paraffin embedding, sectioning, and H&E staining. The slides were scored by blinded investigators for lung damage, inflammation and cellular infiltration on a scale of 0–5 (0, being no damage or inflammation; 1, minimal evidence of inflammation; 2, moderate evidence of inflammation but limited tissue damage and few immune cell infiltration; 3, moderate of inflammation, tissue damage, and immune cell infiltration; 4, strong evidence of inflammation, tissue damage and immune cell infiltration; 5, severe damage and inflammation with strong evidence of immune cell infiltration).Transcriptomics analysisA publicly available RNA-seq (GEO GSE134397) dataset of young and aged AM transcripts was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Raw counts were processed in R (version 4.1.0) using edgeR (version 3.34.1) to generate TMM normalized counts71. False detection rate (FDR) q values (adjusted p values) were used to correct for multiple comparisons. A value of FDR = 0.05 was used as a threshold for statistical significance. Publicly available scRNA-seq dataset of type I and type II AEC transcripts (GSE113049, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE113049) was downloaded from GEO and analyzed in Seurat (version 2.3.0)25. Unique molecular identifier (UMI) gene count matrixes were generated per sample and UMI counts were normalized to library size, scaled by 10,000 and log-transformed. Principal component analysis was performed on the Z scores of the normalized expression values. Cell type clustering was performed using the top 15 principal components and a resolution of 0.6.Tabula Muris scRNA-seq gene counts and analysis codes were accessed online on Figshare and GEO (GSE109774, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE109774)23.Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)AMs were cultured on 35 mm glass bottom dishes (MatTek, P35G-1.5-10-C) and then fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate. Samples were then embedded in resin for sectioning and stained with heavy metals at the University of Michigan Microscopy Core. 2 micron sections were imaged on a JEM-1400Plus (JOEL) at ×5000 magnification. Images of 15 cells per condition and 10 mitochondrial per cell were captured.AM adoptive transferMice were given 50 µL of clodronate-loaded liposomes (Encapsula Nano Sciences, CLD-8901) i.n. to deplete resident AMs prior to adoptive transfer. 36 h following AM depletion, 2 × 105 sex-matched AMs in 40 µL of PBS were given intranasally.Human samplesLungs from donors that were not used for transplantation were lavaged with HEPES-buffered saline and 2 mM EDTA. The fluid was centrifuged, and the supernatant was used for analysis.StatisticsAll murine experiments were performed with at least four biological replicates. Experiments performed with immortalized cell lines were performed with at least three technical replicates. All results are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Data were analyzed using the nonparametric two-tailed Mann–Whitney with FDR correction for multiple tests when necessary, unless otherwise stated. Multiple comparison testing was done by ANOVA with Tukey post hoc. Survival differences were analyzed using a Gehan–Breslow–Wilcoxon test. Specific statistical tests are denoted in the figure legends. Two-sided p values <0.05 were considered significant. Prism 9 (GraphPad) was used for statistical testing and the generation of graphs.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability All source data generated during this study are provided with this article. Source Data are provided with this paper. ReferencesIuliano, D. A. et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet Lond. Engl. 391, 1285–1300 (2018).Article Google Scholar Thompson, W. W. et al. Influenza-associated hospitalizations in the United States. JAMA 292, 1333–1340 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Estimated Flu-Related Illnesses, Medical Visits, Hospitalizations, and Deaths in the United States—2017–2018 Flu Season. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/2017-2018.htm (2019).United States Census Bureau. Age and Sex Composition: 2010. 2010 Census Briefs https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-03.pdf (2011).Cooper, N. J. et al. Effectiveness of neuraminidase inhibitors in treatment and prevention of influenza A and B: systematic review and meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 326, 1235 (2003).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Uyeki, T. M. et al. Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America: 2018 Update on Diagnosis, Treatment, Chemoprophylaxis, and Institutional Outbreak Management of Seasonal Influenza A. Clin. Infect. Dis. 68, e1–e47 (2019).Article PubMed Google Scholar United Nations. World Population Ageing, 2019 Highlights. (2020).Wong, C. K. et al. Aging impairs alveolar macrophage phagocytosis and increases influenza-induced mortality in mice. J. Immunol. 199, 1060–1068 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Cardani, A., Boulton, A., Kim, T. S. & Braciale, T. J. Alveolar macrophages prevent lethal influenza pneumonia by inhibiting infection of type-1 alveolar epithelial cells. PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006140 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McQuattie-Pimentel, A. C. et al. The lung microenvironment shapes a dysfunctional response of alveolar macrophages in aging. J. Clin. Invest. 131, e140299 (2021).Penke, L. R. et al. PGE2 accounts for bidirectional changes in alveolar macrophage self-renewal with aging and smoking. Life Sci. Alliance 3, e202000800 (2020).Vijay, R. et al. Critical role of phospholipase A2 group IID in age-related susceptibility to severe acute respiratory syndrome–CoV infection. J. Exp. Med. 212, 1851–1868 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McCoy, J. M., Wicks, J. R. & Audoly, L. P. The role of prostaglandin E2 receptors in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. J. Clin. Invest. 110, 651–658 (2002).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nakanishi, M. & Rosenberg, D. W. Multifaceted roles of PGE2 in inflammation and cancer. Semin. Immunopathol. 35, 123–137 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Coulombe, F. et al. Targeted prostaglandin E2 inhibition enhances antiviral immunity through induction of type I interferon and apoptosis in macrophages. Immunity 40, 554–568 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar López-Otín, C., Blasco, M. A., Partridge, L., Serrano, M. & Kroemer, G. The hallmarks of aging. Cell 153, 1194–1217 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kumari, R. & Jat, P. Mechanisms of cellular senescence: cell cycle arrest and senescence associated secretory phenotype. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 485 (2021).Article Google Scholar Di Micco, R., Krizhanovsky, V., Baker, D., & d’Adda di Fagagna, F. Cellular senescence in ageing: from mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 75–95 (2021).Article PubMed Google Scholar Franceschi, C. & Campisi, J. Chronic inflammation (inflammaging) and its potential contribution to age-associated diseases. J. Gerontol. Ser. A 69, S4–S9 (2014).Article Google Scholar Franceschi, C., Garagnani, P., Parini, P., Giuliani, C. & Santoro, A. Inflammaging: a new immune–metabolic viewpoint for age-related diseases. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 14, 576–590 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gonçalves, S. et al. COX2 regulates senescence secretome composition and senescence surveillance through PGE2. Cell Rep. 34, 108860 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Loo, T. M. et al. Gut microbiota promotes obesity-associated liver cancer through PGE2-mediated suppression of antitumor immunity. Cancer Disco. 7, 522–538 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Schaum, N. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics of 20 mouse organs creates a Tabula Muris. Nature 562, 367–372 (2018).Article ADS PubMed Central Google Scholar Herschman, H. R. & Hall, W. Regulation of prostaglandin synthase-1 and prostaglandin synthase-2. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 13, 241–256 (1994).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Riemondy, K. A. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing identifies TGFb as a key regenerative cue following LPS-induced lung injury. JCI Insight 5, e123637 (2019).Balter, M. S., Eschenbacher, W. L. & Peters-Golden, M. Arachidonic acid metabolism in cultured alveolar macrophages from normal, atopic, and asthmatic subjects. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 138, 1134–1142 (1988).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Minhas, P. S. et al. Restoring metabolism of myeloid cells reverses cognitive decline in ageing. Nature 590, 122–128 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Williams, J. A. & Shacter, E. Regulation of macrophage cytokine production by prostaglandin E2. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 25693–25699 (1997).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Miller, R. A. et al. An aging Interventions Testing Program: study design and interim report. Aging Cell 6, 565–575 (2007).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Li, M., You, L., Xue, J. & Lu, Y. Ionizing radiation-induced cellular senescence in normal, non-transformed cells and the involved DNA damage response: a mini review. Front. Pharmacol. 9, 522 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xu, M. et al. Senolytics improve physical function and increase lifespan in old age. Nat. Med. 24, 1246–1256 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhu, Y. et al. The Achilles’ heel of senescent cells: from transcriptome to senolytic drugs. Aging Cell 14, 644–658 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Aronoff, D. M., Canetti, C. & Peters-Golden, M. Prostaglandin E2 inhibits alveolar macrophage phagocytosis through an E-prostanoid 2 receptor-mediated increase in intracellular cyclic AMP. J. Immunol. 173, 559–565 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Degraaf, A. J., Zasłona, Z., Bourdonnay, E. & Peters-Golden, M. Prostaglandin E2 reduces toll-like receptor 4 expression in alveolar macrophages by inhibition of translation. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 51, 242–250 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Speth, J. M. et al. Alveolar epithelial cell–derived prostaglandin E2 serves as a request signal for macrophage secretion of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 during innate inflammation. J. Immunol. 196, 5112–5120 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Forselles, K. J. et al. In vitro and in vivo characterization of PF-04418948, a novel, potent and selective prostaglandin EP2 receptor antagonist. Br. J. Pharm. 164, 1847–1856 (2011).Article Google Scholar Cameron, H. A. Quantitative analysis of in vivo cell proliferation. Curr. Protoc. Neurosci. Chapter 3, Unit 3.9 (2006).PubMed Google Scholar Zhang, F., Pirooznia, M. & Xu, H. Mitochondria regulate intestinal stem cell proliferation and epithelial homeostasis through FOXO. Mol. Biol. Cell 31, 1538–1549 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Birsoy, K. et al. An essential role of the mitochondrial electron transport chain in cell proliferation is to enable aspartate synthesis. Cell 162, 540–551 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chiong, M. et al. Mitochondrial metabolism and the control of vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2, 72 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wheaton, W. W. et al. Metformin inhibits mitochondrial complex I of cancer cells to reduce tumorigenesis. eLife 3, e02242 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Palikaras, K., Lionaki, E. & Tavernarakis, N. Mechanisms of mitophagy in cellular homeostasis, physiology and pathology. Nat. Cell Biol. 20, 1013–1022 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen, G., Kroemer, G. & Kepp, O. Mitophagy: an emerging role in aging and age-associated diseases. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8, 200 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McWilliams, T. G. et al. mito-QC illuminates mitophagy and mitochondrial architecture in vivo. J. Cell Biol. 214, 333–345 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, J. et al. Measuring energy metabolism in cultured cells, including human pluripotent stem cells and differentiated cells. Nat. Protoc. 7, 1068–1085 (2012).Mbawuike, I. N. & Herscowitz, H. B. MH-S, a murine alveolar macrophage cell line: morphological, cytochemical, and functional characteristics. J. Leukoc. Biol. 46, 119–127 (1989).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sankaran, K. & Herscowitz, H. B. Phenotypic and functional heterogeneity of the murine alveolar macrophage-derived cell line MH-S. J. Leukoc. Biol. 57, 562–568 (1995).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Agard, M., Asakrah, S. & Morici, L. PGE2 suppression of innate immunity during mucosal bacterial infection. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 3, 45 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sander, W. J., O’Neill, H. G. & Pohl, C. H. Prostaglandin E2 as a modulator of viral infections. Front. Physiol. 8, 89 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, J., Kelley, W. & Goldstein, D. R. Role of aging and the immune response to respiratory viral infections: potential implications for COVID-19. J. Immunol. 207, 313–320 (2020).Article Google Scholar Aw, D., Silva, A. B. & Palmer, D. B. Immunosenescence: emerging challenges for an ageing population. Immunology 120, 435–446 (2007).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hussell, T. & Bell, T. J. Alveolar macrophages: plasticity in a tissue-specific context. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 81–93 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Narzt, M.-S. et al. Epilipidomics of senescent dermal fibroblasts identify lysophosphatidylcholines as pleiotropic senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) factors. J. Invest. Dermatol. 141, 993–1006.e15 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Coppé, J.-P., Desprez, P.-Y., Krtolica, A. & Campisi, J. The senescence-associated secretory phenotype: the dark side of tumor suppression. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 5, 99–118 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansel, C., Jendrossek, V. & Klein, D. Cellular senescence in the lung: the central role of senescent epithelial cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 3279 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Central Google Scholar Martien, S. et al. Cellular senescence involves an intracrine prostaglandin E2 pathway in human fibroblasts. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1831, 1217–1227 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chou, J. P., Ramirez, C. M., Ryba, D. M., Koduri, M. P. & Effros, R. B. Prostaglandin E2 promotes features of replicative senescence in chronically activated human CD8+ T cells. PLoS One 9, e99432 (2014).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, W. et al. Cigarette smoke modulates PGE2 and host defence against Moraxella catarrhalis infection in human airway epithelial cells. Respirology 16, 508–516 (2011).Article PubMed Google Scholar Fenske, R. et al. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels as a predictor of type 2 diabetes control in human subjects: a cross-sectional view of initial cohort study data. FASEB J. 31, 675.6–675.6 (2017). Google Scholar Goto, Y. et al. Monocyte recruitment into the lungs in pneumococcal pneumonia. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 30, 620–626 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sen, D. et al. Tracking the spatial and functional gradient of monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation in inflamed lung. PLoS One 11, e0165064 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, J. M. F. et al. Prostaglandin E2 receptor 2 modulates macrophage activity for cardiac repair. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 7, e009216 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, F. et al. Monocyte-derived alveolar macrophages autonomously determine severe outcome of respiratory viral infection. Sci. Immunol. 7, eabj5761 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ricke-Hoch, M. et al. Impaired immune response mediated by prostaglandin E2 promotes severe COVID-19 disease. PLoS One 16, e0255335 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Knapp, S. et al. Alveolar macrophages have a protective anti inflammatory role during murine pneumococcal pneumonia. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 167, 171–179 (2003).Article PubMed Google Scholar Ghoneim, H. E., Thomas, P. G. & McCullers, J. A. Depletion of alveolar macrophages during influenza infection facilitates bacterial superinfections. J. Immunol. 191, 1250–1259 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yajjala, V. K. et al. Resistance to acute macrophage killing promotes airway fitness of prevalent community-acquired Staphylococcus aureus strains. J. Immunol. 196, 4196–4203 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Childs, A. et al. The burden of respiratory infections among older adults in long-term care: a systematic review. BMC Geriatr. 19, 210 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ebright, J. R. & Rytel, M. W. Bacterial pneumonia in the elderly. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 28, 220–223 (1980).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kline, K. A. & Bowdish, D. M. Infection in an aging population. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 29, 63–67 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J. & Smyth, G. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139–140 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the NIA AG028082 and NHLBI R35 HL155169 awarded to D.R.G.; the T32 AI 007413 awarded to the Program in Immunology at the University of Michigan; the NHLBI F31 HL158003 awarded to J.C.; the Veterans Administration award 5 I01 BX004565 awarded to J.C.D.; the NHLBI R35 HL144979 awarded to M.P.-G.; and the R01 ES032081 awarded to B.K. Seahorse experiments were conducted at the Adipose Tissue Core of the Michigan Nutrition Obesity Research Center supported by P30 DK089503. The authors would like to thank Dr Richard Miller at the University of Michigan for donating the UM-HET3 mice. We would also like to thank Dr Peng Jiang for performing preliminary technical experiments with AECs.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USAJudy Chen, Jane C. Deng, Rachel L. Zemans, Marc Peters-Golden & Daniel R. GoldsteinProgram in Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USAJudy Chen, Jane C. Deng, Marc Peters-Golden & Daniel R. GoldsteinDivision of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USAJane C. Deng, Rachel L. Zemans & Marc Peters-GoldenCenter for Inflammation and Lung Research, Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Inflammation, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, 19140, USAKarim Bahmed & Beata KosmiderDepartment of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, 19140, USAKarim Bahmed & Beata KosmiderDepartment of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USAMin ZhangDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USADaniel R. GoldsteinAuthorsJudy ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJane C. DengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRachel L. ZemansView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKarim BahmedView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBeata KosmiderView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMin ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMarc Peters-GoldenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDaniel R. GoldsteinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsJ.C.: conceptualization, data collection, methodology, data analysis, wrote original draft of manuscript, edited manuscript. J.C.D.: conceptualization, edited manuscript. R.L.Z.: conceptualization, edited manuscript, data analysis. K.B.: data collection, edited manuscript. B.K.: data collection, edited manuscript. M.Z.: conceptualization, edited manuscript. M.P.-G.: conceptualization, edited manuscript. D.R.G.: conceptualization, supervision, funding acquisition, access to data, wrote and edited manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Daniel R. Goldstein.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Klaus Schughart and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationReporting SummarySource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleChen, J., Deng, J.C., Zemans, R.L. et al. Age-induced prostaglandin E2 impairs mitochondrial fitness and increases mortality to influenza infection. Nat Commun 13, 6759 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34593-yDownload citationReceived: 07 March 2022Accepted: 31 October 2022Published: 09 November 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34593-yShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Spinster homolog 2/S1P signaling ameliorates macrophage inflammatory response to bacterial infections by balancing PGE2 production Chao FangPan RenMingkai Li Cell Communication and Signaling (2024) Multicomponent intranasal adjuvant for mucosal and durable systemic SARS-CoV-2 immunity in young and aged mice Sonia JangraJeffrey J. LandersPamela T. Wong npj Vaccines (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingSeverity of neonatal influenza infection is driven by type I interferon and oxidative stress | Mucosal Immunology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature mucosal immunology articles article NB: AS OF JANUARY 1, 2023 THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED WITH ELSEVIER: https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/mucosal-immunology Severity of neonatal influenza infection is driven by type I interferon and oxidative stress Download PDF Article Published: 09 November 2022 Severity of neonatal influenza infection is driven by type I interferon and oxidative stress Ogan K. Kumova1 nAff7, Ioanna-Evdokia Galani2, Abhishek Rao1, Hannah Johnson3, Vasiliki Triantafyllia2, Stephanie M. Matt3, Judy Pascasio4, Peter J. Gaskill3, Evangelos Andreakos2, Peter D. Katsikis5 & …Alison J. Carey1,6 Show authors Mucosal Immunology volume 15, pages 1309–1320 (2022)Cite this article 1526 Accesses 5 Citations 7 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractNeonates exhibit increased susceptibility to respiratory viral infections, attributed to inflammation at the developing pulmonary air-blood interface. IFN I are antiviral cytokines critical to control viral replication, but also promote inflammation. Previously, we established a neonatal murine influenza virus (IV) model, which demonstrates increased mortality. Here, we sought to determine the role of IFN I in this increased mortality. We found that three-day-old IFNAR-deficient mice are highly protected from IV-induced mortality. In addition, exposure to IFNβ 24 h post IV infection accelerated death in WT neonatal animals but did not impact adult mortality. In contrast, IFN IIIs are protective to neonatal mice. IFNβ induced an oxidative stress imbalance specifically in primary neonatal IV-infected pulmonary type II epithelial cells (TIIEC), not in adult TIIECs. Moreover, neonates did not have an infection-induced increase in antioxidants, including a key antioxidant, superoxide dismutase 3, as compared to adults. Importantly, antioxidant treatment rescued IV-infected neonatal mice, but had no impact on adult morbidity. We propose that IFN I exacerbate an oxidative stress imbalance in the neonate because of IFN I-induced pulmonary TIIEC ROS production coupled with developmentally regulated, defective antioxidant production in response to IV infection. This age-specific imbalance contributes to mortality after respiratory infections in this vulnerable population. You have full access to this article via your institution. Download PDF Download PDF Similar content being viewed by others Gasdermin D promotes hyperinflammation and immunopathology during severe influenza A virus infection Article Open access 09 November 2023 Age-induced prostaglandin E2 impairs mitochondrial fitness and increases mortality to influenza infection Article Open access 09 November 2022 Control of IFN-I responses by the aminopeptidase IRAP in neonatal C57BL/6 alveolar macrophages during RSV infection Article Open access 12 April 2021 IntroductionNeonates less than six months of age, especially preterm neonates, are particularly susceptible to respiratory tract infections1. Morbidity and mortality associated with these infections are inversely correlated with age, with the highest susceptibility during the first few months of life2. Although this susceptibility to respiratory viral infections has been attributed to the immunological immaturity of the newborn3,4, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. The neonatal immune system evolves during the transition from fetal to ex utero life. There are quantitative and qualitative differences in immune cells, cytokines, and antibodies compared to adults5 which contribute to respiratory viral susceptibility6. Poorly regulated innate immune responses can be more damaging during infection7,8.A key part of these innate immune responses to viral infection is the production of type I interferons, mainly, IFNα/β9. These cytokines are produced by various immune and parenchymal cell types upon viral infection to reduce viral replication and activate subsequent immune responses10. However, a more pathogenic role of IFNα/β has recently been highlighted in the brain of HSV-1 infected neonates8,11. There are inconsistencies in the literature about whether respiratory viral infection-stimulated IFNα/β is deleterious12,13,14 or protective15,16,17,18. Induction of IFNα/β is followed by production of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines which leads to recruitment of immune cells and bystander damage.In addition to pulmonary type I interferons, type III interferons (IFNλ, IL-28A/B, IL-29) play an important early protective role in influenza virus infection because they limit viral replication and spread from the upper airway to the lower respiratory tract19 without causing inflammation in the airways20. IFNλ have a similar expression pattern, function21, and homology to type I interferons22.Respiratory viruses such as influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) in infected cells and induce oxidative stress23,24,25 to aid in their replication. Increases in ROS and oxidative stress imbalance are coupled with the progression of viral diseases and contribute to influenza-mediated lung damage23,26,27. In viral hepatitis, type I interferon-mediated oxidative stress has a direct effect on liver damage28. However, this direct link has not yet been established in pulmonary infection with respiratory viruses. Newborns, especially preterm neonates are particularly vulnerable to the deleterious effects of ROS and oxidative stress, as they lack adequate pulmonary antioxidant levels29,30,31,32.Previously, we demonstrated that neonatal mice are extremely susceptible to influenza virus33,34. We hypothesize here that influenza virus-induced IFNα/β has a direct role in this susceptibility. To test this hypothesis, we used our in vivo neonatal mouse model and primary neonatal respiratory epithelial cells to examine the direct impact of Type I IFNs on ROS production and oxidative stress. Here, we delineate the pathogenic role of IFNβ-mediated oxidative stress in the neonatal lung during an acute influenza infection and demonstrate the therapeutic value of antioxidant treatment during neonatal infection.ResultsDeletion of IFNαβR rescues influenza virus-mediated mortalityThree-day-old mice are exquisitely sensitive to influenza virus (IV) infection and exhibit high mortality33. Most pups die between 6 and 8 days post infection, which suggests a defective or pathogenic early neonatal antiviral immune response. Type I interferons (IFN I) are key antiviral cytokines produced during early infection and grant viral resistance to uninfected cells17,35. We hypothesized that neonates had a defective IFN I response, which contributed to increased early mortality. To assess the contribution of IFN I during neonatal IV infection, we utilized IFNαβR deficient mice, which are unable to respond to IFN I, including IFNα and IFNβ, the most common IFN I. Three-day-old IFNαβR−/− and aged-matched C57BL/6 (WT) neonates were infected with the H1N1 strain PR8 (A/Puerto Rico/8/34) influenza A virus and tracked for survival. Next, we independently confirmed these findings in a different animal housing location to avoid microbiome effects that may impact reproducibility of data36. Strikingly, two independent labs demonstrated IFNαβR−/− neonatal mice had an improved average survival rate of 70% compared to 13% survival in wild-type (WT) neonatal mice (Fig. 1a).Fig. 1: Type I interferons are deleterious during neonatal influenza virus infection, while type III interferons are essential to protection.Three-day old neonatal and 8-week-old adult mice were intranasally infected with PR8 influenza A virus. a Wild-type (dashed line) (n = 31) and IFNαβR−/− (solid line) (n = 46) neonates were infected and tracked for survival (5 total independent experiments at 2 separate vivarium, 3 experiments performed at Drexel University (DU) and 2 experiments performed at Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens(BRFAA) b At DU, 8-week-old wild-type (open circle) (n = 12, 3 independent experiments) and IFNαβR−/− (closed circle) (n = 15, 4 independent experiments) mice were intranasally infected with PR8 influenza A virus and weights were tracked. Viral burden was determined at 1-, 3-, and 6- days post-infection by real-time PCR and is reported as the fold change relative to a 1-day post-infection wild-type neonatal mouse for c IFNαβR−/− and e Ifnlr1−/− neonatal mice. d At BRFAA, wild-type (dashed line) (n = 9, 2 separate experiments) and Ifnlr1−/− (black line) (n = 12, 2 independent experiments) and IFNαβR−/− Ifnlr1−/− (blue line) (n = 14, 2 independent experiments) neonates were infected and tracked for survival. For viral load analysis, protocol 1 was used for IFNαβR−/− at DU and protocol 2 was used for Ifnlr1−/− at BRFAA. Statistical differences between wild type and transgenic animal survival were assessed by using log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test and Mann-Whitney test when comparing nonparametric values for viral loads and weight loss, where denoted *p < 0.05, ****p < 0.0001.Full size imageIn contrast to our finding with murine neonates, absence of IFNαβR in adults is deleterious20. To confirm these previous findings, IFNαβR−/− and WT adults were infected with H1N1 strain PR8 (A/Puerto Rico/8/34) influenza A virus and tracked for weight loss, an indicator of morbidity. IFNαβR−/− adults lost on average 33% of their initial body weight, compared to 20% in the WT adult mice, and failed to recover their initial body weight as quickly during IV infection (Fig. 1b). We next questioned if IFNαβR−/− neonates had differences in their viral loads. Consistent with the literature15,37, viral titers at early points of infection (1-, 3-, and 6- days post-infection) were comparable between the wild-type WT and IFNαβR−/− neonates (Fig. 1c).IFNλ is essential to protect neonatal mice during influenza virus infectionDue to their overlapping functions with IFN I, we questioned if deletion of IFNλ receptor (Ifnlr1 or IL28Rα) would have a similar protective effect as deletion of IFNαβR−/−. Three-day-old Ifnlr −/− and aged-matched WT neonates were infected with the same H1N1 strain PR8 (A/Puerto Rico/8/34) influenza A virus and tracked for survival. Compared to wild-type neonatal mice with 15% survival, Ifnlr1−/− neonates all succumbed to infection (Fig. 1d). Next, viral loads were assessed in Ifnlr1−/− neonates. Lungs were harvested from Ifnlr1−/− and WT neonates at 1-, 3- and 6-days post-infection. There were no differences in viral burden in the lungs at these time points (Fig. 1e).To determine the dominant interferon, Type I or III, in the protection or susceptibility of murine neonates to IV, animals deficient in both IFNαβR and Ifnlr1 were created, termed IFNαβR−/− Ifnlr1−/−. Three-day-old IFNαβR−/− Ifnlr1−/− and age-matched WT neonatal mice were infected and tracked for survival. Both the wild type and IFNαβR−/− Ifnlr1−/− neonates had similar survival levels with all neonates succumbing to the infection by day 10 (Fig. 1d). These results suggest that IFNλ plays an indispensable protective role in the neonates during IV infection without compromising the host fitness, especially in early life.IFNβ administration post-influenza infection accelerates death in neonatesAdministration of recombinant IFNβ prior to neonatal IV infection protects from mortality33,38,39. However, based on the improved survival of IFNαβR−/− neonatal mice after IV infection (Fig. 1a), we sought to determine if administration of IFNβ after the infection would be deleterious to the murine neonates. Three-day-old neonatal mice were infected with the same influenza virus strain as above and treated 24 h post infection with 1000U recombinant mouse IFNβ or sterile 0.9% saline intranasally (Fig. 2a). IFNβ treatment post infection accelerated neonatal death, with 95% mortality by 5 days post infection (Fig. 2b, black solid line), compared to infected neonatal mice treated with saline, with 75% mortality (Fig. 2b, black dashed line). Adult mice treated with 4000U units of IFNβ 24 h post infection had no associated mortality (Fig. 2b, red dashed line). In contrast to infected neonates, IFNβ treatment had no effect on survival of age-matched uninfected neonates (Fig. 2b, green dashed line). Previously, we demonstrated that neonates have a delayed upregulation of interferon stimulated genes (ISG) in influenza viral infection33 and others have demonstrated this with RSV infection40. Surprisingly, no differences in IFNβ transcription were found between WT neonates and adults at 1- or 3-days post-infection, which suggests that neonates have an aberrant interferon stimulation pathway which increases sensitivity to IFNβ effects, compared to adults (Supplementary Fig. 1). Together, these data confirm an age-specific deleterious effect of IFNβ during neonatal IV infection.Fig. 2: Type I interferons accelerate mortality and worsen pathology after neonatal influenza virus infection.a, b Three-day-old and 8-week-old wild-type mice were intranasally infected with PR8 influenza A virus or saline. Recombinant IFNβ (1000 units for neonates or 4000 units for adults) or saline (sham) was administered 24 h post infection per the a experimental scheme and b survival was tracked. Infected neonates who received IFNβ treatment (black solid line, n = 12) are compared to sham-treated infected neonates (black dash line, n = 11), uninfected neonates with IFNβ treatment (green dashed line, n = 8) and infected adult mice with IFNβ treatment (red dash line, n = 6) (2–3 independent experiments). c–h In separate experiments, neonatal wild type and IFNαβR−/−mice were infected at 3-days of age intranasally with PR8 influenza A virus. c Pathology severity scores were assessed at 3- and 6-days post-infection (3 independent experiments) (n = 5–11). d Representative images demonstrate increased alveolitis and peribronchiolitis in wild-type animals. Scale bar: 50 μm (High magnification) or 500 μm (Low magnification). Absolute cell counts of specified cell types per 100mg of lung was determined by flow cytometry in the e, g bronchoalveolar lavage and f, h interstitial lung at 1- e, f and 3-days post-infection g, h (2 independent experiments, n = 4–6). Statistical differences between wild type and IFNβ treatmentsurvival were assessed by using log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test. Student’s T test was used when comparing 2 roups for pathology severity scores and immunophenotyping, where denoted *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001.Full size imageImproved pulmonary pathology in IFNαβR deficient animalsDue to the improved survival of IFNαβR−/− neonatal mice, we asked if lung pathology was improved in IFNαβR−/− infected mice. Lung histopathology from IFNαβR−/− neonates was compared to age-matched WT neonates using a weighted scoring system33. This scoring method accounts for the percentage of lung affected, in addition to the severity of alveolitis and peribronchiolitis. The scoring was performed by a pathologist blinded to the genotype of the neonates. Three-day-old IFNαβR−/− and WT neonates were infected as above. Although early pathology scores did not differ between the WT and IFNαβR−/− mice, severity scores increased significantly in WT neonates at 6-days post-infection, compared to IFNαβR−/− neonates (Fig. 2c). While IFNαβR−/− neonates had small areas of affected lung, the WT mice had large sections of affected lung, which demonstrated septal wall thickening with cellular infiltration and alveolitis (Fig. 2d). Therefore, neonatal mice deficient in type I IFN signaling had improved lung pathology at 6-days post-IV infection, when WT mice mortality begins (Fig. 1a), which demonstrates a pathogenic role of type I IFN in neonatal mouse IV infection.IFNαβR deficient animals have differential immune cell recruitment during early infectionIn IV-infected adult mice, high amounts of IFN I correlate with increased recruitment and proliferation of inflammatory monocytes and subsequent immunopathogenesis41,42. We asked whether loss of IFN I signal in the neonate would decrease recruitment of inflammatory monocytes to the alveolar airspace and the lung interstitium. Three-day-old IFNαβR−/− and WT neonates were infected with IV. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and whole lung tissue was collected at 1- and 3-days post-infection. We found no differences in total cell count in the BAL or the lung at 1-day post-infection (Supplementary Fig. 2a, b). However, there was a significant decrease in total cells in the BAL in IFNαβR−/− neonates at 3 days post infection, relative to WT neonates. Inflammatory monocytes (CD11bhi, Ly6Chi, Ly6G−, MHC II+) and neutrophils (CD11bhi, Ly6C−, Ly6G+) were defined based on Terrazas, et al.43 (Supplementary Fig. 3). Inflammatory monocytes and neutrophils were significantly decreased in the BAL but not in the lung interstitium at 1- and 3-days post-infection in IFNαβR−/− neonates compared to WT neonates (Fig. 2e, g, Supplementary Fig. 4). There were no differences in macrophage (CD11b+ F4/80+) or classical dendritic cell (CD11b+ and/or CD11c+, MHC IIhi)44 numbers at the assessed time points (Fig. 2e–h). Therefore, IFN I drive enhanced recruitment of inflammatory monocytes and neutrophils into the airway during neonatal IV infection, directly impacting immunopathology.IFNβ induces oxidative stress during neonatal influenza viral infectionIFN I prime cells to produce reactive oxygen species45 during IV infection46,47. Inflammatory monocytes and neutrophils have an enhanced ability to produce ROS during infection and inflammation23,48,49. Based on increased recruitment of inflammatory cells into the alveolar airspace in neonates during IV infection, we next questioned whether these cells were under increased oxidative stress compared to their adult counterparts. To assess pulmonary oxidative stress during early stages of infection, neonatal and adult mice were infected with IV, and lungs were harvested 2-days post-infection. The whole lung cell suspension was treated with IFNβ ex vivo for an hour before measuring oxidative stress by CellROX. N-acetylcysteine (NAC) treated cells were used as background controls for both neonates and adults and yielded similar results (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Age-matched IV-infected animals treated with saline were used to provide a baseline to compare to those animals treated with IFNβ. There was increased oxidative stress in inflammatory monocytes, macrophages, and CD45− epithelial cells from infected neonatal animals, compared to adults, after ex vivo IFNβ treatment (Fig. 3a, Supplementary Fig. 5b). In addition, the CD45− epithelial cell population had the greatest fold increase (7.5-fold) in oxidative stress relative to adults.Fig. 3: Neonates have increased oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species production following influenza viral infection.To determine oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species production in the infected neonate versus adult, 3-day-old neonatal and 8-week-old adult mice were intranasally infected with PR8 influenza A virus. Mice were harvested 2-days post-infection. a Oxidative stress imbalance was determined with CellROX staining after the infected whole lung cell suspension was treated with IFNβ or saline (control), ex vivo for an hour. Average mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of CellROX in the specified immune cell populations in neonates (white bars) (n = 7, 2 independent experiments) and adults (black bars) post-IFNβ treatment (n = 6, 2 independent experiments). b To quantify ROS production in neonates versus adults, dihydroethidium staining was performed. Two days post infection, the whole lung cell suspension was treated with IFNβ or saline (control), ex vivo for an hour. The number of DHE+ CD45− cells post-IFNβ treatment is compared to age-matched saline treated uninfected controls for WT neonates (white bar), IFNαβR−/− neonates (gray bar), and adults (black bar) (n = 5–6 in each group, 2 experiments). Statistical differences between groups were assessed using Mann–Whitney test when comparing 2 groups for MFI and absolute cell count differences, where denoted *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.Full size imageTo directly assess the relative contribution of superoxide production to the oxidative stress imbalance, we employed dihydroethidium (DHE) staining coupled to multicolor flow cytometry. DHE can directly measure the amount of ROS in live cells with specificity for superoxide and hydrogen peroxide50. Again, neonatal and adult mice were infected with IV, and lungs were harvested 2-days post-infection. Whole lung suspensions were treated as above and the cells were stained with DHE following multicolor conjugated antibody application. There was no difference in ROS production in immune cell types in the presence of IFNβ compared to infected adults (Supplementary Fig. 6). To specifically investigate the impact of type I interferons on ROS production in CD45− epithelial cells, infected neonatal wild type and IFNαβR−/− and adult wild-type mouse lung suspensions were compared to uninfected age-matched controls. Wild-type neonates had a significant increase in ROS production by CD45− cells, as compared to IFNαβR−/− neonates and wild-type adults, relative to uninfected controls (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Fig. 7). Therefore, this suggests infected neonatal epithelial cells are particularly sensitive to IFNβ exposure and have a higher propensity to produce ROS in response to IFNβ.Influenza infection is required for IFN I mediated oxidative stress imbalance in neonatal Type II pulmonary epithelial cellsBased on epithelial cells (CD45−) having increased ROS based on DHE staining compared to adult controls, we sought to identify whether type II pulmonary epithelial cells (TIIEC) were a key source of oxidative stress, as the IV replication cycle contributes to production of ROS by infected epithelial cells51. TIIEC are a primary target for IV infection and play an important role in mounting an initial response to the infection52,53. We optimized TIIEC isolation methods54,55 to establish a biologically relevant ex vivo neonatal lung epithelial cell platform. TIIEC are approximately 85% pure after the isolation, based on flow cytometry (Supplementary Fig. 8).Neonatal and adult mice were infected in vivo and TIIEC were harvested 2-days post-infection, with uninfected, aged-matched animals as controls. To examine whether there was increased oxidative stress in influenza virus-infected TIIEC in response to IFNβ, cells were untreated or treated with IFNβ or tert-Butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP), a known inducer of ROS, ex vivo for an hour before measuring oxidative stress with CellROX. Infected neonatal and adult TIIEC were evaluated with the CellInsight CX7 high content screening platform. This confocal imaging system allows automated, unbiased confocal microscopic analysis of large numbers of individual cells across a population, enabling oxidative stress detection through CellROX staining to be evaluated at the individual cell level.The TIIEC were co-stained with DAPI (blue), WGA (red) and CellROX to measure oxidative stress (green) (Fig. 4a). There is not an increase in oxidative stress in the infected adult TIIEC with the ex vivo application of IFNβ (Fig. 4a, b). In contrast, infected neonatal animals exhibited increased oxidative stress in response to exogenous ex vivo IFNβ treatment, compared to untreated neonatal cells and adult cells (Fig. 4a, b). Next, we sought to determine if this oxidative stress was specific to IV infection or was solely developmentally associated. Importantly, we detected over a 2-fold increase in oxidative stress by infected neonatal TIIEC compared to uninfected neonates (Fig. 4c). Together, these data indicate that infected neonatal TIIEC had increased oxidative stress upon exposure to IFNβ compared to infected adults and uninfected neonates based on high content screening.Fig. 4: Influenza-infected neonates have greater oxidative stress imbalance in response to IFNβ.Three-day-old neonatal and 8-week-old adult WT mice were intranasally infected with PR8 influenza A virus. Age-matched uninfected mice were used as controls. Mice were harvested 2-days post-infection and Type II epithelial cells were isolated. The TIIEC were treated with an antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC), IFNβ, or tert-Butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP), or media (Untreated) ex vivo for an hour. NAC treated wells were used as background staining controls. The CellInsight CX7 high content screening platform was used to quantify CellROX intensity at the individual cell level. a Representative images at 10X magnification from IFNβ-treated uninfected and infected neonates and IFNβ-treated infected adults are depicted. The TIIEC were co-stained with DAPI (blue), WGA (red) and CellROX (green). b The percentage of CellROX positive cells relative to total cells in each treatment group is indicated. c Fold change of CellROX intensity relative to age-matched uninfected animals. n = 9 in neonates, n = 3 in adults, 3 independent experiments. To confirm the role of IFNβ in the neonatal program of oxidative stress imbalance during influenza virus infection, IFNαβR−/− and WT neonates were infected as above and TIIEC were harvested 2-days post-infection. d Relative fluorescence units of average CellROX intensity by flow cytometry in IFNβ-treated WT (white bar) and IFNαβR−/− neonates (black bar) is shown. Statistical differences between groups were assessed using Student’s T test was used when comparing 2 groups, where denoted *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.Full size imageNext, to confirm the pivotal role of type I interferons in oxidative stress imbalance, infected neonatal wild type and IFNαβR−/− TIIEC were isolated and treated as above. Flow cytometric analysis of CellROX staining was performed. IFNαβR−/− neonates did not display a significant increase in oxidative stress (Fig. 4d). Therefore, neonatal influenza viral infection coupled with IFN I programs oxidative stress, a feature not found in uninfected neonates and infected adults.Neonates fail to upregulate antioxidant enzymes during infectionNeonates, especially premature neonates, are more prone to oxidative stress as they move from an oxygen poor in utero environment to oxygen rich ex utero environment56,57 and lack robust antioxidant systems58. During IV infection59 and other lung diseases, antioxidant enzymes are upregulated and shuttled to the extracellular matrix60. Potentially, the neonatal propensity towards oxidative stress during IV infection (Fig. 4c) could be due to an aberrant antioxidant response, coupled with increased ROS (Fig. 3b). Therefore, we hypothesized neonatal mice would not respond to IV infection with an increase in these antioxidant enzymes. Superoxide dismutase 3 (SOD3) (Fig. 5a), glutathione peroxidase 3 (GPX3) (Fig. 5b), glutathione synthetase (GSS) (Fig. 5c), and peroxiredoxin 1 (PRDX1) (Fig. 5d) transcripts were analyzed in murine lungs from IV-infected wild-type neonates, IFNαβR−/− neonates, and adults, as well as from uninfected animals. In response to IV infection, adult mice increase transcription of antioxidant enzymes between 1- and 3-days post-infection, compared to their age-matched uninfected counterparts (Fig. 5a–d). In contrast, both IV-infected wild-type and IFNαβR−/− neonates fail to upregulate these enzymes during infection. Therefore, IFN I do not play a suppressive role in antioxidant mechanisms; rather antioxidant gene transcription is developmentally-dependent. Moreover, IV-infected wild-type and IFNαβR−/− neonates at 1-day post-infection suppressed transcription of the extracellular enzyme SOD3, compared to the adult at 1-day post-infection (Fig. 5a). SOD3 is a key antioxidant enzyme in the alveolar airspace59,61,62. Therefore, neonates have a decreased ability to neutralize ROS in the alveolar airspace because of an age-dependent aberrant antioxidant response to influenza virus infection, compared to the adult increase in antioxidant production.Fig. 5: Neonates fail to upregulate antioxidants during influenza virus infection.To determine changes in transcription of antioxidant enzymes in the infected animal, 3-day-old WT (black bars) and IFNαβR−/− (gray bars) neonatal and 8-week-old (white bars) mice were intranasally infected with PR8 influenza A virus. Lungs were harvested at 1- and 3-days post-infection, and from age-matched uninfected animals. a Sod3, b Gpx3, c Gss, and d Prdx1 transcriptions were normalized to the housekeeping gene gapdh (n = 3–6 for each group). Data presented relative to uninfected age-matched mice. Data from 3 independent experiments. Statistical differences between groups were assessed sing one-way ANOVA to compare multiple groups, where denoted ns = non-significant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.Full size imageAntioxidant Treatment Rescues IFNβ mediated mortality in neonates, but not adultsLoss of SOD3 and GPX3 have been linked to tissue damage in the lung62,63 and over-expression of SOD3 ameliorates lung pathology during IV infection64. Based on global increased oxidative stress during IV infection and IFNβ application, coupled with a defective antioxidant response during neonatal influenza viral infection, we asked if treatment with an antioxidant Acetadote would improve survival of IV-infected neonatal mice. Acetadote is a pharmaceutical grade N-acetylcysteine (NAC), used in the treatment of acetaminophen overdose. Acetaminophen overdose significantly decreases intracellular glutathione, a major intracellular antioxidant. We administered 150 mg/kg of Acetadote intraperitoneally into neonatal mice on 1 and 2 days of age prior to IV infection at 3 days. Subsequent doses were given 1- and 3-days post-infection and the mice were tracked for survival (Fig. 6a). Neonatal mice treated with Acetadote had an improved survival (40%) during IV infection compared to their sham-treated litter mates (10%) (Fig. 6b). Next, we sought to determine if Acetadote treatment started post-infection could protect infected mice. Three-day old mice were infected and administered Acetadote intraperitoneally 1-, 3-, 5-, and 7-days post-IV infection (Fig. 6c). Neonatal mice receiving Acetadote had significantly improved survival (25%) compared to their sham recipient litter mates (10%) (Fig. 6d). In contrast, adults treated with the same weight-adjusted dose of 150 mg/kg NAC and pre-infection dosing schedule (Fig. 6e) do not show improve disease pathology (25% maximum weight loss) relative to PBS treated age-matched animals (21% maximum weight loss) (Fig. 6f). These data suggest that ROS production during neonatal infection contributes to pathogenicity, and that antioxidants are a possible therapeutic strategy during IV infection in this vulnerable population.Fig. 6: Antioxidant treatment partially rescues neonates but not adults from influenza-mediated mortality.To determine if exogenous antioxidant could rescue neonatal and adult animals from oxidative stress imbalance-mediated mortality, animals were treated with 150 mg/kg of a pharmaceutical grade antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine (Acetadote) or sham at indicated time points (a, c and e) and tracked for survival (neonates, b and d) or weight loss (adults, f). Treatment with Acetadote partially rescues neonatal mice from influenza-mediated mortality when started prophylactically (a and b); Acetadote (dashed line) (n = 29), sham (solid line) (n = 27) 6 independent experiments. When Acetadote is started post-infection (c and d), there is improved survival; Acetadote (solid line) (n = 18), sham (dashed line) (n = 9) 4 independent experiments. In contrast, adults given the same weight-adjusted dose of NAC have no improvement in morbidity as demonstrated by similar weight loss kinetics (b and f), NAC (black circle) (n = 5, 3 males and 2 females), PBS (open circle) (n = 5, 3 males and 2 females), 2 independent experiments. Statistical differences between treated and control animals’ survival on Kaplan Meier survival curve was assessed by using log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test, where denoted *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.Full size imageDiscussionWith an age-appropriate in vivo murine model of IV infection, our studies provide evidence that type I interferons directly promote an oxidative stress imbalance during IV infection. Neonates, especially premature neonates, are exquisitely sensitive to the pathogenic effects of ROS as they lack appropriate antioxidants in their lungs29,30,31,32. Here, we demonstrate an aberrant global antioxidant response to IV infection in murine neonates and increased pulmonary epithelial cell ROS production in response to IFNβ, which drives this oxidative stress imbalance. Importantly, exogenous antioxidant therapy partially rescues the IV-infected murine neonates, while there is no benefit to adult morbidity. ROS production is important for viral ribonucleoprotein nuclear export and viral release during respiratory viral infections24,25,51,65 which contributes to damage in the lung tissue47. Blocking ROS production ameliorates viral replication, IV mediated inflammation46, and lung damage. ROS produced by NADPH Oxidase (Nox) enzymes of both lung infiltrating immune cells and the lung epithelial cells can also contribute to lung injury and death either directly or via inflammatory cytokine production24,47.Removal and detoxification of ROS is catalyzed by several type of antioxidants. Key pulmonary antioxidants are the superoxide dismutases66 which contain 3 members: cytosolic SOD1, mitochondrial SOD2, and extracellular SOD366,67. SOD1 and SOD2 are intracellular antioxidants which neutralize ROS produced as a result of metabolic activity67. SOD3 is particularly important because over-expression of SOD3 in type II alveolar epithelial cells (TIIECs) aids in lung development of neonatal mice68, attenuates toxicity following hyperoxia61, and prevents IV-induced lung damage64. Neutrophils and macrophages exposed to type I IFNs have a higher propensity to produce ROS via the STAT-1 pathway45,69. During a viral hepatitis infection, type I IFNs down-regulate SOD1 and increase ROS formation, leading to liver damage28. Functional blocking of IFNαβR in macrophages and hepatocytes reduced ROS generation and liver damage28. Consistent with this, IV-infected wild-type murine neonatal TIIECs produce ROS in response to IFNβ, in contrast to IFNαβR−/− murine neonatal TIIECs. Moreover, absence of ROS reduces lung damage and improves resolution of IV infection70. Here, both wild-type and IFNαβR−/− neonatal mice fail to upregulate several antioxidants in response to IV, as compared to their adult counterparts. These experiments provide strong evidence that the driver of the oxidative stress imbalance in wild-type animals is reactive oxygen species production in response to type I interferons.Type I interferons (IFNα and IFNβ) induce an antiviral state, inhibit viral replication, and block the infection of neighboring cells10,71. Loss of function or mutation in type I interferons or their receptors increases symptom severity and mortality during viral infections in adult mice and humans72,73. Surprisingly, neonatal animals lacking the IFNα/β receptor are much more resistant to IV-related death relative to WT neonates, despite having similar viral burden. Type I interferons can act in an autocrine and paracrine manner, amplifying proinflammatory responses, which can lead to increased inflammation in the lung. There are inconsistencies in the literature about whether the IFN α/β produced in response to respiratory viral infection is deleterious12,13,14 or protective15,16,17,18, especially in neonates.We speculate that the timing and magnitude of the neonatal IFN response is critical to whether it is deleterious or protective. For example, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) induces poor IFN I, specifically IFNα, which contributes to RSV-mediated immunopathogenesis74. This reduction in IFN I during RSV is dependent on insulin-responsive aminopeptidase (IRAP) in alveolar macrophages40 or hematopoietic growth factor ligand (Flt3-L) in DCs75. In contrast, we demonstrate IV induces similar IFN transcription in murine neonates compared to adults. However, consistent with others40, previous work from our group revealed downstream IFN signaling and feedback is different in the IV-infected neonate, as ISGs are downregulated33. Finally, IFNβ prior to infection is protective, but induces rapid death if given after IV infection. Further investigation of the age-specific role of IFN I in different viral infections is warranted.IFN I-induced oxidative stress is a critical mechanism of neonatal mortality during IV infection. IV infection programs neonatal immune and epithelial cells to have oxidative stress imbalance in response to IFN I. In contrast, ROS play an important role in IFN I regulation and are required for robust adult antiviral responses in epithelial cells76. Adult humans and mice lacking functional NOX2 complex leads to a prominent IFN I signature and higher inflammation with associated autoimmunity77. However, NOX2-mediated increase in ROS during RNA and DNA virus infections in endocytic compartments of monocytes and macrophages suppresses antiviral and humoral signaling78. Inhibition of NOX2-mediated ROS increase in these cell populations reduces IV-induced lung pathology79. In addition to amplification loops created by ROS, IFN I are responsible for increased recruitment of inflammatory monocytes which express Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). Enhanced recruitment of TRAIL+ inflammatory monocytes and increased expression of death-inducing receptor DR5 on epithelial cells has been linked to increased lung pathogenesis that is not present in IFNαβR−/−13. Together, these data indicate that type I IFNs could have a highly pathogenic role during neonatal IV infection.Type III interferon (IFNλ, IL-28/29) has been identified as a non-redundant “front-line” antiviral interferon against IV and other respiratory viral infections20. While IFNλ signal through a distinct heterodimeric receptor, IFNλR1 (IL28Rα) and IL-10Rβ80, similar signaling cascades to IFN-α/β are initiated, which results in overlapping interferon stimulated gene (ISG) expression12. IFNλ is the predominant early cytokine produced during IV infection81 by respiratory epithelial cells and prevents the spread of virus from upper to lower airway19. WT and IFNαβR−/− neonates have a similar viral burden, likely because IFNλ controls viral replication. IFNλ can maintain host fitness by creating a limited, protective inflammatory environment20, which makes it indispensable during early IV infection in our neonatal murine IV model. IFNα, but not IFNλ, is deleterious when administered post-IV infection, and leads to increased inflammatory cytokines in BAL fluid and inflammatory monocyte frequency14. In addition, higher IFNλ levels in human infants correspond to improved clinical severity scores during early respiratory viral infection82.N-acetylcysteine has been proposed as a therapeutic for respiratory viral infections to combat oxidative stress. In addition to its mucolytic activity in the lung83, it can directly scavenge oxygen free radicals via its thiol-reducing group, and indirectly aids in oxidative stress reduction by providing the necessary precursor cysteine for the synthesis of glutathione (GSH), a key intracellular antioxidant84,85. NAC attenuates pulmonary inflammation in adult BALB/c mice during H9N2 influenza infection. Adult animals that received NAC had lower amounts of proinflammatory cytokines in BAL86. Indeed, our short prophylactic treatment course with a pharmaceutical grade NAC provided protection to our neonates during IV infection, however NAC did not ameliorate IV infection-mediated weight loss in our adults. Importantly, NAC treatment begun 24 h post infection was protective. Recent studies have also confirmed that NAC has a direct inhibition effect on seasonal influenza viruses87. Therefore, antioxidants during IV infection are a promising therapeutic target specifically in the neonate population, both as a therapy to ameliorate oxidative stress and to limit IV replication.Here, with a neonatal murine in vivo model of IV infection, we have challenged the paradigm of the protective role of IFN I and demonstrated age-specific developmental effects during IV infection. To our knowledge, this is the first study linking the neonatal type I interferon response to oxidative stress in the lung. We have demonstrated that the increase in ROS production in the neonatal mice is IFNβ mediated. Type III interferons can provide protection during a neonatal IV infection without IFN I’s pathogenic side effects. In addition, ROS mediated mortality can be alleviated by administration of antioxidants both as a prophylactic and a therapeutic agent. This therapeutic potential takes advantage of the global, age-related aberrant antioxidant response to infection and thus, could potentially be applied to a broad range of viral infections.MethodsMice, Infections, and Interferon β treatmentEight-week-old adult C56BL/6J WT mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Stock No: 000664-JAX) to use as adult controls and for in-house breeding. IFNαβR−/− mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Stock No: 32045-JAX) for in-house breeding. Experimental pups were obtained by timed mating in-house. The mice were housed under specific-pathogen-free conditions in an American Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC)-certified barrier facility at both the Drexel University College of Medicine Queen Lane Campus and New College Building animal facilities.Three-day-old neonatal mice (weight ~3 g) were infected intranasally (i.n.) with 0.12 TCID50 (0.04 TCID50/g) of influenza virus H1N1 strain PR8 (A/Puerto Rico/8/34) in a 5 µl volume. Adult 8-week-old WT mice (weight ~20 g) were infected i.n. with a sublethal dose of 3 TCID50 in a 20 µl volume (0.15 TCID50/g). The mice were anesthetized with inhaled isoflurane before intranasal inoculations. The pups were inspected daily for their activity level, respiratory rate, and the maternal interaction. If the pups were noted to be ignored or disregarded by the mother, had fast breathing, weight loss, or lack of movement when handled, they were removed from the cage. However, the majority of the pups did not exhibit signs of morbidity and were not found in the cage, assumed to be cannibalized by the mother.Additionally, C57BL/6J WT (Stock No: 000664-JAX) and IFNαβR−/− (Stock No: 32045-JAX) mice were both originally purchased from Jackson Laboratories, and Ifnlr1−/−81 mice on a C57BL/6J genetic background were bred at the Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens (BRFAA) animal house, and their pups were obtained by timed mating. IFNαβR−/− Ifnlr1−/− double knock-out animals were generated by breeding IFNαβR−/− and Ifnlr1−/− until double knock-outs were achieved20. All mice were housed in specific-pathogen free (SPF) conditions in full compliance with Federation of Laboratory Animal Science Associations (FELASA) recommendations. All procedures had received approval from Institutional and Regional Ethical Review Boards. Three-day-old neonatal mice were infected intranasally (i.n.) with 3 pfu of influenza virus H1N1 strain PR8 (A/Puerto Rico/8/34) (Charles River Laboratories) in 5 µl volume under inhaled isoflurane anesthesia. Infectious viral load was determined by plaque assay of the titrated viral stock on MDCK cells.Neonatal and adult mice were treated intranasally with 1000 or 4000 units of recombinant mouse Interferon β (Sigma-Aldrich, I9032), respectively. Recombinant IFNβ was diluted in normal saline to 200 units per µL; 5 µL for neonates or 20 µL for adults were administered intranasally under inhaled isoflurane anesthesia.Viral loadsProtocol 1 (DU)At various time points post-infection, the lungs of the mice were harvested, weighed, and frozen at −80 °C in TRIzol (Invitrogen). RNA was isolated by the Qiagen RNeasy kit (Qiagen). The isolated RNA was then used for cDNA synthesis using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). Virus was measured by real-time PCR using influenza specific primers as previously described88. cDNA synthesis was performed using both a specific primer (5′-TCTAACCGAGGTCGAAACGTA-3′) and random hexamers. Real-time assays were performed in triplicate with 5 μl of cDNA, 12.5 μl of 2× TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 900 nM influenza A virus sense primer (5′-AAGACCAATCCTGTCACCTCTGA-3′), 900 nM influenza A virus antisense primer (5′-CAAAGCGTCTACGCTGCAGTCC-3′), and 200 nM influenza A virus probe (FAM-5′-TTTGTGTTCACGCTCACCGT-3′-TAMRA)89. All primers were specific for the influenza A virus matrix protein. Amplification and detection were performed using an Applied Biosystems Prism 7900HT sequence detection system with SDS 2.2.1 software (Applied Biosystems) at the following conditions: 2 min at 50 °C and 10 min at 95 °C, then 45 cycles of 15 s at 95 °C and 1 min at 60 °C. For viral load measurement, a standard curve was developed with serial 10-fold dilutions of stock PR8 with a known TCID50 concentration. Ct values were plotted against virus quantity in TCID50 per milliliter. This curve was used to convert the Ct values for viral loads to TCID50 equivalents. Virus RNA quantities in lungs were expressed as fold change relative to age-matched 1-day post-infection neonatal mice.Protocol 2 (BRFAA)At various time points post infection, the spleen and lung of the mice were harvested. The right lobes were weighed and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen in TriReagent (Sigma-Aldrich) and placed in −80 °C for longer storage. The left lobes and the spleen were used for FACS analysis. Frozen lungs were homogenized, and RNA isolation was performed through phase separation, according to standard protocols. RNA concentration and integrity were determined spectrophotometrically and electrophoretically, respectively. Two micrograms of the isolated RNA was treated with RQ1 DNase (Promega) and used for cDNA synthesis with the M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Viral load was determined by detection of the IAV NS1 RNA in the right lungs by real-time quantitative PCR with iTaq Universal SYBR® Green Supermix (Biorad). with primers published elsewhere (Brandes et al. 2013) [5′-3′ Fwd: TGTCAAGCTTTCAGGTAGATTG, Rev: CTCTTAGGGATTTCTGATCTC]. Relative amounts of RNA expression were normalized to Gapdh [5′-3′ Fwd: AGGTGGTCTCCTCTGACTTC, Rev: CTGTTGCTGTAGCCAAATTCG], and calculated according to the DDCT method. Virus RNA quantities in lungs were expressed as fold change relative to age-matched 1-day post infection neonatal mice.Quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCRAt different points during infection, the right lobes of infected lungs were harvested and immediately homogenized in TRIzol (Invitrogen). Total RNA purification was carried out using the RiboPure kit (AB). Conversion into cDNA used the TaqMan RNA-to-CTT 2-step kit (AB). TaqMan quantitation of IFNβ1, SOD3, GSS, GPX3, PRDX1, and GAPDH was carried out with inventoried primers in an AB 7900HT sequence detection system according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For relative quantitation of the different mRNA species, all values were normalized to measured levels of GAPDH transcripts and expressed relative to values for uninfected WT mice using the comparative threshold cycle (CT) method (Applied Biosystems, Guide to performing relative quantitation of gene expression using real-time quantitative PCR).Isolation of leukocytesPulmonary leukocytes were isolated from individual mice by removing lungs and mincing into smaller pieces. The tissue was then digested for two hours at 37 °C with 3.0 mg/ml collagenase A and 0.15 μg/ml DNase I (Roche) in RPMI 1640 (Mediatech) containing 5% heat-inactivated FBS (Life Technologies), 2 mM l-glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Mediatech). The digested tissue was then passed through a 40-μm cell strainer (Falcon) and washed in the same media as above. Cells were counted using trypan blue exclusion with light microscopy. Bronchoalveolar lavage was obtained by instilling the lungs with 0.1 mL (neonates) or 0.5 mL (adults) PBS/EDTA (25 mM) 5 times via intratracheal cannulation. The samples were centrifuged to obtain cells for flow cytometry.Isolation of type II epithelial cellsThe lungs of neonatal and adult mice were instilled to capacity with Dispase II (ThermoFisher) via a tracheal catheter (29 gauge for neonates, 18 gauge for adults) followed by 0.1% low-melt agarose. Lungs were removed from the animals and digested in Dispase II for two hours at 37 °C. The cell suspension was filtered through progressively smaller cell strainers (100 μm, 40 μm, 25 μm). Leukocytes were depleted from the filtered Type II epithelial cells (TIIECs) by plating the cell suspension on a culture dish coated with purified monoclonal rat anti-mouse anti-CD16/CD32 and anti-CD45 (BD, San Diego, CA) for two hours at 37 °C 10% CO2. After this enrichment process, we consistently attained >80% purity of TIIECs from neonatal animals (Supplementary Fig. 7).Flow cytometryCells were co-stained with anti-mouse CD45 conjugated to PerCP Cy5.5 (ThermoFisher), anti-mouse CD11b conjugated to APC (BioLegend), anti-mouse CD11c conjugated to PE-eF610 (BioLegend), anti-mouse Ly6G conjugated to Pacific Blue (BioLegend), anti-mouse Ly6C conjugated to AlexaFluor 488 (BioLegend), anti-mouse F4/80 conjugated to Brilliant Violet 605 (BioLegend), and anti-mouse MHC II conjugated to AlexaFluor 700 (BioLegend). To assess the purity of TIIEC (CD45−, CD324−, CD326+, MHC II+), the cell suspension was stained with CD45 conjugated to PerCP Cy5.5 (ThermoFisher), CD324 conjugated to PE (BioLegend), CD326 conjugated to APC (BioLegend), and MHC II conjugated to FITC (BioLegend). All stains were completed on ice to prevent internalization. All absolute cell numbers are calculated per 100 mg of lung tissue. Cells were fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde (Fisher Scientific) before flow cytometric analysis. Data were collected on a FACS Fortessa using FACS Diva software (BD Biosciences). Analysis was performed using FlowJo software (Tree Star).HistopathologyBoth lobes of the lung were inflated and fixed with 0.5 mL of 4% neutral-buffered formalin solution. Deparaffinized sections from fixed lungs were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Lung pathology was scored blindly by a board-certified pathologist. A percentage score was determined for percentage of lung which exhibited alveolitis: 0: 0%, 1: 1–5%, 2: 6–20%, 3: 21–40%, 4: 41–70%, 5: >70%. The same percentage score was determined for peribronchiolitis. Next, an intensity score was determined by counting the number of cells in the most affected alveoli: 0: no cells, 1: 1–5 cells, 2: 6–20 cells, 3: 21–40 cells, 4: 41–70 cells, 5: >70 cells. The same intensity score was determined for cellular infiltration in the bronchioles. A weighted severity score was then determined using these percentage and intensity scores.Detection of oxidative stress by flow cytometryFor the analysis of oxidative stress via flow cytometry, 1.0 × 106 cells were treated with saline or 2 mM n-acetylcysteine or 400 μM TBHP or 1000 units of IFNβ at 37 °C 10% CO2 for 1 h in culture media. Cells were then stained with 500 nM CellROX Deep Red diluted in DMSO at 37 °C 10% CO2 for 30 minutes in culture media. During the last 15 minutes of CellROX staining, 1 μl of 1 mM SYTOX Blue Dead Cell stain solution in DMSO was added to the media. For samples with multiple color flow cytometry, surface staining was performed immediately following CellROX staining but before SYTOX staining. Cells were fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde. The cells were immediately acquired on a Becton Dickinson LSRII flow cytometer and data was analyzed on FlowJo software (10.7.1).Detection of reactive oxygen species by flow cytometryTo detect intracellular ROS in neonatal and adult lung cells, the Dihydroethidium (DHE) assay kit (Abcam, ab236206) was used. Neonatal and adult animals were infected with influenza virus as above and harvested 2 days post infection. Lungs were processed to form a single cell suspension. 1.0 × 106 cells were incubated at 37 °C 5% CO2 for 1 h with 5 µM of DHE with saline, 20 mM n-acetylcysteine, 10 µM Antimycin A, or 1000 units of IFNβ. Surface staining was performed immediately after DHE staining and acquired on a Becton Dickinson LSRII flow cytometer and data was analyzed with FlowJo software (10.7.1).Detection of oxidative stress by CellInsight CX7Images were acquired on the CellInsight CX7 high content screening platform, an automated 7-channel confocal microscope. Type II pulmonary epithelial cells were stained with a nuclear stain (blue, DAPI, 386 nm), cell membrane stain WGA (red, 647 nm), and CellROX, a marker for reactive oxygen species (green, 488 nm). Ten fields were imaged in each condition. These images were acquired at 10X with a fixed exposure time of 0.1 seconds. Following acquisition, images were analyzed quantitatively using HCS Studio software. Each image had donor-specific manual alterations in Image Settings to correct background. The nuclear stain was gated by area (Object.Area.Ch1) and the oxidative stress stain was gated by area (ObjectCh2.Area.Ch2) and average intensity (ObjectCh2.AvgIntensity.Ch2). The colocalization had a focal channel of DAPI and a target channel of CellROX (Supplementary Table 1).After scanning the plate, the DAPI/CellROX colocalization was quantified by average intensity (Mean_ROI_A_Target_1_AvgIntensity) which depicted the average intensity of CellROX stain over DAPI staining. The total cell count per condition was enumerated from the DAPI object count, and the average intensity per cell was summed for each condition. Then, the average intensity per cell was calculated by dividing the summed intensity value by the total cell count per condition.StatisticsStatistical analysis was performed using the Shapiro-Wilk W test for normality, Student’s t-test and nonparametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test for paired and unpaired samples, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) when comparing the means of multiple groups, or log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test for survival curves. Analyses were performed with the GraphPad Prism 9 statistical analysis program. P values < 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.Study approvalAll experimental procedures and handling of mice were approved by the Drexel University College of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC), protocol number 20607, project number 1044999. All work was conducted in compliance with government regulations including the US Animal Welfare Act (Animal Welfare Assurance number A3222-01) and the Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The Animal Care and Use program at Drexel has received Full Accreditation from AAALAC International. ReferencesResch, B., Kurath-Koller, S., Eibisberger, M. & Zenz, W. Prematurity and the burden of influenza and respiratory syncytial virus disease. World J. Pediatr. 12, 8–18 (2016).Article PubMed Google Scholar Dawood, F. S. et al. Burden of seasonal influenza hospitalization in children, United States, 2003 to 2008. J. Pediatr. 157, 808–814 (2010).Article PubMed Google Scholar Siegrist, C. A. Neonatal and early life vaccinology. Vaccine 19, 3331–3346 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mohr, E. & Siegrist, C. A. Vaccination in early life: standing up to the challenges. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 41, 1–8 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Adkins, B., Leclerc, C. & Marshall-Clarke, S. Neonatal adaptive immunity comes of age. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4, 553–564 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yu, J. C. et al. Innate immunity of neonates and infants. Front Immunol. 9, 1759 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ogra, P. L., Welliver, R. C., Riepenhoff-Talty, M. & Faden, H. S. Interaction of mucosal immune system and infections in infancy: implications in allergy. Ann. Allergy 53, 523–534 (1984).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wilcox, D. R., Folmsbee, S. S., Muller, W. J. & Longnecker, R. The Type I interferon response determines differences in choroid plexus susceptibility between newborns and adults in herpes simplex virus encephalitis. MBio 7, e00437–00416 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McNab, F., Mayer-Barber, K., Sher, A., Wack, A. & O’Garra, A. Type I interferons in infectious disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 87–103 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jewell, N. A. et al. Differential type I interferon induction by respiratory syncytial virus and influenza a virus in vivo. J. Virol. 81, 9790–9800 (2007).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bogunovic, D. Type I interferons in newborns-neurotoxicity versus antiviral defense. MBio 7, e00639–16 (2016).Crotta, S. et al. Type I and type III interferons drive redundant amplification loops to induce a transcriptional signature in influenza-infected airway epithelia. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003773 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Davidson, S., Crotta, S., McCabe, T. M. & Wack, A. Pathogenic potential of interferon alphabeta in acute influenza infection. Nat. Commun. 5, 3864 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Davidson, S. et al. IFNlambda is a potent anti-influenza therapeutic without the inflammatory side effects of IFNalpha treatment. EMBO Mol. Med. 8, 1099–1112 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Durbin, J. E. et al. Type I IFN modulates innate and specific antiviral immunity. J. Immunol. 164, 4220–4228 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Durbin, J. E. et al. The role of IFN in respiratory syncytial virus pathogenesis. J. Immunol. 168, 2944–2952 (2002).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Durbin, R. K., Kotenko, S. V. & Durbin, J. E. Interferon induction and function at the mucosal surface. Immunol. Rev. 255, 25–39 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Arimori, Y. et al. Type I interferon limits influenza virus-induced acute lung injury by regulation of excessive inflammation in mice. Antivir. Res. 99, 230–237 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Klinkhammer, J. et al. IFN-lambda prevents influenza virus spread from the upper airways to the lungs and limits virus transmission. Elife 7, e33354 (2018).Galani, I. E. et al. Interferon-lambda mediates non-redundant front-line antiviral protection against influenza virus infection without compromising host fitness. Immunity 46, 875–890 e876 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lazear, H. M. & Diamond, M. S. New insights into innate immune restriction of West Nile virus infection. Curr. Opin. Virol. 11, 1–6 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wack, A., Terczynska-Dyla, E. & Hartmann, R. Guarding the frontiers: the biology of type III interferons. Nat. Immunol. 16, 802–809 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Akaike, T. et al. Pathogenesis of influenza virus-induced pneumonia: involvement of both nitric oxide and oxygen radicals. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93, 2448–2453 (1996).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lin, X. et al. The influenza virus H5N1 infection can induce ROS production for viral replication and host cell death in A549 cells modulated by human Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) Overexpression. Viruses 8, 13 (2016).Hosakote, Y. M., Liu, T., Castro, S. M., Garofalo, R. P. & Casola, A. Respiratory syncytial virus induces oxidative stress by modulating antioxidant enzymes. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 41, 348–357 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sgarbanti, R. et al. Redox regulation of the influenza hemagglutinin maturation process: a new cell-mediated strategy for anti-influenza therapy. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 15, 593–606 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Knobil, K., Choi, A. M., Weigand, G. W. & Jacoby, D. B. Role of oxidants in influenza virus-induced gene expression. Am. J. Physiol. 274, L134–L142 (1998).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bhattacharya, A. et al. Superoxide dismutase 1 protects hepatocytes from type i interferon-driven oxidative damage. Immunity 43, 974–986 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar O’Donovan, D. J. & Fernandes, C. J. Free radicals and diseases in premature infants. Antioxid. Redox Signal 6, 169–176 (2004).Article PubMed Google Scholar Buonocore, G., Perrone, S. & Tataranno, M. L. Oxidative stress in the newborn. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2017, 1094247 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Perez, M., Robbins, M. E., Revhaug, C. & Saugstad, O. D. Oxygen radical disease in the newborn, revisited: oxidative stress and disease in the newborn period. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 142, 61–72 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Saugstad, O. D. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia-oxidative stress and antioxidants. Semin Neonatol. 8, 39–49 (2003).Article PubMed Google Scholar Kumova, O. K. et al. Lung transcriptional unresponsiveness and loss of early influenza virus control in infected neonates is prevented by intranasal Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG. PLoS Pathog. 15, e1008072 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Carey, A. J. et al. Rapid evolution of the CD8+ TCR repertoire in neonatal mice. J. Immunol. 196, 2602–2613 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Virus interference: I. The interferon. By Alick Isaacs and Jean Lindenmann, 1957. CA Cancer J Clin 38, 280–290 (1988).Ericsson, A. C. et al. The influence of caging, bedding, and diet on the composition of the microbiota in different regions of the mouse gut. Sci. Rep. 8, 4065 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Koerner, I., Kochs, G., Kalinke, U., Weiss, S. & Staeheli, P. Protective role of beta interferon in host defense against influenza A virus. J. Virol. 81, 2025–2030 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wu, W. et al. Early IFN-beta administration protects cigarette smoke exposed mice against lethal influenza virus infection without increasing lung inflammation. Sci. Rep. 12, 4080 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yoo, J. K., Baker, D. P. & Fish, E. N. Interferon-beta modulates type 1 immunity during influenza virus infection. Antivir. Res. 88, 64–71 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Drajac, C. et al. Control of IFN-I responses by the aminopeptidase IRAP in neonatal C57BL/6 alveolar macrophages during RSV infection. Mucosal Immunol. 14, 949–962 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lin, S. J. et al. The pathological effects of CCR2+ inflammatory monocytes are amplified by an IFNAR1-triggered chemokine feedback loop in highly pathogenic influenza infection. J. Biomed. Sci. 21, 99 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar La Gruta, N. L., Kedzierska, K., Stambas, J. & Doherty, P. C. A question of self-preservation: immunopathology in influenza virus infection. Immunol. Cell Biol. 85, 85–92 (2007).Article PubMed Google Scholar Terrazas, C. et al. Ly6C(hi) inflammatory monocytes promote susceptibility to Leishmania donovani infection. Sci. Rep. 7, 14693 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ng, S. L., Teo, Y. J., Setiagani, Y. A., Karjalainen, K. & Ruedl, C. Type 1 conventional CD103(+) dendritic cells control effector CD8(+) T cell migration, survival, and memory responses during influenza infection. Front. Immunol. 9, 3043 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Glennon-Alty, L., Moots, R. J., Edwards, S. W. & Wright, H. L. Type I interferon regulates cytokine-delayed neutrophil apoptosis, reactive oxygen species production and chemokine expression. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 203, 151–159 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ye, S., Lowther, S. & Stambas, J. Inhibition of reactive oxygen species production ameliorates inflammation induced by influenza A viruses via upregulation of SOCS1 and SOCS3. J. Virol. 89, 2672–2683 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar To, E. E. et al. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species contribute to pathological inflammation during influenza A virus infection in mice. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 32, 929–942 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Casson, C. N. et al. Neutrophils and Ly6Chi monocytes collaborate in generating an optimal cytokine response that protects against pulmonary Legionella pneumophila infection. PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006309 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mittal, M., Siddiqui, M. R., Tran, K., Reddy, S. P. & Malik, A. B. Reactive oxygen species in inflammation and tissue injury. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 20, 1126–1167 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhong, B. et al. Roflumilast reduced the IL-18-induced inflammatory response in fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS). ACS Omega 6, 2149–2155 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Amatore, D. et al. Influenza virus replication in lung epithelial cells depends on redox-sensitive pathways activated by NOX4-derived ROS. Cell Microbiol. 17, 131–145 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Denney, L. & Ho, L. P. The role of respiratory epithelium in host defence against influenza virus infection. Biomed. J. 41, 218–233 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chroneos, Z. C., Sever-Chroneos, Z. & Shepherd, V. L. Pulmonary surfactant: an immunological perspective. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 25, 13–26 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sun, F., Xiao, G. & Qu, Z. Isolation of murine alveolar type II epithelial cells. Bio Protoc. 7, e2288 (2017).Corti, M., Brody, A. R. & Harrison, J. H. Isolation and primary culture of murine alveolar type II cells. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 14, 309–315 (1996).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Saugstad, O. D., Ramji, S. & Vento, M. Resuscitation of depressed newborn infants with ambient air or pure oxygen: a meta-analysis. Biol. Neonate 87, 27–34 (2005).Article PubMed Google Scholar Mohamed, T., Abdul-Hafez, A., Gewolb, I. H. & Uhal, B. D. Oxygen injury in neonates: which is worse? hyperoxia, hypoxia, or alternating hyperoxia/hypoxia. Pulm. Respir. Res. 7, 4–13 (2020). Google Scholar Saugstad, O. D. Oxidative stress in the newborn-a 30-year perspective. Biol. Neonate 88, 228–236 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yamada, Y. et al. Major shifts in the spatio-temporal distribution of lung antioxidant enzymes during influenza pneumonia. PLoS ONE 7, e31494 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Schamberger, A. C. et al. Glutathione peroxidase 3 localizes to the epithelial lining fluid and the extracellular matrix in interstitial lung disease. Sci. Rep. 6, 29952 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Folz, R. J., Abushamaa, A. M. & Suliman, H. B. Extracellular superoxide dismutase in the airways of transgenic mice reduces inflammation and attenuates lung toxicity following hyperoxia. J. Clin. Investig 103, 1055–1066 (1999).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Poonyagariyagorn, H. K. et al. Superoxide dismutase 3 dysregulation in a murine model of neonatal lung injury. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 51, 380–390 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Decharatchakul, N. et al. Association of combined genetic variations in SOD3, GPX3, PON1, and GSTT1 with hypertension and severity of coronary artery disease. Heart Vessels 35, 918–929 (2020).Article PubMed Google Scholar Suliman, H. B., Ryan, L. K., Bishop, L. & Folz, R. J. Prevention of influenza-induced lung injury in mice overexpressing extracellular superoxide dismutase. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 280, L69–L78 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nencioni, L. et al. Influenza A virus replication is dependent on an antioxidant pathway that involves GSH and Bcl-2. FASEB J. 17, 758–760 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hernandez-Saavedra, D., Swain, K., Tuder, R., Petersen, S. V. & Nozik-Grayck, E. Redox regulation of the superoxide dismutases SOD3 and SOD2 in the pulmonary circulation. Adv. Exp. Med Biol. 967, 57–70 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zelko, I. N., Mariani, T. J. & Folz, R. J. Superoxide dismutase multigene family: a comparison of the CuZn-SOD (SOD1), Mn-SOD (SOD2), and EC-SOD (SOD3) gene structures, evolution, and expression. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 33, 337–349 (2002).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lakshminrusimha, S. et al. Superoxide dismutase improves oxygenation and reduces oxidation in neonatal pulmonary hypertension. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 174, 1370–1377 (2006).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kim, J. Y., Choi, G. E., Yoo, H. J. & Kim, H. S. Interferon potentiates toll-like receptor-induced prostaglandin D2 production through positive feedback regulation between signal transducer and activators of transcription 1 and reactive oxygen species. Front. Immunol. 8, 1720 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Snelgrove, R. J., Edwards, L., Rae, A. J. & Hussell, T. An absence of reactive oxygen species improves the resolution of lung influenza infection. Eur. J. Immunol. 36, 1364–1373 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Muller, U. et al. Functional role of type I and type II interferons in antiviral defense. Science 264, 1918–1921 (1994).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gruber, C. et al. Homozygous STAT2 gain-of-function mutation by loss of USP18 activity in a patient with type I interferonopathy. J. Exp. Med. 217, e20192319 (2020).Hwang, S. Y. et al. A null mutation in the gene encoding a type I interferon receptor component eliminates antiproliferative and antiviral responses to interferons alpha and beta and alters macrophage responses. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 11284–11288 (1995).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cormier, S. A. et al. Limited type I interferons and plasmacytoid dendritic cells during neonatal respiratory syncytial virus infection permit immunopathogenesis upon reinfection. J. Virol. 88, 9350–9360 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Remot, A. et al. Flt3 ligand improves the innate response to respiratory syncytial virus and limits lung disease upon RSV reexposure in neonate mice. Eur. J. Immunol. 46, 874–884 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Soucy-Faulkner, A. et al. Requirement of NOX2 and reactive oxygen species for efficient RIG-I-mediated antiviral response through regulation of MAVS expression. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000930 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kelkka, T. et al. Reactive oxygen species deficiency induces autoimmunity with type 1 interferon signature. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 21, 2231–2245 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar To, E. E. et al. Endosomal NOX2 oxidase exacerbates virus pathogenicity and is a target for antiviral therapy. Nat. Commun. 8, 69 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar To, E. E. et al. Novel endosomal NOX2 oxidase inhibitor ameliorates pandemic influenza A virus-induced lung inflammation in mice. Respirology 24, 1011–1017 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mendoza, J. L. et al. The IFN-lambda-IFN-lambdaR1-IL-10Rbeta complex reveals structural features underlying type III IFN functional plasticity. Immunity 46, 379–392 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ank, N. et al. An important role for type III interferon (IFN-lambda/IL-28) in TLR-induced antiviral activity. J. Immunol. 180, 2474–2485 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Salka, K. et al. Innate IFN-lambda responses to dsRNA in the human infant airway epithelium and clinical regulatory factors during viral respiratory infections in early life. Clin. Exp. Allergy 50, 1044–1054 (2020).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Medici, T. C. & Radielovic, P. Effects of drugs on mucus glycoproteins and water in bronchial secretion. J. Int. Med. Res. 7, 434–442 (1979).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kerksick, C. & Willoughby, D. The antioxidant role of glutathione and N-acetyl-cysteine supplements and exercise-induced oxidative stress. J. Int Soc. Sports Nutr. 2, 38–44 (2005).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sun, S. Y. N-acetylcysteine, reactive oxygen species and beyond. Cancer Biol. Ther. 9, 109–110 (2010).Article PubMed Google Scholar Zhang, R. H. et al. N-acetyl-l-cystine (NAC) protects against H9N2 swine influenza virus-induced acute lung injury. Int. Immunopharmacol. 22, 1–8 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Geiler, J. et al. N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) inhibits virus replication and expression of pro-inflammatory molecules in A549 cells infected with highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza A virus. Biochem. Pharmacol. 79, 413–420 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Borowski, A. B. et al. Memory CD8+ T cells require CD28 costimulation. J. Immunol. 179, 6494–6503 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ward, C. L. et al. Design and performance testing of quantitative real time PCR assays for influenza A and B viral load measurement. J. Clin. Virol. 29, 179–188 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by NIH R01AI149801 to AJC, NIH K08AI108791 to AJC, NIH-DA039005 to PJG, NIH-DA049227 to PJG. The authors would like to thank Alexis Brantly for assisting with CX7 image processing.Author informationAuthor notesOgan K. KumovaPresent address: U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Silver Spring, MD, USAAuthors and AffiliationsMicrobiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USAOgan K. Kumova, Abhishek Rao & Alison J. CareyLaboratory of Immunobiology, Center for Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens, Athens, GreeceIoanna-Evdokia Galani, Vasiliki Triantafyllia & Evangelos AndreakosPharmacology and Physiology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USAHannah Johnson, Stephanie M. Matt & Peter J. GaskillPathology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USAJudy PascasioImmunology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the NetherlandsPeter D. KatsikisPediatrics, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USAAlison J. CareyAuthorsOgan K. KumovaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIoanna-Evdokia GalaniView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAbhishek RaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHannah JohnsonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarVasiliki TriantafylliaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarStephanie M. MattView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJudy PascasioView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPeter J. GaskillView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEvangelos AndreakosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPeter D. KatsikisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlison J. CareyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsO.K.K., P.D.K., and A.J.C. designed the experiments. O.K.K. and A.R. performed the W.T. and IFNαβR−/− experiments, including colony maintenance and flow cytometry. O.K.K. and A.J.C. analyzed data and performed the statistical analyses. I.E.G. and V.T. performed W.T. and IFNαβR−/−, Ifnlr1−/− and IFNαβR−/− Ifnlr1−/− survival experiments. O.K.K., H.J., and S.M.M. performed CellInsight CX7 high content screening. J.P. contributed to histology analyses and scoring. P.J.G., E.A., and P.D.K. provided technical support and guidance. O.K.K. and A.J.C. wrote the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Alison J. Carey.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary informationAuthor checklistRights and permissionsSpringer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleKumova, O.K., Galani, IE., Rao, A. et al. Severity of neonatal influenza infection is driven by type I interferon and oxidative stress. Mucosal Immunol 15, 1309–1320 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41385-022-00576-xDownload citationReceived: 26 October 2021Revised: 26 September 2022Accepted: 23 October 2022Published: 09 November 2022Issue Date: June 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41385-022-00576-xShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative You have full access to this article via your institution. Download PDF Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Information Open access publishing About the Editors Contact Press Releases About the Partner For Advertisers Subscribe Publish with us For Authors & Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Mucosal Immunology (Mucosal Immunol) ISSN 1935-3456 (online) ISSN 1933-0219 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedWhy older people get less protection from flu vaccines Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature research highlights article RESEARCH HIGHLIGHT 08 November 2022 Why older people get less protection from flu vaccines Immune players called B cells are partly to blame for the decline in vaccine efficacy for people over 65. Twitter Facebook Email The B cells (pictured) of older people mount a less robust immune response to influenza vaccination. Credit: Natl Inst. Health/SPL Access through your institution Buy or subscribe As people age, their immune response to influenza vaccinations weakens, raising their risk of severe disease. This drop in protection stems, in part, from a defective response to vaccination by immune players called B cells, a new study shows1. Access options Access through your institution Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription 24,99 € / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscription info for Korean customersWe have a dedicated website for our Korean customers. Please go to natureasia.com to subscribe to this journal.Go to natureasia.comRent or buy this articlePrices vary by article typefrom$1.95to$39.95Learn morePrices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support Nature 611, 428 (2022) doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-03589-5 ReferencesBurton, A. R. et al. Cell Rep. 41, 111613 (2022).CAS Google Scholar Download references Subjects Immunology Latest on: Immunology Evolving antibody response to SARS-CoV-2 antigenic shift from XBB to JN.1 Article 07 NOV 24 Immune responses in checkpoint myocarditis across heart, blood and tumour Article 06 NOV 24 Endogenous self-peptides guard immune privilege of the central nervous system Article 30 OCT 24 Jobs Independent junior research group leader registration number: ZE-0104-mikrokos-nwgl-2024 Entry date: as soon as possible Application deadline: 2024-12-15 Salary: E 15 TV-H Duration: 3 year... 35037, Marburg (DE) Philipps-Universität Marburg Research associate (Postdoc) Registration number: fb20-0239-wmz-2024 Entry date: as soon as possible Application deadline: 2024-12-01 Salary: E 13 TV-H Duration: 2 years Volume... Marburg, Hessen (DE) Philipps-Universität Marburg Doctoral positions at International Max Planck Research School for Biology and Computation, Berlin The IMPRS for Biology and Computation, Berlin, offers several PhD positions to outstanding students at the interface between biology and computation. Berlin (DE) Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (MPI-MG) 2024 Recruitment notice Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology: Shenzhen, China The wide-ranging expertise drawing from technical, engineering or science professions... Shenzhen,China Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology Southeast University Future Technology Institute Recruitment Notice Professor openings in mechanical engineering, control science and engineering, and integrating emerging interdisciplinary majors Nanjing, Jiangsu (CN) Southeast University Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Subjects Immunology Sign up to Nature Briefing An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday. Email address Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Sign up Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing Explore content Research articles News Opinion Research Analysis Careers Books & Culture Podcasts Videos Current issue Browse issues Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Staff About the Editors Journal Information Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Awards Contact Editorial policies History of Nature Send a news tip Publish with us For Authors For Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature (Nature) ISSN 1476-4687 (online) ISSN 0028-0836 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedFlu and colds are back with a vengeance — why now? Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature news explainer article NEWS EXPLAINER 10 November 2022 Flu and colds are back with a vengeance — why now? COVID-19 restrictions mean we are more susceptible to these viruses. What’s behind the current surge in the Northern Hemisphere, and what will the new normal be? By Cassandra Willyard0 Cassandra Willyard Cassandra Willyard is a science journalist in Madison, Wisconsin. View author publications You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar Twitter Facebook Email Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Restrictions to curb the spread of COVID-19 markedly blunted the spread of other respiratory illnesses. Influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) — a seasonal virus that usually causes mild cold-like symptoms, but that can be dangerous for young children and older adults — all but disappeared in 2020 and early 2021. Now, in the Northern Hemisphere, RSV is surging, and the hospitalization rate for flu in the United States is higher for this time of year than it has been since 2010. Why exactly are these surges happening now? And what’s in store for future winters? Access options Access through your institution Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription 24,99 € / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscription info for Korean customersWe have a dedicated website for our Korean customers. Please go to natureasia.com to subscribe to this journal.Go to natureasia.comRent or buy this articlePrices vary by article typefrom$1.95to$39.95Learn morePrices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-03666-9 Reprints and permissions Related Articles How COVID-19 is changing the cold and flu season Why easing COVID restrictions could prompt a fierce flu rebound Flu vaccine could cut COVID risk Subjects Diseases SARS-CoV-2 Virology Latest on: Diseases How understudied endometriosis causes pain for hundreds of millions of women News 06 NOV 24 Blood test could help diagnose bipolar disorder — but some researchers are sceptical News 06 NOV 24 Immune responses in checkpoint myocarditis across heart, blood and tumour Article 06 NOV 24 SARS-CoV-2 Design of customized coronavirus receptors Article 30 OCT 24 How long COVID could lift the fog on neurocognitive disorders Nature Index 02 OCT 24 Twenty years of Addgene Technology Feature 30 SEP 24 Virology Hidden players: the bacteria-killing viruses of the gut microbiome Outlook 31 OCT 24 Design of customized coronavirus receptors Article 30 OCT 24 Monkeypox virus keeps getting better at spreading among humans News 30 OCT 24 Jobs Independent junior research group leader registration number: ZE-0104-mikrokos-nwgl-2024 Entry date: as soon as possible Application deadline: 2024-12-15 Salary: E 15 TV-H Duration: 3 year... 35037, Marburg (DE) Philipps-Universität Marburg Research associate (Postdoc) Registration number: fb20-0239-wmz-2024 Entry date: as soon as possible Application deadline: 2024-12-01 Salary: E 13 TV-H Duration: 2 years Volume... Marburg, Hessen (DE) Philipps-Universität Marburg Doctoral positions at International Max Planck Research School for Biology and Computation, Berlin The IMPRS for Biology and Computation, Berlin, offers several PhD positions to outstanding students at the interface between biology and computation. Berlin (DE) Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (MPI-MG) 2024 Recruitment notice Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology: Shenzhen, China The wide-ranging expertise drawing from technical, engineering or science professions... Shenzhen,China Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology Southeast University Future Technology Institute Recruitment Notice Professor openings in mechanical engineering, control science and engineering, and integrating emerging interdisciplinary majors Nanjing, Jiangsu (CN) Southeast University Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Related Articles How COVID-19 is changing the cold and flu season Why easing COVID restrictions could prompt a fierce flu rebound Flu vaccine could cut COVID risk Subjects Diseases SARS-CoV-2 Virology Sign up to Nature Briefing An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday. Email address Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Sign up Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing Explore content Research articles News Opinion Research Analysis Careers Books & Culture Podcasts Videos Current issue Browse issues Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Staff About the Editors Journal Information Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Awards Contact Editorial policies History of Nature Send a news tip Publish with us For Authors For Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature (Nature) ISSN 1476-4687 (online) ISSN 0028-0836 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limitedpneumonia: Don't mistake pneumonia for influenza or cold, watch out for chest pain when coughing - The Economic Times English EditionEnglish Editionहिन्दीગુજરાતીमराठीবাংলাಕನ್ನಡമലയാളംதமிழ்తెలుగు | Today's ePaper My Watchlist Subscribe Sign InSearch+HomeETPrimeMarketsMarket DataNewsIndustryRisePoliticsWealthMFTechCareersOpinionNRIPanacheLuxuryVideosMore MenuLuxuryPanacheTech and GadgetsWorklifePeopleHealthIdeal Weight CalculatorChild Height CalculatorCalorie CalculatorBMI CalculatorBMR CalculatorDiabetes Risk CalculatorEntertainmentPanache People 101Cars & BikesLifestyleBooksCity LifeSpecialsET MagazineBusiness News›Magazines›Panache›Don't mistake pneumonia for influenza or cold, watch out for chest pain when coughing The Economic Times daily newspaper is available online now. Read Today's Paper Don't mistake pneumonia for influenza or cold, watch out for chest pain when coughingSECTIONSDon't mistake pneumonia for influenza or cold, watch out for chest pain when coughingET OnlineLast Updated: Nov 12, 2022, 05:35:00 PM ISTRate StoryFollow usShareFont SizeAbcSmallAbcMediumAbcLargeSavePrintCommentSynopsisVarious infectious agents like viruses, bacteria and fungi cause pneumonia.Getty ImagesPneumonia is a form of acute respiratory infection that affects the lungs, says WHO. RelatedRisk of death and serious health issues rises with Covid reinfection, finds studySlow & steady: Ways to exercise for those recovering from long Covid-195 reasons why tomatoes should be your favourite fruit this yearIt's not easy to detect pneumonia, which occurs due to inflammation of tissue in one or both lungs. When a healthy individual breathes, the small sacs in his/her lungs (alveoli) fill with air. The alveoli of a pneumonia patient are filled with fluid and puss when he/she breathes, making it painful and difficult to take in oxygen. Various infectious agents like viruses, bacteria and fungi cause pneumonia. Streptococcus pneumoniae is common in children. Haemophilus influenzae Type b (Hib) is the second most common cause of bacterial pneumonia, and the respiratory syncytial virus is the most common viral cause of pneumonia.The acute respiratory infection can be spread in some ways. It can spread through air-borne droplets when someone (infected) coughs or sneezes. In some cases, the viruses and bacteria (commonly found in a person's nose, sinus or throat) when inhaled can infect the lungs. In infants, pneumonia may spread through blood, especially right after birth. Handwashing is an effective way to prevent the respiratory infection.MORE STORIES FOR YOU✕Risk of death and serious health issues rises with Covid reinfection, finds studySlow & steady: Ways to exercise for those recovering from long Covid-195 reasons why tomatoes should be your favourite fruit this year« Back to recommendation storiesI don't want to see these stories becauseThey are not relevant to meThey disrupt the reading flowOthersSUBMITThe infection is commonly mistaken for a cold or influenza because its symptoms are not consistent. A person suffering from pneumonia normally experiences common symptoms like cough, fever, sweating, rapid or shallow breathing, and shortness of breath. People must look out for greenish, yellow or bloody mucus during coughing. A patient can also experience sharp or stabbing chest pain during a bout of cough or when s/he tried to breathe deeply. Shaking chills, Loss of appetite, low energy, and fatigue are other symptoms.While nausea and vomiting are most common in small children, older adults experience confusion.To diagnose pneumonia, doctors identify the germ that is causing the infection. Also make sure your share your correct medical history with the physician and get the necessary tests like sputum and blood tests, CT scan, chest X-ray, or as suggested by the doctor.The infection has a number of respiratory-related risk factors.The severe air pollution in the Northern parts of India is the worst for people with pneumonia and other lung problems. Smoking cigarettes can also make the body vulnerable to pneumonia.Other risk factors include chronic lung disease like COPD and bronchitis, heart disease, liver cirrhosis, diabetes and other disorders like dementia and stroke, among other things.(With inputs from WHO & www.lung.org)Read More News onpneumoniapneumonia dayworld pneumonia daycoughcoldinfluenza(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.) Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online....morelessRead More News onpneumoniapneumonia dayworld pneumonia daycoughcoldinfluenza(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.) Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online....morelessPrime ExclusivesInvestment IdeasStock Report PlusePaperWealth EditionThe unflashy founder who has to take Swiggy to IPO and the battle to ZomatoTata’s JLR pips BMW and Merc. But that’s only one side of the coin.Mahesh Patil’s bet on disruptors has worked in the past. He is now upbeat on these sectors.Macroeconomic numbers and US elections: Message for Modi governmentThe market is betting on a successful Tech Mahindra turnaround. Will CEO Joshi deliver?Why interest rate outlook just got more complex123View all StoriesPopular in PanacheKapil Sharma Show: Zomato CEO Deepinder Goyal says he knew he would end up marrying wife Gia on their first dateNisha Madhulika started cooking to battle loneliness. At 65, she is the richest female YouTuberYouTuber Johnny Somali could face a 10-yr-prison sentence for kissing a statue in South Korea. Here's whyBengaluru man's suggestion impresses Deepinder Goyal. He gets an instant job offer from ZomatoTelugu film director Krish to marry famous Hyderabad doctor; Who is Dr Priti Challa?Trending in PanacheGoogle Doodle StaurikosaurusGoogle rejects‘too good’employeePriyanka flashes belly button ringsAmid Lawrence BishnoiVarun Dhawan SamanthaiPhone 16 launch Live UpdatesBigg Boss OTT 3 Finale Live UpdatesBudget 2024 LiveAnant Ambani Wedding Live UpdatesAkshay Kumar COVID NewsSarfira Movie ReviewCristiano Ronaldo RetirementSonakshi Sinha Marriage Live UpdatesSonakshi Sinha WeddingSania Mirza Mohammed ShamiBigg Boss OTT 3Panchayat Season 3 OTT ReleaseGoogle I/O 2024 Live UpdatesCannes 2024 Live StreamingPavitra Jayaram DeathApple Event 2024 Live UpdatesAryan KhanSensexNiftyMiss World Finale 2024 LiveRituraj Singh DeathMithun ChakrabortyentGrammy Awards 2024 LiveSamsung Galaxy S24Granny MaveLatest from ETTrudeau blinks on Khalistan: Is Canadian PM recalibrating?India's direct tax collection rises 15.4 pc to Rs 12.1 lk crHindalco net profit soars 123% YoY to Rs 1,891 croreHot on WebMOREAryanbangarDonald Trump Tom HomanWaaree Energies Share PriceSanjiv KhannaChief Justice of IndiaTata Motors Share PriceDev Uthani Ekadashi 2024Acme Solar Holdings IPOSwiggy IPO AllotmentSensex TodayTata Motors Q2 Results 2025Champions Trophy 2025Vedanta Q2 ResultsElon Musk Justin TrudeauSBI Results TodayAMU Minority StatusMatthew Perry Los Angeles HouseShah Rukh Khan Threat NewsIn Case you missed itMOREGoogle pays tributeGoogle employee gets rejectedPriyanka Chopra weight lossSalman Khan bulletproof carVarun DhawanMaggie Smith NewsSunita Williams Space Station RoutineApple Event 2024 Live UpdatesCristiano Ronaldo Youtube ChannelWho is Miles RoutledgeBigg Boss OTT 3 Finale Live UpdatesBudget 2024 Live UpdatesAnant Ambani Wedding Live UpdatesAkshay Kumar COVID PositiveSarfira ReviewIsha Ambani LehengaCristiano Ronaldo RetirementMORETop Searched CompaniesIRFC share priceSuzlon share priceIREDA share priceTATA Motors share priceYes bank share priceHDFC Bank share priceNHPC share priceRVNL share priceSBI share priceTata power share priceTata steel share priceAdani power share pricePaytm share pricePNB share priceZomato share priceBEL share priceBHEL share priceInfosys share priceIRCTC share priceITC share priceJIO finance share priceLIC share priceReliance share priceHAL share priceJP Power share priceNBCC share priceTCS share priceVedanta share priceWipro share priceIOC share priceIrcon share priceSAIL share priceSJVN share priceGAIL share priceHUDCO share priceREC share priceReliance Power share priceTata Technologies share priceVodafone idea share priceAdani Enterprises share priceAdani Green share priceAdani Port share priceAshok Leyland share priceBank of Baroda share priceBSE share priceCanara Bank share priceCDSL share priceCoal India share priceHFCL share priceIDFC First Bank share priceTop CalculatorsMOREStandard Deviation CalculatorIncome Tax CalculatorAge CalculatorSIP CalculatorTime CalculatorBMI CalculatorGPA CalculatorStatistics CalculatorFraction CalculatorDiabetes Risk CalculatorDate CalculatorLog CalculatorMORETop CommoditiesMenthaoil RateCopper RateSilver RateAluminium RateGold RateMORETop Prime ArticlesFalling Off The Momentum Why Retail Investors Are Losing Money After Witnessing A Long RallyMens Underwear Sales Are Falling Should Indian Economy Prepare For A Below The Belt JoltIs Nifty Next 50 A Good Bet Only If You Are A Super Long Term InvestorWe Want To Solve The Wazirx Binance Issue Once And For All Nischal ShettyNippon India Fund DirectAfter Adani Stocks Hindenburg May Have Crashed Into Indias Green Hydrogen Mission TooIndian It Companies Rode The Cloud Wave As Hyperscalers Growth Tapers How Will It Impact ThemAdani Group Stocks Will Averaging Out Work For Retail InvestorsReliance Jiocinema Is Streaming Ipl 2023 For Free Will This Now Disrupt The Ott BusinessNo 5g Service Lack Of Fresh Funds Could Further Hurt Vodafone Idea Even As Airtel Jio Leap AheadMORETop DefinitionsBusinessAccountingMarketing MixMarketsFiscal DeficitMORETop Story ListingEpfo PensionEarthquake In DelhiEpfoNifty CrashLicMORETop Market PagesFully Drawn AdvanceMORETop SlideshowRaw VegetablesHow Rajendra Badwe Is Making Cancer Treatment Affordable By Repurposing Easily Available DrugsRaw VegetablesIcici BankAxis BankAxis BankIcici BankStock IdeasHow Rajendra Badwe Is Making Cancer Treatment Affordable By Repurposing Easily Available DrugsStock IdeasMOREPrivate CompaniesNdx P2p Private LimitedOla Electric Mobility Private LimitedGoogle India Digital Services Private LimitedMi Lifestyle Marketing Global Private LimitedLatest NewsDune: Prophecy episodes, release date, cast, where to watch. Details hereTuesday judgement for Donald Trump? Will courts dictate US President's tenure?Japan unveils $65 billion plan to aid domestic chip industryTrial begins in RG Kar Medical College doctor's rape and murder case, accused claims innocenceHindalco to spend $4-5 bn on upstream expansionHDFC Bank to divest HDFC House, other realty assetsHFCL consortium to get contract worth Rs 13,000 cr for BharatNet Phase 3 projectIs prayer a placebo?EU sees 'slim' chance of success in EV tariff negotiations with China...Credit the Left for exposing patriarchy?EU brandy to face anti-dumping steps from BeijingBiodiversity is 'old oil'ECI issues show cause notice to West Bengal BJP chief Sukanta MajumdarBetter our 'Ease of Moving Countries'Who gets the engagement ring in a breakup? Court issues landmark ruling; here's all you need to know about the judgementFollow us on:Download ET App:subscribe to our newsletterCopyright © 2024 Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. For reprint rights: Times Syndication ServiceFind this comment offensive?Choose your reason below and click on the Report button. This will alert our moderators to take actionNameReason for reporting:Foul languageSlanderousInciting hatred against a certain communityOthersYour Reason has been Reported to the admin.XTo post this comment you mustLog In/Connect with:The Economic TimesorFill in your details:Will be displayedWill not be displayedWill be displayedShare this Comment:Post to TwitterContinue reading with one of these options:Limited AccessFreeLogin to get access to some exclusive stories & personalised newslettersLogin NowUnlimited AccessStarting @ Rs120/monthGet access to exclusive stories, expert opinions & in-depth stock reportsSubscribe NowETUh-oh! This is an exclusive story available for selected readers only.Worry not. You’re just a step away.Sign In to Read for FreePrime Account Detected!It seems like you're already an ETPrime member withLogin using your ET Prime credentials to enjoy all member benefitsLog out of your current logged-in account and log in again using your ET Prime credentials to enjoy all member benefits.Sign in & Access ET PrimeTo read full story, subscribe to ET Prime Get Unlimited Access to The Economic Times ₹34 per week Billed annually at ₹2499 ₹1749ContinueAlready a Member? Sign In nowSuper Saver Sale - Flat 30% OffOn ET Prime MembershipClaim Offer » Already a Member? Sign In nowUnlock this story and enjoy all members-only benefits.Subscribe NowOffer Exclusively For YouSave up to Rs. 700/-ON ET PRIME MEMBERSHIPAvail OfferOffer Exclusively For YouGet 1 Year FreeWith 1 and 2-Year ET prime membershipAvail OfferOffer Exclusively For YouGet 1 Year FreeWith 1 and 2-Year ET prime membershipAvail OfferOffer Exclusively For YouGet Flat 40% OffThen ₹ 1749 for 1 yearAvail OfferOffer Exclusively For YouET Prime at ₹ 49 for 1 monthThen ₹ 1749 for 1 yearAvail OfferSpecial OfferGet flat 35% off on ETPrimeAvail OfferAvail Offer90 Days Prime access worth Rs999 unlocked for youClaim NowAlready a Member? Sign In nowWhy ?Exclusive Economic Times Stories, Editorials & Expert opinion across 20+ sectorsStock analysis. Market Research. Industry Trends on 4000+ StocksClean experience withMinimal AdsComment & Engage with ET Prime communityExclusive invites to Virtual Events with Industry LeadersA trusted team of Journalists & Analysts who can best filter signal from noise​Get 1 Year Complimentary Subscription of TOI+ worth Rs.799/-​Stories you might be interested inSubscribe to ourET Investment OpportunitiesSUBMITHaemophilus Influenzae Type B: Symptoms, Causes, and Diagnosis Skip to content Menu Health A-Z COVID-19 Arthritis Type 2 Diabetes Heart Disease Digestive Health Multiple Sclerosis View All Prevention & Treatment Diet & Nutrition First Aid Surgery Health Care Health Insurance Public Health Patient Rights Disability Caregivers & Loved Ones End of Life Concerns View All News COVID-19 Health News Tools & Resources Thyroid Test Analyzer Doctor Discussion Guides Hemoglobin A1c Test Analyzer Lipid Test Analyzer Complete Blood Count (CBC) Analyzer What to Buy About Us Editorial Process Meet Our Medical Expert Board Search Search GO Health A-Z COVID-19 Arthritis Type 2 Diabetes Heart Disease Digestive Health Multiple Sclerosis View All Prevention & Treatment Diet & Nutrition First Aid Surgery View All Health Care Health Insurance Public Health Patient Rights Disability Caregivers & Loved Ones End of Life Concerns View All News COVID-19 Health News View All More in Infectious Diseases Coronavirus (COVID-19) Mononucleosis Meningitis Lyme Disease Respiratory Infections Foodborne Infections Rare Infections Travelers' Health Zika Virus More Infectious Diseases View More Tools & Resources Thyroid Test Analyzer Doctor Discussion Guides Hemoglobin A1c Test Analyzer Lipid Test Analyzer Complete Blood Count (CBC) Analyzer What to Buy About Us Editorial Process Privacy Policy Contact Us Verywell Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Ⓒ 2024 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved Infectious Diseases An Overview of Haemophilus Influenzae Type B (Hib) By Robyn Correll, MPH Updated on November 09, 2022 Medically reviewed by Isaac O. Opole, MD, PhD Print Table of Contents View All Table of Contents Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Treatment Prevention Close Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)—not to be confused with seasonal influenza—is a vaccine-preventable disease that is particularly dangerous for young children. Advanced infections can cause potentially serious complications like meningitis, pneumonia, and sepsis. Hib disease is now rare in the United States, but it continues to be a serious childhood illness in areas where the vaccine isn't widely available. FatCamera / Getty Images Symptoms Hib bacteria get into the body through the nose and mouth, where it can linger for a while without causing any symptoms. In some cases, however, the bacteria spread to the bloodstream and to other parts of the body. This is called invasive Hib disease. Invasive Hib disease can affect multiple organ systems and lead to serious complications including meningitis, epiglottitis, pneumonia, septic arthritis, cellulitis, and bacteremia. Meningitis The most common mark of invasive Hib disease is bacterial meningitis, or inflammation around the brain and spine. Prior to widespread vaccination, Hib meningitis occurred in 50 to 65% of cases and was the most common cause of bacterial meningitis in kids under five years old. Symptoms of Hib meningitis include: FeverHeadacheConfusion, irritability, or otherwise altered mental statusStiff neckSensitivity to lightNausea and/or vomitingAltered reflexes (in young babies) Most people with Hib meningitis survive, but the disease can permanently affect their health and development. In the prevaccine era, about 15 to 30% of survivors experienced hearing loss or brain damage, and about 3 to 6% died—even with appropriate treatment. Epiglottitis Hib epiglottitis is when the bacteria infect the epiglottis (the throat tissue that keeps food and liquids from getting into the respiratory tract), sometimes causing swelling so severe it blocks the airway. Epiglottitis occurred in about 17% of Hib cases prior to widespread vaccination. Some symptoms of epiglottitis include: Sore throat that comes on quicklyFeverDrooling (especially in children)Change in voiceBluish skin colorStridor, or a high-pitched sound when someone breathes in or out Pneumonia Pneumonia (an infection of the lungs) is another common complication of invasive Hib disease, occurring in about 15% of cases in the prevaccine era. Signs and symptoms of pneumonia can vary, but they generally include flu-like symptoms like chills, fever, and nasal congestion, productive cough, chest pain, fast breathing (in children), body aches, fatigue, vomiting (in children), and bluish skin color. Septic Arthritis Septic arthritis is a joint infection that happened in roughly 8% of Hib cases prior to the introduction of the vaccine. This happens when Hib bacteria infect the joint (typically a large one like a knee or hip), causing significant discomfort. Symptoms of septic arthritis caused by invasive Hib disease include severe joint pain, difficulty moving affected joint, and redness or swelling around the affected joint. Cellulitis Skin infections (or cellulitis) are another common complication of invasive Hib disease. This occurred in roughly 6% of pre-vaccination era cases—most often in young children—and typically affected the face, head, or neck.﻿﻿ The most common symptom of cellulitis is red, tender, and/or swollen skin. Bacteremia Infections that spread to the bloodstream are called bacteremia (also called sepsis). Symptoms of Hib bacteremia include flu-like symptoms, like fever, chills, and fatigue, abdominal pain, nausea and/or vomiting, anxiety, difficulty breathing, and confusion. Causes Unlike the similarly-named influenza, Haemophilus influenzae is caused by a bacterium (not a virus). There are multiple types of Haemophilus influenzae, but type b (commonly referred to as Hib), has historically been the most severe. Before the development of an effective vaccine, Hib caused the overwhelming majority—roughly 95%—of serious Haemophilus influenzae infections. ﻿﻿ It’s uncertain exactly how Hib bacteria spread, but scientists think it passes from one person to the next through respiratory droplets (through coughing or sneezing).﻿﻿ As a result, people are generally exposed to Hib after being in close contact with someone who is infected, such as at home or in a childcare setting. Babies whose mothers are infected with Hib can also get exposed to the bacteria by aspirating amniotic fluid or coming into contact with vaginal secretions during delivery. People with Hib infections who don’t have any symptoms can still spread the disease to other people. New infections start in the nose and throat, where they can be quickly fought off by the immune system or hang out for months without causing any symptoms. Invasive diseases happen when the bacteria get into the bloodstream and go on to infect other parts of the body. While it’s not exactly clear what causes some cases to jump from a mild infection to an invasive one, it’s possible that other respiratory diseases play a role. For example, if someone is already trying to fight off a virus like influenza, the Hib bacteria might have an easier time spreading in the body. In fact, Hib disease has been a common co-infection during past flu pandemics. At-Risk Populations Certain individuals are more like to get invasive Hib disease than others. Like many vaccine-preventable diseases, Hib mainly affects young children. Prior to widespread vaccination, Hib accounted for 50 to 65% of cases of meningitis in kids under five years old and was the most common cause of bacterial meningitis in these kids. Those most likely to get Hib include unvaccinated children and people close to them, as well as individuals with weakened immune systems, including those with certain medical conditions like: Sickle cell diseaseHIV infectionCancer requiring treatment, such as chemotherapy, radiation, or bone marrow stem cell transplants Diagnosis Because Hib can look like a lot of other bacterial infections, healthcare providers often rely on lab tests, in addition to a person’s medical history and physical exam, to diagnose the disease and recommend treatment. If positive for Haemophilus influenzae, local health officials might also want to run tests to figure out if the infection is due to type b or some other subtype. Physical Exam Before diagnosing Hib, healthcare providers will first take a medical history and look for signs or symptoms of invasive Hib disease or any of its complications. For young children, in particular, practitioners will likely check vaccination records to see if the child has received any or all of the recommended doses of the Hib vaccine. The healthcare provider might also ask about any contact the child might have had with someone (especially household contacts or caregivers) with a known Hib infection. Lab Tests If healthcare providers suspect Hib after a physical exam, they’ll typically confirm the diagnosis by testing body fluids—often blood or spinal fluid—for the bacteria. This can sometimes require a lumbar puncture (or spinal tap) to get a small sample of fluid from the spine. One of the most common ways labs test samples for Hib bacteria is through a culture, where the sample fluid is placed in a special kind of container to see if Haemophilus influenzae bacteria grow. Serotyping If a culture comes back positive for Haemophilus influenzae, it will likely be tested further to determine what strain it is—specifically, whether it’s type b. This is generally done by health authorities (like the local health department) using special tests like slide agglutination or serotype-specific real-time PCR. Treatment Hib disease can be treated effectively with antibiotics, but additional care might be needed to help manage symptoms related to complications. People with invasive Hib disease (especially young children) are often hospitalized as a result of the infection. Antibiotics The most common medication used to treat Hib is a 10-day course of a third-generation cephalosporin (such as cefotaxime or ceftriaxone) or a combination of chloramphenicol and ampicillin. Additional Support Depending on the severity of the infection, individuals with Hib disease might also need treatment to help with symptoms or subsequent complications. These can include breathing support, blood pressure medication, wound care (due to skin infections), amputations (due to bacteremia), or long-term rehabilitation for brain damage or hearing loss (due to meningitis). Prevention While Hib can often be effectively treated using antibiotics, the best protection against the disease and its potential complications is by preventing it all together through vaccination. The vaccine is typically administered during early childhood in three or four doses, depending on the brand. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends the following groups receive the Hib vaccine: Children ages 2 to 15 months (or up to 5 years old if unvaccinated, for catch-up doses).Unvaccinated children under age 18 years who have an HIV infection.Anyone (kids or adults) who is unvaccinated and doesn’t have a functional spleen or who has sickle cell disease.Anyone (kids or adults) who has received a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, even if they’ve been vaccinated against Hib before. While it’s rare, there are some people who shouldn’t be vaccinated against Hib. Those who have had a life-threatening allergic reaction to the Hib vaccine or any of its components shouldn’t get the vaccine, and those experiencing moderate to severe illnesses should wait until they get better before receiving a dose. If you aren’t sure if you or your child should be vaccinated against Hib, talk to your healthcare provider or healthcare provider before vaccination. A Word From Verywell Hib is extremely rare in the United States. Thanks to vaccines, the number of Hib cases to plummet by more than 99% nationwide,﻿﻿ and serious complications like Hib meningitis are virtually unheard of now. That said, Hib outbreaks can still happen in areas with low vaccination coverage. The best way to prevent Hib and other vaccine-preventable diseases is by following the CDC’s recommended vaccination schedule.﻿﻿ 50 Anti-Vaccine Myths 2 Sources Verywell Health uses only high-quality sources, including peer-reviewed studies, to support the facts within our articles. Read our editorial process to learn more about how we fact-check and keep our content accurate, reliable, and trustworthy. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Pink Book: Haemophilus influenzae type b. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Table 2. Recommended Adult Immunization Schedule by Medical Condition and Other Indications, United States. Additional Reading Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About Haemophilus influenzae Disease. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Haemophilus influenzae type b. In: Epidemiology and Prevention of Vaccine-Preventable Diseases. Hamborsky J, Kroger A, Wolfe S, eds. 13th ed. Washington D.C. Public Health Foundation: 119-131. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommended Child and Adolescent Immunization Schedule for ages 18 years or younger, United States. By Robyn Correll, MPH Correll holds a master of public health degree and has over a decade of experience working in the prevention of infectious diseases. See Our Editorial Process Meet Our Medical Expert Board Share Feedback Was this page helpful? Thanks for your feedback! What is your feedback? Other Helpful Report an Error Submit Related Articles Can Rash Be a Symptom of RSV? What Is Cellulitis? How Fungal Infections in the Lungs Mimic Cancer What to Know About Long COVID and Eczema Can Adults Get RSV? COVID Variant XEC Could Become Dominant Soon: How You Can Protect Yourself Should You Wait to Get a Booster Shot After COVID-19? What Causes Thick Mucus in Throat and What to Do About It Hemorrhagic Gastroenteritis Risk in Humans What to Know About Polycythemia Vera and COVID-19 COVID Depression: Understanding the Connection and How to Cope Mycobacterium Avium Complex (MAC) Infection and Lung Effects What Is COVID Arm Rash and What Causes It? Treating COVID Rash in Kids Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy and COVID-19 What Is Schistosomiasis Disease? Daily Health Tips to Your Inbox Email Address Sign Up You're in! Thank you, {{form.email}}, for signing up. There was an error. Please try again. Health A-Z Prevention & Treatment Health Care News Meet Our Medical Expert Board About Us Editorial Process Diversity Pledge Privacy Policy In the News Advertise Terms of Service Careers Contact Follow Us Verywell Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Ⓒ 2024 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved Verywell Health is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.Tri-demic? Time to increase protections against surging respiratory viruses – PUBLIC HEALTH INSIDER Primary Menu Home About Blogs en Español Con Confianza y En Comunidad Press Releases Instagram Englishአማርኛالعربية简体中文繁體中文EnglishFilipino日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어ਪੰਜਾਬੀРусскийAfsoomaaliEspañolУкраїнськаTiếng Việt PUBLIC HEALTH INSIDER Official insights from Public Health – Seattle & King County staff Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube Tri-demic? Time to increase protections against surging respiratory viruses Public Health InsiderCommunicable Disease, COVID-19, influenzacoronavirus, COVID-19, flu, RSV We’ve been hearing talk of a potential triple threat of viruses or a “tri-demic” this winter – a rise in multiple types of respiratory viruses. We sat down with Dr. Eric Chow, who leads our Communicable Disease and Epidemiology Section, to learn more about what’s happening and what we can do to stay safer. Slides are available in the following languages: አማርኛ (Amharic), العربية (Arabic), 简体字 (Chinese – Simplified), 繁體字 (Chinese – Traditional), دری (Dari), English, Français (French), 日本語 (Japanese), ភាសាខ្មែរ (Khmer), 한국어 (Korean), Kajin M̧ajeļ (Marshallese), ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi), Русский (Russian), Af Soomaali (Somali), Español (Spanish), Wikang Tagalog/Filipino (Tagalog/Filipino), ትግርኛ (Tigrinya), Українська (Ukrainian), Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) Dr. Eric, we’ve heard concerns about a potential “tri-demic” this winter – high cases of COVID-19, flu, and RSV. Is this something Public Health is worried about? Yes, both locally and nationally we’re seeing a rise in these respiratory viruses. This is concerning both for the health of our most vulnerable residents, such as young children, older adults, and for people with underlying conditions. It’s also concerning for our healthcare system, which for many months has been experiencing staffing shortages and limited available hospital beds for new patients. We’re seeing more cases of RSV this winter than we have in the last four years, and the numbers are rising sharply. This is resulting in many very young children needing to be hospitalized. Seattle Children’s Hospital Emergency Department is reporting seeing twice as many patients as they typically do during this time of the year, with about half these patients arriving with some type of respiratory concern. They anticipate these volumes will only increase in the coming months. In addition, although it’s not possible to predict the ultimate severity and duration of any flu season, it looks like this winter could be a particularly bad one. Nationally, hospitalization rates for flu this early in the season are higher than they have been at this time of the year for the last 10 years. And finally, we’re concerned about a possible surge in COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations this winter as people gather indoors more frequently and new variants become more widespread. Whether these outbreaks occur simultaneously or sequentially, they can make a lot of children and adults sick and we should take steps to protect ourselves, our families and our community by preventing as many illnesses as possible. What’s behind the concern about a potential “tri-demic?” Our last two flu and RSV seasons were historically mild in large part because of mask wearing, social distancing, and people staying home when ill to prevent serious COVID-19 infections. Now that most of these protective measures aren’t in place, we’re seeing a lot more spread of respiratory viruses. In addition, because flu and RSV transmission has been so low in recent seasons, population immunity is likely lower now than it would be if we’d had more typical RSV and flu seasons recently. In particular, more young children than usual may be more likely to get infected since they have never been exposed to the flu or RSV. And, while the volume of COVID-19 hospitalizations and deaths is currently much lower than in prior fall/winter seasons – thanks primarily to COVID-19 vaccines – new variants continue to evolve. In addition, many people who are at high-risk and eligible for an updated booster shot have still not received it, leaving them more vulnerable to serious infections, even if they were previously vaccinated or infected. In short – if you’re feeling sick, even if you test negative for COVID-19, please stay home! It could be the flu or RSV, and you could pass it on to people who are more vulnerable. This is especially important for folks who will be around infants or older adults, who are particularly susceptible to serious illness from flu and RSV. Tell us more about RSV. Is this a new virus? RSV stands for respiratory syncytial virus. It’s a common respiratory virus that comes up every winter, but this year we’re seeing a very high volume of cases, particularly in young children. Anyone can get RSV – for adults and older children, it can feel like a cold. But it can be a very serious illness – causing pneumonia or bronchiolitis – for babies and older adults, including requiring hospitalization or even leading to death. Those with underlying medical conditions such as asthma and COPD may also be at increased risk for complications with RSV infections. What symptoms should people look for with RSV? In both children and adults, RSV symptoms include: Runny nose Decrease in appetite Coughing Fever In very young infants with RSV, the only symptoms may be irritability, decreased activity and appetite, and breathing difficulties. If you or your child is having difficulty breathing, not drinking enough fluids, or experiencing worsening symptoms, call your doctor. Seattle Children’s has more information about RSV symptoms to look for in young children on their website. How do these three viruses spread? The viruses that cause RSV and influenza are thought to spread primarily by droplets from people who are infected. They can spread when an infected person coughs or sneezes and the droplets land in your eyes, nose or mouth, or if you touch a surface that has the virus on it, like a doorknob, and then touch your face before washing your hands. The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads similarly, though it is more easily able to spread through the air and is less likely to live for long periods of time on surfaces, like the viruses that cause RSV and influenza. It’s important to know that wearing a high quality, well-fitting mask in indoor public settings and washing your hands regularly can help protect against all three of these respiratory illnesses – RSV, flu, and COVID-19. Aside from staying home when we’re sick, what else should we do to fight this potential “tri-demic”? While there’s no vaccination to protect against RSV at this time, getting your seasonal flu shot and updated COVID-19 booster is important to protect against serious complications from those viruses. Our local healthcare and hospital system is already fragile, and we’re worried about capacity during a potential “tri-demic.” Getting your flu shot and COVID-19 booster will help protect yourself and those around you from serious illness and hospitalization, and in turn help protect hospital capacity to treat all other illnesses that need hospital care, including RSV. You’re a parent to a new baby (congrats!). What are you doing to help protect your little one from respiratory viruses? Thank you! Yes, having a new baby is so exciting, but can also be scary when hearing about things like a “tri-demic.” To help keep our son safer from respiratory illness, my partner and I are both up to date on our flu shots and updated COVID-19 booster, and we make sure that anyone who has close contact with our son (baby-sitters and family and friends who visit) are also up to date on all their vaccinations. As soon as our son turns 6 months old, we’ll be getting his flu and COVID-19 vaccines, since he’s so susceptible to serious illness. In addition, we’re clear with visitors that if they’re not feeling well – even if they’ve tested negative for COVID-19 – that they wait to visit with our family until their symptoms have cleared. Finally, my family is avoiding large indoor gatherings right now to help prevent one of us picking up a virus we could pass to our son. When we do go into indoor spaces, we wear a well-fitting face mask, like a N95 or KN-95 and try to improve ventilation where possible. In addition to protecting new babies, it’s important for people who are pregnant to make sure they’re up to date on their flu and pertussis vaccines, and to ensure that anyone who will be around the infant is also fully up to date on their vaccinations. Great reminder about the new COVID-19 booster and flu shot. Who’s eligible and where can we go to get them? Everyone ages 5 years and older who’s gotten a COVID-19 shot (booster or primary series) at least two months ago should get the updated booster. So, even if you got a COVID-19 booster before, you should still get this updated booster! Families should ensure that children ages 6 months to 4 years have completed their primary COVID-19 vaccine series. For more information about where to get a free COVID-19 shot (including the updated booster), visit: kingcounty.gov/vaccine Everyone ages 6 months and older should get a flu shot every year. More information about where to get a free flu shot is available on our Find a Vaccine Clinic webpage. Flu activity is starting to increase locally at this time, so don’t delay getting your flu shot any longer! Lastly, just a reminder that it’s safe and effective to get the flu shot and the COVID-19 shot at the same time. More information: Find a COVID vaccine near you: kingcounty.gov/vaccine Find a flu shot clinic near you King County influenza and RSV data dashboard King County COVID-19 data dashboard Originally published November 8, 2022. Share this:Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)Click to print (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)MoreClick to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)Click to share on Pocket (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window) Post navigation Ask Miss Rona: Updated COVID-19 boostersUpdated dashboard shows continued devastation caused by fentanyl and disparities in overdose deaths Follow Blog via Email Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. Email Address Follow Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube Powered by WordPress.com. Discover more from PUBLIC HEALTH INSIDER Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue readingFlu shot clinic today at Mountainlair | E-News | West Virginia University Skip to main content WVU Home WVUToday WVU Calendar Sign up for E-News | Submit item | About E-News Search Would you like to search this site specifically, or all WVU websites? Search this site Search WVU All Posts Toggle Search Home Announcements Events Colleges Research Health Athletics In The News All Posts Friday, November 11, 2022 Flu shot clinic today at Mountainlair WVU will host a flu vaccine clinic from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. today (Nov. 11) in the Mountainlair Shenandoah Room. The clinic is open to all University faculty, staff and students. At this event, people age nine years old and up can get the vaccine. The high-dose influenza vaccine intended for individuals ages 65 and older will not be available. Remember to bring your insurance information. Many insurance providers, including PEIA, cover the cost of the annual flu vaccine. Walk-in appointments are also available to the WVU community through WVU Medicine Student Health during regular business hours from 7:45 a.m. to 8 p.m., Monday through Friday, and from 9:45 a.m. to 4 p.m on Saturdays. Visit Talent and Culture or WVU Medicine Student Health for more information. Related Mountaineer Week celebration begins today WVU holds Nolan Burch Week of Remembrance Traffic patterns to be adjusted for Veterans Day Parade Experience the holidays with Jackson’s Mill University Police to host self-defense training Accreditations Web Standards Privacy Notice Questions or Comments? © 2024 West Virginia University. WVU is an EEO/Affirmative Action employer — Minority/Female/Disability/Veteran. Last updated on November 11, 2022. A-Z Site Index Campus Map WVU Careers Directory Give Handshake WVU Alert WVU Today WVU Portal WVU on Facebook WVU on Twitter WVU on YouTubeCan you get the flu after receiving a flu shot? | Fortune WellHomeLifeHealthMindFamilyAging WellHome PageSEARCHSectionsFORTUNE 500NewsEuropeAsiaTechAIFinancePersonal FinanceReal EstateCryptoLeadershipSuccessWellLifeHealthMindFamilyAging WellRecommendsCredit CardsBankingBest High-Yield Savings AccountsBest Savings AccountsBest CD RatesBest Money Market AccountsSavings CalculatorInsuranceMortgagesInvestingLoansHealthEducationTop Business SchoolsTop Information Technology and Data SchoolsTop Health SchoolsBusiness SolutionsVideoRankingsFORTUNE 500GLOBAL 500MOST POWERFUL WOMENGREAT PLACE TO WORK LISTSBEST MBA PROGRAMSMORE RANKINGSFortune Company ListAnalyticsNewslettersMagazineDecember 2023/January 2024October/November 2023August/September 2023June/July 2023April/May 2023February/March 2023Live MediaCEO InitiativeHealth·FluCan you get the flu after receiving a flu shot?BYAlexa MikhailRecent CDC data found this year's flu shot reduces hospitalization risk by 50%. Getty ImagesAs the flu season takes off, you may be worried about getting sick. The number of hospitalizations from the flu this season have surpassed what’s been seen the past 10 years at this time, and experts have been warning of a tripledemic with the uptick in COVID, RSV, and flu cases. “It’s kind of cause for alarm,” Dr. Megan Berman, associate professor of internal medicine at the Sealy Institute for Vaccine Sciences at the University of Texas Medical Branch Health, tells Fortune. Experts say a flu shot is your best defense against the virus, but some people are opting to skip the vaccine, lamenting that they will get the infection anyway. So can you get the flu after receiving the shot? You can still get the flu, but it may not be as severe The flu vaccine usually reduces the risk of getting sick with the flu each year by between 40% and 60%, depending on the strain that circulates and how well the vaccine matches that strain. While the vaccine cannot guarantee you won’t get sick, it helps protect against severe illness that can lead to hospitalization and death, similar to the COVID shot. Data found this year’s flu shot reduces hospitalization risk by nearly 50%, per the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). People with chronic conditions, like lung or heart disease, are at a higher risk of getting severely sick from the flu, so the vaccine is crucial in preventing hospitalization in this group. “When we talk about severe disease, we’re talking about people getting in the hospital, exacerbating underlying chronic illness, or dying from infection,” Berman says. In the 2019–2020 flu season, the CDC estimates, the vaccine prevented 7.5 million flu cases, over 100,000 hospitalizations, and over 6,000 deaths. You can get the flu before antibodies kick in It takes two weeks for the body to generate an immune response after the jab. If you get the flu within that two-week window post-vaccine, it’s likely because your body hasn’t guarded itself against the virus yet. Also, you may have already had the flu when you received the vaccine. You may have another virus with similar symptoms Flu and COVID share a host of symptoms, including cough, sore throat, fever, chills, and more. If you have flu-like symptoms and you’ve been vaccinated, it may be a different virus. Testing will give a clear answer, Berman says. She commonly sees patients who assume they had either COVID or the flu based on their symptoms but seldom have proof. She always tells them that it’s better to get tested instead of assuming a particular virus caused the symptoms—it can lead many to think they are immune from an infection they never had, she says. “We have the capability to test, and a lot of people were just assuming they have something without actually knowing,” she says. “There are a lot of these viruses. They mimic one another.” There are also different treatments for COVID versus the flu (Paxlovid and Tamiflu respectively). You might not have as strong of an immune response Those 65 and older, who make up the bulk of hospitalizations from the flu every year, don’t have as strong an immune response to the flu vaccine as those younger. The CDC recommends other vaccines for this population, some being higher-dose, according to the CDC: Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent vaccine, Flublok Quadrivalent recombinant flu vaccine and Fluad Quadrivalent adjuvanted flu vaccine. For people receiving immunosuppressive therapy, like for cancer treatment, or for those who have an autoimmune disorder, immune response to the vaccine may also be less effective. If you’re over 18, you can get the Flublok vaccine, which can work better for this group. If the pharmacy doesn’t have the particular flu vaccine you’re looking for, get the general vaccine that’s available. “Any vaccine is better than no vaccine,” Berman says. The flu shot cannot give you the flu Some worry whether the flu vaccine can actually give you the flu itself. However, the vaccine is made from an inactivated or killed part of the virus, so it’s not possible for the virus to replicate and cause illness. Your body may have side effects right after the shot like a fever, soreness, headache, nausea, or muscle aches, but it’s a sign of the body creating an immune response. The side effects subside within a few days. As people travel for the holiday season and gather indoors when it’s cold, it’s recommended to do your part and stay protected even if you’re not high-risk, Berman says. Sign up for the Fortune Features email list so you don’t miss our biggest features, exclusive interviews, and investigations.Latest in Health0 minutes agoHealth - CancerWorking out at these times of day could reduce your risk of colorectal cancer by 11%, new study saysBYLindsey Leake0 minutes agoHealth - chemicalsEndocrine-disrupting chemicals are everywhere. Here’s how to reduce your exposureBYAni Freedman0 minutes agoHealth - bird fluBird flu begins its human spread, as health officials scramble to safeguard people and livestockBYCarolyn Barber0 minutes agoMind - mental health8 surprising, subtle signs you have high-functioning anxietyBYAlexa Mikhail0 minutes agoHealth - Donald TrumpRFK Jr. wants Trump to remove fluoride from water over health claims. Here’s what science says.BYBeth Greenfield0 minutes agoHealth - MedicaidTrump’s White House return poised to tangle health care safety netBYStephanie Armour and KFF Health NewsMost Popular0 minutes agoHealth5 symptoms women over 40 should always take seriouslyBYJessica Firger0 minutes agoHealthRFK Jr. wants Trump to remove fluoride from water over health claims. Here’s what science says.BYBeth Greenfield0 minutes agoHealthYou might be overdoing it on protein and not getting enough of another vital nutrient, dietitians sayBYAni Freedman0 minutes agoHealthBird flu begins its human spread, as health officials scramble to safeguard people and livestockBYCarolyn Barber0 minutes agoMindMillions were devastated by the election results, and so were their therapists. Here’s how they pushed through togetherBYBeth Greenfield0 minutes agoAging WellShopping for a 2025 Medigap policy? There may be some good news for youBYRichard EisenbergRankings100 Best CompaniesFortune 500Global 500Fortune 500 EuropeMost Powerful WomenFuture 50World’s Most Admired CompaniesSee All RankingsSectionsFinanceLeadershipSuccessTechAsiaEuropeEnvironmentFortune CryptoHealthWellRetailLifestylePoliticsNewslettersMagazineFeaturesCommentaryMPWCEO InitiativeConferencesPersonal FinanceRecommendsCustomer SupportFrequently Asked QuestionsCustomer Service PortalPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseSingle Issues for PurchaseInternational PrintCommercial ServicesFortune Brand StudioFortune AnalyticsFortune ConferencesAdvertisingBusiness DevelopmentAbout UsAbout UsEditorial CalendarPress CenterWork at FortuneDiversity and InclusionTerms and ConditionsSite Map© 2024 Fortune Media IP Limited. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy | CA Notice at Collection and Privacy Notice | Do Not Sell/Share My Personal Information FORTUNE is a trademark of Fortune Media IP Limited, registered in the U.S. and other countries. FORTUNE may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.RSV and flu are back. Here’s what Oregonians should know - OPB Nov. 12, 2024contribute nowElection results and analysisStay updated as votes are counted and trends emergeHealthRSV and flu are back. Here’s what Oregonians should knowBy Amelia Templeton (OPB)Nov. 9, 2022 12:39 a.m.Experts say this respiratory season is unusual, but your individual risk probably hasn’t changed muchIn this 2022 photo, a health care provider places a bandage on the injection site of a patient who just received an influenza vaccine. The best way to prevent seasonal flu is to get vaccinated every year. Courtesy of Centers for Disease Control and PreventionIt’s that time of year again: stuffy noses ... barking coughs ... respiratory viruses going around.THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:Become a SponsorTwo in particular — the flu and RSV — are worth educating yourself about.Like COVID-19, the flu and RSV cause lots of infections and are mild for most, but can cause more serious illness and hospitalization for anyone with a weakened immune system, including: very young children, pregnant people, adults 65 and up, and the immunocompromised.Both viruses virtually disappeared during the COVID-19 pandemic, something state public health officials say they’d never seen before. The flu typically causes 12,000 to 52,000 deaths a year in the United States, and RSV is the leading cause of pneumonia in babies under one.Experts are concerned that both viruses could be poised to make a major comeback this winter, but that’s not a foregone conclusion. Flu season in particular is difficult to predict. Here’s what to expect from RSV and the flu in Oregon.FluWhat it isInfluenza, commonly known as flu, is a big family of viruses that transmit through breathing, coughing and sneezing. Two types in particular, Influenza A and Influenza B, cause most infections in humans. Each infected person tends to spread it to one or two others, making it much less transmissible than COVID-19.How to know it’s fluSymptoms include fever, cough, sore throat, runny or stuffy nose, body aches, headache, chills and fatigue. Vomiting and diarrhea is more common in children.What we know about this yearWith people gathering and returning to more normal behavior post COVID restriction, experts expect a more normal flu season and an increase in cases.Flu activity in Oregon is minimal so far, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, but some states in the southern United States are reporting a lot of infections. This is normal — flu season usually starts later in Oregon than in other parts of the country.Winter flu season in the southern hemisphere can be a bellwether for what to expect in the northern hemisphere. Dr. Melissa Sutton, medical director of viral respiratory pathogens at the Oregon Health Authority, said this year, it’s particularly difficult to glean clues as to what to expect.Data from the southern hemisphere has been “all over the map,” with some places reporting high levels of flu and others reporting lower than typical flu levels, she said. Sutton said some of the variation may be due to underreporting of flu, with public health departments shifting focus toward COVID..Reduce your riskFlu vaccines are readily available and recommended for everyone 6 months and older. In Oregon, fewer people have gotten their annual flu vaccine than is typical this time of year.Even if you’re not personally in an at risk group, getting vaccinated is a good way to reduce overall transmission of the flu and to help protect people who are at risk. Flu is known to cause pneumonia. The two conditions are responsible for around 500 deaths a year in Oregon, primarily in adults 65 and older, but often includes three or four pediatric deaths.“The more people we can get vaccinated, the less we’ll see it spreading in our communities.” Sutton said.There are several different flu vaccines available, including three higher dose options that are recommended, in particular, for people 65 and older who are at higher risk for complications.THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:Become a SponsorFILE - This 1981 photo provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) shows an electron micrograph of Respiratory Syncytial Virus, also known as RSV. New research announced by Pfizer on Tuesday, Nov. 1, 2022, showed vaccinating pregnant women helped protect their newborns from the common but scary respiratory virus that fills hospitals with wheezing babies each fall. CDC via AP, File / APRSVWhat it isRespiratory syncytial virus, or RSV for short, is a single virus that transmits through coughing, sneezing and touching contaminated surfaces. It’s usually mild and is one of the most common causes of a cold in children. In some cases though, it can cause lung infections like bronchiolitis or pneumonia, particularly in children under 2. Each infected person tends to spread it to three others — so it’s more contagious than flu, less contagious than COVID.Most RSV infections go away on their own in a week or two and can be managed with proper nutrition, hydration, sleep and use of over-the-counter medicationYoung children, especially those under 6 months, are more likely to experience complications. Preterm infants, infants with congenital heart or lung conditions, and infants with asthma are at the highest risk.That’s in part due to their smaller airways and inability to blow their noses, said Eliza Hayes Bakken ‚a pediatrician and medical director of the pediatrics clinic at OHSU Doernbecher Children’s Hospital.“Babies can literally look like they are kind of drowning in snot,” she said. “Suctioning them so they can get some breaths through their nose and they can feed a little bit better is one of our major interventions that we do for infants.”How to know its RSVRunny nose, decrease in appetite, coughing, sneezing, fever, wheezing and labored breathing are signs of RSV. Symptoms usually appear in stages, not all at once. In young infants with RSV, the only symptoms may be irritability, decreased activity and breathing difficulties, according to the CDC.What we know about this yearSome states are reporting surges in RSV-related clinic and hospital visits. The Oregon Health Authority declared the official onset of RSV season last week based on the number of tests coming back positive.Because RSV largely stopped spreading during the pandemic, Sutton said there’s likely a larger pool of kids being exposed to it for the first time.“So essentially we’re worried that a broader range of ages might experience that severe disease,” Sutton said.There’s also the phenomenon known as waning immunity, where lack of exposure to a virus can reduce antibodies and the immune response. It could affect nursing infants whose mothers’ immunity may have waned, making them less likely to pass protective antibodies through breast milk.However, Hayes Bakken said parents shouldn’t put too much stock in news reports of surges in RSV. It’s normal for some RSV seasons to be bad and others mild. Furthermore, Hayes Bakken said if your child delayed getting RSV during the pandemic and is now coming down with it for the first time, that’s likely to their advantage.“I would rather your healthy 3-year-old get RSV for the first time than your 2-month old,” she said. “The vast majority of kids who are having a tough time of it are the kids who have a tough time of it every year.”Hayes Bakken also suspects that part of why so many more parents are bringing toddlers with RSV into clinics is because people who became new parents during the pandemic have less experience helping children get through fevers and respiratory viruses at home.Reduce your riskThere is no vaccine for RSV, so people who want to avoid it should consider wearing a mask if they’re in a crowded indoor environment. If you live with a child under 2, having adults and older children in the household mask in crowded indoor environments can reduce the risk of transmission.And if you have an infant under 6 months or a young child with underlying conditions, consider limiting the number of visitors in your household during RSV season. Hayes Bakken said she tells parents of young infants to minimize the number of people who come to meet the new baby and to avoid large gatherings. On the other hand, if there’s a small circle of family and friends helping out with the new baby, that’s worth the risk.Hand washing is also a more effective and important tool against RSV transmission than it is for COVID and people are advised to wear a mask if they have a runny nose to keep others from getting sick.THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:Become a SponsorTHANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:Become a Sponsor📨 Stay informed after Election DayLearn what the election results will mean for the Pacific Northwest. Subscribe to our “First Look” newsletter for a daily roundup of the biggest stories shaping the region.EmailPlease leave this field blankSign upTags: Health, FluOPB’s critical reporting and inspiring programs are made possible by the power of member support.Become a Sustainer nowTV & Radio SchedulesSponsorshipHelp CenterManage My MembershipContact UsNotificationsPrivacy PolicyFCC Public FilesFCC ApplicationsTerms of UseEditorial PolicySMS T&CContest RulesAccessibilityListen to the OPB News live stream (opens new window)Streaming NowAll Things ConsideredShow switch stream buttonsSwitch Stream:OPB NewsListen to the OPB News live stream (opens new window)KMHDListen to the KMHD live stream (opens new window)How Many People Die From Flu Every Year? - Flu Deaths 2023-2023SearchSubscribeMy BookmarksShopPrevention PremiumHealthCondition CentersWeight LossFitnessSexFood &amp; NutritionBeautyLifeNewsletterFollowAbout Prevention.comMedical Review BoardPrevention AwardsWinPrivacy NoticeTerms Of UseSkip to ContentHealthBeautyFitnessNutritionLifeShoppingSubscribesign inSearchPURPLE HARMONY REVIEWBROOKS GHOST REVIEWBEST LEGGINGS ON AMAZONNEW EDITOR-FAVORITE PICKSWINTER RUNNING JACKETSHealthCold & Flu SeasonHere’s How Many People Actually Die From the Flu Each Year, According to DoctorsHere’s How Many People Actually Die From the Flu Each Year, According to DoctorsFlu activity is back again for the 2022-2023 season after last year’s mild season.By Korin MillerUpdated: Nov 07, 2022 1:25 PM ESTSave ArticleJump to:How many people die from the flu each year?Why can the flu be so deadly?Who is most at risk of dying from the flu?How many total flu-related deaths are expected for the 2022-2023 season?How to protect yourself from the flu The flu is back this winter, along with other illnessesFlu season, which runs from October through May, usually results in millions of infections and thousands of deaths.Doctors explain how COVID-19 prevention efforts have diminished flu-related deaths in the past.RSV and COVID-19 are dominating headlines right now, but there’s another potentially serious illness simmering in the background: the flu. People have written off the flu in the past, but doctors say that’s a mistake. “Prior to COVID-19, the flu was the most deadly respiratory virus we saw each year in the U.S.,” says Thomas Russo, M.D., professor and chief of infectious disease at the University at Buffalo in New York. “Now, COVID is an estimated five times more lethal.”But with all of the warnings about the flu being deadly, how many people die from the flu each year? Caveat: It’s hard to come by exact numbers, but there are estimates. Here’s the deal. How many people die from the flu each year?The answer is slightly complicated: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) doesn’t have an exact count of the number of people who die from influenza each year. Instead, the federal agency develops estimates based on rates of confirmed hospitalizations from the flu.For that reason, it’s difficult to compare flu deaths with those of COVID-19, which are actual documented deaths, says Dr. Russo. “COVID deaths have been very specific—you have to have a positive COVID test for it to be attributable to COVID,” he says. According to preliminary estimates from the CDC, 25,000 people died from flu in the 2019-2020 flu season. There were no estimates for the 2020-2021 season due to “minimal influenza activity,” the CDC says, and it’s estimated that 5,000 people died from the flu last year. The number of flu deaths varies by season, though. In the 2018-2019 season, an estimated 52,000 people died of the flu, per CDC data.And, of course, COVID-19 has screwed things up a bit. Flu death estimates traditionally incorporated pneumonia cases and “COVID has made that challenging” given that people can also die of pneumonia caused by COVID-19, says infectious disease expert Amesh A. Adalja, M.D., a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. “Many times in the past, death certificates would simply say ‘pneumonia’” if someone died from pneumonia caused by the flu, Dr. Adalja says. “The CDC knows that they need to make adjustments to the way influenza deaths are tracked now—they just haven’t figured out what that should be,” Dr. Adalja says. Why can the flu be so deadly?The flu is a contagious respiratory illness that’s caused by influenza viruses that infect the nose, throat, and lungs, the CDC explains. There are two main types—influenza A and B—that regularly circulate each year. While plenty of people get the flu, have a miserable period of illness, and then recover, others can actually die of the virus. “Influenza is a respiratory virus that has the ability to kill at a very high rate, even in the modern era,” Dr. Adalja says. “In severe cases, it causes pneumonia that can be complicated with a secondary bacterial infection.”Other possible serious complications triggered by the flu, per the CDC, can include: inflammation of the heart (myocarditis) inflammation of the brain (encephalitis) inflammation of the muscle tissues (myositis, rhabdomyolysis) multi-organ failure (like respiratory and kidney failure) Sepsis, a life-threatening response to an infectionWho is most at risk of dying from the flu?The CDC has a list of people who are at a higher-than-average risk of getting seriously ill with the flu and even dying of it: Adults 65 and up Pregnant people Young children Young children with neurological diseaseCertain health conditions can also put people at a higher risk of severe flu, the CDC says, including: Asthma Heart disease and stroke Diabetes HIV/AIDS Cancer Chronic kidney disease“The flu tends to kill people at the extremes of age: very young and very old,” Dr. Adalja says. “The very young and the old may have very low physiological reserve when it comes to fighting influenza off.”How many total flu-related deaths are expected for the 2022-2023 season?The CDC releases estimates on flu cases and deaths each year. Right now, the agency estimates that between 730 and 2,100 people have died of the flu from Oct. 1 through Oct. 29—and the season has just started. Still, the same disease-prevention practices we’ve mastered to slow the spread of COVID-19 can also impact impacted flu transmission, says David Cennimo, M.D., assistant professor of medicine-pediatrics infectious disease at Rutgers New Jersey Medical School. While flu rates are higher than last year’s low numbers, they’re still lower than your average flu season. That’s “a byproduct” of efforts like masking, hand-washing, and social distancing, Dr. Cennimo says. How to protect yourself from the fluIf you haven’t already gotten your flu shot, William Schaffner, M.D., an infectious disease specialist and professor at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, recommends doing it ASAP, as it takes time to build immunity. Flu season continues through May, after all. “It’s still not too late to get vaccinated,” he says.Since there’s no hard and fast data on how many people die from the flu each year, it can be tricky to calculate how much getting the flu shot protects you from death, Dr. Russo says. “We do know that dying from the flu is much less likely if you’ve been vaccinated than if you don’t get the vaccine,” he says. “Certainly, the more vulnerable you are, the greater benefit the vaccine in decreasing the likelihood of a bad outcome.”The following precautions can also protect you from the flu, per the CDC: Avoid close contact with people who are sick. Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water aren’t available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer. Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth. Clean and disinfect high-touch surfaces and objects.Methods that help prevent the spread of COVID-19, like wearing a mask in crowded indoor spaces when flu cases are high in your area can also help you prevent a cold, flu, RSV, and other respiratory illnesses, Dr. Russo says. If you suspect you may have the flu, Dr. Adalja recommends contacting your doctor ASAP or visiting your local urgent care clinic. “Have a low threshold to be tested and prescribed an antiviral,” he says. Medications like oseltamivir (Tamiflu) work best when they’re taken soon after you develop symptoms, he points out, so timing is important.Related StoryU.S. Could Face Tripledemic of RSV, COVID, and Flu..Advertisement - Continue Reading BelowCold & Flu Season7 Ways to Get Over the Flu Faster16 Best Foods to Eat When You Feel SickSigns Your Cold Might Be Getting BetterHow to Check for a Fever Without a ThermomerAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowCan Mucinex Help You Get Pregnant?FDA Approves New Home Flu VaccineCDC Warns About Flu Deaths in KidsSo, When Is the Best Time for a Flu Shot?Natural Ways to Ease NauseaHow to Get Rid of a Lingering CoughGenius Home Remedies to Soothe a Sore Throat ASAPHow to Break a Fever ASAPAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowAbout Prevention.comNewsletterPress RoomGive A GiftCommunity GuidelinesSubscribeMedia KitAdvertise OnlineOther Hearst SubscriptionsCustomer ServiceA Part of Hearst Digital MediaWe may earn commission from links on this page, but we only recommend products we back.©2024 Hearst Magazines, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Privacy NoticeCA Notice at CollectionYour CA Privacy Rights/Shine the LightDAA Industry Opt OutTerms of UseSite MapCookies ChoicesSouth Carolina is 1 of 3 states reporting 'very high' flu related illnesses: CDCPlease ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of website accessibilityTue, 12 Nov 2024 00:53:39 GMT (1731372819041)Story Infinite Scroll - News3 v1.0.0 (common)c176e2edee36242d1f910bbcf0b370e84d231d3fNewsWeatherRadarMapsInlandGrand StrandSkyCam NetworkRequest a SpeakerHurricane CenterABC 15 Weather Authority BlogEd’s Weather SchoolClimate CarolinasSpotlightTrafficGame CenterWatch Now 67 Tue 78 Wed 75Town HallArmstrong Williams Town HallShow LessTown HallArmstrong Williams Town Hall Armstrong Williams takes on the news of the week and asks the questions you want answered. Don't miss our weekly town hall.WATCHSouth Carolina is 1 of 3 states reporting 'very high' flu related illnesses: CDCby Julia VarnierWed, November 9th 2022 at 12:10 PMUpdated Thu, November 10th 2022 at 11:42 PM6VIEW ALL PHOTOSMap shows 2022-23 Influenza Season Week 43 ending Oct 29, 2022, where South Carolina is one of three states showing very high illness rates. (Credit: CDC)TOPICS:FlorenceFlorence,Province of Florence,ItalyHealth Medical PharmaLaurinburgLaurinburg,North Carolina,United StatesLumbertonMyrtle BeachSouth Carolina,United StatesSOUTH CAROLINA (WPDE) — Early increases in seasonal influenza activity continue nationwide.The southeastern and south-central areas of the country are reporting the highest levels of activity followed by the Mid-Atlantic and the south-central West Coast regions.More specifically, South Carolina is one of three states shaded in purple on the CDC's Influenza Season map forWeek 43, October 23 to October 29.TRENDING:Socks for Kids: Help keep area children warm by donating socksWhen looking closer at the CDC's weekly report, Myrtle Beach, Lumberton, Florence and Laurinburg are listed as areas with the highest level of reported flu illness in our region.Regional Influenza Activity increased across the entire state during the last reported week, according to SCDHEC's latest report.The percent of patient visits to sentinel providers for an influenza-like illness (ILI) was 10.8% within the last reported week, which is above South Carolina’s baseline (3.6%), according to the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control.There were 251 influenza-associated hospitalizations reported by 46 hospitals in week 43 of reporting; The cumulative hospitalization rate is 8.4 per 100,000. In the current flu season, there have been 423 influenza-associated hospitalizations.South Carolina reported three influenza-associated deaths within the last reported update, with five deaths total.We spoke with SCDHEC who says the latest report by the CDC is no more alarming than what they've seen since the beginning of flu season."I don't know that today's alarms me anymore than last weeks, we've been seeing this since week one of flu season," explained Dr. Brannon Traxler, Director of Public Health for the Department of Health and Environmental Control."Week one of flu season in South Carolina we were in widespread flu activity, so this is not something that just developed in the last week. We've been seeing large amounts and its been increasing very quickly," said Dr. Traxler.Dr. Traxler encourages those who haven't already received their flu shots to get them as soon as possible. Traxler says the vaccine takes approximately two weeks to take effect.Stay ConnectedLike UsFollow Ussbg-envelopeNewsletter Sign up /sign-up© 2024 Sinclair, Inc.TermsEEOWPDEWPDEWWMBWWMBPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyCookie PreferencesLoading ...Why Older Adults Need Stronger Flu Shots HealthlineHealth ConditionsFeaturedAllBreast CancerIBD MigraineMultiple Sclerosis (MS)Rheumatoid ArthritisType 2 DiabetesSponsored TopicsArticlesAllAcid RefluxADHDAllergiesAlzheimer's & DementiaBipolar DisorderCancerCrohn's DiseaseChronic PainCold & FluCOPDDepressionFibromyalgiaHeart DiseaseHigh CholesterolHIVHypertensionIPFOsteoarthritisPsoriasisSkin Disorders and CareSTDsDiscoverWellness TopicsAllNutritionFitnessSkin CareSexual HealthWomen's HealthMental Well-BeingSleepProduct ReviewsAllVitamins & SupplementsSleepMental HealthNutritionAt-Home TestingCBDMen’s HealthOriginal SeriesAllFresh Food FastFood hacks to make eating healthier, easier.Diagnosis DiariesReal diagnosis stories from people who get it.You’re Not AloneStories from real people that destigmatize mental health conditions.Present TenseReal-world mindfulness for busy people.Video SeriesAllYouth in FocusMental health challenges facing our youth.Healthy HarvestMeet your food, from farm to table.Through An Artist's EyeA breast cancer story told through art.Future of HealthInnovations shaping the future of health.PlanHealth ChallengesMindful EatingSugar SavvyMove Your BodyGut HealthMood FoodsAlign Your SpineFind CareAllPrimary CareMental HealthOB-GYNDermatologistsNeurologistsCardiologistsOrthopedistsLifestyle QuizzesWeight ManagementAm I Depressed? A Quiz for TeensAre You a Workaholic?How Well Do You Sleep?Tools & ResourcesHealth NewsFind a DietFind Healthy SnacksDrugs A-ZHealth A-ZConnectFind Your Bezzy CommunityBezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.AllBreast CancerInflammatory Bowel DiseaseCOPDMigraineMultiple SclerosisPsoriasisFollow us on social mediaCan't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.SubscribeHealth NewsFact CheckedFlu Shots: Why Older Adults Need a Stronger DoseWritten by Michelle Pugle on November 11, 2022 — Fact checked by Maria GiffordShare on PinterestExperts recommend older adults receive a stronger dose of the flu shot. Alexey Kuzma/StocksyExperts are predicting a strong flu season in the United States as COVID-19 restrictions ease and people venture out more.They say adults over age 65 should get one of the stronger doses of flu vaccine available.They say older adults need the extra protection because their immune system isn’t as effective against the flu virus as younger adults.Three new “extra strength” flu shots are now available for people ages 65 and older.Experts are saying the new flu shots are coming out just in time for what’s predicted to be the worst flu season in years. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), research has demonstrated the following vaccines are potentially more effective than standard-dose vaccines for people ages 65 and older. Fluzone High-Dose QuadrivalentFlublok QuadrivalentFluad Quadrivalent Like standard-dose flu vaccines, these new flu shots are designed to protect against four of the more likely flu strains to spread this season.The difference between the two types of shots is the total amount of antigens (immune system activators). Each new vaccine has four times the standard dose. The CDC recommends everyone receive a flu shot every year, starting with 6-month-old babies.Why older adults need stronger flu shotsDr. Barbara Bawer, a family medicine physician at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, tells Healthline adults ages 65 and older need a higher dose of the flu vaccine because with age the immune system often weakens and does not build up enough of a response to the regular vaccine dose.Dr. Phillip Kadaj, a Michigan-based internal medicine physician and medical expert for JustAnswer, explains that antigens are the immune system activating substances in the flu vaccine. Bawer adds that if you’re over 65, getting a stronger dose of the flu shot is now what’s required to protect against contracting the flu and reduce the likelihood of becoming severely ill from the flu and requiring hospitalization.These assertions are backed up by a new study that reports that aging impairs the body’s immune response to the influenza A virus.Just in time for flu seasonExperts suggest the stronger dose of vaccine is coming at a critical time.However, according to a survey from the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases (NFID), more than half of U.S. adults may be considering skipping this year’s flu shot. Experts say that’s a problem.They note that the flu shot is still the most effective way to prevent illness and severe symptoms.And while the past few years have seen lower-than-average recorded flu levels, change is coming quickly. Bawer says if we want to know what to expect this flu season, we can look at Southern Hemisphere countries such as Australia.Australia is a predictor of what could come in the United States, says Bawer, and that country had its worst flu season in five years.Kadaj agrees with the prediction of a severe flu season, saying he expects flu cases will become more prevalent again as COVID-19 infections have become less serious and people venture out more.“As COVID-19 infections have become milder and we have effective vaccines for COVID-19, we should start to see an uptick in flu cases,” he says. “I would expect the flu cases this year to reach or get close to pre-pandemic levels.”Bawer recommends people over 65 get their flu vaccine no later than by the first week in November and ideally in the last two weeks of October. Getting the shot any earlier than this may mean decreased immunity by the season’s end.“Getting your shot now will give you enough protection from the strains in the vaccine to cover you during the peak flu months and 1 to 2 months on either end as well,” explained Bawer. What does COVID-19 have to do with the flu?Bawer explains the pandemic’s previous impact on flu rates.She says mask mandates since 2020 have made people more vigilant in their use of hand sanitizer and washing hands more frequently and thoroughly, which has lowered influenza rates across the board.Also, people have been more cautious about attending gatherings, including holidays, so we have not had as many cases of the flu in the past two years.“This is both wonderful and problematic,” Bawer says. “Wonderful, of course, because this means a healthier population from a flu standpoint, but this also means that we have much less or little data on the types of flu strains that are out there.”“But now we no longer have mask mandates (except primarily in health care settings), and people are tired of avoiding loved ones over the holidays and missing out on events in general,” she said. “The combination of the two will yield possibly severe results.”Experts say you can get vaccinated against the flu and receive a COVID-19 vaccine booster at the same time.“When the pandemic first started, and the COVID-19 vaccines were brand new, we did not have enough information to know what type of side effects to expect,” says Bawer. “Therefore, we recommended a window between the COVID-19 vaccine and others to give time for people to show any side effects and learn what to expect.”“More than two years into the pandemic and we now have that information,” she noted. “In many ways, this makes it no different than getting multiple booster vaccines at once or when kids get multiple vaccines during their well-child checks.”Kadaj agrees, saying the two shots are perfectly fine to do together, but he does caution his patients saying that they may have more side effects.Common and temporary symptoms from vaccines, says Kadaj, include:Body achesFeverChillsMuscle pain“The reason [for caution] is that these patients are simply getting more antigen/immune activating substances at one time,” he says.So, for example, someone may have a reaction to flu or COVID-19 vaccines, but when they are combined, the reactions are stronger and more likely, he says.Nonetheless, he says getting vaccinated against COVID-19 and the flu is the best method of protecting yourself and your community from experiencing severe illness. How we reviewed this article:HistoryShare this articleWritten by Michelle Pugle on November 11, 2022 — Fact checked by Maria GiffordRead this nextQ&A: Flu Vaccine or COVID-19 Booster? Which Shot Should You Get First This Fall?Experts say research indicates it's OK to get the flu shot and a COVID-19 booster vaccine at the same time, although it's not necessary to do soREAD MOREWhat to Know About Having Influenza A When You’re PregnantInfluenza A is the most common variant of the flu and the one you’re most likely to get during pregnancy. A flu shot is the best protection against…READ MOREThe Difference Between Stomach Flu and InfluenzaMedically reviewed by Angelica Balingit, MDThe stomach flu and influenza can both cause similar symptoms. Learn more about how you can tell them apart. READ MOREInfluenza Spread: Airborne, Droplet, and Contact Transmission ExplainedMedically reviewed by Avi Varma, MD, MPH, AAHIVS, FAAFPYes, the influenza virus is airborne, but it also spreads by other methods. Keep reading to learn more, including prevention tips. READ MORECan the Flu Shot Give You Influenza?Medically reviewed by Alana Biggers, M.D., MPHThe flu shot won’t give you influenza because it contains inactive forms of the virus. However, you might have side effects like headaches, fevers…READ MOREQuiz: When Should I Get My Flu Shot?Medically reviewed by Angelica Balingit, MDIt's generally best to get your flu shot toward the beginning of fall. READ MORE8 Easy Ways to Get Rid of Mucus in Your ChestMedically reviewed by the Healthline Medical NetworkHere are 8 tips to help get rid of mucus in your chest. From vapor rub and hot shower steam to essential oils and decongestants, these may help.READ MORE10 Natural Remedies for Flu SymptomsMedically reviewed by Cynthia Cobb, DNP, APRN, WHNP-BC, FAANPWhile there's no cure for the flu, here are several natural remedies that might help soothe flu symptoms, from easing a sore throat and irritated…READ MORECan You Die from the Flu?Medically reviewed by Daniel Murrell, M.D.Seasonal flu is a viral infection that tends to start spreading in the fall and hits its peak during the winter months. It can continue into the…READ MOREAbout UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsSitemapMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzyExperts share advice for MSU, East Lansing community at start of flu season - The State News Monday, November 11, 2024 Home News Michigan MSU Business Environment All News Life Community Students Events & Entertainment Social Justice Health All Life Sports Football Men’s Basketball Women’s Basketball Volleyball Ice Hockey Men’s Soccer Women’s Soccer Baseball Softball All Sports Commentary Podcasts Photo and Video More Contact classifieds Religious Directory Obituaries All More Donate More Take a peek behind the curtain and test drive the NEW StateNews.com today! NEWS / MICHIGAN Experts share advice for MSU, East Lansing community at start of flu season Maggie George November 11, 2022 The Olin Health Center, now offering free flu vaccines for all students. — Photo by Denille Reid | The State News Michigan State University physicians are encouraging members of the university and East Lansing community to get their influenza shot and take other safety precautions as flu season sets in. After two winters of being protected from flu season by mask mandates and physical distancing, experts say this season might see more cases as our immune systems are reintroduced to the virus. “We were so protected the last few years from other circulating viruses that our immune systems may not be ready to protect us from many viruses – including influenza,” MSU physician Dr. Michael Brown said. This season’s influenza immunization protects against four strains of the virus. When choosing which strains to develop vaccinations against, experts look at data from Australia, whose flu season is earlier in the calendar year, said Dr. Pete Gulick, an associate professor of medicine in MSU's College of Osteopathic Medicine. Besides vaccinations, doctors recommend wearing a mask when you feel sick. “At the individual level, you can make that choice at any time," Brown said. "That’s where I think it’s directly relevant to this influenza season. If you see someone on campus wearing a mask, it may be that they’re just trying to protect others." For the East Lansing and MSU community, this flu season may spread more quickly due to the increased number of close quarters indoor attractions on or near campus, such as sporting events. Brown said there are lots of opportunities for a virus that has infected a few people to then infect many. Despite the rapid spread that experts anticipate due to the social patterns of college students, it is predicted that the symptoms will not lead to severe cases. “On the positive side, same demographic of being young adults makes the population less at-risk for hospitalization and severe illness resulting in an ICU stay or death," Brown said. Gulick, on the other hand, is concerned for the older members of the community. “I’m just worried more in the people that are higher risk," Gulick said. "The ones that are older, the ones that are immunosuppressed, the ones that have comorbid diseases. If they get hit with the flu, they’re the ones that may be hospitalized." MSU is offering opportunities for the community to get ahead of flu season and become prepared. MSU spokesperson Dan Olsen said the university is being proactive. He recommends becoming vaccinated against influenza and COVID-19, washing your hands frequently and disinfecting high-touch surfaces. “That’s something the university does frequently," Olsen said. "We increase those efforts during winter illness season. Doorknobs, exits and entries, bathrooms regularly, especially the communal bathrooms throughout our residence halls." READ MORE MSU Cancelling classes, group discussions: MSU faculty grapple with how to address election results amid scrutiny Emilio Perez Ibarguen and Theo Scheer BASEBALL How the baseball radar gun got its start at MSU Hannah Holycross COMMUNITY MSU's creative writing department emphasizes the importance of the craft Amy Cho A vaccine clinic will be held on Nov. 16 at the Breslin Center from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., offering both influenza and COVID-19 doses. Vaccinations are also available through appointment at Olin Health Center.﻿ Support student media! Please consider donating to The State News and help fund the future of journalism. Donate Featured Local Savings Featured Local Savings Discussion Share and discuss “Experts share advice for MSU, East Lansing community at start of flu season” on social media. facebook twitter MSU Community: Share your voice post-shooting TRENDING MICHIGAN Human remains found in freezer in East Lansing residence Hannah Holycross MSU Republican Mike Balow wins spot on MSU board, second winner too close to call Theo Scheer MEN'S BASKETBALL What we learned in MSU men's basketball's blowout of Niagara Thomas Cobb MSU MSU board race still too close to call as Democrat takes lead for second seat Theo Scheer MSU Divided MSU student body reckons with Trump victory Emilio Perez Ibarguen COMMUNITY Community members gather at Baker Woodlot for invasive species removal Anna Barnes Sections news sports spotlight opinion classifieds obituaries Quick Links about advertise board of directors photo reprints privacy policy corrections & archives student positions Social alumni contact us email newsletter Latest Print Issue All Content © 2024 State News, Inc. Powered by Solutions by The State News.Avian flu set to deal killer blow to turkey farmers at Christmas | Food & drink industry | The Guardian Skip to main contentSkip to navigationClose dialogue1/2Next imagePrevious imageToggle captionSkip to navigationPrint subscriptionsSearch jobs Sign inIntInternational editionUK editionUS editionAustralia editionEurope editionThe Guardian - Back to homeThe GuardianNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleShow moreHide expanded menuNewsView all NewsWorld newsUS elections 2024UK newsClimate crisisUkraineEnvironmentScienceGlobal developmentFootballTechBusinessObituariesOpinionView all OpinionThe Guardian viewColumnistsCartoonsOpinion videosLettersSportView all SportFootballCricketRugby unionTennisCyclingF1GolfUS sportsCultureView all CultureBooksMusicTV & radioArt & designFilmGamesClassicalStageLifestyleView all LifestyleFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneySearch input google-search SearchSupport usPrint subscriptionsSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsThe Guardian appVideoPodcastsPicturesNewslettersToday's paperInside the GuardianThe ObserverGuardian WeeklyCrosswordsWordiplyCorrectionsSearch input google-search SearchSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsBusinessEconomicsBankingMoneyMarketsProject SyndicateB2BRetail Steve Childerhouse on his Norfolk farm before 11,000 of his turkeys were wiped out.View image in fullscreenSteve Childerhouse on his Norfolk farm before 11,000 of his turkeys were wiped out.The ObserverFood & drink industry This article is more than 2 years oldAvian flu set to deal killer blow to turkey farmers at ChristmasThis article is more than 2 years oldHard-hit producers who have lost tens of thousands of pounds after culling stock now fear they may not be able to continueJoanna PartridgeSat 12 Nov 2022 13.00 GMTLast modified on Sun 13 Nov 2022 05.08 GMTShareIt is “eerily silent” on Steve Childerhouse’s poultry farm near Attleborough in Norfolk. At this time of year, he’d usually be working flat out, feeding his turkeys and geese for the busy Christmas period. But this year the sheds are empty, after avian influenza hit his farm in late September, wiping out all of his 11,000 free-range turkeys and 2,500 geese destined for local festive dinner tables.In one fell swoop, a bird flu outbreak has devastated the 51-year-old’s livelihood. After almost 40 years – he started raising geese as a boy – Childerhouse is still coming to terms with the loss.“I wouldn’t wish it on anybody,” he says, recalling how quickly the infection spread through his flock. He believes the disease was brought to his farm by wild birds, who initially passed it on to his geese.The highly infectious bird flu that has been sweeping across Britain for more than a year now, and gained pace in recent weeks, is deadly for farmed animals such as turkeys and geese. However, any outbreak is also catastrophic for the farmers, as any remaining birds on the site have to be culled. At present the disease doesn’t pass easily from birds to humans.“I’ve never seen anything like it and I don’t want to see it ever again,” Childerhouse says. “We had taken these birds from day-old chicks.”He is reeling not just from the financial hit, but from the “emotional rollercoaster” of dealing with bird flu, which he likens to grief.After the cull, he had to inform all the local butchers and farm shops that usually sell his birds, and warn all of his regular workers that he would not be able to offer them much-needed seasonal jobs this year.It’s the Covid of poultry, except that turkeys and other poultry don’t get sick and recover; they just diePaul Kelly, farmerChilderhouse has already decided he won’t go back into rearing geese, and in the meantime is looking for work elsewhere.The UK’s worst-ever outbreak of bird flu has prompted fears about the availability of British turkeys and geese this Christmas.The newly appointed farming minister, Mark Spencer, told the Observer it would be “quite a challenge” for consumers to get hold of a British goose “because there’s been such devastation in the sector”. He insisted, however, that there should be enough turkeys to go around, thanks to robust supply chains.Nearly 9 million turkeys are eaten in the UK each Christmas, of which about 90% are British, according to the British Poultry Council. The sector relies on seasonal supply to rear, slaughter and process birds in time for all of those festive meals.The industry body says the free-range sector has taken the biggest hit from bird flu, with about 35% of producers – which between them rear more than a million birds each year – directly affected.There have been 100 confirmed cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 in England since the start of October. The outbreak has now been running for more than a year, since October 2021, and in that time there have been more than 230 cases.It has led, so far, to the culling of 3.5m birds on UK farms and piled pressure on Britain’s egg producers, at a time when soaring energy and feed costs are causing many to leave the sector.Bird flu cases usually drop during the summer months, but that did not happen this year. The disease has been most acute in East Anglia, especially Childerhouse’s home county of Norfolk. It is currently spreading northwards and westwards, with several confirmed cases in Lincolnshire, Cheshire and North Yorkshire, and also north Wales and Anglesey.This wave of avian influenza is also spreading around Europe. Experts suspect the illness is now endemic in wild birds, creating a year-round risk of infection.There is as yet no available vaccine against bird flu. At the end of last month, among other measures, the government ordered that all poultry and other captive birds in England be housed indoors. This was an extension of the housing order that had been in place in Norfolk, Suffolk and parts of Essex since mid-October.However, many in the poultry industry believe this move came too late. They had been calling for several weeks for a nationwide poultry housing order after an upsurge in outbreaks. More cases on farms are expected as more migratory birds return to the UK for winter.View image in fullscreenA bird flu control zone in eastern Norfolk: all animals in the area must be kept indoors by order. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PAA spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) said it had announced “a package of support including quicker compensation packages, as well as stepping up biosecurity rules to minimise the risk of the disease spreading”.The package also included a change to the rules of the bird flu compensation scheme available to farmers: they are now eligible for compensation payments from the start, rather than the end, of a planned culling. And in a move designed to give them more certainty over business planning, poultry farmers are now allowed to slaughter their animals early and freeze them, so the birds can be defrosted and sold to consumers in the run-up to Christmas, labelled “previously frozen”.Third-generation turkey farmer Paul Kelly has already started processing some of his birds, several weeks earlier than usual, to dodge rising bird flu cases.“It’s the Covid of poultry, except that turkeys and other poultry don’t get sick and recover; they just die,” he says from his farm in Essex. “I can honestly say this is the worst year I have had to deal with in my entire business career.”Kelly calls the government’s compensation scheme “not fit for purpose”. He lost 9,000 of his 65,000 Christmas turkeys after an outbreak of bird flu at one of his sites, although his premium KellyBronze birds were not affected.Unlike other livestock, under current legislation farmers are only compensated for the number of birds that are fit and healthy at the start of a bird flu cull.“Our industry is saying this is many years out of date and isn’t fit for purpose,” Kelly says. Hundreds of birds can succumb to the illness between the farm notifying the authorities of an outbreak, and officials arriving to start the cull.Poultry is an “unsupported sector” according to Minette Batters, president of the National Farmers’ Union. She warns that, with bird flu coming on top of 30% cost price inflation, farmers are struggling.“We’ve got to make sure that we do not lose the critical mass of poultry producers, for eggs and meat,” Batters adds. “We’ve got to take special action. We have severe market failure on the back of a disease. The compensation package has to be enough to give farmers the confidence to keep producing, because they are also facing inflationary costs.”Ash Amirahmadi of Arla: ‘I thought milk was boring. Little did I know’Read moreHoward Blackwell is another Essex turkey farmer who finds himself literally and figuratively at a loss after a bird flu outbreak among his flock of 5,500 turkeys and 1,800 geese in early October.The 59-year-old introduced turkeys to the arable farm set up by his grandparents at Coggeshall, near Braintree, in 1983, as an extra source of income. But he estimates that he will have lost nearly £200,000 as a result of the outbreak, and is currently unclear how much compensation he will receive. His farm shop and wholesale meat business have been allowed to continue operating, but under stringent restrictions.Bird flu is not a one-season worry for Blackwell and other affected farmers. The complex and costly clean-up operation required after an outbreak, which can include a legally enforced 12-month delay in restocking with birds, means he is not sure whether he will even be allowed to rear poultry next year.Until there is a bird flu vaccine, Blackwell is fearful for the future.“It’s like Russian roulette. If you haven’t got a vaccine, you could restock and it could happen again.”Explore more on these topicsFood & drink industryThe ObserverBird fluTurkey (popular Christmas and Thanksgiving dish)Rural affairsFarmingfeaturesShareReuse this contentMore on this storyMore on this storyBird flu outbreak confirmed at East Yorkshire poultry farm6d agoBird flu in pheasants in England sparks concern over lax rearing rules17 Oct 2024Risk of bird flu spreading to humans is ‘enormous concern’, says WHO 18 Apr 2024Northumberland’s Farne Islands reopen to visitors after bird flu outbreak27 Mar 2024Avian flu outbreak confirmed at vital seabird colonies in Wales20 Jul 2023Human gene identified that prevents most bird flu viruses moving to people 28 Jun 2023RSPB calls for suspension of game-bird releases over avian flu fears18 May 2023Two poultry workers test positive for bird flu in England16 May 2023‘We feel more prepared’: Farne Islands face another season battling avian flu4 May 2023Most viewedMost viewedBusinessEconomicsBankingMoneyMarketsProject SyndicateB2BRetailNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleOriginal reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morningSign up for our emailHelpComplaints & correctionsSecureDropWork for us Privacy policyCookie policyTerms & conditionsContact usAll topicsAll writersDigital newspaper archiveTax strategyFacebookYouTubeInstagramLinkedInXNewslettersAdvertise with usSearch UK jobsBack to top© 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)Canada is seeing an early rise in flu cases. Is a 'tidal wave' of infection coming? | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Canada is seeing an early rise in flu cases. Is a 'tidal wave' of infection coming? | CBC News LoadedHealthCanada is seeing an early rise in flu cases. Is a 'tidal wave' of infection coming?Canada is on track to face its first full flu season in several years — one that’s starting earlier than usual, all while the country’s healthcare system is already grappling with respiratory infections like COVID-19 and RSV.Season starting earlier than usual as virus spreads alongside COVID-19, RSVLauren Pelley · CBC News · Posted: Nov 11, 2022 4:00 AM EST | Last Updated: November 11, 2022The influenza virus, as seen under an electron microscope. Canada is on track to face its first full flu season in several years — one that’s starting earlier than usual. (U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases)Social SharingCanada is on track to face its first full flu season in several years — one that's starting earlier than usual, all while the country's healthcare system is already grappling with respiratory infections like COVID-19 and RSV.It's hard to know how the months ahead will play out, including what level of strain serious influenza infections will put on overrun hospitals, and how this year's slate of viruses will interact now that SARS-CoV-2 is firmly in the mix.But what's clear is there's already a sharp rise in recent infections, and a "tidal wave" of cases is likely on the way, said Dr. Sameer Elsayed, an infectious diseases physician and medical microbiologist in London, Ont., and a professor with Western University. "We're going to have a big influenza season, I expect, this year."At the national level, influenza activity has been "increasing steeply" and crossed the seasonal threshold of five per cent of samples coming back positive by late October. Should those trends hold, the federal government will be declaring the start of an influenza epidemic in Canada in its next update, scheduled for Nov. 14.Ontario has already soared past that benchmark, with roughly 10 per cent of tests recently coming back positive for this year's dominant strain of influenza A.In the latest update from Public Health Ontario on Nov. 4, the province said the flu season has started "more than a month earlier than typically observed in pre-pandemic seasons."That early start comes as the province's pediatric hospitals are already overflowing with children sick with illnesses including respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, and while positive test results for COVID-19 are back on the rise, most recently hitting 17 per cent. "In the coming months, Ontario will likely face the triple threat of respiratory illnesses," warned Dr. Rose Zacharias, president of the Ontario Medical Association, a physician advocacy group, during a press conference on Wednesday.AnalysisWe're close to cold and flu season. So, what does that look like with COVID-19 in the mix?Alberta began experiencing a spike in influenza A cases as well by the end of October, alongside the circulation of other pathogens, and B.C. public health officials are also watching for an ongoing rise in positive samples."At the moment we are seeing influenza creeping up, and samples come in through long-term care facilities, children's hospitals, adult hospitals," said medical microbiologist Dr. Linda Hoang, the associate director and program head of the bacteriology and mycology lab at the B.C. Centre for Disease Control.Clues from Southern HemisphereHow Canada's flu season will progress from here could mirror, to some degree, what countries in the southern hemisphere experienced earlier this year.In Chile, where the 2022 flu season has come and gone, influenza A began circulating "months earlier" than during pre-pandemic flu seasons, according to a recent report released by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control. (The U.S. is now experiencing an early start as well, with southern states seeing the largest surges.)Chilean officials reported more than 1,000 hospitalizations during the season. That's higher than during the COVID pandemic when public health restrictions and other factors kept flu at bay for more than a year, but lower than during recent pre-pandemic flu seasons. The country's flu shots also cut the risk of hospitalization nearly in half. Triple the usual number of kids are coming to Ontario ERs with respiratory illnesses. Here's whyData on lab-confirmed influenza cases in Australia this year also show the country experienced both an early start and end to its flu season, and a level of infections far higher than any of the five years prior.But the 2022 flu season's clinical severity — referring to the overall death toll, and the proportion of patients admitted into intensive care — was deemed "low" by the Australian government.WATCH | Ontario physicians warn of 'triple threat' respiratory season:Concerns grow over triple threat of surging respiratory illnesses2 years agoDuration 2:50The Ontario Medical Association is urging people to wear masks indoors and get their flu and COVID-19 shots as concern builds that a spike in flu cases could overwhelm a health-care system already seeing an influx of RSV and COVID patients.So what do those trends signal for Canada in the months ahead?Alyson Kelvin, a virologist and researcher with the Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization at the University of Saskatchewan, said it's possible our flu season may also "peak and decline" earlier as well.But she stressed the combination of flu and other respiratory viruses, including COVID's first time circulating in the winter months without any public health restrictions, makes the stretch ahead particularly difficult to predict.Surge in RSV adds to pediatric hospital pressures. Here's what to doIt's possible the flu season's early start in the southern hemisphere, echoed now in countries further north, suggests the virus is moving into circulation on the heels of other waves of infections. "We could see a later rise in COVID-19 cases, maybe in early January," Kelvin said. "But it also could be just the backlash of not seeing influenza for the past two years; I really don't know. And I'll be watching the numbers to see a more clear pattern in the next couple of years."Time for masks again?Hospital teams worry that waves of different viral infections would mean months of strain on Canada's health-care system, whether or not influenza cases alone amount to high levels of hospitalizations this season."It's only November," said Dr. Fahad Razak, an internist at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto, during an interview on CBC News Network."Typically respiratory virus season, including influenza and RSV, but of course COVID as well, would be expected to peak in the coming months. So we have not seen, likely, how bad this will get."Canada's top doctor encourages wearing masks as hospitals struggle with virus surgesThe months ahead could be "very, very difficult," he added, given the already-lengthy wait times to access care at many over-run and short-staffed hospitals across the country.Given those concerns, a growing chorus of physicians are now calling for a return to mask-wearing inside indoor settings to mitigate the spread of viral infections.WATCH | Toronto physician calls for return of mask mandates:Time to bring back mask mandate, says Toronto doctor2 years agoDuration 5:18Dr. Fahad Razak, internist at St. Michael's Hospital, says the triple threat posed by COVID-19, RSV and influenza should be dealt with through public health measures like mask mandates."If it's added to the other layers of protection, including vaccination, then it might actually make a difference in terms of dampening the surge so that the hospitals can cope just a little bit better," Canada's chief public health officer Dr. Theresa Tam said in a news conference Thursday. A study published this week in the New England Journal of Medicine offered more evidence suggesting masks can help mitigate virus transmission. The peer-reviewed research, which focused on school districts in Boston, found the lifting of masking requirements was associated with roughly 45 more COVID cases per 1,000 students and staff in the months following the end of a statewide policy.Why COVID-19 and flu could be in a 'tug of war' in the years aheadMasks are a blunt, imperfect tool, said Razak, but one that also helped keep influenza at bay in Canada throughout much of the pandemic. The 2020 flu season ended abruptly after a range of public health restrictions were put in place to combat COVID, and there wasn't evidence of community circulation of influenza the following season, either. Typically, the flu is thought to kill thousands of Canadians each year, while COVID is currently killing hundreds every week.Canadians encouraged to get flu, COVID shotsGetting a vaccine to protect against both is paramount this fall, multiple medical experts have stressed in recent interviews with CBC News.It's even safe to get both a COVID booster shot and an annual flu shot during the same appointment, according to Canada's National Advisory Committee on Immunization.Second OpinionThe COVID emergency may be over — but when will the pandemic end?Kelvin, who has long studied influenza, said Canadians always need to take the threat of flu seriously. The added fear now, she said, is that it's roaring back while there's another respiratory virus — SARS-CoV-2 — now in the mix."That's going to add to increased severe disease cases," she said. "And that's what I want to be watching out for — that we're doing the most that we can to reduce respiratory virus transmission in the community."ABOUT THE AUTHORLauren PelleySenior Health & Medical ReporterLauren Pelley covers the global spread of infectious diseases, pandemic preparedness and the crucial intersection between health and climate change. She's a two-time RNAO Media Award winner for in-depth health reporting in 2020 and 2022, a silver medallist for best editorial newsletter at the 2024 Digital Publishing Awards, and a 2024 Covering Climate Now award winner in the health category. Contact her at: lauren.pelley@cbc.ca.@LaurenPelleyCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowUnderstanding vaccines while pregnant and breastfeeding - Vaccine Education Menu Search Search MSU Extension Vaccine Education Vaccine Facts and Resources 4-H Community Health Ambassador Program Physician Peer Education Program My Vaccine Story Understanding vaccines while pregnant and breastfeeding Contact: Maggie Magoon<magoonma@msu.edu>, Michigan State University Extension - November 11, 2022 Updated from an original article written by Alyssa Maturen. This content was created as part of the Michigan Vaccine Project, a three-year vaccine education effort supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. Information was current as of the date of publication. Share Tweet Save Share Print Email Learn the benefits and risks of vaccination during pregnancy to make informed healthcare decisions. Pregnancy is a time of change, learning, and preparation. One of the best ways to prepare for welcoming a new member to the family is by getting vaccinated. While getting vaccinated during pregnancy is something you should always discuss with your doctor, there are some vaccines that are widely recommended before, during and after pregnancy. What Vaccines Should I Get During Pregnancy? The CDC recommends that everyone get two vaccines during their pregnancy: the inactivated flu vaccine (given by injection not nasally) and the Tdap vaccine. According to the CDC, “flu vaccines have been given to millions of pregnant women over the years, and scientific evidence shows that it is safe. Getting the flu vaccine during pregnancy is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your baby for several months after birth from flu-related complications.” Additionally, “the Tdap (Tetanus-Diphtheria-Pertussis) vaccine is also recommended during pregnancy, ideally between 27 and 36 weeks of each pregnancy, regardless of how long it has been since your last dose of the vaccine. This vaccine protects you and your baby against Pertussis, more commonly known as whooping cough.” What Vaccines Should I Not Get During Pregnancy? There are some vaccines that the CDC recommends not be given during pregnancy due to safety concerns of the developing fetus. These include: Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine Measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine Live influenza vaccine (nasal flu vaccine) Varicella (chicken pox) vaccine Certain travel vaccines such as yellow fever, typhoid fever, and Japanese encephalitis Are Vaccines Safe if I am Breastfeeding? It is safe to receive most vaccines right after giving birth, even while breastfeeding, with one exception. The CDC does not recommended getting the yellow fever vaccine for those who are breastfeeding unless travel to certain countries is unavoidable. Your healthcare provider will be better able to determine if that vaccination benefit outweighs the risks. Do Babies Carry Their Mother’s Immunity? According to the National Health Service (NHS), antibodies that mothers receive during pregnancy from vaccination are passed to their unborn babies through the placenta in a process known as passive immunity. Immunity in newborns starts to decrease after the first few weeks or months of life, but passive immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella can last for up to a year. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) reported that contracting COVID-19 during pregnancy increased the risk of severe disease and death. Research also showed that the antibodies a mother received from getting the COVID-19 vaccine while pregnant may protect their baby for six months or more after birth. To know what specific vaccines are recommended for you, talk to your doctor as they can vary from person to person based on age, lifestyle, medical conditions, travel, and previous vaccinations. More information about vaccines during pregnancy can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pregnancy/index.html Where can you find vaccines? To find a vaccine, check with your primary care physician, local health departments, pharmacies, and clinics. You can also visit https://www.vaccines.gov/ to locate a vaccine clinic near you. If you would like to learn more about vaccines, check out Michigan State University Extension’s partnership with the Michigan Vaccine Project to find links to event schedules, podcasts, publications, webinars, and videos relating to vaccine education at https://www.canr.msu.edu/vaccineeducation/ Did you find this article useful? Please tell us why? Submit September 16 New Commissioner School 2024 Register Now October 31 MSU Extension's Tips to Get You Through the Holidays Register Now You Might Also Be Interested In The Michigan Vaccine Project Presents an Ounce of Prevention: A Conversation with Disability Network West Michigan Part 1 Published on March 6, 2023 MVP Presents an Ounce of Prevention: An Interview with Arun Tandon Published on August 23, 2022 The Michigan Vaccine Project Presents an Ounce of Prevention: A Conversation with Disability Network West Michigan Part 2 Published on March 6, 2023 A virus among us Published on August 15, 2024 Updated COVID-19 vaccines (2023) Published on August 15, 2024 Protect yourself from HPV through vaccination Published on August 15, 2024 X Close « Previous Next » Tag List chronic disease, food & health, msu extension, mvp article, vaccine education Call Us: 517-884-7277 Contact Information Sitemap Accessibility Privacy Disclaimer Call MSU: (517) 355-1855 Visit: msu.edu MSU is an affirmative-action, equal-opportunity employer. Notice of Nondiscrimination Spartans Will. © Michigan State University MSU is an affirmative-action, equal-opportunity employer, committed to achieving excellence through a diverse workforce and inclusive culture that encourages all people to reach their full potential. Michigan State University Extension programs and materials are open to all without regard to race, color, national origin, gender, gender identity, religion, age, height, weight, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, marital status, family status or veteran status. Issued in furtherance of MSU Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Quentin Tyler, Director, MSU Extension, East Lansing, MI 48824. This information is for educational purposes only. Reference to commercial products or trade names does not imply endorsement by MSU Extension or bias against those not mentioned. The 4-H Name and Emblem have special protections from Congress, protected by code 18 USC 707. We comply with the Federal Trade Commission 1998 Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA). Search Menu Share Search for Filter by content type All Content Articles Courses Events People Podcasts Publications Recipes Videos MSU Extension Vaccine Education Related Content Vaccine Facts and Resources 4-H Community Health Ambassador Program Physician Peer Education Program My Vaccine Story Share Tweet Save Share Print EmailBird flu: Farmer wants Welsh government housing orderSkip to contentBritish Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveHomeNewsIsrael-Gaza WarWar in UkraineUS & CanadaUKUK PoliticsEnglandN. IrelandN. Ireland PoliticsScotlandScotland PoliticsWalesWales PoliticsAfricaAsiaChinaIndiaAustraliaEuropeLatin AmericaMiddle EastIn PicturesBBC InDepthBBC VerifyUS ElectionFull resultsKamala HarrisDonald TrumpJD VanceTim WalzSportBusinessExecutive LoungeTechnology of BusinessFuture of BusinessInnovationTechnologyScience & HealthArtificial IntelligenceAI v the MindCultureFilm & TVMusicArt & DesignStyleBooksEntertainment NewsArtsArts in MotionTravelDestinationsAfricaAntarcticaAsiaAustralia and PacificCaribbean & BermudaCentral AmericaEuropeMiddle EastNorth AmericaSouth AmericaWorld’s TableCulture & ExperiencesAdventuresThe SpeciaListEarthNatural WondersWeather & ScienceClimate SolutionsSustainable BusinessGreen LivingVideoLiveLive NewsLive SportHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherNewslettersBird flu: Farmer wants Welsh government housing orderBBCCapestone Organic Poultry Ltd lost 130,000 chickens in an avian flu outbreak in SeptemberThe Welsh government lacks "understanding and awareness" of avian flu, a large poultry business has said.This September, 130,000 organic chickens were culled, following a "very small outbreak" of bird flu in one of its sheds. The Welsh government has said the situation is "under daily review". The managing director of Capestone Organic Poultry, near Milford Haven, Pembrokeshire, is calling for a mandatory housing order. This measure - currently in place in England - legally requires all bird owners to keep their animals indoors and to follow stringent measures to protect their flocks from the disease.Wales holds off on tighter bird flu rulesAnti-bird flu measures in place across Great BritainAvian influenza is a highly contagious viral disease which affects the respiratory, digestive or nervous system of many species of bird. Some strains can spread easily and quickly between birds and have a high death rate.On Tuesday, Minister for Rural Affairs Leslie Griffiths issued a statement on the severity and spread of avian influenza in Wales, emphasising it was "under daily review". She also confirmed she still stood by the decision made by the chief veterinary officer for Wales, who declared an all-Wales Avian Influenza Prevention Zone (AIPZ) on 17 October 2022. The AIPZ requires all bird keepers to adhere to certain biosecurity measures.Stringent biosecurity measures are in place to try and prevent spread of the disease.In a statement at the Senedd on Tuesday, she said: "Over the last 12 months, we have witnessed the most severe outbreak of avian influenza in Wales and across Great Britain."This has been the largest outbreak of an exotic notifiable disease in animals since the catastrophic outbreak of foot and mouth disease in 2001."Ms Griffiths said the Welsh government was taking a "science-led approach", rather than following the UK government in England, which, on Monday, 7 November brought mandatory housing of birds into force. "Fortunately, in Wales, we have not seen anything like the number of outbreaks in England, which would be required to justify any such housing order," she said."Furthermore, the scientific advice of my interim chief veterinary officer is that, for Wales, the biosecurity requirements of our AIPZ are currently appropriate and sufficient to contain the threat." In total, Wales has recorded 10 infected premises since October 2021. There were none between February and September 2022.There have been three infected premises confirmed in Wales since the beginning of October 2022The latest confirmed case was at a premises near Buckley, Flintshire, on Monday 7 November. 'Critical time'Having experienced first-hand the effect of avian flu on his business, Capestone managing director Rob Cumine said he believed the Welsh government needed to have a "serious rethink" about how it manages the disease."We're in quite a critical time in terms of controlling the disease and housing orders are very effective, both within domestic poultry and also in wild birds," he said. "I think we should be aligned [with England]. Just because there's a border, a wild bird doesn't respect that necessarily as it flies between farms."The business supplies major high street retailers and well-known brands, employing roughly 200 people year-round in rural Pembrokeshire.Rob Cumine, of Capestone Organic Poultry farm, is calling for further government actionReacting to the Welsh government's AIPZ as a means of managing the disease, Mr Cumine said he did not think it was sufficient."There's lots of things going on in the world at the moment and avian influenza is one of the challenges that government face but, for an individual business, when it impacts you, it is disastrous really," he said."I think there's been a lack of government understanding and awareness. We've seen some announcements in England, a shift in support and understanding of the impact, so I'm hoping we'll see more in Wales." But for Ioan Humphreys, from Carno, Powys, who has 32,000 hens, the financial costs of keeping them indoors would also cause concern. "The flock do enjoy being outside a lot," he said."It would have a big effect on them, it would stress them out, it would increase my feed prices. I'd have to buy more equipment in the shed to keep the birds happy, more pecking blocks to stop them getting too stressed, so it would have a financial strain on the business."Ioan Humphreys, of That Welsh Farmer, says a housing order would increase financial pressures on himFarming unions are also calling on the Welsh government to keep a close eye on the development of the disease. NFU Cymru representative and poultry farmer Llŷr Jones, from near Corwen, Denbighshire, has expressed his daily fear of the avian flu. "We've got nearly as many cases as the whole of last year, and we're only a few days into the winter," he said."Why did we have a housing order last year, and why aren't we having one this year even though we've got more cases?"Mr Jones's hens are spread out over 40 acres (16 hectares) of land.He said: "I don't know how many birds fly over this land each day, but it would be quite a high number. By having them outside, for me, it's not if I get avian flu, but when. "That's why it's important to have this housing law for the hens, so that I can then make sure no wild birds are able to get into my flock."He added: "I'm not sure how England's science is telling people to house them [the hens] and the Welsh science isn't. "It just doesn't make any sense and I just hope they will change their minds very soon." A Welsh government spokesperson said: "Having analysed the available scientific evidence, we are not introducing mandatory housing of poultry in Wales at this time. "We will continue to monitor the situation in Wales. All keepers must keep their birds safe by rigorously applying the biosecurity measures in the Wales Avian Influenza Prevention Zone, and be vigilant for signs of the disease."If you have suspicion or confirmation of Avian influenza, contact your local Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) office immediately on 0300 303 8268.Bird flu found at site in north WalesRecord avian flu outbreak sees mass cull in UK, EUDepartment for Environment, Food & Rural AffairsMilford HavenCarnoWales businessCorwenWelsh governmentChickensWalesRelatedBluetongue restrictions extended in England31 Oct 2024NorthamptonshireFarm show bans livestock over bluetongue fears28 Oct 2024Science & EnvironmentCoastal erosion victim vows to continue legal fight25 Oct 2024EnglandMore2 hrs agoMotorists who bought cars on finance could share in billionsThe car finance industry is setting aside billions to pay for potential claims after a test case.2 hrs ago4 hrs ago'I've been kicked and spat on' say shop workersShop workers say they have been spat on and told "you've got Covid".4 hrs agoWales7 hrs agoNew Tory chair backs devolution despite debate callsThe new Welsh Tory grassroots leader rejects calls for the party to consider abolishing the Senedd.7 hrs agoWales7 hrs agoPeople smuggling ring run from car wash - courtThe defendants are accused of running the operation from the Fast Track Hand Car Wash in Caerphilly.7 hrs agoWales8 hrs agoMother-of-two dies during Turkey weight-loss opJanet Savage paid £2,750 for the procedure but stopped breathing during surgery.8 hrs agoWalesBritish Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherBBC ShopBBC in other languagesFollow BBC on:Terms of UseAbout the BBCPrivacy PolicyCookiesAccessibility HelpContact the BBCAdvertise with usDo not share or sell my infoContact technical supportCopyright 2024 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.RSV, flu, COVID-19 cases could overwhelm Michigan hospitalsSkip to main content HomeElection 2024Voter GuideNewsDetroitWayneOaklandMacombMichiganMichigan PoliticsEducationJohn CarlisleM.L. ElrickNeal RubinObserver & EccentricUSA TODAY Michigan could be pummeled with RSV, flu, COVID-19, health leaders warnKristen Jordan Shamus Detroit Free PressShow Caption Hide Caption RSV, Influenza, COVID-19: What you need to knowThere's a strong possibility of a tripledemic this winter. Here's what you need to know.Self Improved, Problem SolvedIt’s been dubbed the “tripledemic,” the threat of three viral infections — influenza, RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) and coronavirus — pummeling the state all at once.Both Michigan and national health leaders say they’re concerned that the triple whammy could converge upon us in the weeks ahead as new coronavirus variants gain ground, spreading along with other seasonal viruses.“We have not only flu, RSV and COVID, which have all the attention right now, but we have rhinovirus and parainfluenza and other coronaviruses,” said Dr. Natasha Bagdasarian, chief medical executive of the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services.The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced Friday it will issue an alert to thousands of health care providers nationally about the huge spike in cases of RSV, along with a rise in flu cases amid an underlying coronavirus pandemic.More:Macomb County boy dies from RSV as Michigan pediatric hospitals fill with sick kidsMore:Wave of Michigan RSV cases taxes pediatric hospitalsHospitals, short on staff already, struggling with viral waveIt’s a recipe for overwhelmed hospitals.Statewide, pediatric intensive care hospital beds are now 89% full, according to data from the Michigan Health and Hospital Association and the state health department. Many of them are being used to care for children sick with RSV, which can cause severe illness and, rarely, death in young children, people who are immunocompromised and people age 65 and older.“Hospitals are here for Michiganders, particularly in emergencies,” Dr. Gary Roth, chief medical officer of the hospital association, said in a statement. “But our capacity to provide pediatric hospital care is extremely strained. Right now, the staffing challenges we have been sounding the alarms about all year combined with rapid spread of respiratory illnesses are impacting our hospitals’ ability to care for our sickest children in a timely manner.”Corewell Health East, the new name for Beaumont Health, announced it will enforce new visitor restrictions starting Monday to limit the spread of RSV, influenza, coronavirus and other respiratory illnesses at its eight southeastern Michigan hospitals. Children ages 5 and younger will not be permitted to visit, though exceptions can be made in extraordinary circumstances.“What we are seeing with the trends right now is that not only are RSV surveillance numbers in terms of positive tests going up, but the number of patients who are presenting to urgent cares and emergency departments with RSV are also going up, and this is primarily in the under 4 age group,” Bagdasarian said.A wintertime COVID uptick?It's not just RSV. Coronavirus hospitalizations in Michigan also have risen slightly since last week, the state health department reported. As of Friday, about 1,200 Michiganders were hospitalized with confirmed or suspected cases of COVID-19. Of them, 43 were children.The state's wastewater surveillance sites are reporting that the levels of coronavirus they’re finding in samples are at their highest point in seven weeks — 20% above baseline thresholds.“We've always talked about the likelihood of a COVID-19 uptick in the winter,” Bagdasarian told the Free Press. “We have always talked about the fact that this is a virus that likes to transmit in cold, dry conditions. It likes to transmit during indoor gatherings and so the likelihood of that happening around the holidays, in December, in January, is high."The news isn't much better when it comes to flu, either.Over the last two weeks, the percentage of positive influenza tests has more than doubled nationally, CDC data shows. Though Michigan has yet to see a huge uptick in flu cases this season, flu hospitalizations are climbing in other parts of the U.S.More:Flu threatens early surge. Doctors urge vaccinations now.More:Amoxicillin shortage in Michigan, US fueled by surge in pediatric RSV cases: What to knowFederal officials monitoring cases and supply needsDawn O'Connell, assistant secretary for the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response, said Friday that the federal government is working with state and local health care providers to assess hospital capacity problems.“We are monitoring capacity across the country, sharing best practices to reduce the strain on systems, and standing by to deploy additional personnel and supplies as needed,” O’Connell said during a news briefing.“We are tracking trends and the number of cases of respiratory viruses, the number of emergency department visits, the number of inpatient admissions and the number of intensive care unit admissions. This allows us to anticipate surges, peaks and valleys in hospital bed capacity. We are also closely monitoring the supply chain for any potential shortages.”The federal agency can deploy supplies such as masks, surgical gloves, gowns and ventilators from the Strategic National Stockpile to struggling hospitals, O’Connell said. National Disaster Medical System teams could be deployed to hard-hit areas as well. “To date, no state has requested this level of support and additional personnel or supplies,” O’Connell said, “but we stand ready … to work with them should these resources be needed.“With increased RSV infections, a rising number of flu cases and the ongoing burden of COVID-19 in our communities, there's no doubt that we will face some challenges this winter. But it's important to remember … that RSV and flu are not new.”She and other health leaders urged all eligible Americans to get a flu vaccine and to ensure they’re up to date on COVID-19 vaccines and boosters to reduce the stress on hospitals.Doctors disappointed in flu, COVID vaccine ratesMichigan still hasn't hit the targets it had hoped to reach for flu and COVID-19 immunizations.The goal is to provide 4 million flu shots to Michiganders this fall and winter. As of Oct. 22, the most recent date for which data was available, 43.4% of the state's residents had gotten a dose of the flu vaccine. This year's quadrivalent formulation of the flu shot contains an H3N2 strain, which is dominant in the U.S. right now.The numbers are even lower when it comes to the latest bivalent COVID-19 vaccine booster.More:As monkeypox cases dip, Michigan's top doctor urges ongoing cautionMore:Story of survival: Runner, 26, lived after his heart stopped during half-marathonAbout 10% of the state's population — 981,659 people — had taken the newly formulated coronavirus booster shot as of Nov. 1, state data shows. The bivalent booster was made using the omicron variant as a target, which means it's likely to offer good protection against hospitalization and death when people are infected with the subvariants now gaining traction in the U.S. — B.4.6, BQ.1 and BQ.1.1."The problem I see in a national way is that there has not been very much uptake of the booster," said Dr. Arnold Monto, a University of Michigan professor emeritus of epidemiology and global public health who also is acting chairman of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee."It’s really unfortunate, especially given the fact that the elderly and other groups are still at risk of having a severe infection."Bagdasarian called the low rate of vaccine uptake "troubling.""It's not that people have completely stopped getting vaccinated, but it has not been as robust as I had hoped it would be," she said.The crystal ball is broken when it comes to predicting what awaits with COVID-19, said Monto, who worked at U-M for more than 50 years and helped vaccinate schoolchildren to bring herd immunity to Tecumseh during the 1968 influenza pandemic. He also worked in Beijing, China, during another coronavirus outbreak, the 2002-03 SARS outbreak."Making predictions has been rather difficult in the past and is even more difficult now," Monto said."We thought we’d be out of the woods with the first series inoculations. We know now that we need to keep up vaccines. We’re going to be getting data on how well boosters are working, and that's going to take a little while if we don't have that many people who are getting vaccinated."What we don't know — and this is why I think it is difficult more than usual to predict — is that we have had a lot of natural (COVID) infection and how that is going to affect the spikes that would have occurred otherwise, is hard to say."Worry that antibody treatments won't work on subvariantsWhile there's hope that the new COVID-19 bivalent vaccine will offer good protection, epidemiologists, including Bagdasarian, are concerned that the subvariants B.4.6, BQ.1 and BQ.1.1, have the ability to evade current monoclonal antibody treatments.“We have variants of concern where if they continue to spread at the rate they're spreading now, we will lose some of our therapeutic tools," Bagdasarian said.One such tool is Evusheld, a monoclonal antibody that’s authorized for use in people who are immunocompromised. It works as a preventive treatment for transplant recipients, people with HIV, those who are on chemotherapy and people who take immunosuppressing drugs and may not build up enough antibodies from vaccines to protect them.The B.4.6 subvariant appears to be able to evade Evusheld, Bagdasarian said.“Those individuals who have weakened immune systems and who have been counting on Evusheld to keep them safe, they will not have the same level of protection,” she said.And the BQ.1 and BQ.1.1 subvariants that are beginning to gain in dominance in the U.S. also are likely to be resistant to Evusheld, along with bebtelovimab, the only other monoclonal antibody treatment available now for use against COVID-19 after a person has been infected with the virus, according to the National Institutes of Health.“Losing those two medications is a big hit,” Bagdasarian said.While the antiviral drug Paxlovid is still a treatment option for some Americans at high risk for severe disease from the coronavirus, it isn’t a drug that can be used universally.That’s because Paxlovid interacts with a lot of other commonly used medications and can’t be given to anyone who has severe kidney or liver disease. If you take blood thinners or heart rhythm medication like flecainide or amiodarone, you shouldn't take Paxlovid. Cholesterol-lowering drugs also can interact with Paxlovid, so people who take those medications may need to talk to their doctors about whether they should go off their cholesterol drugs for a short time to take Paxlovid instead. Paxlovid also is a risk if you have HIV because it can make the medicines used to treat HIV less effective. “We are heading into the winter with an already strained health care system,” Bagdasarian said. “We're already hearing that our pediatric ICUs and … pediatric emergency departments are really strained. So if we add on top of that an uptick in COVID … that is not responsive to monoclonal antibodies and ... an uptick in influenza A ... that is going to make for a very difficult cold and flu season.“We're really asking people to just use commonsense strategies, use the tools that we have to keep health care systems functioning and … available for those who need urgent medical care. We want to ensure that if someone has a heart attack or a stroke or … is in a motor vehicle accident, that they have access to the excellent health care that they that they normally would have access to. And that means using the tools.”Those suggestions include:Making sure you’re up to date on COVID-19 vaccines and the bivalent booster.Getting a flu shot. Having a supply of COVID-19 tests at home to use in case you develop symptoms.Staying home when you're sick: “We have to remember that what might be a mild infection for someone in their 20s and 30s could be a life-threatening infection for a newborn or someone who's elderly or immunocompromised,” Bagdasarian said.Keeping a supply of masks at home and wearing them if you must go out or be around others when you feel ill. Talking to your doctor before you get sick so you’re aware of the treatment options and can access them quickly should you contract coronavirus or influenza. "It is a very tricky virus," Monto said. "We would never have thought that a viral infection of the respiratory tract would be an emergency for years — for several years."Contact Kristen Jordan Shamus: kshamus@freepress.com. Follow her on Twitter @kristenshamus. Subscribe to the Free Press. Facebook Twitter EmailHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024These Flu Shots Are Better for Animals and Just as Effective, Researchers Say Skip to content • Health & Wellness Health Stories + solutions for a changing world 11/08/24 Fri November 8th. News Climate Food Health Policy Science Search English Español Diet Lifestyle Mental Health Nutrition Public Health Toxic Planet Climate Environment Pollution Justice Oceans Wildlife Research Industry Policy Food Solutions Food Systems Food Waste Food Aquaculture Workers Investigations Food Waste Food Systems Industry Innovations Sustainable Farming Research Food Labeling Health Nutrition Public Health Lifestyle Diet Mental Health Beauty Toxic Planet Policy Entertainment Sanctuaries Law & Justice Reflections Workers Sport Animal Testing Investigations Justice Research Future of Food Election 2024 Meat Lobby Science Technology Sentience Research Breakthroughs Animal Testing Animal Behavior Mythbusting Search English Español Instagram Facebook X Mastodon LinkedIn YouTube Resources for Journalists Food & Farming Media Network How to Pitch Us Freelance Charter Work With Us Sentient Mission People Donate Funding Contact Environmental Policy Code of Ethics Testimonials Reported These Flu Shots Are Better for Animals and Just as Effective, Researchers Say More than 80 percent of flu vaccines rely on chickens confined in secret FDA facilities. But there are alternatives. Tue November 8th, 2022 Reported • Health • Public Health Words by Karen Asp - Share on Facebook - Share on LinkedIn - Share on Whatsapp - Share on X - Copy URL Coppied - Republish 6 min read Vaccines are one of the most effective public health tools for reducing serious illness and death from the flu. According to the CDC, “flu vaccination prevented an estimated 7.5 million influenza illnesses, 3.7 million influenza-associated medical visits, 105,000 influenza-associated hospitalizations and 6,300 influenza-associated deaths.” What people may not realize is that most vaccines are made using millions of eggs, sourced from chickens kept in secret locations throughout the U.S. Each egg yields one and a half doses of flu vaccine, and the prediction is that this year, manufacturers will supply the United States with 173.5 to 183.5 million doses of influenza vaccines, according to the CDC. That’s a staggering number of eggs — more than 140 million, according to reporting from CNN in 2020. There are other vaccines on the market that don’t require eggs in the manufacturing process, however, and while switching much of the production to egg-free would be challenging, there are a number of arguments for making the change. How Are Flu Vaccines Made? There are several different types of flu vaccines on the market, and a key difference among them is how they’re manufactured. They fall into three main categories: Egg-based, cell-based and recombinant. Egg-based flu shots use a virus grown in chicken eggs. According to CDC estimates, about 80 percent of the vaccine supply for the 2022-2023 flu season will be produced using this technology. They’re currently recommended for anybody aged six months and up and include Afluria Quadrivalent, Fluarix Quadrivalent, FluLaval Quadrivalent and Fluzone Quadrivalent. Other egg-based vaccines are designed for specific populations. For people 65 and older, the CDC recommends a high dose flu shot (Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent) or a flu shot containing an adjuvant which creates a stronger immune response (Fluad Quadrivalent). Another egg-based option, a nasal spray vaccine made with weakened live flu viruses called FluMist Quadrivalent, is an option for people aged two through 49, as long as you meet certain qualifications, like not being pregnant or immunocompromised. Cell-based flu shots, on the other hand, are made without using eggs, as they contain virus grown in a cell culture. Anybody can get this shot — called Flucelvax — as long as they’re at least six months old. Finally, the recombinant flu shot uses no eggs or flu viruses, and are instead made with synthetic ingredients. Recombinant vaccine technology is also the fastest of the three. Only one flu shot, Flublok Quadrivalent, uses this technology. It’s licensed for use in adults aged 18 and older. The History of Eggs and Flu Vaccines Influenza, a contagious respiratory illness that causes mild to severe illness and even death, was first identified as a virus in the 1930s. A decade later, the flu vaccine was developed using fertilized chicken eggs. “Biologists at the time were starting to figure out how to grow viruses, and what they learned is that viruses grow well in eggs,” says John D. Grabenstein, RPh, PhD, director for scientific communications at Immunize.org and managing editor of IZ Express. The process starts by injecting live virus into a fertilized egg so that it can replicate. Once it does, scientists collect the replicated viruses and then purify and kill them. What’s left are inactivated viruses, then used to make the flu vaccine. The eggs used to manufacture flu vaccines are housed in numerous FDA-inspected facilities across the U.S. Conditions there are kept extremely clean, with the chickens and their eggs tested regularly for suspicious pathogens. The process is so tightly controlled, in fact, that these eggs even have their own designation — SPF or specific pathogen free. Is There an Advantage to Using Eggs? Egg-based vaccine manufacturing remains the most common despite these new methods. “It’s what’s been done for decades,” Grabenstein says. “Even when the demand for flu vaccines increased from the 80s through the 2000s, manufacturers kept the technology that everybody, including the FDA, was comfortable with.” With the infrastructure already in place, there’s a pretty big incentive to continue with the same tried and true methods. Egg-based vaccines are also cheaper to produce. Yet that doesn’t mean egg-based vaccines are more effective. Year to year, flu vaccine efficacy does vary. Since the vaccine is made months ahead of the actual flu season, vaccine developers have to try and anticipate which influenza strains will be circling. Nobody can predict this with 100 percent accuracy, which is why the flu vaccine’s efficacy rate is lower than other vaccines like those against COVID-19. A good ballpark figure for the flu vaccine’s efficacy rate for preventing infection is about 50 percent, and while that may seem low, keep in mind that preventing spread isn’t the only or even most important goal. “The vaccine is more effective at preventing hospitalization and death than preventing actual infection,” Grabenstein says. “It’s important to get vaccinated because influenza is a serious, viral infection that kills a lot of people, especially elders, young children and people with underlying health conditions.” Some experts argue that having the virus grow in mammalian cells rather than eggs improves the efficacy of the vaccine, given that mammals, humans in this case, are the target population for the shot. The reason comes down to something called adaptation. “To get a human virus to grow in a chicken egg, it has to adapt to the growing conditions,” Grabenstein says. “That adaptation changes the virus a little, which may be the reason egg-based vaccines aren’t working as well as we’d like.” There’s a problem, though. “Not everybody agrees with this theory, and the only data to support this comes from laboratories,” Grabenstein says. One study from Sanofi, manufacturer of Flublok, in fact, suggests that its recombinant-based vaccine offers 30 percent more protection from the flu than a quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine which uses eggs. The FDA, however, won’t allow companies to claim superiority of these vaccines over egg-based vaccines. And the CDC doesn’t endorse one vaccine manufacturing method over another. The recombinant vaccine does have other advantages. As the CDC notes, because it doesn’t rely on the egg supply, these vaccines would be critical if there were a pandemic or a shortage of eggs to grow the influenza virus. What’s more, that process wouldn’t be “limited by the selection of vaccine viruses that are adapted for growth in eggs,” the CDC notes. And it would avoid mutations that sometimes occur by growing viruses in eggs, which can affect how well the vaccine works in people. There are also animals to consider. Choosing the Most Animal-friendly Vaccine A shift away from egg-based influenza vaccines would spare as many as a million layer hens from confinement each year. No vaccine is animal-free, of course — the cell-based one was developed using one cocker spaniel in 1958 and the recombinant one insects — the number of animals used for either of the egg-free vaccines is significantly fewer than the typical shot, in addition to the other arguments for switching. And you can choose which vaccine you get. Locations offering egg-free flu vaccines can be found at vaccines.gov by choosing “egg-free vaccines” on the drop-down menu. Support Us Independent Journalism Needs You Custom amount $ Donate » -opens in new tab. Donate via PayPal More options » - Share on Facebook - Share on LinkedIn - Share on Whatsapp - Share on X - Copy URL Coppied - Republish Republish this article » The Author Karen Asp Karen Asp is an award-winning journalist and author who specializes in health, fitness, nutrition and animals. She writes regularly for national magazines and web sites, including Real Simple, Everyday Health, AARP’s The Girlfriend, Outside, Yoga Journal, Bicycling, Women’s Health, Forks Over Knives and VegNews. She’s also a vegan lifestyle coach, fur mom who regularly fosters dogs, and animal rescuer who’s working to raise awareness about the importance of eating plants, avoiding puppy mills and adopting from a shelter or rescue. Solutions The Power of Plants: One Doctor’s Mission to Fight Diabetes Through Diet Health•8 min read More Health & Wellness Analysis Every Human Case of Avian Flu Reported So Far Health•2 min read Reported Syngenta Spent Decades Attempting To Quiet Health Concerns About Its Profitable Herbicide. A former Florida rancher battling Parkinson’s disease reflects on years of using paraquat. Health•21 min read Analysis Avian Flu: Sentient’s Latest Stories Avian flu poses an increasing risk to humans. Here's what we know, and a link to all of our coverage. Health•1 min read Climate Investigation UN Green Climate Fund Investing in Factory Farming, Report Finds Climate•6 min read Food Solutions Slaughterhouse Workers Seek a ‘Brave New Life,’ but Challenges Remain Food•9 min read Health Reported Why Vegan Restaurants Going Un-Vegan Isn’t Necessarily a Long-Term Problem Diet•5 min read Policy Explainer Do Government Subsidies Make Meat Cheaper? Yes, but With Some Important Caveats Meat Lobby•10 min read Science Explainer Weather Conspiracy Theories: How Misinformation Distracts from Climate Reality Mythbusting•7 min read Most Read Today • Fri November 8th The Power of Plants: One Doctor’s Mission to Fight Diabetes Through Diet How Climate Change Misinformation and Apathy Helped Trump Win Trump’s Climate Change & Factory Farming Policies: What to Expect From His Win What Are Food Deserts and Why Do They Exist? Why Eating Meat Is Bad for the Environment and Climate Change, Explained How Overconsumption Affects the Environment and Health, Explained Amazon Deforestation Is Falling Under Brazil’s New President — but Is It Too Late? Smithfield Foods Is Owned by China, but Pollution and Price-Fixing Is the Real Problem Stories + solutions for a changing world Instagram Facebook X Mastodon LinkedIn YouTube 18 Bartol Street #1150, San Francisco, CA 94133 Subscribe The Core: A weekly newsletter with exclusive insights and videos from our journalists * indicates required Email Address * Subscribe » Support Us Independent Journalism Needs You Custom amount $ Donate » -opens in new tab. Donate via PayPal Resources for Journalists Food & Farming Media Network How to Pitch Us Freelance Charter Work With Us Sentient Mission People Donate Funding Contact Environmental Policy Code of Ethics Testimonials Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Sentient Media. Sentient Media is a 501(c)3 tax-exempt organization, tax ID 83-0804345. English EspañolCold, flu or Covid: which is it? - BHF Skip to main content Who we are Learn CPR Store finder Search Close Popular across the BHF How to do CPR Get your free Gifts in Wills guide Cost of living Recipes Information and support Information and support Conditions Risk factors Support Tests Treatments CPR and defibrillators: How to save a life How your heart works For professionals Health at work Heart Matters How you can help How you can help Volunteer Donate Fundraise Take part in an event Partner with us London to Brighton Bike Ride Sunday 15 June 2025 is our next London to Brighton Bike Ride. Sign up now! Volunteer in our shops A great way to meet new people and share your skills – we'd love for you to join our team Shop Shop Buy furniture and items for your home Our eBay shop BHF gifts and merchandise Defibrillator shop Donate your items Book a house clearance Find your local shop Volunteer in our shops What we do What we do Who we are Our research Our strategy News from BHF Jobs at BHF Find BHF near you Find your nearest BHF shop, and book and clothing bank Our research: Heart statistics Read the most comprehensive statistics on the effects, prevention, treatment, and costs of heart and circulatory diseases in the UK Donate Donate Donate items Donate money Leave a gift in your Will Lottery Donate items We pick up furniture and electrical items from your home for free. The items you donate are sold in our stores to help fund our lifesaving research Donate money BHF funds the science that saves lives. Your donation helps us discover new ways to beat heart diseases Search Sign in/Register Menu Information and support How you can help Shop What we do Back Information and support Conditions Risk factors Support Tests Treatments CPR and defibrillators: How to save a life How your heart works For professionals Health at work Heart Matters Back How you can help Volunteer Donate Fundraise Take part in an event Partner with us London to Brighton Bike Ride Sunday 15 June 2025 is our next London to Brighton Bike Ride. Sign up now! Volunteer in our shops A great way to meet new people and share your skills – we'd love for you to join our team Back Shop Buy furniture and items for your home Our eBay shop BHF gifts and merchandise Defibrillator shop Donate your items Book a house clearance Find your local shop Volunteer in our shops Back What we do Who we are Our research Our strategy News from BHF Jobs at BHF Find BHF near you Find your nearest BHF shop, and book and clothing bank Our research: Heart statistics Read the most comprehensive statistics on the effects, prevention, treatment, and costs of heart and circulatory diseases in the UK Back Donate Donate items Donate money Leave a gift in your Will Lottery Donate items We pick up furniture and electrical items from your home for free. The items you donate are sold in our stores to help fund our lifesaving research Donate money BHF funds the science that saves lives. Your donation helps us discover new ways to beat heart diseases Close Heart Matters More than a magazine: information, inspiration and support Heart Matters magazine Heart Matters magazine Activity Medical Real life News Nutrition Research Wellbeing Home Information and support Heart Matters magazine News Coronavirus & heart disease Cold, flu or coronavirus: which is it? Cold, flu or Covid: which is it? Updated 8 November 2022 We explain the symptoms of coronavirus, cold and flu, and how to tell the difference. What's on this page What are the differences between Covid, the flu and a cold? What are the main symptoms of Covid-19? Coronavirus symptoms vs cold Flu symptoms vs Covid If I have cold or flu symptoms, should I test for Covid? Is a Covid-19 cough different to a normal cough? Is a runny nose a symptom of coronavirus? Can coronavirus start with having the flu or a cold? How long do coronavirus symptoms take to appear? What are the symptoms of the common cold? What do I do if I have cold symptoms? Should I stay at home if I have cold or flu symptoms? What are the symptoms of flu? What do I do if I have flu symptoms? What are the differences between Covid, the flu, and a cold? Each of these illnesses are caused by different viruses, but unfortunately, they can have similar symptoms. As different symptoms and different strains of Covid-19 have arisen, it’s become harder to tell the difference between Covid-19, colds and flu. Covid-19 is a respiratory illness caused by the strain of coronavirus that first emerged in December 2019 in Wuhan, China. This strain of coronavirus hadn’t been seen in humans before. Flu (influenza) is also a respiratory illness that affects your lungs, but flu is caused by a different kind of virus, instead of a coronavirus. Flu can be dangerous, which is why those with underlying medical conditions like heart disease or diabetes are offered a flu jab at this time of year. Colds are caused by many different viruses, but most commonly a rhinovirus or a coronavirus (not the same type of coronavirus that causes Covid-19). A cold only affects your upper respiratory tract (your nose and throat), not your lungs. Because of this a cold is often referred to as a "head cold". Colds usually aren't serious. What are the symptoms of Covid-19? The main symptoms of Covid-19 have changed over time, and the NHS has updated its list of symptoms to reflect this. The new list of Covid-19 symptoms includes: high temperature or shivering a new and continuous cough a blocked or runny nose feeling tired or exhausted a sore throat a headache an aching body feeling breathless loss or change to your sense of smell or taste loss of appetite diarrhoea feeling sick or being sick The following Covid-19 symptoms are also being reported by users of the Covid ZOE app: sore throat runny nose blocked nose persistent cough headache These Covid-19 symptoms are similar to those you may experience when you have a cold or flu, which can make it hard to tell the difference. Coronavirus symptoms vs cold The Omicron variant (the most dominant strain in the UK) has symptoms that are very similar to a cold. Symptoms such as a headache, a sore throat, a runny nose, muscle aches, coughing or sneezing can be symptoms of the Omicron variant, or a cold. Coronavirus symptoms vs flu It’s not easy to tell the difference between Covid-19 and the flu. The flu has many symptoms in common with Covid, such as a headache, sore throat, fever, cough, tiredness, muscle aches, a runny nose and shortness of breath. However, it’s unusual for the flu to cause a loss or change to your sense of taste and smell, which can happen with Covid-19. Want to get fit and healthy? Sign up to our fortnightly Heart Matters newsletter to receive healthy recipes, new activity ideas, and expert tips for managing your health. Joining is free and takes two minutes. I’d like to sign-up If I have cold or flu symptoms, should I test for Covid? It’s a good idea to avoid passing on any virus, whether it’s a cold, flu or Covid-19. This is particularly important if you’re likely to be in contact with people who might be vulnerable, or if you’re going to be in an indoor gathering (especially since you may not know who is vulnerable). It might be difficult for you to avoid going to a workplace, or being in contact with vulnerable people. In this case it would be a good idea to take a lateral flow test, if you can. You can still use any free lateral flow tests you already have, or buy tests if you are able to. You may also be able to order free ones if you are eligible (for example if you are classed as very vulnerable to Covid). It’s really important to test if you get Covid symptoms and you are classed as very vulnerable to Covid, for example if you’ve had an organ transplant, or have problems with your immune system, or have certain medical conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis. This is so that you can be offered medication if you need it, to reduce the risk of being seriously ill. You should have been sent a PCR test to use if you have symptoms, and you may also have been sent lateral flow tests. If you develop cold or flu symptoms, take a PCR test. You can also take a lateral flow test straight away, while you wait for the PCR test results. If you test positive on a lateral flow, report the result so you can be prescribed the right medication. If you test negative, you should still wait to see what the PCR test result says. Read about what to do if you test positive for Covid Is a Covid-19 cough different to a normal cough? While many people with Covid-19 will get a dry cough, some people develop a wet cough that brings up mucus. This can make it difficult to know whether your cough is caused by Covid-19 or another infection, such as cold or flu, and having a test is the only way you can know for sure. Is a runny nose a symptom of coronavirus? Yes. According to data from the Covid ZOE study, a runny nose is one of the top five symptoms of the Omicron variant. A runny nose is also a common symptom of a cold and can be a symptom of the flu too. Can coronavirus start with having the flu or a cold? No, you can’t catch coronavirus from a cold or flu, but the symptoms can be similar. How long do coronavirus symptoms take to appear? According to the CDC, it can take between 2 to 14 days for symptoms to appear after you've been in contact with the virus. What to do if you have tested positive for coronavirus. When to get medical help If you have an existing health condition and develop coronavirus symptoms, it’s important to let your GP know immediately, or call NHS 111. If your condition worsens, including severe shortness of breath, pain in your chest, blue lips or face, confusion, inability to stay awake, or coughing up blood, it’s essential you call 999 and seek emergency medical help. Can’t get through to your GP? Here’s what to do When do you still need to get medical help? What are the symptoms of the common cold? Cold and flu symptoms are similar, but cold symptoms are less severe. Cold symptoms also appear gradually, unlike flu symptoms which come on very quickly. Most adults recover from a cold in around 7-10 days, but symptoms can persist for up to three weeks. Usual cold symptoms include: sneezing muscle aches a blocked or runny nose a sore throat Sometimes cold symptoms include: headaches coughs a raised temperature pressure in your ears and face a loss of taste and smell Not typically symptoms of a cold: diarrhoea or vomiting breathlessness Remember: There are some crossover symptoms between the common cold and coronavirus. If you experience a fever, a new unexplained cough, or a loss of taste and smell, it’s important that you arrange a a Covid test, particularly if you’re considered to be at higher risk. Find out if you’re eligible for a free lateral flow test through the NHS or GOV.UK websites. Supporting you to get the care you need We know that many of you are experiencing delays to treatment at this time, or have questions and concerns about getting medical help. We've created this set of information to help you with these issues. Where to get medical help if your appointment is delayed or cancelled Appointment and surgery delays When do you still need to get medical help? Making the most of phone and video appointments What do I do if I have cold symptoms? Like flu, it’s important to get plenty of rest and keep yourself hydrated if you have a cold. You can buy cold remedies from the supermarket, but speak to a pharmacist if you have any questions about what medicine you can take. The symptoms of a cold can be similar to the symptoms of the Omicron variant of coronavirus. Contact your GP by phone if you develop cold symptoms and: you have heart, lung, kidney or neurological disease your symptoms do not improve after 3 weeks your symptoms get suddenly worse your temperature is very high, or you feel hot and shivery you're finding it hard to breathe or develop chest pain you have a weakened immune system Should I stay at home if I have cold or flu symptoms? Yes, if you can. If you have cold or flu symptoms, even if they're not Covid, it would be considerate to avoid contact with other people, to avoid spreading viruses, especially to older or vulnerable people who might become seriously unwell as a result. Remember that it may not always be obvious who is vulnerable to becoming seriously ill from Covid. If you have symptoms and are unable to avoid contact with other people, the best thing to do is to wear a face covering, stay away from crowded places, and avoid close contact with people with a weakened immune system. If you can’t avoid being indoors with other people, try to make sure the space is well ventilated, for example by opening windows and doors if you can. What are the symptoms of flu? Flu symptoms tend to come on very suddenly, and make you feel too ill to carry out normal activities. They commonly last 5-7 days. Usual flu symptoms include: a sudden high temperature of 38C or above an aching body feeling tired or exhausted a dry cough a headache Sometimes flu symptoms include: runny nose sore throat difficulty sleeping loss of appetite diarrhoea or tummy pain feeling sick and being sick Not typically a symptom of flu: sneezing What do I do if I have flu symptoms? If you have flu symptoms you should try to limit your contact with people, especially those who are vulnerable. Get plenty of rest and try to keep warm. You might also find that drinking lots of water and taking paracetamol might help you feel better. If you’ve had a heart attack, you shouldn’t take ibuprofen. A pharmacy should be your first point of call if you want to get help or advice for flu, but try to phone or contact them online instead of going in person. A pharmacist will able to give you advice and recommend the best medicine for you. However, you should contact NHS 111 immediately if you have flu symptoms and you: have heart, lung, kidney or neurological disease have diabetes are pregnant are over 65 you have a weakened immune system have been experiencing symptoms for more than 7 days If you suddenly develop chest pain, begin coughing up blood or have difficulty breathing, phone 999. Back to top ^ What to read next... Long Covid: symptoms, tests and treatments Read the article Related Links How quickly can you get Covid-19 again? Long Covid recovery guide: tips for fatigue and breathlessness Get your flu jab Sign up to Heart Matters More useful information Our coronavirus support hub Covid-19: what it means if you have heart disease Covid vaccines: your questions answered British Heart Foundation Get in touch Contact us or get help Customer services: 0300 330 3322 Phone lines are open Mon - Fri 9am-5pm Nurse Helpline Work for us Jobs Volunteer Your BHF Online community Sign inegister Get our email newsletter Find the BHF near you Our policies Privacy Cookies Terms & conditions Accessibility Executive pay Modern slavery statement All policies Cookie settings Follow us British Heart Foundation is a registered charity in England and Wales (225971), Scotland (SC039426) and the Isle of Man (1295). A company limited by guarantee, Registered in England and Wales (699547) and the Isle of Man (6201F). Registered office: Greater London House, 4th Floor, 180 Hampstead Road, London NW1 7AWAvian flu cause of dead geese in area - Keizertimes About Keizertimes Why Pay for News Subscribe Now Advertising Our Journalism Privacy and Terms You think you know. To be sure, read Keizertimes. Toggle sidebar & navigation Home E-edition News Community Sports Opinion Submissions Login Subscribe Contact us Home E-edition News Community Sports Opinion Submissions Login Subscribe Contact us NEWS Avian flu cause of dead geese in area by Joshua Manes on November 10, 2022 Joshua Manes Author More in NEWS: Celtic boys soccer in state semi-final November 11, 2024 CASA office moving to Salem November 8, 2024 Council addresses PERS, city property November 8, 2024 zA flock of birds fly over Staats Lake in the Inland Shores neighborhood on Nov. 8. (JOSHUA MANES/Keizertimes) It’s been hard not to notice the thousands of birds making their way through the skies of Keizer in recent weeks. But some haven’t made the full trip. The Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) confirmed that four dead cackling geese were picked up by staff from Staats Lake on Oct. 24. Five more dead geese were in the water, and 10 that showed clinical signs of avian influenza (AI) — commonly referred to as bird flu. ODFW also picked up a live cackling goose from a Salem city park. All tested positive for AI. ODFW received reports of sick geese in the area for the rest of the week. The following week, a wildlife control operator contracted by the HOA at Inland Shores removed more bird carcasses from Staats Lake on Nov. 3 and 6. “Avian influenza is becoming more prevalent on the landscape in the Willamette Valley this fall,” Beth Quillian, the ODFW North Coast, North & South Willamette Watersheds Communications Coordinator, said in an email. Avian influenza is a virus that infects birds’ respiratory and gastrointestinal tract. Like the common human flu, there are many different strains. Most are considered low pathogenic avian influenza, and infected birds have little to no signs. There are strains that are high pathogenic avian influenza, like the H5N1 strain present this year. These carry a high mortality rate in poultry, 90-100% in chickens, typically in 48 hours, according to the CDC. The USDA announced the first detection this year on Jan. 14. This was the first time since 2016 the H5N1 virus was detected in a wild bird in the United States. The poultry industry tries to stay vigilant against AI outbreaks, but Oregon Department of Agriculture State Veterinarian Ryan Scholz worries about the smaller scale. “My biggest concern is those people who have a couple chickens in their backyards,” Scholz said. Scholz said most domesticated birds shouldn’t be susceptible, as they would rarely be around excrement from a sick bird, possibly tracked in on the bottom of a shoe. Another common case of domesticated birds becoming infected is with domesticated ducks, typically with a pond on the property. Scholz said wild, infected ducks will land in the pond and expose the domesticated ones. While there is some anecdotal evidence of isolated examples of the virus jumping to other wild animals. Scholz expressed worry for wild foxes specifically. However, transfer is most often seen from wild water birds like ducks and geese to raptors like eagles and hawks. Scholz said the only year that was as bad was in 2015, though he said this is not specifically a worse strain. In 2015, the problem started in the winter, built in the spring, and was gone by the summer, according to Scholz. But not this year. “It never stopped,” Scholz said. Scholz expects more cases, and said with the high number of detections, it can be assumed there is a large number of birds carrying. And this surge didn’t come out of nowhere. Local bird expert and author Harry Fuller wrote a column for the Salem Reporter in September that said AI could be a threat to local birds through the winter. “This year is particularly bad,” Fuller said. Fuller stressed that the worse areas around Keizer will be the wet and marshy lands. If a bird dies in the water, the disease can spread through that water. If a bird dies in a dry field, unless the carcass is eaten, the disease had little chance to spread. This is what was on Fuller’s mind when he wrote his piece in September. “When all the geese and ducks get in here, as fall goes on and it starts to rain and bigger areas are underwater, this thing can spread everywhere,” Fuller said. One bird that Fuller mentioned could be at risk are bald eagles. Any bird that is likely to associate with migrant birds is at risk. But Fuller highlights the eagle because he said that this time of year, eagles are one of the top scavenger in the area. Eagles have immunity to many of the diseases other birds can suffer from, but Fuller said the bald eagle is not immune to AI. “Bald eagles have been found dead across Alaska, Canada, Washington state, I think there’s even been several here in Oregon,” Fuller said. While the possibility of a spread to human hosts is rare, it is historically possible, with cases in Asia over the last few decades, according to Scholz. Caution should be taken though when encountering a sick or potential sick bird. The ODFW urges people to give distance when seeing a bird with possible signs of infection, and refrain from feeding ducks and geese. If you must dispose of a bird carcass, the ODFW recommends you wear gloves, invert a garbage bag and use proper handwashing hygiene. If you see multiple sick or dead birds, contact ODFW at (866) 968-2600. Tags: Avian Influenza, Bird Flu, ODFW, Staats Lake Joshua Manes SearchSearchRecent NewsCeltic boys soccer in state semi-final CASA office moving to Salem Council addresses PERS, city property Mayor race too close to call Obituary: Joyce Ann (Andrick) Merritt, 1943-2024 About Keizertimes Why Pay for News Subscribe Now Advertising Our Journalism Privacy and Terms Copyright © 2024 Keizertimes Designed by WPZOOM Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) WebsiteAs respiratory diseases spike, CDC urges clinicians to offer vaccines, antivirals - MCKNIGHT’S LONG-TERM CARE NEWS MCKNIGHT’S SENIOR LIVING MCKNIGHT’S HOME CARE Log In Register Subscribe Log In MORE FROM MCKNIGHT’S MCKNIGHT’S LONG-TERM CARE NEWS MCKNIGHT’S SENIOR LIVING MCKNIGHT’S HOME CARE Subscribe News Daily Update News Clinical Daily News Business Daily News Tech Daily News HealthDay News The Brighter Side Weekly Roundup Earnings News On the Move Magazine Digital and Print archive Subscribe Columns Editors’ Notes Guest Columns Marketplace Columns Living Leadership Rehab Realities The Real Nurse Jackie Things I Think Submission guidelines for mcknights.com Resources Newsmakers Podcasts Market Leaders Podcasts Dealmaker’s Handbook Technology Supplement Workforce Development Guide Videos Business Solutions On E-Books Whitepapers Partner Content Industry Directory Webinars/Live Events McKnight’s Tech Awards + Summit Pinnacle Awards Webinars Online Forums Online Expos Product Theaters Workforce Development Forums McKnight’s Women of Distinction Awards and Forum McKnight’s Women of Distinction Honorees Topics Executive Leadership Rural Peril Outlook Survey COVID-19 Payment Policy Workforce Clinical Daily News As respiratory diseases spike, CDC urges clinicians to offer vaccines, antivirals Alicia Lasek Credit: Getty Images November 8, 2022 Share › Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Share by Email Print U.S. health officials have asked clinicians to help lessen the impact of an exceptional respiratory virus season on seniors and other vulnerable Americans. In a health advisory released Friday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended that clinicians be ready to prevent, test for and treat spiking cases of influenza, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and the common cold, and watch for an expected uptick in COVID-19. Two years of COVID-19 as the dominant respiratory disease has thrown off seasonal timing of others and left more people at risk of severe disease, they said. “Currently, the U.S. is experiencing a surge and co-circulation of respiratory viruses other than SARS-CoV-2,” the advisory stated. Co-circulation of these respiratory diseases “could place stress on healthcare systems this fall and winter,” its authors wrote. There are early signs that influenza is causing more severe illness in older adults than in previous years, for example, with more related hospitalizations at this time of year than seen in a decade. Flu hospitalizations As of Oct. 29, influenza hospitalization rates for adults aged 75 years and older were higher than they were in the 2021-2022 season, and appeared to be trending upward. The CDC expects continued high-level circulation of influenza viruses throughout the remainder of fall and the winter. Overall, “we’re seeing the highest influenza hospitalization rates going back a decade,” said Jose Romero, MD, director of CDC National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, at a Friday press conference. In the Southeastern United States, influenza A H3N2 viruses, associated with severe flu seasons, have accounted for 20% of positive flu tests. And there is a greater proportion of H1N1 viruses in the mid-Atlantic and Midwest, Romero reported. RSV and COVID a threat The agency has also raised cautions about RSV, which began an uncharacteristic rise in the spring that included an increase in RSV-associated emergency department visits and hospitalizations. Currently, some regions are already near the seasonal peak levels typically seen in December or January, it reported. A spike among young children has been particularly notable this fall, but the disease can also put seniors at high risk of adverse outcomes. The latest signs indicate that infection levels may be plateauing in some areas of the United States, the CDC noted. Rhinovirus/enterovirus infections, which cause common cold symptoms, have also spiked early but may be reaching a plateau as well. Meanwhile, the CDC asked clinicians to keep COVID-19 on their radars, with infections expected to follow the same rising pattern this winter as they did in the 2021-2022 season. A decline in COVID cases and hospitalizations that began in August has slowed in recent weeks, with new daily cases up 4.7% compared to the prior week, according to the CDC’s COVID data tracker. The weekly average for new hospitalizations has declined 1%, but the seven-day average for deaths decreased 3% when compared to the prior week. At the ready Clinicians should focus on prevention in the form of “prompt vaccination” for flu and COVID-19 for eligible patients who are not up to date, the CDC recommended. For flu, this season’s updated influenza A(H3N2) vaccine component appears to be a close match to the circulating virus, suggesting that it should offer protection against those viruses to date, its health advisory noted. Updated COVID-19 booster shots also protect against both the ancestral SARS-CoV-2 virus and the predominant omicron BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants that cause COVID-19. Early treatment with antivirals for both flu and COVID-19 should be employed early in the disease process, and clinicians should be ready to make use of prophylactic and therapeutic monoclonal antibodies against the disease as well, the CDC said. The new health advisory recommended that clinicians consider diagnostic testing to guide treatment in certain cases, and refer patients to education for respiratory diseases, including more information about RSV for seniors. The full November 4 health advisory can be found on the CDC’s website. Related articles: CDC releases vaccine coverage data for healthcare personnel, 2021-2022 In advance of possible flu surge, vaccination for seniors may cut use of antibiotics Seasonal flu vax guidance released, with drug preferences for seniors Acute Respiratory antiviral pill CDC Clinical Vaccines Top Stories View All News CMS gives nursing homes months more to complete onerous revalidation process News Advocate, collaborate for successful SNF discharges: expert News Gen Z influence on LTC workplace requires careful leadership dance Editors' Picks View All Don’t let this happen to you By John O'Connor Trust but verify, on election day … and every day By Kimberly Marselas Controlling your destiny By John O'Connor Featured Content View All Partner content The ultimate guide to increasing capital for long-term care facilities Market Leaders Podcasts Leveraging ACOs to deliver high quality primary care in senior living News Subscribe About Us Contact Us Advertise Copyright © 2024 Haymarket Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in any form without prior authorization. Your use of this website constitutes acceptance of Haymarket Media’s Privacy Policy and Terms & Conditions. Cookie Settings Close more info about As respiratory diseases spike, CDC urges clinicians to offer vaccines, antivirals Loading... Close more info about As respiratory diseases spike, CDC urges clinicians to offer vaccines, antivirals Loading...U.Va. Health professionals warn of possible “twindemic” - The Cavalier Daily - University of Virginia's Student Newspaper Subscribe | Español 中文 Serving the University Community Since 1890 News All News Academics & Student Life Administration Self Governance City & Government Focus Sports All Sports Men's Basketball Women's Basketball Football Baseball Softball Men's Golf Women's Golf Men's Lacrosse Women's Lacrosse Men's Soccer Women's Soccer Indoor Track & Field Outdoor Track & Field Cross Country Field Hockey Rowing Squash Swimming & Diving Volleyball Wrestling Men's Tennis Women's Tennis Opinion All Opinion Columns Guest Columns Editorials Letters to the Editor How to Submit Humor Life All Life Columns Features Food Sex & Relationships A&E All A&E Local Features Music Television and Film Literature Multimedia Podcasts Cartoon Video Photo Puzzles Faculty Salaries Magazine Archive Advertise About About Alumni Policies Contact Submit a Tip Where to Find the Paper Join Us H&S U.Va. Health professionals warn of possible “twindemic” With an upcoming chance of high influenza rates and COVID outbreaks, students are actively protecting themselves through precautionary measures Photo by Amanda Hail | The Cavalier Daily By Bhavya Guduru November 10, 2022 With the winter season right around the corner, risk for COVID-19 outbreaks has increased and influenza rates are high, especially in densely-packed communities at the University. Health officials warn about the strong possibility of a simultaneous spike in flu and COVID-19 cases causing a rare phenomenon — a twindemic. Though COVID-19 cases in Charlottesville are low, they are expected to increase as winter sets in. At the moment, over 400 deaths involving COVID-19 occur each day in the U.S. This number is predicted to increase, possibly upwards of 1000 daily deaths by March if current booster vaccination rates persist, per an updated analysis from the Commonwealth Fund and the Yale School of Public Health. The rise of new variants, increased indoor interaction compared with the past two years and waning levels of community immunity are leading to increased risk of COVID-19. Combined with high flu rates, the U.S. is facing a viable risk of a twindemic this winter, as Dr. Costi Sifri, director of hospital epidemiology at U.Va. Health, detailed at a U.Va. Health media briefing. “We could [and] should anticipate a flu season this year,” Sifri said. “We saw a fairly robust flu season in the Southern Hemisphere this summer, their winter in Australia, for example. We should expect to see that now.” Australia is currently arriving at the end of its worst flu season in five years. The flu season began earlier, and hit children hardest. Notably, this is Australia’s first severe flu season since the COVID-19 pandemic began. “People are back together, [so] there’s a lot more opportunity for the flu to spread,” Sifri said. “There is a lot less level of immunity to flu since people have not had the flu for a couple years. At the same time, there are opportunities for COVID-19 to be transmitted over the next couple months.” The CDC reports that the 2020-21 season had the lowest recorded flu activity, furthering the risk of infection, especially among the most vulnerable. Increased rates of influenza can also be attributed to reductions in community-based preventative methods. Face mask usage, physical distancing and reduced travel helped to stave off a twindemic last year. Now, nearly half of Americans rarely or never wear face masks indoors, despite CDC recommendations. The University’s mask mandate has been lifted, though students are still encouraged to wear masks in public, especially when feeling unwell. Experts agreed that a lack of mask usage and disregard of vaccine recommendations are the primary factors causing the high risk of a twindemic this winter. If the twindemic is realized, hospitalization rates will rise, putting stress on an already overburdened and understaffed healthcare system. Housing and Residence Life no longer has isolation housing available to all students who contract COVID-19, so students must take their own precautions if infected. First-year Engineering student Yashasvisai Veeramasu is one of many students who have planned how to isolate themselves. “My roommate [and I] are actually not from far [away], so we do have the ability to go home if we do end up catching something,” Veeramasu said. Charlottesville community members and University students can still take several precautionary measures in an effort to remain protected against COVID-19 and the influenza. Most importantly, doctors recommend getting COVID-19 boosters and influenza shots. “The best thing that we can do to protect ourselves is to make sure we are up to date with our vaccines for both COVID-19 and influenza,” Sifri said. During the media briefing, Dr. Max Luna, associate professor of cardiovascular medicine, urged University students to take proper precautions. “Vaccination remains tremendously successful to prevent hospitalization and death by COVID-19,” Luna said. The current COVID-19 booster is bivalent, targeting two Omicron variants — BA. 4 and BA. 5. The CDC recommends that people five years or older get the bivalent booster if it has been at least two months since their last COVID-19 vaccine dose. For those five years or older who have recently tested positive for COVID-19, the recommendations allow for receiving the next vaccine dose once three months have passed since testing positive. There are many options to get flu shots and COVID-19 boosters in Charlottesville. The Blue Ridge Health District offers vaccinations at local health departments, a mobile health unit, community events and local pharmacies. Independent pharmacies such as CVS also provide these shots. Boosters and flu shots are also available through on-Grounds organizations, such as Madison House. Students can make such appointments at any time by registering with the Student Health and Wellness Department. Most students and staff are fully vaccinated with the first two doses of the COVID-19 vaccine, but they are strongly encouraged by U.Va. Health officials to get their updated boosters. Read More U.Va. students and physicians team up for another year of free kidney screenings By Merrill Hart | 6 days ago Saturday’s screening marked the first by KDSAP at Portico Church, near IX Art Park. U.Va. Health faculty demand removal of health system CEO, School of Medicine dean By Grace Thrush and Ford McCracken | September 5, 2024 The letter states that leaders in U.Va. Health have dismissed, punished and silenced those who have followed U.Va. reporting protocols. Board of Visitors’ Health System Board approves University Medical Center contracts and credentials By Lexie Stadler | March 3, 2024 The University requested approval from the Board on proposed contracts with Cardinal Health LLC, a pharmaceutical company that will provide CAR T-cell therapies — a therapy used to treat cancer. Local Savings Comments Top Stories Latest 2024 Elections — live updates and results By CD News Staff | 6 days ago Virginia allowed to purge 1,600 voter registrations days before election By Merrill Hart | 3 days ago Students weigh in on America’s future after Trump victory By Thomas Baxter and Grace Thrush | 4 days ago John D’earth is taking his final bow at the University By Cooper Carlson | 3 days ago U.Va. Marriage Pact and the University roll out new “Ring by Spring” program By Adair Reid | 4 days ago How will U.Va. select the next dean of students? By Zackary Holt | 1 hours ago Rowing dominates home course at the Rivanna Romp By Eleanor Lynch | 9 hours ago Men’s soccer hunkers down and blazes forward in ACC Tournament quarterfinal win over Pittsburgh By Michael Liebermann | 11 hours ago Women's tennis delivers strong performance at ITA Sectionals By Gracie Genereux | 20 hours ago Exploring MaKshya Tolbert’s ‘Shade is a place’ By Sophie Hay | Yesterday Latest Video More on YouTube Latest Podcast With Election Day looming overhead, students are faced with questions about how and why this election, and their vote, matters. Ella Nelsen and Blake Boudreaux, presidents of University Democrats and College Republicans, respectively, and fourth-year College students, delve into the changes that student advocacy and political involvement are facing this election season. Print Edition Print Archive | Download Latest Edition About Contact Advertise Donate Code of Ethics Find A Paper All rights reserved © 2024 The Cavalier Daily Powered by Solutions by The State NewsThe 2022-2023 flu season is on track to be very, very bad | VoxSkip to main contentThe homepageVoxVox logoExplainersPoliticsCultureAdviceListenAudioWatchVideoMenuThe homepageVoxVox logoNavigation DrawercloseCloseSearchVideoWatchAudioListenCrosswordPlayExplainersPoliticsCultureAdviceScienceTechnologyClimateHealthMoneyLifeFuture PerfectNewslettersBecome a MemberLogin / Sign UpFacebookInstagramYoutubeRSSTikTokVoxVox logoThis flu season is looking really scary, in one chartFearless journalism needs your support now more than everOur mission could not be more clear and more necessary: We have a duty to explain what just happened, and why, and what it means for you. We need clear-eyed journalism that helps you understand what really matters. Reporting that brings clarity in increasingly chaotic times. Reporting that is driven by truth, not by what people in power want you to believe.We rely on readers like you to fund our journalism. Will you support our work and become a Vox Member today?Support VoxScienceThis flu season is looking really scary, in one chartHere’s how to prepare for it.by Keren Landman, MDNov 12, 2022, 12:30 PM UTCFacebookLinkChristina Animashaun/Vox; Getty ImagesKeren Landman, MD is a senior reporter covering public health, emerging infectious diseases, the health workforce, and health justice at Vox. Keren is trained as a physician, researcher, and epidemiologist and has served as a disease detective at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Flu season is here — and early red flags suggest it’s on track to be very, very bad. The latest data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) Flu View report show extraordinarily high numbers of positive flu tests reported to the agency from labs around the US. As of November 5, nearly 14,000 positive flu tests had been reported, as shown in the orange line on the below chart. That’s more than 12 times the number reported at the same time in 2019 (shown in the black line).This year’s early and meteoric rise in flu transmission is at least somewhat related to the fact that more people are being tested for the flu than during previous years. Over the past five weeks, nearly twice as many flu tests were done at clinical labs nationwide as during the same period last year (about 460,000 versus 254,000). More testing means more cases will get picked up.But there are other signs that these numbers represent real and very scary trends. For starters, a much higher proportion of flu tests are turning up positive than in previous years: During past bad flu seasons, test positivity has topped out around 3.6 percent, but last week, nearly 13 percent of flu tests were positive. When a higher proportion of tests are positive, that means more people who are feeling sick actually have the flu than in past years.Concerning signals are also coming from doctors’ offices and hospitals. At this time of year, only 1 to 2 percent of patients in outpatient clinics generally report flu-like illnesses. But right now, that number is up to 5 and a half percent, according to CDC. Not all of those patients actually have the flu — many might have RSV or other infections — but in combination with the flu testing numbers, it’s worrisome.Additionally, more than five times as many people have been hospitalized for the flu so far this season than at the same point in any of the last 10 years. And unlike RSV, which poses the biggest threat to the youngest and oldest, the severe disease flu causes is more evenly spread across age groups. About one-third of the people who’ve been hospitalized for flu this year were 65 or older, while another quarter were ages 18 to 49.These are especially worrisome signs given the health care workforce strain we’ve already seen during the ongoing RSV surge. And this early start doesn’t suggest this flu wave will be a flash in the pan. The flu is currently worst in the southeastern US, but that will almost certainly change as the air gets colder and the virus migrates northward. Plus, cases haven’t peaked this early since 2009-10’s no good, very bad H1N1 flu pandemic.The good news: There’s a lot you can do to protect yourself from the flu. This year’s flu vaccine is widely available and free with most insurance plans. And because both of the dominant flu strains currently circulating were included in this year’s vaccine formulation, there’s hope the shot will help prevent severe illness in people who get it.There’s also medicine to treat the flu, so if you’re sick and at risk for flu complications, seek medical care early.And all that masking, ventilating, and air-filtering we learned to do during the pandemic does a lot to prevent flu transmission (not to mention all the other respiratory nasties out there).Flu transmission actually dropped dramatically during the pandemic. In the chart above, look at the blue lines, which represent cases reported over the last two years. You can see that there were very few positive tests in 2020, when mitigation measures — like widespread masking — were still in place and most kids weren’t in school buildings. Transmission picked up in 2021, but was on track with prior seasons — and was probably curbed beginning late in the year due to increased masking and social distancing in response to the omicron surge of Covid-19.This year’s start to the flu season is scary. But we can still take steps to flatten this curve.You’ve read 1 article in the last monthHere at Vox, we're unwavering in our commitment to covering the issues that matter most to you — threats to democracy, immigration, reproductive rights, the environment, and the rising polarization across this country.Our mission is to provide clear, accessible journalism that empowers you to stay informed and engaged in shaping our world. By becoming a Vox Member, you directly strengthen our ability to deliver in-depth, independent reporting that drives meaningful change.We rely on readers like you — join us.Swati SharmaVox Editor-in-ChiefMembershipMonthlyAnnualOne-time$5/month$10/month$25/month$50/monthOther$50/year$100/year$150/year$200/yearOther$25$50$100$250OtherJoin for $10/monthWe accept credit card, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. You can also contribute viaSee More: Cold and flu seasonHealthHealth CareInfectious DiseasePolicyScienceMost PopularTrump’s tariffs could tank the economy. Will the Supreme Court stop them?Can Trump run again in 2028? Here’s what you need to know.The debate over why Harris lost is in full swing. Here’s a guide.Take a mental break with the newest Vox crossword43 lab monkeys escaped in South Carolina. They have a legal claim to freedom.Today, ExplainedUnderstand the world with a daily explainer plus the most compelling stories of the day.Email (required)Sign UpBy submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.Advertiser Content FromThis is the title for the native adMore in Science43 lab monkeys escaped in South Carolina. They have a legal claim to freedom.The world’s most mysterious psychedelic is already inside your brainWhy the Pentagon just can’t quit Elon MuskAudioWhy do we love to scare ourselves?DNA from wild organisms could save your life — but there’s a catchIs climate change really making hurricanes worse?Future PerfectNov 1143 lab monkeys escaped in South Carolina. They have a legal claim to freedom.Who owns the escaped monkeys now? It’s more complicated than you might think.By Angela Fernandez and Justin MarceauThe HighlightNov 4Member ExclusiveThe world’s most mysterious psychedelic is already inside your brainDMT, “the nuclear bomb of the psychedelic family,” explained.By Oshan JarowDefense & SecurityNov 3Member ExclusiveWhy the Pentagon just can’t quit Elon MuskHow Musk’s SpaceX became too big to fail for US national security.By Joshua KeatingAudioUnexplainableOct 30Why do we love to scare ourselves?This research group is studying our love for haunted houses ... at a haunted house.By Byrd PinkertonDown to EarthOct 28DNA from wild organisms could save your life — but there’s a catchInside the extremely messy, profoundly confusing fight over who should profit from non-human DNA.By Benji JonesClimateOct 18Is climate change really making hurricanes worse?What we know — and don’t know — about how global warming influences tropical storms.By Umair IrfanAdvertiser Content FromThis is the title for the native adVoxVox logoFacebookInstagramYoutubeRSSTikTokAbout usOur staffEthics & GuidelinesHow we make moneyContact usHow to pitch VoxNewslettersPrivacy NoticeTerms of UseCookie PolicyCookie SettingsLicensingAccessibilityPlatform StatusCareers© 2024 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights ReservedBest masks, masking methods to protect against Covid, flu, RSVSkip NavigationSuccessStartupsSide HustlesPower PlayersLeadershipMoneyEarnSpendSave and InvestBecome Debt-FreeWorkLand the JobGet AheadClosing the GapScience of SuccessLifePop Culture and MediaPsychology and RelationshipsHealth and WellnessReal EstateVideoMost PopularCNBC TVCoursesMenuSEARCHCNBC.COMHealth and WellnessCovid, flu, RSV: Here are the best masks and masking methods for protection against the 'tripledemic'Published Tue, Nov 8 20228:05 AM ESTRenée Onque@iamreneeonqueShareShare Article via FacebookShare Article via TwitterShare Article via LinkedInShare Article via EmailKilito Chan | Getty ImagesAs we get deeper into fall season, experts are warning of a potential 'tripledemic' – the circulation of Covid-19, the flu and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), all at the same time.Infections from the new "Scrabble" variants are increasing, hospitalizations from RSV are skyrocketing at a terrifying pace, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warns that there are early increases of seasonal flu activity."Wearing a high-quality mask…when you're indoors in public places, will certainly reduce your risk," Dr. Céline Gounder, an infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist, told CNBC Make It.But the type of mask you use and how you wear it are also significant and can determine how protected you will be from the viruses that are spreading, says Bill Taubner, president of Bona Fide Masks Corporation.Here's what Taubner says you should consider when masking.The best masks for the most protectionThe CDC ranks protective face masks in this order:Highest level of protection: N95s and other respirators approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and HealthGreat protection: KN95sGreat protection: Well-fitting disposable surgical masksDecent protection: Layered finely woven productsLeast protection: Loosely woven cloth productsSimilar to the CDC, Taubner recommends N95 and KN95 masks, especially in high-risk settings like hospitals or mass transit. "The KN95 and N95 [masks] have a particulate filtration efficiency of 95% or above," Taubner explains. "Cloth masks [without filters], which don't have a minimum threshold, probably test in the neighborhood of 20% or 30%."But it's important to keep in mind that, depending on where you purchase your KN95 and N95 masks, you could be receiving less protection than you think, he says. "People started testing them in labs, and they found out that the vast majority of these KN95s weren't even coming close to meeting any of these standards," Taubner says.When purchasing masks, he suggests:Buying from a reputable company Seeking out companies that are transparent about their supply chain, including listing their manufacturerReferring to the CDC's guidance for masksMasking methods for the most protectionOnce you have a high-quality mask, you want to also make sure that you're wearing it correctly to reduce your risk.Taubner recommends these masking methods for optimal use:Avoid leakage which are open areas at the top, bottom or sides of your maskMake sure your hands are clean before touching your maskOnly touch the outside of your maskIf applicable, push the metal nose piece down for a snug fitHere's when to keep and when to toss your maskTaubner also advises against using the same mask two days in a row.The CDC reports that "data from surface survival studies indicate that a 99% reduction in infectious SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses can be expected under typical indoor environmental conditions within 3 days."After one use, you should store a KN95 mask in a paper or plastic bag, note the date, and reuse it after at least four days have passed, says Taubner. When in doubt, you should look to the manufacturer's specific recommendations for the product.But if you've visited a high-risk area, it's probably best to toss your mask after one use, he notes.And if your mask ever becomes difficult to breathe in after multiple uses, you should throw it away as well.N95 masks are technically single-use products, says Taubner, but the CDC offers guidance on the best way to reuse them when they're in short supply.Another important reminder is that certain masks, including KN95 and N95, lose their efficiency when they've been washed, he adds."Let's put it this way, a cloth mask is better than no mask. A three-ply mask is better than a cloth mask. An N95 and a KN95 would be better than the other masks," Taubner says."Some just may not give you as much protection as you'd like. But in some cases, there's no choice."Want to earn more and work less? Register for the free CNBC Make It: Your Money virtual event on Dec. 13 at 12 p.m. ET to learn from money masters like Kevin O'Leary how you can increase your earning power.Sign up now: Get smarter about your money and career with our weekly newsletterStay in the loopGet Make It newsletters delivered to your inboxSign UpAbout UsLearn more about the world of CNBC Make ItLearn MoreFollow UsCNBC.COMJoin the CNBC Panel© 2024 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBC UniversalPrivacy PolicyAd ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of ServiceContactCDC adds new color to flu activity chart indicating highest levels of respiratory illnesses Skip to main contentOpen Main Menu NavigationOpen SearchPartly Cloudy icon48ºGo to the WDIV homepageJoin InsiderSign InNeed Assistance?SearchNewsWatch LiveLocal NewsTrafficNationalWorldEntertainmentTravelHealthDecision 2024PoliticsElectionsCommunityLocal 4+Watch Local 4+A Conversation WithWhat's In That GarageDetroit Sports+Live in the DHelp Me HankInvestigationsFlashpointTasty TuesdaySolutionariesTV ListingsMeTV DetroitWeatherWeather NewsAlertsMIPicsSchool ClosingsForecasting ChangeSportsDetroit Sports+LionsLions StatsTigersTigers StatsRed WingsRed Wings StatsPistonsPistons StatsWolverinesSpartansOlympics4FrenzyFeaturesGo 4 ItWatch Local 4+ParadeEvents CalendarVote 4 The Best4YIMIPicsAll 4 PetsBrag BookMoney MinuteSunshine AwardsIn The DIn Your NeighborhoodFoodContests & RulesLive In The DDine In The DClick On DealsCouch ClubWhat's The BuzzEvents Live GuideAnn ArborHeadlinesTopicsSportsEventsAnn Arbor WeatherGet InvolvedContact UsHelp CenterMeet The TeamCareers at WDIVAdvertise with usNewslettersNewsLocal 4+WeatherSportsFeaturesLive In The DAnn ArborContact UsNewslettersNewsLocal 4+WeatherSportsFeaturesLive In The DAnn ArborContact UsNewslettersCloseHealthElizabeth Washington, Digital News EditorPublished: November 9, 2022 at 12:19 PMTags: CDC, Respiratory Illnesses, HealthLATEST NEWSDelphine Klaput will celebrate her 100th birthday on Nov. 2343 minutes agoOriginal ‘Rosie the Riveter’ reflects on legacy at 99 during Veterans Day celebration in YpsilantiRead full article: Original ‘Rosie the Riveter’ reflects on legacy at 99 during Veterans Day celebration in YpsilantiLions host Jaguars on Sunday1 hour agoDetroit Lions' improbable Sunday Night Football victory over Texans sparks citywide feverRead full article: Detroit Lions' improbable Sunday Night Football victory over Texans sparks citywide feverNo description available1 hour agoIn Your Neighborhood: Getting to know TroyRead full article: In Your Neighborhood: Getting to know TroyNo description available2 hours agoGrassroots movement in Troy pushes for action on I-75 noiseRead full article: Grassroots movement in Troy pushes for action on I-75 noiseCLICK ON DEALSTake a look at the latest Insider Deals.Make household chores easier and more with these Insider DealsRead full article: Make household chores easier and more with these Insider DealsYour lifetime productivity buddy — Microsoft Office 2021 you'll pay for only onceYour lifetime productivity buddy — Microsoft Office 2021 you’ll pay for only once Read full article: Your lifetime productivity buddy — Microsoft Office 2021 you’ll pay for only once Sign up for our Events Newsletter!Sign UpHealthCDC adds new color to flu activity chart indicating highest levels of respiratory illnessesPurple indicates areas with very high activity levelsElizabeth Washington, Digital News EditorPublished: November 9, 2022 at 12:19 PMTags: CDC, Respiratory Illnesses, HealthSick woman and man have cold, flu and high fever.The Center for Disease Control (CDC) has added a new color to its flu activity level chart, indicating areas with very high levels of respiratory illnesses.Purple on a map shows the highest level of ILI activity. According to the CDC, the system monitors respiratory illness, including fever plus a cough or sore throat, also referred to as ILI.Recommended VideosAccording to week 43, the District of Columbia, Alabama, South Carolina and Tennessee are deemed very high for influenza-like illnesses. For more information on ILI activity levels, click here. Weekly Influenza Surveillance Report of week 43 (The Center for Disease Control (CDC))Copyright 2022 by WDIV ClickOnDetroit - All rights reserved.Click here to take a moment and familiarize yourself with our Community Guidelines.Loading...Recommended VideosTV ListingsEmail NewslettersRSS FeedsContests and RulesContact UsCareers at WDIVClosed Captioning / Audio DescriptionPublic FileTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyDo Not Sell My InfoFCC ApplicationsCookie PreferencesFollow UsVisit our YouTube page (opens in a new tab)Visit our Facebook page (opens in a new tab)Visit our Instagram page (opens in a new tab)Visit our X page (opens in a new tab)Visit our RSS Feed page (opens in a new tab)Get Results With OmneIf you need help with the Public File, call (313) 222-0556.At WDIV, we are committed to informing and delighting our audience. In our commitment to covering our communities with innovation and excellence, we incorporate Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies to enhance our news gathering, reporting, and presentation processes. Read our article to see how we are using Artificial Intelligence.Copyright © 2024 ClickOnDetroit.com is managed by Graham Digital and published by Graham Media Group, a division of Graham Holdings.Confirmed case of Avian Influenza in Derby - Derby City Council Skip to content About cookies on this site This website uses cookies to improve your experience and analyse information on site performance and usage. Learn more about how we use cookies. Allow all cookies Cookie settings myAccount Search Derby City Council logo myAccount Services Services Menu Close Advice and benefitsBusinessCommunity and livingCouncil and democracyEducation and learningEnvironment and planningHealth and social careHousingLeisure and cultureLicensingMapsTrading Standards and environmental healthTransport and streetsJobs and careersNews Search Apply Book Pay Report Apply Book Pay Report Home News2022NovemberConfirmed case of Avian Influenza in Derby Confirmed case of Avian Influenza in Derby Published: 8 November 2022 The public are advised to not feed wild birds in parks. We are aware of a confirmed case of Avian Influenza (bird flu) in a wild bird at a park in Derby. We are liaising closely with Defra and would encourage all park users to follow the below advice. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has said that bird flu is primarily a disease of birds and the risk to the general public’s health is very low. Advice to park users: Keep to the footpaths Keep dogs on leads Do not feed wild waterfowl Do not pick up or touch dead or sick wild birds Do not touch wild bird feathers or surfaces contaminated with wild bird droppings If you keep poultry or other birds, wash your hands and clean and disinfect your footwear before tending to your birds Please report dead wild waterfowl (swans, geese, or ducks) or other dead wild birds, such as gulls or birds of prey to Defra’s GB helpline: 03459 335577 Councillor Jerry Pearce, Cabinet Member for Streetpride, Public Spaces and Leisure commented: “Whilst the risk to the public is very low, I’d strongly encourage residents who visit our parks to refrain from feeding wild ducks, geese and other birds as a way to help us prevent the further spread of disease. “Anyone who owns chickens or ducks in the city should register their flocks with Defra as soon as possible to be kept up to date on the latest advice and information about the outbreak. Our teams will continue to work closely with Defra to manage the situation.” Further information is available on the Government website. Leisure Share this article… FB LI TW WA EM Previous Next More in this section Newsroom Sign up for news updates Enter your email to sign up for email updates Derby City Council logo AccessibilityTermsContactCookiesPrivacyLanguageJobsMapsStaff Access Link to X (formerly known as Twitter) account Link to Facebook account Link to YouTube account Link to Instagram account © Derby City Council Designed by Jadu Close What are you looking for? Search Cookies used on the site are categorized into 'necessary' and 'analytical'. You can read about each category and allow or deny some or all of them. You can see a list of cookies assigned to each category and detailed information on the cookies page. Necessary cookies Some cookies are required to provide core functionality. The website won't function properly without these cookies and they are enabled by default and cannot be disabled. Analytical cookies Analytical cookies help us improve our website by collecting and reporting information on its usage. Analytical cookies Save preferences Allow all cookiesWas Avian Influenza Even in Belize? – Love FM Belize News & Music Power Back to Top Skip to content 7145 Slaughterhouse Road, Belize City (+501) 203-2098 or 203-0528 Monday to Friday: 8:00am - 5:00pm #CatchItFirstOnLove Belize High Court Restores UDP Control: Alliance Ordered to Vacate Headquarters Court Declares Post-Convention Actions Invalid, Barrow Retains Leadership of UDP Tracy Panton and Alliance Plan National Tour Following Court Ruling SSB Faces Rising Demands Due to Increased Cancer Diagnoses Salvation Army Launches Annual Christmas Kettle Appeal at Battlefield Park UDP Leadership Struggle Intensifies as Two Factions Release Competing Newspaper Editions Family Appeals for Mercy as Brett Mejia Faces Attempted Murder Charges After Protecting Sister from Attack Vincent Scott Remains Free Amid Allegations of Threatening Ex-Partner with Firearm Cabinet Approves Creation of Criminal Justice Board to Address Systemic Challenges Women’s Department Renamed to Family Support and Gender Affairs Department LOGIN ← CLICK ON PLAY FOR LIVE STREAMING or Refresh Browser to Reload Stream ↑ CLICK ON PLAY FOR LIVE STREAMING or Refresh Your Browser to Reload Stream Monday November 11, 2024 HOME NEWS ARCHIVES CONTACT MUNICIPALS 2024 HOME NEWS ARCHIVES CONTACT MUNICIPALS 2024 On Your Mobile On Smart Speakers Home / Agriculture & Farming / Was Avian Influenza Even in Belize? Love Staff October 25, 2022 Was Avian Influenza Even in Belize? Agriculture & Farming November 8, 2022 No Comment 2075 Now we turn to the poultry industry…in mid-September, the Belize Agriculture Health Authority (BAHA) announced that it received positive results for Avian Influenza from poultry samples from one farm in the Blue Creek Community, Orange Walk District. Immediate control measures were taken. Cabinet was informed of the matter and in its weekly brief said it approved measures recommended by BAHA to control and eradicate the disease. Measures included depopulation of birds from affected farms, cleaning and disinfection, checkpoints to control the movement of poultry and poultry products from affected farms, and increasing surveillance in communities where there is a presence of the disease. About a month later, Cabinet said that Agriculture Minister Jose Mai had notified that the quick response by the government and poultry producers to address the outbreak of the avian flu in Belize was successful. Cabinet said (quote) all tests conducted by Belize Agricultural Health Authority show Belize is completely free of the avian influenza virus.” (end of quote) However, today President of the Belize Poultry Association Armando Cowo told Love News that there was no case of Avian Influenza in the country because the sample was a false positive. Here is how he explained it. Armando Cowo, Manager, Belize Poultry Association: “With regard to the Avian Influenza it was never here. I mean the lab gave us what we call a false positive and this happens, no test is 100% accurate so after we verified the testing crew the National Veterinary Services Lab in the US which is the reference lab for the World Organization for Animal Health they couldn’t find anything in Belize so they said look you don’t have a problem, it’s a false positive so all the testing have come back. I think the last time we spoke I told you that we still had some tests out there but now everything has come back negative and that’s good for us. So based on that now we need to look at how we can get the SI I think 128 repealed. We advised the minister on that so we will be doing so we’re hoping to be able to do it this week but you know agricultural was hit so I don’t know how busy he is right now but hopefully between now and next week we can have that SI repealed and everything goes back to normal.” Reporter: Okay so going back to your first statement because it caught me off guard just now that Avian Influenza wasn’t really here. Armando Cowo, Manager, Belize Poultry Association: “Wasn’t here. It wasn’t here.” Reporter: But there were press releases, there were samples. I mean thousands of birds depopulated. Armando Cowo, Manager, Belize Poultry Association: “Yes thousands of birds were depopulated. How should I say it, the sample the first sample that came back with false positive was the sample that was sent to the University of Georgia Poultry Development and Research Center the PDRC but the PDRC is not the reference lab for the OIE. And this just goes to show that you can get false positives in labs in advanced countries like the US. The NVSL the NVSL does genetic sequencing so if it is there they will find it, they’re going down digging deep into the samples to see if it’s really really there. The NVSL did all their cross checks and they said it’s not here. So it’s a false positive.” Reporter: So you’re telling me that all those birds were killed, money was lost on a false positive ? Armando Cowo, Manager, Belize Poultry Association: “Yes money was lost on false positive which is why we need to be careful and I’ve been saying it from the get go that we needed that confirmation from NVSL before drastic measures were taken but unfortunately those measures were taken. We supported the Agricultural Health Authority in those measures because again the reason we did that is because everyone was scared, we didn’t know what direction to go NVSL was taking long again because of this whole pandemic and shortage of staff and time is going and you can’t be sitting down on a time bomb it might just go off any minute but then at the end of the day there was no bomb. It was a bomb scare put it that way.” According to Cowo, the hope now is that discussions with government representatives will be had to decide how producers can receive help. Armando Cowo, Manager, Belize Poultry Association: “We’ll approach them and see what they have to say I mean nothing is off the table. If they can help us help the farmer that would be nice but then again after Lisa there are so many other people that got damage with other aspects of the agricultural sector now I don’t know how possible that would be but I must say that yes we would welcome any assistance they can give us. Any assistance government can give us. Reporter: How much money are we talking about ? Armando Cowo, Manager, Belize Poultry Association: “In direct cost we’re looking at just one farmer alone in direct cost that farmer lost about a hundred and five thousand dollars in direct loss that is his birds were depopulated – because everything that is in that barn is decontaminated and whatever is there has to be dumped. So the birds were dumped, the feed that was in that barn was dumped because you have to understand how the feeding system works we have grain bins, we have feed bins that are filled at the barn and then with machine that is spread through the feeders to the birds so all that feed had to be dumped because we’re not taking any risk. A zero risk policy.” Reporter: And then okay so at the end of the day how many birds were depopulated ? Armando Cowo, Manager, Belize Poultry Association: “Twenty four thousand one hundred and eight four in Blue Creek, four thousand in Spanish Lookout. In terms of broilers, broilers are the ones that go in what we call chicken the other one is layers and those are the ones that lay the eggs. There’s a small farm some layers depopulated but again we’re still trying to quantify his one because he had them in different stages of growth. He had some that were going out and he had some that were starting so it kind of makes it a little more complicated to quantify.” Prev NewsHurricane Lisa Damaged Chicken Barns Next News BSI’s New Products Prove to Be Fruitful on… Search Contact us 875541 Followers 5002 Followers 64500 Followers 50,254 Followers 23434 Followers 5870 Followers Most Share 1 Making Peace through Basketball Love News October 3, 2022 0 2 Hundreds of Mangroves Planted on Belize… Love News October 3, 2022 0 3 UDP completes standard bearer application process Love News October 3, 2022 0 4 Chester Vs Oj Continues Love News October 3, 2022 0 5 Why was Nimrod Catzim Out on… Love News October 3, 2022 0 6 Belize City man injured in traffic… Love News October 3, 2022 0 7 Belize Hosts First Ever Regional Customs… Love News October 3, 2022 0 8 Belize Look to Venezuela for Cheaper… Love News October 3, 2022 0 9 Belize Deplores Russia’s Supposed Annexation of… Love News October 3, 2022 0 10 Belize Awaits Michelle Kwan’s Arrival Love News October 3, 2022 0 11 ASR releases September price estimates Love News October 3, 2022 0 12 Undocumented Cuban Nationals transiting Belize is… Love News October 3, 2022 0 13 Long Lines at Immigration Dept. Soon… Love News October 3, 2022 0 14 GAF Returns Belize Flag Love News October 3, 2022 0 15 Minister of Transport Says Upgraded Buses… Love News October 3, 2022 0 Related post News Flash & Headlines November 8, 2024 Belize High Court Restores UDP Control: Alliance Ordered to… ‘The status quo ante has been restored’ – those are the words used in the ruling from the Belize High Court… Government & Politics November 8, 2024 Court Declares Post-Convention Actions Invalid, Barrow Retains Leadership of… And while the building has been returned to Barrow and his Central Executive, the issue of who is the UDP Leader… News Flash & Headlines November 8, 2024 Tracy Panton and Alliance Plan National Tour Following Court… Despite the court ruling earlier today, Tracy Panton has announced that she and her Alliance group will be going on a… Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. About. Love FM is a radio station in Belize City, Belize that provides news and music. We broadcast on FM frequencies 88.9, 95.1, and 98.1 MHz. Love FM was founded in 1993 as a small private radio station and has since grown into a nationwide entity, providing Belize and listeners overseas with in-depth coverage of current events occurring in the country. Contact Love FM Categories.Government & Politics Crime & Police News Youth, Women, Society & Lifestyle Business, Companies & Organizations Health & Science Economy, Banking & Finance Lands, Natural Resources & Environment Agriculture & Farming Top Stories Ministry of Health Urges Vaccination Corona Virus Update August 3, 2023 Sugarcane Protests: A Calm Week Agriculture & Farming January 5, 2024 Extreme Weather Hits Belize: Stagnant Live & Current Events November 30, 2023 Copyright © 1994 - 2024 Love FM | News & Music Power. All Rights Reserved. About Advertise Privacy & Policy Contact Open chat Powered by Joinchat HelloCan we help you?How you can get tested using the “Quad Swab” method | KOLR - OzarksFirst.com Skip to content KOLR - OzarksFirst.com Springfield 58° Sign Up Springfield 58° Sponsored By Toggle Menu Open Navigation Close Navigation Search Please enter a search term. Primary Menu News Local News Missouri News Arkansas News Investigates Mike Checks Crime Your Local Election HQ Health Code Violations KOLR 10 Daybreak National News Fentanyl Crisis Politics from The Hill Washington DC BestReviews Automotive News Press Releases Top Stories Veterans honored at Ozarks Tech Veterans Day ceremony Video Top Stories College of the Ozarks holds annual Veterans Day service 25 mins ago Video Mo. business groups consider challenging Proposition … 41 mins ago Video Next storm to move through Wednesday 1 hour ago Video Lawsuit against MSU president alleges harassment … 2 hours ago Video Weather Today’s Forecast School Closings Weather Stories Interactive Radar Ozarks Regional Live Weather Cameras Ozarks Storm Shelters Submit Your Weather Photos Wagging and Walking Forecast Weather Class Top Stories Next storm to move through Wednesday Video Top Stories The most extreme weather swing in Springfield history 7 hours ago Video Great conditions for Veteran’s Day 21 hours ago Gallery Soggy start, sunny finish 3 days ago Video Will weekend rain spoil weekend plans? 3 days ago Video Video Watch Newscasts Latest Video Breaking News Livestream Sports Local Sports Ozarks High School Sports High School Athlete Of Week MSU Bear Nation KC Huddle Pro-Football Challenge NFL Draft The Big Game Springfield Cardinals NASCAR Lucas Oil Speedway Golf Masters Report LIV Golf Big Race – Daytona Big Race – Indy Top Stories Beard says Bears have ‘nothing to lose’ in trip to … Top Stories MoState womens soccer rolls into NCAA tournament 1 hour ago Andy says three Chiefs players are close to returning 2 hours ago Lady Bears Linthacum: A last time for everything 20 hours ago Video Chiefs’ Leo Chenal describes winning field goal block 1 day ago Ozarks Experts Ozarks Home Experts Ozarks Health Experts Living Ozarks Contests / Events Springfield’s Remarkable Women OzarksFirst Poll Unscripted Serving the Ozarks Christmas Extravaganza Putting the Ozarks First Exploring the Ozarks Community Calendar Home For The Holidays Springfield’s Remarkable Women Best of Branson Professionals Entertainment Gas price tracker Pet Connection Horoscopes Lottery Veterans Voices Hispanic Heritage Month Black History Month Border Report Tour Contact Us Meet The Team Report It Newsletter Sign-Up About Us Advertise With Us Viewer Panel Sign-Up Total TV – TV Schedule Rescan TV Tutorial Regional News Partners About BestReviews Ozarks First Mobile Apps Jobs Find a Job Post a Job Work for Us Search Please enter a search term. Local News How you can get tested using the “Quad Swab” method by: Ashley Eddy Posted: Nov 11, 2022 / 06:09 PM CST Updated: Nov 11, 2022 / 06:24 PM CST by: Ashley Eddy Posted: Nov 11, 2022 / 06:09 PM CST Updated: Nov 11, 2022 / 06:24 PM CST SHARE SPRINGFIELD, Mo. – When people start feeling bad, it can be hard to determine whether it’s COVID-19, the flu, or something else. Health leaders are hoping to make pinpointing what’s wrong a little easier. It’s through a new method called “Quad Swab.” One swab can detect COVID-19, RSV, and influenza A & B. People are starting to get tested across the state. On Friday, people came to Marshfield. Webster County Health Administrator Scott Allen said they are thankful to work with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services to provide this new kind of test. “When you kind of transpose those symptoms of RSV, flu A, influenza B, and COVID on top of each other, so many of them are similar,” said Allen. Randy Slocum was one of the people to get tested. He said it’s extremely convenient. “Feels like they’re doing a better job trying to keep up with things and keep the community safe and healthy,” said Slocum. The free drive-thru testing events are happening in places like Marshfield and Springfield. Allen said this is especially important as we head into the holiday season and people start gathering. He said by doing this kind of testing it helps health experts catch the virus before it spreads through a specific area. “We’re able to tell if we can narrow it down to maybe there are three kids in a classroom who come up with RSV, we can stop that spread before it spreads to an entire school campus,” said Allen. For a full schedule of testing events, click here. https://dynd.gettested.me/dyndlab/events/ Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ✕ Read next > Read next > Next ✕ ✕ Read next > Next story in Cancel Read next > Next story in Cancel The best blankets, quilts and throws for cozy season Bedding / 3 days ago Throw blankets can be found in almost any size, fabric and color, with numerous options for electric or weighted blankets to keep warm this season. Starbucks’ holiday menu is back — here’s what’s on … Coffee & Accessories / 4 days ago It’s the most wonderful time of the year! Starbucks rolls out its annual holiday menu on Nov. 7. Best warm activewear for winter workouts Sports Apparel / 6 days ago There is winter exercise apparel for every part of your body, with plenty of styles and colors available. View All BestReviews Close Thanks for signing up! Watch for us in your inbox. Subscribe Now OzarksFirst Breaking News SIGN UP NOW Top Stories Wisconsin Supreme Court grapples with whether state’s … Veterans honored at Ozarks Tech Veterans Day ceremony College of the Ozarks holds annual Veterans Day service Mo. business groups consider challenging Proposition … Next storm to move through Wednesday Top Stories More Stories Trump asks Rep. Mike Waltz, China hawk, to be his … Firefighter dies after falling up to 50 feet on hike Veterans honored at Ozarks Tech Veterans Day ceremony College of the Ozarks holds annual Veterans Day service New Zealand’s leaders formally apologize to survivors … Mo. business groups consider challenging Proposition … Southwest is offering buyouts to airport workers … Voters in California city reject measure allowing … More Stories Local Sports Beard says Bears have ‘nothing to lose’ in trip to … Sports / 43 mins ago MoState womens soccer rolls into NCAA tournament Sports / 1 hour ago Lady Bears Linthacum: A last time for everything Sports / 20 hours ago Bears blitz Racers for 8th straight win Sports / 2 days ago District Semifinals High School Football Highlights Top Stories / 3 days ago 1st and 10 District Semifinals Scoreboard Ozarks High School Sports / 3 days ago 1st and 10 Game of the Week: Branson vs. Glendale Sports / 3 days ago Ozark falls in volleyball Class 5 title match Sports / 4 days ago MSU womens soccer into Valley title match Sports / 4 days ago Rogersville advances to Class 3 volleyball championship … Sports / 4 days ago Hall of Fame Evangel coach Jenkins dies at 72 News / 4 days ago Inspired Ozark volleyball into Class 5 title match Sports / 5 days ago Evangel looking to bounce back on senior day Sports / 5 days ago Beard vows Bears won’t fall in trap game Sports / 5 days ago Mo State loses tough battle at Butler Sports / 7 days ago Lady Bears roll in exhibition win over S&T Sports / 7 days ago Mo State football mourns death of recruit Sports / 1 week ago Athlete of the Week: Khasye Highley Sports / 1 week ago Bears muzzle Salukis for seventh straight win Sports / 1 week ago 1st and 10 Week 10 Highlights Sports / 1 week ago View All Local Sports World News New Zealand’s leaders formally apologize to survivors … World News / 33 mins ago Middle East latest: Israeli minister reports some … World News / 1 hour ago The Netherlands follows Germany and others in bringing … World News / 7 hours ago Russian glide bombs, drones and a ballistic missile … World News / 7 hours ago Remembering Armistice Day in Europe: Liberty should … World News / 8 hours ago Round 2 in the Trump-vs-Mexico matchup looks ominous … World News / 9 hours ago Japan’s reelected Prime Minister Ishiba vows to step … World News / 9 hours ago 17 Chadian soldiers and 96 rebels killed in a Boko … World News / 15 hours ago Research reveals China has built prototype nuclear … World News / 20 hours ago Israeli strikes kill dozens in Lebanon and isolated … World News / 20 hours ago View All World News KOLR - OzarksFirst.com Video Veteran given scholarship, others honored at Ozarks … 41 mins ago College of the Ozarks holds annual service for Veterans … 39 mins ago Defamation lawsuit against MSU president alleges … 2 hours ago Springfield News Today 5 months ago Davy & Natalie Lloyd Academic Center PKG | KSN 16 … 9 hours ago WEATHER WHIPLASH | The Great Blue Norther of 1911 7 hours ago New restaurants now open in Springfield 1 year ago Students respond to MSU President lawsuit 20 hours ago Veterans Day parade returns successfully to Springfield 1 day ago MSU PRESIDENT LAWSUIT 2 days ago Community supporting three after crash 3 days ago More Videos More from KOLR - OzarksFirst.com The Latest: Fewer than 20 races to be called as control … Lawsuit against MSU president alleges harassment … Mo. Sen. Schmitt withdraws from Trump AG consideration Haiti’s main airport shuts down as gang violence … Harriet Tubman posthumously named a general in Veterans … Gunshots at Tuskegee University sent terrified students … Former Lakeland staffer sentenced for child sex crimes Dutch tram set on fire while tensions are high after … More from KOLR - OzarksFirst.com Close Thanks for signing up! Watch for us in your inbox. Subscribe Now Breaking News SIGN UP NOW 3-Day Forecast Current 58° Clear Tonight 41° Clear Precip: 0% Tomorrow 63° Mostly Sunny Precip: 0% Washington DC Bureau BestReviews.com - Top picks to make everyone happy The best early Black Friday gifts under $50 Holiday / 3 hours ago The best early Best Buy Black Friday deals Holiday / 3 hours ago Wayfair’s Black Friday Sneak Peek has deals up to … Holiday / 5 hours ago Walmart’s early Black Friday sale is starting today Holiday / 59 mins ago All the best Veterans Day freebies and deals Holiday / 6 hours ago The best Black Friday deals at PetSmart Holiday / 3 days ago View All BestReviews Picks Local News, Weather and Sports in the Springfield and Branson local area Professionals Contact Us Work for Us Contests / Events KOZL-TV and KRBK EEO Public File Report Mission FCC Applications KOLR-TV FCC Public File KOZL-TV FCC Public File KRBK-TV FCC Public File KOLR-TV Children’s Television Programming Reports KOZL-TV Children’s Television Programming Reports KRBK – TV Children’s Television Programming Reports Get News App Get the iOS app Get the Android app from Google Play Get Weather App Get the iOS Weather app Get the Android Weather app from Google Play Stay Connected Haystack Privacy Policy 06/27/2024 Terms Of Use FCC Applications Public File Assistance Contact The Hill NewsNation BestReviews Content Licensing Nexstar Digital Journalistic Integrity Sitemap Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information © 1998 - 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. | All Rights Reserved. ✕Public urged not to touch sick or dead wild birds – as avian influenza confirmed by Defra in Wolverhampton | City Of Wolverhampton Council Skip to main content Listen Youtube Instagram Flickr X Facebook LinkedIn Search... Nav opener/closer Zoom inZoom outResetContrastHelp Main navigation Our Services A to Z In your area News Work for Us My account Public urged not to touch sick or dead wild birds – as avian influenza confirmed by Defra in Wolverhampton Breadcrumb Home News Public urged not to touch sick or dead wild birds – as avian influenza confirmed by Defra in Wolverhampton The Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) and the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) has now confirmed there is avian influenza A(H5N1) in wild bird populations in Wolverhampton. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) is urging people not to touch any sick or dead wild birds following die off in wildfowl in the city including in Canada geese in West Park. Pets should also be kept on a lead and away from any potentially infected birds. Dr James Chipwete, Consultant in Health Protection with UKHSA West Midlands, said: “The A(H5N1) strain is currently the most common strain of bird flu in this country and is highly pathogenic to other birds. The risk to the public from avian flu remains low, however it is possible for humans to catch the virus, so it is vital that people do not touch any sick or dead birds, or have contact with their droppings, eggs or bedding, which may also be contaminated. As a precaution, anyone who has been in direct contact with a sick or dying bird in an area where the infection has been confirmed, will require close monitoring and follow up with UKHSA.” The City of Wolverhampton Council and UKHSA West Midlands are working together and liaising with Defra (the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs) and APHA (Animal and Plant Health Agency) to manage the situation and protect public health and reduce the risk to other birds, wildlife and pets. Councillor Jasbir Jaspal, City of Wolverhampton Council’s Cabinet Member for Public Health and Wellbeing, said: “I would like to reassure residents that the risk of them catching avian flu is very low. This is an infectious virus which spreads among birds, and it is very unusual for humans to be affected. “However, we are issuing a precautionary warning as it is possible for humans to catch the virus through close contact with an infected bird, dead or alive. Therefore, it is very important that you do not touch any sick or dead wild birds you may find. Equally, you must not touch their droppings, eggs or bedding. “If you find any dead wild birds in our parks, do not touch them and instead report them to Wolverhampton Council’s park rangers’ team on 07766 473 150. In addition, please do not feed any birds until further notice as this encourages them to congregate and risk spreading the infection to other birds.” Contact City of Wolverhampton Council park rangers’ team on 07766 473 150: for removal of dead birds in city parks, to prevent potential spread of infection to birds, pets or people If you have found a sick or injured wild bird: Please contact the RSPCA on 0300 1234 999. Do not touch the bird. Outside the Wolverhampton area – contact the Defra helpline on 03459 33 55 77 to report: 1 or more dead birds of prey or owls 3 or more dead gulls or wild waterfowl (eg swans, geese and ducks) 5 or more dead birds of any species For further advice see GOV.UK. For more information contact UKHSA West Midlands press office on 0121 232 9223/4 Out of Hours 07834 311 393. Released: Tuesday 8th November, 2022 The Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) and the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) has now confirmed there is avian influenza A(H5N1) in wild bird populations in Wolverhampton Share Share to Facebook Share to Linkedin Share to E-mail Was this page useful? YesNeutralNo Last Updated 8 November 2022 A to Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Out of darkness cometh light Useful links Contact us Freedom of information Sign Language Privacy & Cookies Accessibility Customer feedback Our website Street Racing Injunction Social Media Facebook YouTube Twitter Flickr Instagram LinkedIn Join our mailing list Public Map Gallery © 2024 City of Wolverhampton Council