Municipal and neighbourhood level wastewater surveillance and subtyping of an influenza virus outbreak | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Municipal and neighbourhood level wastewater surveillance and subtyping of an influenza virus outbreak Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 22 September 2022 Municipal and neighbourhood level wastewater surveillance and subtyping of an influenza virus outbreak Elisabeth Mercier1, Patrick M. D’Aoust1, Ocean Thakali1, Nada Hegazy1, Jian-Jun Jia1, Zhihao Zhang1, Walaa Eid2, Julio Plaza-Diaz2, Md Pervez Kabir1, Wanting Fang1, Aaron Cowan1, Sean E. Stephenson2, Lakshmi Pisharody1, Alex E. MacKenzie2, Tyson E. Graber2, Shen Wan1 & …Robert Delatolla1 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 12, Article number: 15777 (2022) Cite this article 7998 Accesses 65 Citations 254 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Civil engineeringEnvironmental sciences AbstractRecurrent influenza epidemics and pandemic potential are significant risks to global health. Public health authorities use clinical surveillance to locate and monitor influenza and influenza-like cases and outbreaks to mitigate hospitalizations and deaths. Currently, global integration of clinical surveillance is the only reliable method for reporting influenza types and subtypes to warn of emergent pandemic strains. The utility of wastewater surveillance (WWS) during the COVID-19 pandemic as a less resource intensive replacement or complement for clinical surveillance has been predicated on analyzing viral fragments in wastewater. We show here that influenza virus targets are stable in wastewater and partitions favorably to the solids fraction. By quantifying, typing, and subtyping the virus in municipal wastewater and primary sludge during a community outbreak, we forecasted a citywide flu outbreak with a 17-day lead time and provided population-level viral subtyping in near real-time to show the feasibility of influenza virus WWS at the municipal and neighbourhood levels in near real time using minimal resources and infrastructure. Similar content being viewed by others Measurement of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in wastewater tracks community infection dynamics Article 18 September 2020 An analysis of 45 large-scale wastewater sites in England to estimate SARS-CoV-2 community prevalence Article Open access 25 July 2022 Wastewater sequencing reveals community and variant dynamics of the collective human virome Article Open access 28 October 2023 IntroductionThe World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that every year approximately 3,000,000–5,000,000 severe influenza infections occur, causing between 290,000 and 650,000 deaths globally1. In Canada, influenza is estimated to cause approximately 12,200 hospitalizations and 3500 deaths annually, making it one of the top 10 leading causes of death1,2. The significant impacts of seasonal and pandemic influenza on global health, particularly in the context of the potential deregulation of the traditional seasonality of respiratory pathogens after the onset of COVID-19, has created an urgent need for an improved surveillance of this disease. Standard clinical surveillance is resource intensive and is often a lagging indicator of community outbreaks. Furthermore, the data it generates is not sufficiently region-specific in terms of influenza activity and viral subtype3. Wastewater surveillance (WWS) may be used to test large populations for influenza using a single sample, similar to the application of SARS-CoV-2 WWS used to monitor the incidence of COVID-19 in communities4,5,6,7,8. WWS provides anonymous and aggregated data quickly at low cost and at potentially large scale through passive contributions by the community, and therefore may support and complement clinical surveillance programs and strengthen health emergency response systems in a similar manner to the tracking if the poliovirus during the twentieth century8,9. The potential of WWS as a public health tool therefore merits further development.Influenza is a single-stranded RNA virus of the Orthomyxoviruses class and is divided into types A, B, C, and D. Influenza A virus (IAV) and influenza B virus (IBV) are typically associated with endemic seasonal influenza activity, and different subtypes of IAV are responsible for influenza pandemics10,11. The shedding characteristics of IAV and IBV suggests WWS could be used to identify and monitor seasonal influenza outbreaks and pandemics12. Previous studies have reported elevated fecal shedding rates of IAV and IBV of up to 106 copies/g13. In addition to shedding the virus at high rates, infected individuals maintain fecal viral titers that are higher and persist longer than nasal viral titers14,15.IAV and IBV are fecally shed at high rates, but since the virus has an outer lipid membrane envelop it is often presumed to be found in low concentration in wastewater. Hence the application of precise influenza WWS requires the optimization of methods to enrich influenza viral RNA from wastewaters. To do so, a thorough investigation of the partitioning of the influenza viral RNA signal in wastewater matrix is required. By elucidating the fraction of wastewater that influenza viral RNA signal is most prevalent, sample enrichment and concentration protocols can be optimized to yield higher viral signal recovery, and thus improve testing sensitivity and precision. The hydrophobic nature of the outer lipid membrane suggests that IAV and IBV should occur preferentially to the solids. In general, there has been limited success detecting endogenous IAV and IBV RNA in wastewater, and partitioning experiments have largely been limited to investigating spiked concentrations of viral surrogates in wastewaters16,17,18. The behavior of endogenous influenza virus RNA signal should differ from spiked viral surrogate within a wastewater matrix19. Preliminary investigations by Wolfe et al.18 hint that endogenous influenza virus RNA preferentially partitions to the solids fraction compared to polyethylene glycol (PEG) precipitated supernatant, which supports the hypothesis of disease target partitioning to the solids fraction of wastewater. As such, with the current knowledge of influenza partitioning in wastewater based predominantly on surrogate spiking experiments and on a single study of partitioning of endogenous IAV, additional study of endogenous influenza virus partitioning in wastewater is necessary to optimize the enrichment of disease targets and subsequently apply influenza WWS at the municipal and neighbourhood levels.Numerous studies of influenza virus in natural water sources have analyzed the potential of oral influenza transmission pathways17,20,21, but only one has outlined a successful protocol for detecting endogenous IAV in municipal wastewaters18. The results demonstrated good agreement between wastewater measurements of IAV and reported clinical cases observed as part of the Michigan University’s campus surveillance program and Stanford University’s athlete surveillance program. However,there is insufficient information about detection and trend analysis of IAV WWS signals in cities and local communities, and most importantly, its relationship with clinical surveillance metrics. New information on IAV WWS is therefore required to bridge this gap. Furthermore, no study to date has demonstrated the potential for WWS to be used to subtype IAV. Subtyping could be especially useful to public health in identifying the presence of IAV strains responsible for community disease during seasonal epidemics. Because IAV may undergo antigen shift or drift, which favours pandemic-potential influenza features, it is important to develop methodologies to subtype IAV in wastewater. Even with the knowledge that 18 hemagglutinin (H1 to H18) and 11 neuraminidase (N1 to N11) subtypes exist for IAV, the subtypes that routinely cause human infections today are restricted to two strains, H1N1 and H3N211. Identification of which subtype is responsible for community disease, with each subtype associated with distinct and clinically relevant phenotypic characteristics, would further increase the impact of IAV WWS.In this study, we investigated the partitioning behaviour of endogenous IAV in municipal and neighbourhood wastewaters. We then used our findings to optimize an enrichment protocol for the quantification of influenza virus RNA in wastewater. Our optimized protocol was subsequently applied to quantify IAV and IBV RNA citywide wastewater as well as within three distinct neighbourhoods in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. The wastewater viral signal was correlated with clinical case data available from Ottawa Public Health during an out-of-season outbreak to determine the benefits and complementary attributes of influenza virus WWS. Finally, IAV positive municipal and neighbourhood wastewaters were tested for H1N1 and H3N2 to identify the subtype that was responsible for community disease. This study is the first to show the applicability of influenza virus WWS and subtyping at the citywide and neighbourhood-levels during an influenza outbreak and the relationship between influenza virus WWS and subtyping to clinical surveillance.Results & discussionPartitioning of endogenous IAV virus in primary sludge and municipal wastewatersOptimization of the enrichment and extraction method was conducted prior to initiating city and neighbourhood influenza WWS. The City of Ottawa and its neighbourhoods experienced an uncommon resurgence of IAV activity in the spring of 2022, which allowed for the collection of wastewater samples containing endogenous IAV. Sanger sequencing of PCR products confirmed the presence of IAV in samples from both WRRF and three neighbourhoods. Aligned sequences of the PCR products from primary sludge and municipal wastewater samples showed 92.5 and 98.1% homology with IAV (H3N2, Hong Kong/1/68/MA/E2 subtype), respectively. IBV was not detected in any of the clinical or wastewater samples. As such, only endogenous IAV fractionation experiments were performed on primary sludge (citywide samples) and municipal wastewater (neighbourhood samples), as endogenous IBV primary sludge and municipal wastewater samples were unavailable.In the primary sludge, IAV was found to almost exclusively partition in the solids fraction; analysis of primary sludge detected 88.1 ± 10.6% of the viral signal in the settleable solids with < 0.1% present in both PEG-precipitated solids and liquid fractions (Fig. 1A). Similar partitioning was observed in municipal wastewater; 84.6 ± 10.3% of the viral signal was in the settleable solids, 4.0 ± 3.1% was in suspended solids larger than 0.45 µm (filtered), and < 0.1% was in the supernatant (Fig. 1B). These findings are in agreement with another study which reported IAV partitioning to settled solids in wastewater20. Based on our findings, primary sludge and municipal wastewater sample processing and viral signal measurements for IAV were performed using solids-optimized enrichment and extraction methods.Figure 1Partitioning of measured endogenous IAV viral signal present in: (A) primary sludge (n = 6); (B) municipal wastewater (n = 12). Means and standard error are displayed. Where the standard deviation is too small, the error bars are not displayed. Each measurement is based on three technical triplicates for each biological replicate.Full size imageSurveillance of wastewater IAV & IBV RNA citywide The City of Ottawa’s unseasonal influenza A outbreak in the spring of 2022 corresponded with a SARS-CoV-2 resurgence. These diseases were monitored daily from February 1st, 2022, until March 24, 2022 through WWS. IAV was detected in 79 (60%) of the 131 samples tested, while IBV was not detected. Meanwhile, SARS-CoV-2 viral signal above the limit of quantification22 was detected in 123 out of the 131 samples tested (94%). IAV and SARS-CoV-2 signals were normalized using PMMoV signal to account for human fecal content in the wastewater solids (Fig. 2). PMMoV is recommended as a normalizing factor to enable identification of trends due to its stability in wastewater and its low temporal variation in concentration, particularly when analyzing the solid fraction of wastewater6,23,24,25,26,27,28,29.Figure 2A comparison of both IAV and SARS-CoV-2 wastewater signals citywide in Ottawa, from samples harvested from the city’s WRRF. It was demonstrated that the detection of IAV in wastewater at the city-level (Feb. 13, 2022) occurred 17 days before the first clinical detection of IAV at any of the city’s hospitals or clinics.Full size imageMandated masking requirements in the Province of Ontario, which were applied during the COVID-19 pandemic, were largely lifted on March 21, 2022. Lifting of the mandate combined with a one-week student March break (ending March 21, 2022) coincided with a predictable increase in the seven-day average PMMoV-normalized concentration of SARS-CoV-2 along with the initiation of an IAV wave in Ottawa (Fig. 2). The citywide IAV signal did not increase as markedly as that of SARS-CoV-2 during the same post-masking mandate resurgence. Distinction between the rates of increase of IAV and SARS-CoV-2 signal in the city can likely be attributed to factors such as population susceptibility to the diseases, disease transmissibility, incubation period, and possible differences in degradation rates of the disease targets within the sewer system and within primary sludge clarifiers. IAV typically has a shorter mean incubation period (2.0 days)30,31,32 compared to ancestral SARS-CoV-2 (6.4 days)33,34, parainfluenza (4.0 days)32, respiratory syncytial virus (5.0 days)32, SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant (4.8 days)35,36 and Omicron variant (3.6 days)35,36. Interestingly, the decline of both wastewater viral signals was observed at a similar rate and ended on similar dates. This similarity may simply be due to the end of the flu season coinciding with the exhaustion of Omicron BA.1 in the city. Alternatively, population-wide behaviour may have imparted a similar impact on the transmission of both viruses. Regardless of which hypothesis is correct, the observed overlap of the virus wastewater profiles the of viral interference, whereby the presence of one virus diminishes the spread of another37.Citywide PMMoV-normalized IAV concentrations in primary sludge showed moderate correlation with weekly IAV clinical positivity rates (Pearson’s r = 0.50, p < 0.05, n = 14). During the study period, an average of 184 ± 62 weekly clinical Influenza tests were performed in Ottawa, with a maximum weekly test rate of 312 performed in the first week of May. This moderate correlation was observed without the application of a time-step shift being applied to the IAV wastewater signal, which precedes the clinical cases. Time-step correlation analysis revealed that when shifting the IAV wastewater signal 17 days forward, the Person’s R correlation coefficient between the wastewater signal and clinical data increased remarkably (r = 0.97, p < 0.05, n = 14). The 17 day overall lead time of the IAV wastewater signal had the highest Person’s R correlation compared to time-steps tested over the range 0–21 days. In this study, the lead time of wastewater surveillance compared to clinical surveillance is the time difference between the identified progression of the outbreak measured in wastewater versus its identified progression by clinical surveillance. The specific lead times of WWS over clinical testing related to initial detection in the wastewater, outbreak detection, peak, and resolution, ranged from 15 to 21 days (Table 1).Table 1 Lead time of normalized IAV viral RNA signal to weekly IAV percent positivity.Full size tableSeveral factors can explain the extensive lead time for WWS. First, IAV clinical testing in Ottawa is regulated by Public Health Ontario and is typically prescribed when patients meet one of four conditions: (i) pediatric emergency room patient (< 18 years of age) with respiratory infection symptoms, (ii) hospitalized inpatient showing signs and symptoms of respiratory infection, (iii) patient showing signs and symptoms of respiratory infection in an institution where an outbreak has been declared, and (iv) patient showing signs and symptoms of respiratory infection in an institution where an outbreak has not been declared38.Constraints imposed on clinical testing access, such as those listed above, cause underestimation of the prevalence of the disease compared to random sampling39. Since WWS is independent of clinical testing, it is not affected by such constraints and provides an unbiased representation of the temporal prevalence of the disease in this regard40. Hence, WWS of SARS-CoV-2 may provide similar predictive power to that of random clinical testing, and we hypothesize that the same holds true for influenza WWS41. Second, clinical test data is reported citywide by the date of clinical testing and not by the onset of symptoms, making it likely that fecal shedding of viral RNA could begin before individuals seek medical treatment and are clinically tested42,43. Lastly, due to the well-documented spread of many diseases in younger children at early-childcare centers and schools44,45,46,47, IAV likely infects large numbers of individuals (young children and their parents) and is relatively undetected by current clinical surveillance before it transitions to more vulnerable populations (e.g., the elderly, sick or immunocompromised) who may find themselves in greater need of medical treatment and are more likely to undergo clinical testing.Although WWS does not predict cases in a population, it is important to highlight that in the current influenza surveillance context in Ottawa, WWS is the surveillance methods which has shown the potential for the earliest identification of influenza activity in the community and to provide a significant early window of time for public health to act. In particular, the 17-day lead time in detecting influenza in the community allows for public health to communicate to its healthcare partners in the city who make clinical decisions on testing, antiviral prescription and hospital staffing. Overall, this demonstrates that WWS more accurately reflects the onset and prevalence of illness in the studied community compared to clinical surveillance and can provide early warning, thereby allowing the implementation of mitigation measures and confirmation of outbreak resolution.Surveillance of wastewater IAV & IBV RNA in neighbourhoods Three neighbourhoods in Ottawa were also monitored for IAV, IBV and SARS-CoV-2 viral signals in wastewater (Fig. 3). Since IBV was not circulating in Ottawa at the time of the study, it was not detected in any of the samples. The neighbourhoods and their sewershed characteristics are described in Table S1. Peaks of both IAV and SARS-CoV-2 viral signals were observed earliest in neighbourhood #1 compared to the other neighbourhoods and the citywide signal. The mean age of residents in this community was significantly lower (approx. 10 years younger) compared to residents in the other two neighbourhoods and the City of Ottawa. We hypothesize that the lower mean age of this neighbourhood indicates the presence of more children, who could have contributed to earlier transmission of IAV and SARS-CoV-2, particularly in the context of lower Covid-19 vaccination rates for young children48. Therefore, the wastewater IAV signal peaked in this neighbourhood prior to the other neighbourhoods or within the city as a whole. The early peaking for IAV and not SARS-CoV-2 within the communities may be attributed to distinctions in disease susceptibility and transmissibility in the two cohorts as well as differing sewer infrastructure and associated degradation rates in the associated sewersheds. Neighbourhood #1 saw significantly more elevated viral signals for both IAV and SARS-CoV-2 on several occasions, which supports the idea that more in-community transmission of both viruses occurred during the studied period. The IAV and SARS-CoV-2 viral signals in neighbourhood #2 did not deviate significantly from the citywide signal observed in primary sludge. Coincidentally, this neighbourhood is characterized by population age and number of households that is closest among the three neighbourhoods to citywide averages, perhaps hinting at a similar population distribution. Onset of the IAV outbreak in this neighbourhood was first detected on March 16, 2022, which was after the first detection of clinical cases of IAV citywide. The most elevated PMMoV-normalized IAV viral signal was observed in neighbourhood #3. We believe that because neighbourhood #3 has both the highest population density of all of the neighbourhoods (Table S1), more congregate living situations may exist there, which favors community transmission of IAV49,50,51. Neighbourhood #3 also saw more elevated viral signal levels of SARS-CoV-2 on some occasions, which supports our hypothesis of more in-community transmission of both diseases.Figure 3Comparison of both IAV and SARS-CoV-2 wastewater signals at the neighbourhood level (A–neighbourhood #1, B–neighbourhood #2 and C–neighbourhood #3) in Ottawa, for samples harvested from the sewer system. The normalized IAV viral signal differed between neighbourhoods and with the citywide signal when population characteristics differed.Full size imageOverall, findings illustrate that detecting both IAV and potentially IBV in sewage samples collected from local, smaller geographical areas may be used as an effective and economical strategy to track the timing, location, and magnitude of influenza activity. However, it has yet to be established if wastewater viral signal differences at the neighbourhood level can be explained by population characteristics, transmission dynamics or a combination of both.Subtyping of wastewater IAV RNA citywide and in neighbourhoods During the spring of 2022, the City of Ottawa experienced its first outbreak of influenza since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. This outbreak was caused exclusively by IAV, and no IBV viral signal was detected in the wastewater or clinical samples. Therefore, wastewater samples were retrospectively subtyped for H1N1 and H3N2 at a rate of one sample per week. H3N2 was circulating IAV subtype in the three neighbourhoods and citywide, while H1N1 was not detected. H3N2 was identified citywide in the primary sludge via RT-qPCR on February 13, 2022, 17 days earlier than detection of the first case of IAV by clinical surveillance or subsequent clinical subtyping of the virus. In Eastern Ontario, only two out of the four eligible sample categories, samples collected from the first four patients of an institution with a respiratory illness outbreak and samples from patients in institutions not experiencing an outbreak, are sent to Public Health Ontario Laboratories (PHOL) where they are typed and subtyped for H1 and H3. At the peak of influenza testing in Ottawa in 2022, these samples represented only 18% of all testing. The remaining 82% corresponded to samples collected from symptomatic hospitalized patients or symptomatic children who had been admitted to the ER, which were sent to the Eastern Ontario Regional Lab Association (EROLA) where they were only typed for IAV or IBV. The majority of the clinical tests performed were not subtyped and thus important information was absent from clinical testing regarding the state of the circulating subtypes, which can fluctuate during seasonal outbreaks52. IAV subtyping via RT-qPCR WWS is nearly real-time and uses minimal resources and infrastructure, which creates unique opportunities for use as and additional tool for public health units/agencies when they carry out clinical surveillance.ConclusionPublic health agencies use clinical data such as outpatient visits, hospitalizations, and clinical test results to conduct influenza surveillance, and this data reflects the test date rather than the date of disease onset. Consequently, a lag exists between the community spread of influenza and detection of increased prevalence using traditional approaches. In addition, the clinical data does not accurately indicate the beginning, peak, and end of a given influenza outbreak, nor does it accurately capture the magnitude of influenza illnesses in the community given that most milder sickness, which account for the majority of cases, go undetected.Our results show that IAV could be quantitated and subtyped through WWS 17 days prior to detection by traditional clinical surveillance. Detecting both IAV and potentially IBV in sewage samples could be a strategy for effective surveillance of influenza viruses in terms of date of emergence, location, and magnitude of outbreaks. By accurately reflecting the whole population burden and onset of illness, WWS serves as an invaluable adjunct to clinical surveillance, informing the implementation of appropriate public health and patient management strategies.MethodsSite descriptionsWastewater samples collected in this study were harvested from the City of Ottawa’s Robert O. Pickard Environmental Centre, which is the city’s sole water resource recovery facility (WRRF) and processes wastewater from approximately 910,000 individuals or approximately 91% of the Ottawa’s population. In addition, wastewater samples were harvested from three manholes that enabled access to city sewer collectors. These locations geographically isolated three distinct city neighbourhoods that were previously identified as communities that are vulnerable to COVID-19 due to their higher population densities and higher percentages of residents working in congregate care settings (e.g., long-term care facilities). Further information about the sampling locations is provided in Table S1.Wastewater sample collection, enrichment, and nucleic acid extractionTo obtain samples that were representative of the citywide viral load of IAV and IBV, hourly 24-h composite samples of primary clarified sludge were collected daily from the Ottawa WRRF between February 2, 2022, and May 24, 2022. For samples representative of neighbourhood-level viral loads of IAV and IBV, hourly 24-h composite municipal sewer wastewater samples were harvested two to three times a week from the neighbourhoods across the same period. Upon collection, the primary sludge samples were immediately refrigerated at 4 °C at the WRRF to await transport, and they were placed in coolers with ice packs for transport to the laboratory for analysis. Harvested neighbourhood samples were immediately placed in coolers with ice packs and transported to the laboratory, where they were allowed to settle for 60 min followed by decanting to obtain settled solids. Forty milliliters of well-homogenized primary sludge (WRRF samples) or 40 mL of settled solids (neighbourhood sewer samples) was centrifuged and 250 mg of the pelleted material was processed using the RNeasy PowerMicrobiome (Qiagen) methodology as previously described by D’Aoust et al.22.Wastewater sample RT-qPCR analysisMeasurements of IAV, IBV, pepper mild mottle virus (PMMoV), and SARS-CoV-2 were performed via singleplex RT-qPCR (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) using previously developed assays23,53,54,55. All primers and probes, PCR cycling conditions, and reagent concentrations are described in Table S3. Each sample was run in triplicate with non-template controls and five-point standard curves prepared with an RT-ddPCR-quantified lab-propagated Hong Kong/1/68/MA/E2 (H3N2) strain of IAV (IAV positive control), and the EDX RPPOS standard (Exact Diagnostics) (IBV positive control). The assay’s limit of detection (ALOD) and quantification (ALOQ) for IAV’s M gene region were approximately 3.5 and 5.7 copieseaction, respectively. PCR efficiency ranged from 91–102% and R2 values were greater than 0.98 (n = 10).Primary sludge and municipal wastewater fractionation experimentsPrimary sludge collected from the City of Ottawa and municipal wastewater collected from three Ottawa neighbourhoods were used to determine the fractionation of endogenous influenza RNA in these two wastewater matrices. As this study was performed during an outbreak of IAV activity in the City of Ottawa during the spring of 2022, the fractionation experiments were performed on IAV positive primary sludge and municipal wastewater samples. All replicates were subject to the same storage, transport, and holding times prior to the fractioning experiments. Each fraction was extracted within two hours of performing the fractionation procedure.Two 250 mL primary sludge samples were collected on different days and subsequently split into three biological replicates (n = 6) and separated into three fractions: settled solids, PEG-precipitated solids, and supernatant (Fig. 4A). To study primary sludge fractioning, samples were completely mixed, and 30 mL of sludge was collected and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 45 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was decanted and set aside with care so as to not disturb the pellet. Samples were again centrifuged (10,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C) and the remaining supernatant was decanted and set aside. The remaining pellet was then stored at 4 °C until extraction. The pellet was considered to be the settled solid fraction of the sample, and it was processed using the RNeasy PowerMicrobiome Kit (Qiagen) as previously described by D’Aoust et al.6. The supernatant (~ 27 mL) was serially filtered through a 30 kDa–15 mL Amicon ultrafiltration cartridge (EMD Millipore) at 4000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was then processed using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) on a QIAcube Connect automated extraction platform as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, 30 mL of sludge was treated with a PEG 8000 solution at a final concentration of 80 g/L, 0.3 M NaCl, and its pH was adjusted to 7.3 in a final volume of 40 mL. The samples were then mixed and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Each sample was then centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 45 min at 4 °C, and then centrifuged again at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. The remaining pellet was then stored at 4 °C until further processing. The sample fraction was considered to be the PEG-precipitated solids fraction of the sample, and it was processed using the RNeasy PowerMicrobiome Kit (Qiagen) following methodologies previously described by D’Aoust et al.22.Figure 4Process flowchart describing: (A) Processing of primary clarified sludge samples to examine the fractionation of influenza A viral signal within the supernatant and solid pellet with and without PEG addition, and (B) Processing of municipal wastewater to examine the fractionation of influenza A viral signal within the supernatant, filtered suspended solids and solid pellet.Full size imageTo determine the fractionation of endogenous IAV in municipal wastewater, three 4.0 L of municipal wastewater was collected on different days from the three neighbourhoods in Ottawa, split into four biological replicates (n = 12), and separated into three fractions: settled solids, 0.45 µm filter solids, and supernatant (Fig. 4B). For municipal wastewater fractioning, samples were settled for two hours at 4 °C and then 40 mL of the settled solids were harvested and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 45 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was decanted and set aside, being careful to not disturb the pellet. Samples were recentrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C and the remaining supernatant was again set aside. The final pellet, which was considered the settled solid fraction, was stored at 4 °C until extraction and processed using the RNeasy PowerMicrobiome Kit (Qiagen) as previously described by D’Aoust et al.6. Subsequently, 40 mL of the post-settled supernatant of each sample was serially filtered through a 30 kDa–15 mL Amicon cartridge at 4000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C to generate the supernatant fraction. This was processed using a QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) on a QIAcube Connect automated extraction platform as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, 500 mL of supernatant (post-settling) from each sample was serially filtered through a 1.5 µm glass fiber filter (GFF) followed by filtration through a 0.45 µm GF6 mixed cellulose ester (MCE) filter (EMD Millipore). Thirty-two milliliters of elution buffer (0.05 M KH2PO4, 1.0 M NaCl, 0.1% (v/v) TritonX-100, pH 9.2) was then passed through the spent filter (1.5 µm and 0.45 µm). The resulting eluate, which was considered to be the 0.45 µm filter solids fraction, was captured and stored at 4 °C until processing using an RNeasy PowerMicrobiome Kit (Qiagen) as previously described by D’Aoust et al.6.Several enrichment methods were used in this study to partition the primary sludge and municipal wastewaters. In particular, we used PEG precipitation, filtration, and centrifugation, as these methods satisfactorily concentrate enveloped viruses in wastewater19,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65. In addition, two RNA extraction kits were used to analyze the distinct solids and liquid fractions of the primary sludge and municipal wastewater samples. The RNeasy PowerMicrobiome Kit (Qiagen) extraction kit was used to process solids-rich fractions and has been previously demonstrated to preferentially extract viral RNA from solids. The QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) extraction kit was used to process liquid fractions and has been demonstrated to preferentially extract viral RIN from the liquid fraction of wastewaters54,66,67,68.The percentage of IVA gene copies partitioned to the primary sludge solids fraction was calculated by multiplying the gene copies measured in the extracted mass of solids by the ratio of the total mass of pelleted solids to the extracted mass. PEG precipitation was applied to the primary solids to calculate the viral signal present in the unsettled/suspended solids of the liquid fraction that was not detected by analyzing the liquid fraction alone. Thus, the IAV viral signal in the PEG-precipitated solids fraction was calculated by subtracting the IVA gene copies measured in the solids precipitated via PEG from the IVA gene copies measured in the primary sludge solids fraction without PEG. Finally, IVA gene copies in the primary sludge supernatant fraction were calculated by multiplying the gene copies measured in the extracted liquid phase by the ratio of the total liquid volume to the extracted volume. The total measurable endogenous IAV signal from the primary sludge samples was subsequently calculated by summing the IVA gene copy fractions. Partitioning of the total signal was expressed as the percentage of the total measured signal of the fractions.The number of IVA gene copies in the municipal wastewater solids fraction was calculated by multiplying the gene copies measured in the extracted mass of the solids by the ratio of the total mass of pelleted solids to the extracted mass. The IVA gene copies in the 0.45 µm filtered solids fraction and supernatant fraction was calculated by multiplying the gene copies measured in the extracted sample by the ratio of the total sample volume to extracted volume. The total measurable endogenous IAV signal from the municipal wastewater samples was calculated by adding the three IVA gene copy fractions together. Partitioning of the total signal was expressed as a percentage of the total measured signal.Clinical dataAll influenza clinical data was provided weekly by Ottawa Public Health. Influenza screening of patient clinical samples in Ottawa was performed via RT-PCR assays either at the regional or provincial level, depending on whether patient samples originated from hospital inpatient testing or institutional outbreaks, respectively. Testing criteria for influenza screening in Ontario included: (i) pediatric (< 18 years old) emergency room patients with respiratory infection symptoms, (ii) all hospitalized inpatients showing signs and symptoms of respiratory infection, (iii) patients showing signs and symptoms of respiratory infection in institutions where an outbreak was declared, and (iv) patients showing signs and symptoms of respiratory infection in institutions where an outbreak was not declared38. Types 3 and 4 clinical samples, namely institutional patient samples, were the only ones sent to Public Health Ontario Laboratories (PHOL), where they were typed and subtyped. All other samples were sent to the Eastern Ontario Regional Lab Association (EROLA) to be typed.Statistical analysesTime-step Pearson’s R correlation analyses were performed using Graphpad Prism (version 9.3.1) to evaluate the fit between observed IAV viral signal in wastewater and reported IAV clinical data obtained from Ottawa Public Health, and to determine the lag/prediction period between observed IAV viral signal in wastewater and reported IAV clinical cases at various time steps from zero to 21 days. Normality of the data was established beforehand using a quantile–quantile plot to determine the validity of using Pearson’s R correlation.Ethical considerationsPrior to conducting this study, we sought guidance from both the University of Ottawa’s research ethics board and the Canadian research ethics board, and determined that the use of wastewater-acquired viral signals at the neighbourhood level and citywide did not require board review and approval. All clinical data utilized in this study was anonymous and was collected and collated by local public health units in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. The use of anonymized clinical data was approved by the ethics committee of Ottawa Public Health. Furthermore, informed consent was obtained from all subjects and/or their legal guardian(s). Data availability Data is available upon reasonable request by contacting the corresponding author. ReferencesWorld Health Organization. Up to 650 000 people die of respiratory diseases linked to seasonal flu each year. (2018).Infection Prevention and Control Canada. Seasonal Influenza, Avian Influenza and Pandemic Influenza. (2014).Rolfes, M. A. et al. Annual estimates of the burden of seasonal influenza in the United States: A tool for strengthening influenza surveillance and preparedness. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 12, 132–137 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kumar, M. et al. First proof of the capability of wastewater surveillance for COVID-19 in India through detection of genetic material of SARS-CoV-2. Sci. Total Environ. 709, 141326 (2020).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Peccia, J. et al. Measurement of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in wastewater tracks community infection dynamics. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 1164–1167 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar D’Aoust, P. M. et al. Quantitative analysis of SARS-CoV-2 RNA from wastewater solids in communities with low COVID-19 incidence and prevalence. Water Res. 188, 116560 (2021).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Randazzo, W. et al. SARS-CoV-2 RNA in wastewater anticipated COVID-19 occurrence in a low prevalence area. Water Res. 181, 115942 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ahmed, W. et al. First confirmed detection of SARS-CoV-2 in untreated wastewater in Australia: A proof of concept for the wastewater surveillance of COVID-19 in the community. Sci. Total Environ. 728, 138764 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Metcalf, T. G., Melnick, J. L. & Estes, M. K. Environmental virology: from detection of virus in sewage and water by isolation to identification by molecular biology–a trip of over 50 years. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 49, 461–487 (1995).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hutchinson, E. C. Influenza virus. Trends Microbiol. 26, 809–810 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Centers for Diease Control and Prevention. Types of Influenza Viruses | CDC. Cdc.Gov (2019).Minodier, L. et al. Prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with influenza, clinical significance, and pathophysiology of human influenza viruses in faecal samples: What do we know?. Virol. J. 12, 1–9 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Arena, C. et al. Simultaneous investigation of influenza and enteric viruses in the stools of adult patients consulting in general practice for acute diarrhea. Virol. J. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-422X-9-116 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hirose, R. et al. Long-term detection of seasonal influenza RNA in faeces and intestine. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 22(813), e1-813.e7 (2016). Google Scholar Al Khatib, H. A. et al. Molecular and biological characterization of influenza A viruses isolated from human fecal samples. Infect. Genet. Evol. 93, 104972 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kevill, J. L. et al. Assessment of two types of passive sampler for the efficient recovery of SARS-CoV-2 and other viruses from wastewater. Sci. Total Environ. 838, 156580 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Heijnen, L. & Medema, G. Surveillance of Influenza A and the pandemic influenza A (H1N1) 2009 in sewage and surface water in the Netherlands. J. Water Health 9, 434–442 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wolfe, M. K. et al. Wastewater-based detection of an influenza outbreak. medRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.02.15.22271027 (2022).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Canadian Water Network (CWN). Phase I Inter-Laboratory Study: Comparison of approaches to quantify SARS-CoV-2 RNA in wastewater. (2020).Deboosere, N. et al. Development and validation of a concentration method for the detection of influenza a viruses from large volumes of surface water. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77, 3802–3808 (2011).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lebarbenchon, C. et al. Viral replication, persistence in water and genetic characterization of two influenza a viruses isolated from surface lake water. PLoS ONE https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0026566 (2011).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar D’Aoust, P. M. et al. COVID-19 wastewater surveillance in rural communities: Comparison of lagoon and pumping station samples. Sci. Total Environ. 801, 149618 (2021).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Wolfe, M. K. et al. Scaling of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in settled solids from multiple wastewater treatment plants to compare incidence rates of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 in their Sewersheds. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00184 (2021).Article PubMed Central Google Scholar D’Aoust, P. M. et al. Catching a resurgence: Increase in SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA identified in wastewater 48 h before COVID-19 clinical tests and 96 h before hospitalizations. Sci. Total Environ. 770, 145319 (2021).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Verily Life Sciences. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater is an efficient and scalable approach for community infection monitoring. (2021).Bivins, A. et al. Within- and between-day variability of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in municipal wastewater during periods of varying COVID-19 prevalence and positivity. ACS ES&T Water Acsestwater. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsestwater.1c00178 (2021).Article Google Scholar Nagarkar, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 monitoring at three sewersheds of different scales and complexity demonstrates distinctive relationships between wastewater measurements and COVID-19 case data. Sci. Total Environ. 816, 151534 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhan, Q. et al. Relationships between SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater and COVID-19 clinical cases and hospitalizations, with and without normalization against indicators of human waste. ACS ES&T Water https://doi.org/10.1021/acsestwater.2c00045 (2022).Article Google Scholar LaTurner, Z. W. et al. Evaluating recovery, cost, and throughput of different concentration methods for SARS-CoV-2 wastewater-based epidemiology. Water Res. 197, 117043 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, Z., Harrich, D., Li, Z., Hu, D. & Li, D. The unique features of SARS-CoV-2 transmission: Comparison with SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza virus. Rev. Med. Virol. 31, 1–11 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Adékambi, T. & Drancourt, M. Dissection of phylogenetic relationships among 19 rapidly growing Mycobacterium species by 16S rRNA, hsp65, sodA, recA and rpoB gene sequencing. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 54, 2095–2105 (2004).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Lessler, J. et al. Incubation periods of acute respiratory viral infections: A systematic review. Lancet Infect. Dis. 9, 291–300 (2009).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Elias, C., Sekri, A., Leblanc, P., Cucherat, M. & Vanhems, P. The incubation period of COVID-19: A meta-analysis. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 104, 708–710 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Quesada, J. A. et al. Incubation period of COVID-19: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Rev. Clínica Española (English Ed.) 221, 109–117 (2021).CAS Google Scholar Du, Z. et al. Shorter serial intervals and incubation periods in SARS-CoV-2 variants than the SARS-CoV-2 ancestral strain. J. Travel Med. 5, 1–3 (2022). Google Scholar Grant, R. et al. Impact of SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant on incubation, transmission settings and vaccine effectiveness: Results from a nationwide case-control study in France. Lancet Reg. Heal. - Eur. 13, 1–12 (2022). Google Scholar Piret, J. & Boivin, G. Viral interference between respiratory viruses. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 28, 273 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Public Health Ontario. Respiratory Viruses (including influenza) | Public Health Ontario.Sullivan, P. S. et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 cumulative incidence, United States, August 2020–December 2020. Clin. Infect. Dis. 74, 1141–1150 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Olesen, S. W., Imakaev, M. & Duvallet, C. Making waves: Defining the lead time of wastewater-based epidemiology for COVID-19. Water Res. 202, 117433 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wright, J., Driver, E. M., Bowes, D. A., Johnston, B. & Halden, R. U. Comparison of high-frequency in-pipe SARS-CoV-2 wastewater-based surveillance to concurrent COVID-19 random clinical testing on a public U.S. university campus. Sci. Total Environ. 820, 152877 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Miura, F., Kitajima, M. & Omori, R. Duration of SARS-CoV-2 viral shedding in faeces as a parameter for wastewater-based epidemiology: Re-analysis of patient data using a shedding dynamics model. Sci. Total Environ. 769, 144549 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jones, D. L. et al. Shedding of SARS-CoV-2 in feces and urine and its potential role in person-to-person transmission and the environment-based spread of COVID-19. Sci. Total Environ. 749, 141364 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Weissman, J. B. et al. The role of preschool children and day-care centers in the spread of shigellosis in urban communities. J. Pediatr. 84, 797–802 (1974).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Neuzil, K. M., Hohlbein, C. & Zhu, Y. Illness among schoolchildren during influenza season. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 156, 986 (2002).Article PubMed Google Scholar Musher, D. M. How contagious are common respiratory tract infections?. N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 1256–1266 (2003).Article PubMed Google Scholar Osterholm, M. T., Reves, R. R., Murph, J. R. & Pickering, L. K. Infectious diseases and child day care. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 11, 31–41 (1992).Article Google Scholar Ottawa Public Health. COVID-19 Vaccination Dashboard - Ottawa Public Health. (2021).Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Respiratory syncytial virus activity - United States, July 2007-June 2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 60, 1203–1206 (2011).Jones, K. E. et al. Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature 451, 990–993 (2008).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Smith, T. P. et al. Temperature and population density influence SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the absence of nonpharmaceutical interventions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2019284118 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kissling, E. et al. Influenza vaccine effectiveness estimates in Europe in a season with three influenza type/subtypes circulating: The I-MOVE multicentre case-control study, influenza season 2012/13. Eurosurveillance 19, 20701 (2014).Article PubMed Google Scholar CDC. Research Use Only CDC Influenza SARS-CoV-2 ( Flu SC2 ) Multiplex Assay Primers and Probes. 2, 2–4 (2021).Corpuz, M. V. A. et al. Viruses in wastewater: Occurrence, abundance and detection methods. Sci. Total Environ. 745, 140910 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Haramoto, E. et al. Occurrence of pepper mild mottle virus in drinking water sources in Japan. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 79, 7413–7418 (2013).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ahmed, W. et al. Comparison of virus concentration methods for the RT-qPCR-based recovery of murine hepatitis virus, a surrogate for SARS-CoV-2 from untreated wastewater. Sci. Total Environ. 739, 139960 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pecson, B. M. et al. Reproducibility and sensitivity of 36 methods to quantify the SARS-CoV-2 genetic signal in raw wastewater: Findings from an interlaboratory methods evaluation in the U.S.. Environ. Sci. Water Res. Technol. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ew00946f (2021).Article Google Scholar Pérez-Cataluña, A. et al. Comparing analytical methods to detect SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater. Sci. Total Environ. 758, 143870 (2021).Article ADS PubMed CAS Google Scholar Philo, S. E. et al. A comparison of SARS-CoV-2 wastewater concentration methods for environmental surveillance. Sci. Total Environ. 760, 144215 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kantor, R. S., Nelson, K. L., Greenwald, H. D. & Kennedy, L. C. Challenges in measuring the recovery of SARS-CoV-2 from wastewater. Environ. Sci. Technol. 55, 3514–3519 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zheng, X. et al. Comparison of virus concentration methods and RNA extraction methods for SARS-CoV-2 wastewater surveillance. Sci. Total Environ. 824, 153687 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Torii, S., Furumai, H. & Katayama, H. Applicability of polyethylene glycol precipitation followed by acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA from municipal wastewater. Sci. Total Environ. 756, 143067 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Palmer, E. J. et al. Development of a reproducible method for monitoring SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater. Sci. Total Environ. 799, 149405 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Whitney, O. N. et al. Sewage, salt, silica, and SARS-CoV-2 (4S): An economical kit-free method for direct capture of SARS-CoV-2 RNA from wastewater. Environ. Sci. Technol. 55, 4880–4888 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nalla, A. K. et al. Comparative performance of SARS-CoV-2 detection assays using seven different primer-probe sets and one assay kit. J. Clin. Microbiol. 58, 1–6 (2020).Article Google Scholar Ahmed, W. et al. Surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in wastewater: Methods optimization and quality control are crucial for generating reliable public health information. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Heal. 17, 82–93 (2020).Article Google Scholar Barril, P. A. et al. Evaluation of viral concentration methods for SARS-CoV-2 recovery from wastewaters. Sci. Total Environ. 756, 144105 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Feng, S. et al. Evaluation of sampling, analysis, and normalization methods for SARS-CoV-2 concentrations in wastewater to assess COVID-19 burdens in wisconsin communities. ACS ES&T Water 1, 1955–1965 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe acknowledge the help and assistance of the University of Ottawa, the Ottawa Hospital, the Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, the Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario’s Research Institute, Public Health Ontario, and all of their employees who were involved with this project. We also thank Dr. Earl Brown for providing the influenza virus stock. The time, facilities, resources, and feedback given to this study was greatly appreciated.FundingThis research was supported by the Province of Ontario’s Wastewater Surveillance Initiative (WSI), as well as a CHEO (Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario) CHAMO (Children’s Hospital Academic Medical Organization) grant that was awarded to Dr. Alex E. MacKenzie.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Civil Engineering, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, K1N 6N5, CanadaElisabeth Mercier, Patrick M. D’Aoust, Ocean Thakali, Nada Hegazy, Jian-Jun Jia, Zhihao Zhang, Md Pervez Kabir, Wanting Fang, Aaron Cowan, Lakshmi Pisharody, Shen Wan & Robert DelatollaChildren’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, K1H 8L1, CanadaWalaa Eid, Julio Plaza-Diaz, Sean E. Stephenson, Alex E. MacKenzie & Tyson E. GraberAuthorsElisabeth MercierView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPatrick M. D’AoustView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarOcean ThakaliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNada HegazyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJian-Jun JiaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZhihao ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWalaa EidView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJulio Plaza-DiazView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMd Pervez KabirView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWanting FangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAaron CowanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSean E. StephensonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLakshmi PisharodyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlex E. MacKenzieView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTyson E. GraberView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShen WanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRobert DelatollaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsE.M., S.W. and R.D. conceived the experiment(s), E.M., J.J.J., Z.Z., W.E. and S.W conducted the experiments, E.M., P.M.D., O.T, N.H., J.J.J., Z.Z, W.E., J.P.D., P.K., W.F., A.C., S.E.S., L.P., A.E.M, T.E.G, S.W. and R.D. analyzed the results, E.M., P.M.D., O.T, J.J.J., W.E., L.P., A.E.M, T.E.G, S.W. and R.D. edited the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Robert Delatolla.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleMercier, E., D’Aoust, P.M., Thakali, O. et al. Municipal and neighbourhood level wastewater surveillance and subtyping of an influenza virus outbreak. Sci Rep 12, 15777 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20076-zDownload citationReceived: 01 July 2022Accepted: 08 September 2022Published: 22 September 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20076-zShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Development of a wastewater based infectious disease surveillance research system in South Korea Yun-Tae KimKyungwon LeeKyoung-Ryul Lee Scientific Reports (2024) Statistical analysis of three data sources for Covid-19 monitoring in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany Maximilian PilzKarl-Heinz KüferNeele Leithäuser Scientific Reports (2024) Longitudinal study on the multifactorial public health risks associated with sewage reclamation Inés Girón-GuzmánSantiago Sánchez-AlberolaGloria Sánchez npj Clean Water (2024) Human norovirus (HuNoV) GII RNA in wastewater solids at 145 United States wastewater treatment plants: comparison to positivity rates of clinical specimens and modeled estimates of HuNoV GII shedders Alexandria B. BoehmMarlene K. WolfeAmanda Bidwell Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology (2024) Wastewater sequencing reveals community and variant dynamics of the collective human virome Michael TiszaSara Javornik CregeenAnthony W. Maresso Nature Communications (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing70 years of GISRS – the Global Influenza Surveillance & Response System Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English العربية 中文 Français Русский Español Português Donate Donate Home Health Topics All topicsABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Resources Fact sheets Facts in pictures Multimedia Podcasts Publications Questions and answers Tools and toolkits Popular Dengue Endometriosis Excessive heat Herpes Mental disorders Mpox Countries All countriesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Regions Africa Americas Europe Eastern Mediterranean South-East Asia Western Pacific WHO in countries Data by country Country presence Country strengthening Country cooperation strategies Newsroom All news News releases Statements Campaigns Events Feature stories Press conferences Speeches Commentaries Photo library Headlines Emergencies Focus on Cholera Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Greater Horn of Africa Israel and occupied Palestinian territory Mpox Sudan Ukraine Latest Disease Outbreak News Situation reports Weekly Epidemiological Record WHO in emergencies Surveillance Operations Research Funding Partners Health emergency appeal International Health Regulations Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee Data Dashboards Triple Billion Progress Health Inequality Monitor Delivery for impact COVID-19 dashboard Data collection Classifications SCORE Surveys Civil registration and vital statistics Routine health information systems Harmonized health facility assessment GIS centre for health Reports World Health Statistics UHC global monitoring report About WHO About WHO Partnerships Committees and advisory groups Collaborating centres Technical teams Organizational structure Who we are Our work Activities Initiatives General Programme of Work WHO Academy Funding Investment in WHO WHO Foundation Accountability External audit Financial statements Internal audit and investigations Programme Budget Results reports Governance Governing bodies World Health Assembly Executive Board Member States Portal Home/ Newsroom/ Feature stories/ Detail/ 70 years of GISRS – the Global Influenza Surveillance & Response System Ary Rogerio Silva / PAHO © Credits 70 years of GISRS – the Global Influenza Surveillance & Response System Going from strength to strength in the fight against influenza and other respiratory diseases 19 September 2022 Influenza and other respiratory diseases pose a real threat to individuals and communities everywhere. Even in their comparatively mild seasonal form, respiratory diseases such as influenza (also known as the flu) kill hundreds of thousands each year. When such diseases occur as pandemics, they inflict large scale societal and economic disruption, and cost lives. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that they can set back many of the hard-won health gains of the Sustainable Development Goals and other aspirations of the World Health Organization and the international community to bring about the highest possible level of health for all.Today, seasonal epidemic outbreaks of influenza affect up to 1 billion people each year, causing 3 to 5 million severe cases and up to 650 000 deaths annually due to respiratory diseases. The number of influenza-related deaths is likely to be greater as more is learned about deaths related to influenza – for example, influenza-triggered deaths due to cardiovascular causes."Influenza is not a national issue; it’s not a national phenomenon – it’s a global phenomenon and you can’t work on it isolated in the country."- Dr Olav Hungnes, Director of National Influenza Centre, Norwegian Institute of Public Health The birth of the Global Influenza Surveillance & Response SystemGlobal health threats require a global response. In July 1948 – only 3 months after the adoption of the WHO Constitution and exactly 30 years after the devastating H1N1 influenza pandemic of 1918 – the World Influenza Centre at Mill Hill in London was established. The subsequently formed WHO Expert Committee on Influenza met for the first time in 1952 at an event now widely regarded as the birth of global influenza surveillance by the World Health Organization. The resulting early network consisted of the World Influenza Centre and 21 collaborating laboratories in 25 countries, primarily located in Europe and North America. Within a year, this network doubled in size and expanded into every region of the world. Today, 127 countries, areas and territories are able to detect, report and share data on circulating influenza viruses.Hill, London home to the World Influenza CentreThe Global Influenza Surveillance & Response System (GISRS) conducts the laboratory testing that is the foundation of disease surveillance for influenza and other respiratory viruses. Through GISRS, countries share clinical specimens and virus samples for genetic analysis throughout the year to understand patterns of respiratory virus circulation, to identify new and characterize novel influenza viruses as well as other emerging respiratory viruses, and to form the basis for seasonal influenza vaccine compositions. "I am proud to say that WHO, through its Global Influenza Programme, has been at the very heart of the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System since its creation in 1952." - Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of World Health Organization The importance of GISRS in global health crisesIn 2022, GISRS marks 70 years of countries working together to protect against influenza and other respiratory disease threats, in a model of global collaboration and cooperation. From the start, the GISRS network has been instrumental in detecting and controlling new influenza viruses with pandemic potential.In 1957, the GISRS network detected the emergence of a new influenza virus in Singapore – distinct from those previously circulating. The network worked swiftly to identify the previously unknown virus subtype – influenza A(H2N2) – and offered materials and knowledge to influenza laboratories around the world to test for the virus and inform vaccine development. The virus spread across countries through trade and transportation routes, and caused the deaths of over a million people worldwide. The 1957-58 pandemic also forged the key role of GISRS in global health crises through the establishment of global disease surveillance, virus identification, and strengthening of and collaboration among national laboratories and sharing critical information for pandemic response.Although originally conceived to address influenza, GISRS has served as a vital support for countries facing non-influenza respiratory disease emergencies. In addition to the influenza pandemics of 1957, 1968 and 2009, GISRS has coordinated the world’s response to episodic human cases of infection with the avian influenza A(H5N1) virus since 1997, the first outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2002, and the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 2012 in some countries. Most recently, GISRS proved to be a pivotal global resource during the COVID-19 pandemic. National Influenza Centres – which collect influenza virus specimens and conduct preliminary analysis – became the primary hubs for testing and analysing the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus that causes COVID-19.Countries leveraged the expertise and infrastructure of their National Influenza Centres to launch an immediate response to the COVID-19 pandemic and engage influenza surveillance systems to detect evolving SARS-CoV-2 viruses. For instance, in January 2020, the National Influenza Centre in Nepal became the first reference laboratory in the country for SARS-CoV-2 testing, making it possible for quick detection, testing and genetic sequencing of SARS-CoV-2. In addition to expanding the capacities of its laboratory network, the country also integrated the respiratory disease surveillance system to monitor for both influenza and SARS-CoV-2 viruses concurrently. Even crisis-affected nations were able to adopt existing respiratory disease surveillance and laboratory infrastructure for COVID-19 response. The first COVID-19 sample collected in Afghanistan was at an influenza sentinel site, from where it was shipped to the National Influenza Centre for confirmation by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test.Laboratory technicians prepare respiratory samples for PCR testing for respiratory viruses at the National Influenza Centre, Rafik Hariri University Hospital in Beirut, Lebanon. July 2022.SARS-CoV-2 is just the latest example of respiratory viruses that have demonstrated beyond doubt their ability to infect humans and cause widespread outbreaks, and are a reminder of the looming threat of the next potential pandemic. As we celebrate the first 70 years of this international collaboration on global health, the world needs GISRS more than ever. "GISRS played a critical role in the COVID-19 pandemic and, as such, further concretized its important position in the global surveillance architecture."- Dr Sylvie Briand, Director of Epidemic and Pandemic Preparedness and Prevention, World Health OrganizationThere are several ways that the GISRS network supports countries and communities to tackle known and unknown respiratory disease outbreaks.1. GISRS helps countries to share respiratory virusesInfluenza virus sharing is an essential cornerstone of preparing the world against pandemics. Virus sharing allows for pandemic risk assessment, the development of candidate vaccine viruses, revising diagnostic reagents and test kits, and surveillance for resistance to antiviral medicines.GISRS laboratories currently share around 20 000 influenza virus samples every year with WHO Collaborating Centres. The WHO provides financial and logistic support, especially to low- and lower-middle income countries, to enable such sharing through the WHO Shipping Fund Project – a GISRS resource that was created to ensure active and timely sharing of seasonal and potentially pandemic avian influenza viruses within the global network.The detailed characterization of these viruses is essential for assessing which viruses are expected to dominate in upcoming influenza seasons or carry the threat of the next pandemic. Watch the video: How GISRS works2. GISRS provides vital information-sharing and analysis platformsThe GISRS network provides regular updates on the influenza situation through the analysis of laboratory and disease surveillance results reported to the WHO FluNet and FluID systems, respectively. FluNet is a web-based tool that allows National Influenza Centres and reference laboratories to share virological data for tracking the movement and spread of viruses globally. The database links with the FluID platform to offer regional influenza epidemiological data to chart global influenza trends.In 1997, the first year of its operation, WHO FluNet was notified of 12 000 influenza-positive specimens. By 2016, this figure had reached almost half a million. Between 2014 and 2019, the network tested an average of 3.4 million clinical specimens annually. This figure surged to 6.7 million tests for influenza and 44.2 million tests for SARS-CoV-2 performed by National Influenza Centres in 2020 and 2021. Laboratory testing on this enormous scale allows the WHO to conduct risk assessments on the influenza situation and alert countries to the emergence of unusual virus strains. Data from these global platforms are made publicly available to health policymakers to make informed decisions on managing influenza and other respiratory illnesses. Another publicly shared database is the GISAID Initiative, first launched in May 2008 as a tool for scientists to safely share influenza genetic sequence data after recognizing the threat of avian influenza viruses to humans. GISAID’s major role in the COVID-19 pandemic was providing a platform for sharing the genetic sequence data for SARS-CoV-2, including the first complete genome of the SARS-CoV-2 virus within 48 hours of its completion through the EpiCoV database. 3. GISRS provides the viruses for seasonal and pandemic vaccine productionInfluenza viruses evolve and circulate regularly. Members of the GISRS network play a unique and important role in tracking the global circulation and new strains of influenza viruses and all directly contribute to the development of appropriate vaccines against seasonal influenza. Throughout the year, National Influenza Centres share a subset of the viruses they isolate with the WHO Collaborating Centres. These centres perform detailed characterization of the viruses received. The resulting information shared with the WHO and the GISRS network, informs the selection, development, and production of safe and effective seasonal influenza vaccines as well as the key reference reagents that are required for the regulatory approval for their use.Twice a year, the WHO makes recommendations on virus strains for inclusion in influenza vaccines per hemisphere (North and South) and flu season. Various vaccines are developed, targeting 3 or 4 strains of the virus predicted to be most commonly circulating in the coming flu season. Health worker administering influenza vaccine at a medical centre in Bishkek, KyrgyzstanIn addition, the GISRS infrastructure allows for the rapid detection of influenza or other respiratory viruses of pandemic potential, allowing experts to quickly develop and deploy vaccines against them. Learn more about the history of the influenza vaccine here. 4. GISRS promotes fair and equitable access through the Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) FrameworkThe Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework is a World Health Assembly resolution adopted by Member States in 2011 for a global and unified approach to pandemic influenza preparedness and response. The WHO, through the PIP Framework, brings together industry and other stakeholders and Member States to improve and strengthen the sharing of influenza viruses with human pandemic potential through the GISRS network, and to increase access to vaccines, antivirals, and other pandemic-related supplies in developing countries.The objective of the PIP Framework is to improve pandemic influenza preparedness, response and protection by improving and strengthening GISRS as a fair, transparent, equitable, and effective system that allows all nations to share H5N1 and other influenza viruses with human pandemic potential; and have access to vaccines and other benefits.This support has helped countries to improve laboratory capacities such as in Togo, where the influenza laboratory at the Institut National d’Hygiene (INH) in Lomo was recognized as a National Influenza Centre in 2021, thanks to the support from GISRS, the PIP Framework and through PIP Partnership Contributions. Hence, even as the nation prioritized responding to the COVID-19 pandemic with added demand on laboratory diagnostics, Togo’s influenza surveillance and pandemic preparedness capacities were strengthened for the future.During the 2020-2021 biennium,15 out of the 17 [1] countries (88%) that reported zoonotic influenza cases to the WHO shared influenza viruses of pandemic potential with GISRS. In addition, many PIP-supported countries were able to authorize COVID-19 vaccines within 15 days of the WHO issuing an emergency use listing. Through its work in facilitating the global sharing of viruses and ensuring their detailed characterization, including for vaccine production, GISRS acts as a cornerstone of this landmark international endeavour. 5. GISRS fosters key partnershipsPartnership is the driving force of GISRS as it continues to galvanize collaborations with stakeholders in both the human and animal health sectors. By working closely with networks and agencies across the public and private sectors including vaccine, pharmaceutical and diagnostics manufacturers, and the academia, the contributions of the GISRS network have proven invaluable to global health security. GISRS works with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) and national animal health experts to detect and respond to spill-overs of zoonotic influenza viruses from animal to humans. The WHO-FAO-WOAH Tripartite Alliance, which was announced in 2010, aims to prevent and control the health risks at the human–animal–ecosystems interface by providing multi-sectoral leadership and championing the One Health approach, recognizing that human health, animal health and the environment are strongly interconnected.GISRS works with vaccine manufacturers and regulatory agencies every year to ensure that influenza vaccines and the necessary vaccine reagents are updated and available well before the start of each influenza season in a multi-faceted and time-sensitive process. WHO Collaborating Centres and specialized laboratories develop the high-growth candidate viruses needed for vaccine development and production. The WHO Essential Regulatory Laboratories produce, calibrate and distribute diagnostic reagents based on antigens (for developing antibodies) that are provided by vaccine manufacturers. Through this long-standing public-private partnership, GISRS ensures the timely development and release of vaccines to protect against influenza.GISRS today: a public health resource for the worldSince its establishment in 1952, the GISRS network has expanded to 127 countries, areas and territories. The network now includes 158 institutions, including 148 National Influenza Centres recognized by the WHO in 124 Member States, seven WHO Collaborating Centres, four Essential Regulatory Laboratories, and 13 H5 Reference Laboratories.By monitoring and responding to influenza and other respiratory viruses that can cause seasonal epidemics, zoonotic outbreaks, and potential pandemics, GISRS has become an invaluable global public health resource. The GISRS network makes it possible to track the global spread of potentially highly dangerous influenza or other respiratory viruses, and of mounting a meaningful response when the first signals of an impending epidemic or pandemic are detected.GISRS will continue to be at the heart of the WHO’s global influenza strategy which aims to reduce the burden of seasonal influenza, minimize the risk of zoonotic influenza and mitigate the impact of pandemic influenza. This will be achieved through a range of research, capacity-strengthening, and policy-development activities. In all these areas, the activities and support of the GISRS network will be a crucial asset for the WHO and all key partners. "GISRS is the frontline in the fight against influenza. It is one of the oldest and most significant examples of international cooperation for public health."- Dr Wenqing Zhang, Head of Global Influenza Programme, World Health Organization Moving beyond influenza: expanding GISRS (GISRS Plus)As GISRS celebrates 70 years of milestones and achievements, it also looks to the future and to the exciting prospects ahead. In particular, the vision of an enhanced and expanded network – the GISRS Plus – is now coming into view. The WHO is working with GISRS and countries to develop a strategic action plan, building upon existing influenza infrastructure, workforce, experience, trust and confidence that would be capable of detecting, monitoring and responding to priority respiratory virus with epidemic or pandemic potential. An integrated global defence against respiratory diseases that harnesses technological innovations and progresses the knowledge of respiratory pathogens would revolutionize the tools and approaches to pandemic response. Entering its eighth decade, the Global Influenza Surveillance & Response System will continue to build upon the vision of its founders – to strengthen the world in the common fight against the threat of respiratory viruses. [1] The remaining countries did not have virus material left for sharing. Regions Africa Americas Eastern Mediterranean Europe South-East Asia Western Pacific Policies Cybersecurity Ethics Information disclosure Permissions and licensing Preventing sexual exploitation Terms of use About us Careers Frequently asked questions Library Newsletters Procurement Publications Contact us Report misconduct Privacy policy © 2024 WHOFlu season could be rough this year : Shots - Health News : NPR Accessibility links Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts for audio player Open Navigation Menu Newsletters NPR Shop Close Navigation Menu Home News Expand/collapse submenu for News Election 2024 National World Politics Business Health Science Climate Race Culture Expand/collapse submenu for Culture Books Movies Television Pop Culture Food Art & Design Performing Arts Life Kit Gaming Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music All Songs Considered Music Features Tiny Desk Live Sessions Podcasts & Shows Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows Daily Morning Edition Weekend Edition Saturday Weekend Edition Sunday All Things Considered Fresh Air Up First Featured The NPR Politics Podcast Throughline Trump's Trials Wild Card with Rachel Martin More Podcasts & Shows Search Newsletters NPR Shop All Songs Considered Music Features Tiny Desk Live Sessions About NPR Diversity Support Careers Press Ethics Flu season could be rough this year : Shots - Health News After virtually disappearing for the last two years, there are troubling clues that the flu could come roaring back this year, to cause trouble alongside COVID. Shots Health News From NPR Your Health Treatments & Tests Health Inc. Policy-ish Public Health Twitter Your Health Flu is expected to flare up in U.S. this winter, raising fears of a 'twindemic' September 23, 20224:59 AM ET Heard on Morning Edition Rob Stein Flu is expected to flare up in U.S. this winter, raising fears of a 'twindemic' Listen · 4:35 4:35 Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/1124311571/1124662880" width="100%" height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Enlarge this image Health officials are predicting this winter could see an active flu season on top of potential COVID surges. In short, it's a good year to be a respiratory virus. Left: Image of SARS-CoV-2 omicron virus particles (pink) replicating within an infected cell (teal). Right: Image of an inactive H3N2 influenza virus. NIAID/Science Source hide caption toggle caption NIAID/Science Source Health officials are predicting this winter could see an active flu season on top of potential COVID surges. In short, it's a good year to be a respiratory virus. Left: Image of SARS-CoV-2 omicron virus particles (pink) replicating within an infected cell (teal). Right: Image of an inactive H3N2 influenza virus. NIAID/Science Source The flu virtually disappeared for two years as the pandemic raged. But influenza appears poised to stage a comeback this year in the U.S., threatening to cause a long-feared "twindemic." While the flu and the coronavirus are both notoriously unpredictable, there's a good chance COVID cases will surge again this winter, and troubling signs that the flu could return too. "This could very well be the year in which we see a twindemic," says Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease professor at Vanderbilt University. "That is, we have a surge in COVID and simultaneously an increase in influenza. We could have them both affecting our population at the same time." Sponsor Message The strongest indication that the flu could hit the U.S. this winter is what happened during the Southern Hemisphere's winter. Flu returned to some countries, such as Australia, where the respiratory infection started ramping up months earlier than normal, and caused one of the worst flu seasons in recent years. What happens in the Southern Hemisphere's winter often foreshadows what's going to happen north of the equator. Shots - Health News Scientists debate how lethal COVID is. Some say it's now less risky than flu "If we have a serious influenza season, and if the omicron variants continue to cause principally mild disease, this coming winter could be a much worse flu season than COVID," Schaffner warns. And the combination of the two viruses could seriously strain the health system, he says. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that flu causes between 140,00 and 710,000 hospitalizations annually. "We should be worried," says Dr. Richard Webby, an infectious disease specialist at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. "I don't necessarily think it's run-for-the-hills worried. But we need to be worried." The main reason the flu basically disappeared the last two years was the behavior changes people made to avoid COVID, such as staying home, avoiding public gatherings, wearing masks, and not traveling. That prevented flu viruses from spreading too. But those measures have mostly been abandoned. Sponsor Message "As the community mitigation measures start to roll off around the world and people return to their normal activities, flu has started to circulate around the world," says Dr. Alicia Fry, who leads influenza epidemiology and prevention for the CDC. "We can expect a flu season this year — for sure." Young kids at especially high risk The CDC is reporting that the flu is already starting to spread in parts of the south, such as Texas. And experts caution very young kids may be especially at risk this year. Though COVID-19 generally has been mild for young people, the flu typically poses the biggest threat to both the elderly and children. The main strain of flu that's currently circulating, H3N2, tends to hit the elderly hard. But health experts are also worried about young children who have not been exposed to flu for two years. "You have the 1-year-olds, the 2-year-olds, and the 3-year-olds who will all be seeing it for the first time, and none of them have any preexisting immunity to influenza," says Dr. Helen Chu, assistant professor of medicine and allergy and infectious diseases and an adjunct assistant professor of epidemiology at the University of Washington. In fact, the flu does appear to have hit younger people especially hard in Australia. "We know that schools are really the places where influenza spreads. They're really considered the drivers of transmission," Chu says. "They'll be the spreaders. They will then take it home to the parents. The parents will then take it to the workplace. They'll take it to the grandparents who are in assisted living, nursing home. And then those populations will then get quite sick with the flu." "I think we're heading into a bad flu season," Chu says. 'Viral interference' could offset the risks Some experts doubt COVID and flu will hit the country simultaneously because of a phenomenon known as "viral interference," which occurs when infection with one virus reduces the risk of catching another. That's an additional possible reason why flu disappeared the last two years. Shots - Health News The new COVID booster could be the last you'll need for a year, federal officials say "These two viruses may still both occur during the same season, but my gut feeling is they're going to happen sequentially rather than both at the same time," Webby says. "So I'm less concerned about the twindemic." Nevertheless, Webby and others are urging people to make sure everyone in the family gets a flu shot as soon as possible, especially if the flu season arrives early in the U.S. too. (Most years officials don't start pushing people to get their flu shots until October.) Sponsor Message So far it looks like this year's flu vaccines are a good match with the circulating strains and so should provide effective protection. But health officials fear fewer people will get flu shots this year than usual because of anti-vaccine sentiment that increased in reaction to COVID vaccinations. Flu vaccine rates are already lagging. "We are worried that people will not get vaccinated. And influenza vaccine is the best prevention tool that we have," the CDC's Fry says. Fry also hopes that some of the habits people developed to fight COVID will continue and help blunt the impact of the flu. "The wild card here is we don't know how many mitigation practices people will use," Fry says. "For example, people now stay home when they're sick instead of going to work. They keep their kids out of school. Schools are strict about not letting kids come to school if their sick. All of these types of things could reduce transmission." influenza flu shots flu season Facebook Flipboard Email Read & Listen Home News Culture Music Podcasts & Shows Connect Newsletters Facebook Instagram Press Public Editor Corrections Contact & Help About NPR Overview Diversity NPR Network Accessibility Ethics Finances Get Involved Support Public Radio Sponsor NPR NPR Careers NPR Shop NPR Events NPR Extra Terms of Use Privacy Your Privacy Choices Text Only Sponsor MessageBecome an NPR sponsorFlu shot facts and side effects | Live Science Skip to main content Open menu Close menu Live Science Live Science Search Search Live Science Subscribe RSS Space Health Planet Earth Animals Archaeology Physics & Math Human Behavior Technology Chemistry More Science news About us Newsletter Follow us Story archive How It Works MagazineWhy subscribe?The ultimate action-packed science and technology magazine bursting with exciting information about the universeSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with checkout code 'LOVE5'Engaging articles, amazing illustrations & exclusive interviewsIssues delivered straight to your door or device From$26.49View Deal Trending'Superheavy' elementPompeii victimsJames Webb Space TelescopeCrocodile quizBest cameras for wildlife photography Health Viruses, Infections & Disease Flu Flu shot facts and side effects References By Rachael Rettner, Nicoletta Lanese published 22 September 2022 What's in flu shots and how effective are they at fighting influenza this season? When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works. (Image credit: Mohd Yazid Zainal / EyeEm via Getty Images) Jump to: When to get your flu shot Who should NOT get it? Flu vaccine side effects Flu vaccine effectiveness Types of flu vaccines Flu vaccines for the 2022-2023 season Flu activity: 2022-2023 season Flu shot & COVID-19 Flu vaccine myth: It causes flu. Flu vaccine myth: Pregnant women shouldn't get it. Flu vaccine myth: Antibiotics kill it. Flu vaccine myth: You only need one shot. Flu vaccine myth: It contains thimerosal. Flu vaccine myth: It's not a serious virus. The seasonal flu shot is a yearly vaccine administered to protect against the flu, or influenza. In the United States, flu shots are recommended for everyone ages 6 months and older, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The flu can be a very serious illness, especially in young children, adults ages 65 and over, those with underlying health conditions and pregnant women. The flu shot is the best way to protect yourself and your family from the flu, according to the CDC.Strains of the flu virus are constantly changing, so a new flu vaccine is made each year. Scientists make the vaccine before the flu season starts by predicting which flu strains are likely to be the most common during the upcoming season."Since the flu virus frequently drifts in its genetic composition, you have to reformulate the vaccine, and this is one of the reasons that people have to [get a flu shot] on an annual basis," Dr. William Schaffner, a preventive medicine and infectious disease expert at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Tennessee told Live Science.When should you get a flu shot?(Image credit: SDI Productions/Getty Images)Exactly when the flu season starts and ends is unpredictable, so health officials recommend that people get their flu shot in early fall, ideally by the end of October, according to the CDC. Flu activity typically peaks in February."We'd like to get as many people protected against influenza before influenza becomes active in communities across the country," Schaffner said.Most flu vaccines are given before Thanksgiving, Schaffner said, but people can still get their shot throughout the winter months. Each season's flu shot expires in June of that year, but Schaffner said he would consider it "too late" to get a flu vaccine after March, unless a person is traveling to the Southern Hemisphere (where the flu season will then be starting).After vaccination, it takes a person about two weeks to build up immunity against the flu.People can visit the CDC's Vaccines.gov website to find flu shot locations.Who should NOT get a flu vaccine?Children younger than 6 months cannot get a flu shot. Those who have had a severe allergic reaction to a flu vaccine in the past should not get that type of flu shot again, and they should speak with their health care provider about whether they can receive another type of flu shot, according to the CDC. Similarly, people who have had a life-threatening reaction to flu-vaccine ingredients besides egg proteins shouldn't get flu vaccines with those ingredients, and they should speak with their health care provider about whether there is a flu vaccine that's right for them, the CDC says. These other ingredients might include gelatin or antibiotics, which are added to some flu shots to prevent bacterial contamination during manufacturing. (Not all flu shots contain antibiotics.)People with egg allergies can still receive any type of flu shot that's recommended for their age group, even if the flu shot is made with egg-based technology (and thus contains a small amount of egg protein), according to the CDC. Studies have found that people with egg allergies are very unlikely to experience a severe reaction to flu vaccines. People who've had a severe allergic reaction to eggs should get their flu shot under the supervision of a health care provider who can treat severe allergic reactions, the CDC says. In addition, several types of flu shots are egg-free, including recombinant flu vaccines and cell-based flu vaccines. People with a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), a rare, acute autoimmune disease that can cause paralysis, should talk with their doctor about whether they can get a flu vaccine. Some people with this condition cannot get a flu shot, according to the CDC. The cause of GBS is not known, but it is often linked with infections with viruses or bacteria; and in very rare cases, the condition has been linked with flu vaccination.If you're not feeling well, you should talk to your doctor before getting a flu shot while you have symptoms. You should not get the flu vaccine if you have a high fever; you should wait until the fever is gone, according to Schaffner. However, if you have a minor illness, like a mild cold or a headache, you may still be able to get a flu shot.Flu shot side effects(Image credit: Shutterstock)According to the CDC, mild side effects from the flu shot include soreness, redness or swelling at the injection site; low-grade fever; and aches. Only about 1% to 2% of people who get a flu shot will have fever as a side effect, Schaffner said. These mild effects should go away within a few days.Rare but serious side effects can occur, including allergic reactions. Symptoms of serious side effects include difficulty breathing, swelling around the eyes or lips, hives, racing heart, dizziness and high fever, according to the CDC. If you experience serious side effects, you should seek medical care immediately. In addition, it's important to ask your health care provider to file a Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System report either online or by calling VAERS at 1-800-822-7967, the CDC says.The flu nasal spray vaccine, which is approved for healthy, non-pregnant people ages 2 to 49, can cause a slightly different set of side effects compared with other types of flu shots. For children, side effects of the flu nasal spray can include runny nose, wheezing, headache, vomiting, muscle aches and fever. For adults, side effects from the nasal spray might include runny nose, headache, sore throat and cough. These side effects last a short time compared with the actual flu illness, the CDC says.How effective is the flu vaccine?The effectiveness of the seasonal flu vaccine depends upon several factors, including how well the flu strains in the vaccine match the strains in circulation. Some studies show that when the strains in the vaccine are a good match with the ones that are circulating, vaccinated individuals are 40% to 60% less likely to visit the doctor for flu illness than people who aren't vaccinated, according to the CDC.Flu vaccine effectiveness can also vary depending on the age and health status of the person being vaccinated. For example, older adults may have a weaker immune response to the H3N2 component of the flu vaccine (the component that protects against the H3N2 flu strain), according to the CDC.Benefits of the flu vaccineBut even though flu vaccines don't offer 100% protection against illness, there are numerous benefits to vaccination. For example, several studies have found that individuals who do get sick with the flu develop less-severe symptoms if they are vaccinated. A 2021 study published in the journal Vaccine that reviewed data from multiple flu seasons found that, among adults who were hospitalized with the flu, those who were vaccinated were 26% less likely to be admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), and 31% less likely to die from flu, compared with those who were unvaccinated, according to the CDC. And according to a 2018 study, among adults admitted to the ICU for flu between 2012 and 2015, vaccinated patients spent four fewer days in the hospital, on average, than those who were not vaccinated.Related: Why is the flu shot less effective than other vaccines?What kinds of flu shots are there?(Image credit: Helder Faria/Getty Images)Flu shots known as "quadrivalent vaccines" protect against four strains of flu virus. These include two influenza A strains H1N1 and H3N2 — and two influenza B strains — the lineages B/Yamagata and B/Victoria. All flu shots for the 2022-2023 flu season are quadrivalent, according to the CDC.In addition to the standard-dose flu vaccine given through a needle, flu shots are available in several other forms. These include a high-dose version for people ages 65 and older; an "adjuvanted" version that contains an ingredient that helps boost the immune response to the vaccine for ages 65 and older; a "cell-based" version that's grown in animal cells rather than in hens' eggs and is approved for people ages 6 months and older; a "recombinant" vaccine that does not use the full influenza virus or chicken eggs in the production process and is approved for people ages 18 and older; and a nasal spray, which is approved for healthy people ages 2 to 49 but not for pregnant women or those with weakened immune systems.There is also a needle-free flu shot, delivered by a so-called jet injector, which uses a high-pressure stream of fluid to inject the vaccine, the CDC says. It is approved for adults ages 18 to 64. Starting in the 2022-2023 flu season, the CDC recommends that people ages 65 and older preferably get vaccinated with one of the three following flu vaccines: the high-dose flu vaccine, called Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent vaccine; the adjuvanted flu vaccine, called Fluad Quadrivalent adjuvanted flu vaccine; or the recombinant flu vaccine, called the Flublok Quadrivalent recombinant flu vaccine. This recommendation was made because recent studies suggest that these vaccines are potentially more effective for older adults compared with other versions of the flu shot, according to the CDC. Among these three vaccines, the CDC does not recommend one over the other, as they were all linked with increased protection for older adults. But if the recommended shots aren't available, older adults shouldn't wait to get vaccinated and should receive a standard-dose version of the shot instead.What's in this year's flu vaccines?The composition of the 2022-2023 flu shot is different from last season's flu shot. Specifically, one influenza A component of the flu shot (H3N2) and one influenza B component of the shot (Victoria lineage) were updated for the 2022-2023 season. According to the CDC, the 2022-2023 quadrivalent egg-based flu shot contains the following strains of the flu virus:A/Victoria/2570/2019 (H1N1) pdm09-like virusA/Darwin/9/2021 (H3N2)-like virus (updated from last year's shot)B/Austria/1359417/2021-like virus (B/Victoria lineage) (updated from last year's shot)B/Phuket/3073/2013-like virus (B/Yamagata lineage)Then, there are the two types of flu vaccines that don't involve eggs: cell-based and recombinant-based flu vaccines. In cell-based flu vaccines, the inactivated flu virus is grown in cultured cells from mammals rather than in hens' eggs. Recombinant flu vaccines are created synthetically: To make this type of vaccine, scientists combine a lab-made antigen specific to the flu virus with a baculovirus (this type infects only invertebrates, not humans).For the 2022-2023 season, these two types of flu vaccines contain the same components as the egg-based vaccine except the H1N1 component, which in the cell- or recombinant-based flu vaccines will be A/Wisconsin/588/2019 (H1N1) pdm09-like virus, according to the CDC.What's flu activity like this season? (Image credit: Shutterstock)As of mid-September, flu activity in most of the U.S. was low or minimal. But activity is already increasing in Texas, New Mexico and Georgia, which are currently reporting moderate levels of flu activity, and the District of Columbia, which is reporting high flu activity, according to the CDC.Even if flu activity is currently low in your community, you shouldn't wait to get your flu shot. Flu activity could begin to increase at any time, and it takes people about two weeks after receiving their shot to develop antibodies against flu viruses, the CDC says.Some health experts are warning that flu season could be bad this year, based on what was seen in the Southern Hemisphere, which experiences its flu season during the summer months."I do think it's going to be a worse year [for flu] than we've seen in the last few years," Dr. Bessey Geevarghese, a pediatric infectious disease physician at Northwestern Medicine Central DuPage Hospital in Illinois, told The New York Times. The end of most COVID-19 restrictions has opened the door for the return of flu. What's more, people are likely more susceptible to flu this year because they've had less exposure to the virus over the past two years during the pandemic, Geevarghese told the Times.Flu shot and COVID-19: Your questions answered(Image credit: Shutterstock)How do I know if I have the flu or COVID-19?Symptoms of COVID-19 and the flu can be similar, but your doctor can order a test to determine if you have COVID-19 or the flu. There are even tests that check for both flu viruses and SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, at the same time. Should I get a flu shot during the COVID-19 pandemic?Yes, getting a flu shot every year is the best way to protect yourself and others from the flu. You can take precautions to protect yourself from COVID-19 while getting a flu shot, such as getting vaccinated against the coronavirus and wearing a mask.Will a flu vaccine protect against COVID-19?No, flu shots do not protect against SARS-CoV-2. (Separate vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 have been approved or authorized for emergency use in the U.S.) But flu shots do protect against strains of seasonal flu viruses and can reduce your risk of getting sick from the flu, as well as the risk of hospitalization and death from flu, according to the CDC.Can I get a COVID-19 shot and flu shot at the same time?Yes, people can get a flu vaccine and a COVID-19 vaccine — including the new COVID-19 bivalent booster shot — at the same time, according to the CDC. People tend to experience a similar set of side effects, and receive the same protection from diseases, whether vaccines are given alone or with other vaccines, according to the CDC. However, people may be slightly more likely to experience systemic side effects, such as fatigue and muscle aches, if they receive both shots at the same time. A study published July 15, 2022, in the journal JAMA found that people who got a flu shot and a COVID-19 booster shot at the same time were 8% to 11% more likely to have systemic side effects, compared with people who received just a COVID-19 booster shot. But these side effects tended to be mild and resolve quickly, according to the CDC.If you haven't been vaccinated against COVID-19, you should get vaccinated as soon as possible to protect yourself from the disease and stay up to date with COVID-19 booster shots, and you should aim to get a flu shot by the end of October.Myth #1: You get the flu from the flu shot."It's a myth that you can get flu from the flu vaccine," Schaffner said.The viruses in the flu shot are killed, so people cannot get the flu from a flu vaccine. However, because it takes about two weeks for people to build up immunity after they get the flu vaccine, some people may catch the flu shortly after they've been vaccinated if they are exposed to the flu during this time period. Some people may also mistakenly attribute symptoms of a cold to the vaccine, Schaffner said.The nasal spray vaccine contains a "live attenuated" flu virus, but the virus is weakened so that it cannot cause the flu. The viruses in the nasal spray can't replicate in the warm temperatures of the lungs and other parts in the body. However, because temperatures in the nose are colder, the virus causes a small infection in the nose. This infection does not cause symptoms in most people, but in some people, it causes symptoms such as runny nose and sore throat, Schaffner said. These symptoms are typically short-lived, the CDC says.This local infection will prompt the body to make antibodies against the flu virus, Schaffner said. "That provides better protection against the real flu, which is, of course, a virus that can make you seriously ill," Schaffner said.Myth #2: The flu vaccine isn't safe for pregnant women.Studies show flu vaccines are safe for women in any stage of pregnancy, the CDC says. There are several reasons why it's important for pregnant women to get a flu shot, Schaffner said."Pregnant women, when they get influenza, have a tendency to get a more severe disease" and are at increased risk for complications and hospitalization from the disease, Schaffner said.In addition, flu vaccination in pregnancy helps to protect the baby against flu during the first six months of life, when the baby is too young to receive a flu shot, Schaffner said. The mother "passes that protection on to her newborn baby," Schaffner said.Related: Am I pregnant? 12 early signs of pregnancyMyth #3: Antibiotics can fight the flu if you get it.Antibiotics only kill bacteria, but the flu is caused by a virus. Therefore, antibiotics do not help people recover from the flu.There are antiviral drugs that can fight flu infections, but they've only been shown to work when they're given within 48 hours of the start of symptoms. "Most people, by the time they go to the doctor, they're past the 48-hour mark," said Dr. Dennis Cunningham, system medical director of infection prevention at Henry Ford Health System in Detroit.For patients hospitalized with severe flu, the drugs may help, he said. But they aren't a cure, and for most people who aren't hospitalized, these drugs may only cut down on the duration of the flu by a day or two.Myth #4: You don't need to get the flu vaccine every year.There are two reasons doctors recommend that people get the flu vaccine every year, Cunningham told Live Science.For one, the strains of the flu virus that are circulating change from year to year. "It's like the common cold — there's more than one type of virus that causes the flu," and, in fact, there are hundreds of influenza viruses, he said. Each year, health officials identify the virus strains that are the most likely to cause illness during the upcoming flu season, according to the CDC.Second, the immunity you develop after getting the shot wanes by the following year. "If you get your shot in August, you'll be safe through March, but those antibodies won't be for the next flu season," Cunningham said.Myth #5: It contains thimerosal, which may be harmful.Thimerosal, a preservative that contains mercury, has never been shown to be harmful, Cunningham said. The type of mercury linked with nervous system damage is called methyl mercury, he said. Concerns over levels of methyl mercury have led to recommendations that pregnant women avoid eating large amounts of certain types of fish, such as swordfish.In contrast, thimerosal is an ethyl mercury compound that has antimicrobial properties. Still, because the preservative raised controversy, especially over a now-disproven link to autism, it was taken out of almost all U.S. vaccines starting in 2001, Cunningham said.The injectable form of the flu vaccine is available to health care providers as large, multidose bottles and small vials carrying individual doses. A tiny amount of thimerosal is added to the multidose bottles to ensure that no bacteria will grow in the vaccine, Cunningham said. The individual-dose bottles contain no thimerosal. The nasal spray form of the flu vaccine also contains no thimerosal, he noted.Myth #6: The flu isn't serious."The flu is certainly a very serious disease," Cunningham said.Every year, between 15 million and 60 million cases of the flu are reported in the U.S., Cunningham said. More than 200,000 people with the flu are admitted to hospitals yearly, and between 3,000 and 50,000 people in the U.S. die of the flu annually. During the 2019-2020 flu season (the last flu season with data available before the COVID-19 pandemic), the CDC estimated that 38 million Americans were infected with the flu and 22,000 people died from it.One reason people may not perceive the flu as being serious is that cases of the "stomach flu" are mistaken for influenza virus infections. "True influenza is an infection of the lungs and respiratory tract," Cunningham said. Infected people may develop a high fever, body aches and nasal congestion, he said.People with the stomach flu — which is commonly caused by a type of virus called a norovirus — have diarrhea, cramping and other gastrointestinal symptoms. Influenza does not typically cause such symptoms.This article is for informational purposes only and is not meant to offer medical advice.Editor's note: This article was last updated on Sept. 22, 2022. Live Science staff writer Nicoletta Lanese and contributor Rachael Rettner contributed to this report.Originally published on Live Science. Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter nowGet the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox.Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over. TOPICS children vaccines youth Rachael RettnerSocial Links NavigationContributorRachael is a Live Science contributor, and was a former channel editor and senior writer for Live Science between 2010 and 2022. She has a master's degree in journalism from New York University's Science, Health and Environmental Reporting Program. She also holds a B.S. in molecular biology and an M.S. in biology from the University of California, San Diego. Her work has appeared in Scienceline, The Washington Post and Scientific American. More about fluH5N1 bird flu is evolving to better infect mammals, CDC study suggestsHow to get better faster when you have the flu, according to scienceLatestNASA's Chandra X-ray telescope sees 'knots' blasting from nearby black hole jetsSee more latest ► Most PopularWhat are ultraprocessed foods?Who invented video games?Easter Island (Rapa Nui) and its famous Moai statuesWhat's the highest place on Earth that humans live?Follow Live Science on social mediaLive Science daily newsletter: Get amazing science every dayWhat is artificial intelligence (AI)?Why is the 'T-zone' on your face so oily?Is it possible to have too many antioxidants?How do fevers kill germs?Is it too late to get a flu shot? LATEST ARTICLES1NASA's Chandra X-ray telescope sees 'knots' blasting from nearby black hole jets2Space Force's mysterious X-37B begins 'aerobraking' to lower orbit. Here's how it works.3Do ostriches really bury their heads in the sand? 4How did the Concorde fly so fast?5Forgetting may provide a surprising evolutionary benefit, experts say Live Science is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookies policy Accessibility Statement Advertise with us Web notifications Careers Editorial standards How to pitch a story to us © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.Ducks offer clues to avian influenza risk | MPR NewsSkip to Main ContentSkip to audio player to listen liveStay Curious. Stay Connected.MailNewsletters♡Donate NowMenuSearchSearchSign inSign upMenuPrograms & PodcastsScheduleWays to GiveSearchSign inSign upCreate a Free MPR news profile for youSign upCloseFirst Name Last Name Email Address Create User Name Create Password *Password must be at least 8 characters and contain one uppercase letter, one lowercase letter, one number and one symbol.Create AccountAlready have an account?Sign inBy submitting, you consent that you are at least 18 years of age and to receive information about MPR's or APMG entities' programs and offerings. The personally identifying information you provide will not be sold, shared, or used for purposes other than to communicate with you about MPR, APMG entities, and its sponsors. You may opt-out at any time clicking the unsubscribe link at the bottom of any email communication. View our Privacy Policy.Welcome back to news for youSign in to your profileCloseUsernamePasswordForgot Password?Sign inNew to MPR News?Sign up CloseWelcome back to news for youReset PasswordCloseEnter the username on file and we'll send you a code to reset your password.Username submit requestStill require assistance or not sure what your User Name is?Contact us Welcome back to news for youEmail VerificationA verification code has been emailed to Verification code Confirm your accountStill awaiting the code?Send anotherEnvironmental NewsDan GundersonThief Lake Wildlife Management Area September 22, 2022 4:00 AMDucks offer clues to avian influenza riskMinnesota Department of Natural Resources waterfowl technicians Sophie Arhart and Ryan Dunnell show the wing colors of female and male Blue-winged Teal. Dan Gunderson | MPR NewsPlayListenDucks offer clues to avian influenza riskGo Deeper.CloseCreate an account or log in to save stories.Log inCreate a free AccountLike this?CloseThanks for liking this story! We have added it to a list of your favorite stories.Show me!SaveShareX (twitter.com)FacebookMailLow clouds and rain showers move across the Thief Lake Wildlife Management Area as a two person crew in a small boat splashes ashore carrying dozens of ducks in plastic crates. The ducks were captured in traps baited with barley out on the water. The crew carried the grumbling ducks to a processing site set up on two pickup trucks parked with tailgates open. Pliers, syringes and swabs are laid out, ready for action. Minnesota Department of Natural Resources waterfowl technicians Sophie Arhart and Ryan Dunnell come to shore with dozens of captured ducks in crates. Each of the ducks will get a numbered leg identification band, some will be swabbed and have blood drawn to test for avian influenza.Dan Gunderson | MPR NewsMinnesota DNR biologist Ciara McCarty reaches into a crate and grabs a Blue-winged Teal.Turn Up Your SupportMPR News helps you turn down the noise and build shared understanding. Turn up your support for this public resource and keep trusted journalism accessible to all. ♡ Donate nowMcCarty records the leg band number and the age and sex of the duck. This is part of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources’ annual waterfowl banding initiative. Each year some 3,000 ducks are captured and outfitted with a numbered aluminum leg band. When hunters turn in the bands, it helps biologists track migration patterns and bird mortality. But a subset of these ducks will also be tested for avian influenza. “Swabs test for active virus on the bird and then blood samples will test for antibodies within the blood,” explained McCarty. Stress on the farmAvian influenza outbreak stressing farmersA different virusDeaths in wild birds raise concern about changing virusTracking bird fluWillmar lab plays a key roleThis is a multi-agency effort. The team catching the ducks and leading the banding work is DNR. U.S. Department of Agriculture wildlife disease biologist Timothy White is here collecting fecal and throat swabs to test for highly pathogenic avian influenza. The swabs will be sent to a lab in Missouri. Any positive results will be confirmed by the National Veterinary Services Laboratories in Ames, Iowa. Minnesota Department of Natural Resources waterfowl biologist Ciara McCarty holds two ducks as she processes captured ducks at the Thief Lake wildlife management area.Dan Gunderson | MPR NewsThis is part of a national surveillance effort. "By taking this national approach, we can get information not just from here, but as they move down the flyway in the different states," said White. “It helps give us an understanding of what’s going on in the wild bird,” he said. “And we can pass that information along to poultry producers and maybe it will help them make different management decisions as far as protecting their flocks.” Minnesota sees a lot of ducks. According to the DNR, 60 percent of migratory birds in North American pass through the state as they follow the Mississippi flyway in spring and fall. Researchers are eager to learn more about the highly pathogenic avian flu virus because the current variant is not acting like those in previous outbreaks. Minnesota Department of Natural Resources waterfowl technician Sophie Arhart releases a captured duck at Thief Lake wildlife management area.Dan Gunderson | MPR NewsThis virus has continued to circulate through the summer, killing many more wild birds compared to previous outbreaks. There’s a lot of virus out on the landscape, which makes this surveillance important, said Julianna Lenoch, USDA National Wildlife Disease Program coordinator."The biggest things for us to understand (are), is the virus still circulating, which bird species are carrying it and which flyways they may be returning to as we look to the fall migration and the birds returning across North America," she said. Lenoch said poultry producers did a great job earlier this year of reducing the impact of the virus by implementing strong biosecurity plans, and those plans should be active now. “I wouldn't wait for it to be detected close to you, our evidence right now is that this virus is pretty widespread and pretty present, so all of our poultry enthusiasts are encouraged to maintain that level of biosecurity,” she said.A duck has a swab sample taken from its throat to be tested for avian influenza virus at Thief Lake Wildlife Management Area near Middle River, Minn.Dan Gunderson | MPR NewsThe Minnesota Board of Animal Health has reported nearly a dozen case of avian influenza in commercial and backyard poultry flocks this month. Lenoch says there are at least two variants of the highly pathogenic H5N1 virus circulating in North America. One entered the country on the east coast, the other on the west coast. Viruses are constantly mutating and co-mingling and experts want to know what might have changed over the summer. "So what's important for us to understand now is are we seeing any mixing of those viruses,” said Lenoch. “Could we potentially see any emergence of a new virus in North America as those strains and those bird migratory pathways converge? That helps us potentially understand what we might be looking at for fall risk."Throat and rectal swab samples are collected from a duck to test for the presence of avian influenza. Waterfowl can often carry a variety of avian influenza viruses without becoming sick.Dan Gunderson | MPR News“The landscape is riddled with risk, if you're an avian out there,” said Bryan Richards, the Emerging Disease Coordinator at the U.S. Geological Survey National Wildlife Health Center. “The virus is out there, it remains a threat, it didn't go away. And I think the evidence suggests we'll see more of this going on through the fall.”The virus has continued to kill wild birds over the summer, hitting colonial nesting birds such as terns and pelicans hard, said Richards. The virus has also been found in a range of mammals from juvenile red fox in Minnesota to a black bear in Canada, and earlier this month the first ever case in a dolphin in Florida. “And now we're at the beginning of fall bird migration, so birds are on the move. And so those birds coming back down from northern latitudes, we’ll have to see what they bring with them,” said Richards. While USDA is conducting surveillance in 49 states for the virus responsible for outbreak that's killed more than 40 million turkeys and chickens nationwide, and nearly 3.5 million domestic poultry in Minnesota this year, other researchers are taking a deeper look. At the Thief Lake Wildlife Management Area, Alinde Fojtik prepares to draw a blood sample from the jugular vein of a duck immobilized on the tailgate of a pickup. Blood is drawn from a few ducks to test for viral antibodies. This data is part of a long-term project by the Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study at the University of Georgia to monitor avian influenza.Dan Gunderson | MPR News"It tells us whether or not they have the antibodies to the virus,” she explained. “They carry it or just have the antibodies from past infections.” Fojtik is a Research Professional with the Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study at the University of Georgia. She travels the Mississippi flyway collecting waterfowl samples. The project was been collecting samples since 1998, and annually in Minnesota since 2005, amassing a huge collection of data on the multitude of flu viruses that co-evolved with waterfowl over millennia. "We track low pathogenic avian influenza viruses so we can see what naturally occurs in the populations,” explained Fojtik. “Trying to establish the normal trend of flu and then we see if something changes, if something is different." So the swabs and blood samples collected here in northern Minnesota will not only help track the risk from the current deadly avian influenza virus, but also help provide context, allowing scientists see the big picture of how these ever-present viruses in waterfowl are changing. Minnesota DNR projects good overall outlook for firearm deer hunting season Minneapolis leaders call for shutdown of Hennepin County incineratorVoters overwhelmingly back Minnesota lottery spending on environmental projects for another 25 yearsPublic input sought on major powerline proposed for southwest MinnesotaProgram ScheduleStation DirectoryProviding Support for MPR. Learn MoreUniversity Health Services announces schedule for student flu vaccine clinics | Penn State UniversityPenn StateUniversity Health ServicesUniversity Health Services announces schedule for student flu vaccine clinicsCredit: Student Affairs Communications & Marketing. All Rights Reserved.September 23, 2022UNIVERSITY PARK, Pa. — University Health Services (UHS) has announced the schedule for its annual flu shot clinics and encourages Penn State students to protect themselves against the influenza virus by getting vaccinated. “Flu is a contagious respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses, which attack your respiratory system — nose, throat and lungs,” said Cecilia Devonshire, the UHS infection control nurse manager. “Influenza is commonly called flu, but it is not the same as stomach ‘flu’ viruses that cause vomiting and diarrhea. Getting an annual flu vaccine is the best way to protect yourself, your friends, and your family from getting the flu. Flu shots can also lessen the severity of illness and lower the risk of developing serious complications in those who do become infected.” UHS, a unit of Student Affairs, will launch the 2022 flu shot clinics at the end of the month. The dates and locations — within the HUB-Robeson Center — are as follows: Sept. 29 — Alumni Hall Oct. 3 — Alumni Hall Oct. 6 — Heritage Hall Oct. 11 — Heritage Hall Oct. 13 — Heritage Hall Oct. 17 — Alumni Hall The clinics are open 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. on each of its scheduled dates. Students wishing to attend must make an appointment via myUHS. Walk-ins are not permitted. Prior to the appointment, students should login to myUHS to verify that they have completed all necessary forms under the “Forms” tab and uploaded their health insurance card under the “Insurance Cards” tab. Students should bring their Penn State ID to the appointment, and it is encouraged that they eat something prior to the administration of the vaccine. More information on the flu clinics can be found on the UHS flu webpage. If they prefer, students can schedule a private appointment with UHS — separate from the clinic — to receive a flu vaccine. In addition to the clinics, UHS and Vaccinate America — a student-led organization at Penn State — will host an “Influenza Vaxx Faxx” seminar on Oct. 11 in Flex Theater, HUB-Robeson Center at 6p.m. More details will be announced on the UHS Facebook and Instagram accounts, @studentwellnesspsu. Refreshments will be served. Last Updated September 24, 2022TagsCampus LifeHealth and SafetyStudentsUniversity ParkStudent AffairsUniversity Health ServicesGet the news by emailSubscribeFacebookTwitterLinkedinInstagramGet News By EmailDiscover NewsExploreNewsCareersFacts and RankingsCollegesCampusesHealth CareResearchImpactResourcesProspective StudentsCurrent StudentsInternational StudentsBusiness and IndustryVeterans and MilitaryVisitorsFaculty and StaffAlumniMediaCOVID-19 InformationPopular LinksMapsDirectoryLibrariesAcademic CalendarLionPATHStay ConnectedEmails / HeadlinesEmergency NotificationsPenn State GoStrategic CommunicationsReport MisconductPolice201 Old Main, University Park, PA 16802814-865-4700Contact UsNon DiscriminationEqual OpportunityAccessibilityLegal StatementsThe Pennsylvania State UniversityThe Pennsylvania State University © 2024Health officials predicting a rough flu season for Iowans this yearSkip to main content HomeElection 2024NewsIowa CaucusesCandidate TrackerCrime & CourtsEducationIowa PoliticsNational PoliticsUSA TODAYHealthIowa MournsInvestigationsCourtney Crowder Flu season may be really bad in Iowa this year. Here's why, and how to protect yourselfMichaela Ramm | Des Moines RegisterShow Caption Hide Caption Flu season is coming back to the US this year. Here's what we know.After a two-year hiatus, health experts say the flu may be back this season. Here's why the U.S. could see an uptick in flu cases.USA TODAY, USA TODAYIowa could be in for a rough flu season this year, health officials say.While seasonal influenza is unpredictable, indicators show this year's strain of the respiratory virus could be severe.Coupled with declining diligence on mask-wearing and social distancing, public health officials and other health care providers say it's important Iowans get their flu shots soon. "It’s imperative they get the shot, because it really decreases the chance of having a very bad cold and flu season," said Dr. Daniel Fick, chief medical officer at Hy-Vee.To predict each year's season, epidemiologists study how the virus spreads in Australia and the rest of the southern hemisphere, which experience its flu season before the United States. As of this month, Australia is nearing the end of its worst flu season in five years. Cases were about three times higher than the average during that five-year period, and the country reached its peak roughly two months earlier than usual, according to government surveillance reports.Iowa and the rest of the country "could easily see the same," said Polk County Health Department Director Helen Eddy."Our community should take this information seriously and get a flu shot to protect themselves and their family," she said.More: Flu may be coming back with a vengeance, experts say, and children could be at riskWhy the flu season is expected to be badIn the latest phase of the pandemic, Iowans, for the most part, have dropped coronavirus mitigation strategies that have also kept influenza and other respiratory viruses at bay.Less mask-wearing and social isolation this winter will help spread the flu, said Fick, who is also a family medicine physician with the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.Fick encouraged Iowans to get their flu shot as soon as possible.September and October are the "sweet spot" for individuals to get vaccines, Fick said. By the time the holidays arrive, they should be protected against severe illness. Individuals may receive their flu shot at the same time as the new coronavirus booster shots, which were approved by federal health officials earlier this month.Will the 'twindemic' come back this year?Health officials have often warned about the repercussions of a "twindemic" — surges COVID-19 and flu happening at the same time — on the state's health-care system.However, Fick said that risk is less likely this year.The state's population has more immune protection, either through vaccination or prior infection, against the coronavirus than it did earlier in the pandemic. While the latest omicron variant still poses a risk to vulnerable groups, the new viral strain is less likely to cause severe illnesses.Should a new, more severe variant emerge, the state's health-care systems will be prepared to respond, Fick said."Neither a new strain of COVID-19 nor a bad strain of influenza is going to sneak up on us," Fick said. "We will have weeks of notice and the ability to start ramping things back up."It is possible to be infected with COVID-19 and the flu at the same time, according to Polk County health officials, particularly when cases are high. If individuals are sick, they should contact their health care providers to be tested and to receive guidance on how to treat their illness.More: Coronavirus Watch: Flu may be coming back with a vengeanceHow many people died from flu last year? Iowa reported 42 total flu deaths during the 2021-22 season, according to state surveillance reports.That's an increase from the 6 deaths in the 2020-21 season, which public health officials largely attribute to precautions taken because of the pandemic. That compares with the 103 deaths in the 2019-20 season. In 2017-18, at least 270 Iowans died from the flu. The U.S. saw somewhere between 8 million and 13 million flu-related illnesses during the 2021-22 flu season, according to preliminary estimates from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Federal health officials also reported as many as 170,000 flu-related hospitalizations and 14,000 deaths. What happened to flu vaccination rates during the pandemic?The number of Iowans receiving the flu shot has fallen over the past two years, even as public health officials emphasized the importance of vaccines.Last year, 34% of the state population — 1,072,588 individuals — were vaccinated against influenza, a nearly 5 percentage point drop from the year before, according to data from the Iowa Department of Health and Human Services.The 2019-20 season saw the highest statewide vaccination rate over the past five years, with 40% of Iowans obtaining a dose. In Polk County, 37% of the population received the flu vaccine last year, a drop from the nearly 44% who received the shot in the 2019-20 season.Each year's vaccine is formulated based on the prominent strains detected in the southern hemisphere. Even if it's not exactly right, flu shots are effective against serious illness, Fick said. "Vaccines dramatically decrease illnesses, hospitalizations and deaths," he said. "It won’t prevent an infection, but it gives your body and your immune system a heads up the virus is coming." Where can I get a flu shot?Flu vaccines are recommended for all individuals aged 6 months and older. Polk County Health Department began administering flu vaccines earlier this week. Appointments are required and available Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to noon and 1 p.m. to 4 p.m.Individuals can schedule appointments at immunizepolk.com.Polk County public health officials will be hosting community-based flu shot clinics throughout the Des Moines metro area in the next several weeks. A schedule of those clinics can be found at polkcountyiowa.gov/health-department/clinical-services/seasonal-flu.Iowans can also receive a flu shot at their doctor's offices and at most major retail pharmacies, including Hy-Vee, which began offering vaccines last month. According to officials, many Hy-Vee pharmacy locations are offering drive-thru flu shot clinics between Sept. 6 and Oct. 17. Appointments can also be scheduled in advance by visiting hy-vee.com/my-pharmacy/vaccine-consent.What are the symptoms of flu? According to the CDC, common symptoms of influenza include: FeverCoughSore throatRunny or stuffy noseBody achesHeadachesFatigueAnyone can get sick from the flu, but those at higher risk for developing complications include the young, the old and those with certain chronic medical conditions, such as asthma.Michaela Ramm covers health care for the Des Moines Register. She can be reached at mramm@registermedia.com, at (319) 339-7354 or on Twitter at @Michaela_Ramm. Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024When should you get the new COVID-19 booster and the flu shot? Now is the right time for both Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair It is safe to get the newly formulated COVID-19 booster shot and the flu shot at the same time. SDI Productions/ E+ via Getty Images When should you get the new COVID-19 booster and the flu shot? Now is the right time for both Published: September 22, 2022 1.40pm BST Libby Richards, Purdue University Author Libby Richards Associate Professor of Nursing, Purdue University Disclosure statement Libby Richards has received funding from the National Institutes of Health. She is is affiliated with the American Public Health Association. Partners Purdue University provides funding as a member of The Conversation US. View all partners Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger At this point in the COVID-19 pandemic, nearly everyone has experienced the panic and uncertainty that come with having mild COVID-like symptoms – such as a cough and sore throat – only to test negative day after day. With cold and flu season just around the corner, that state of frustrating uncertainty is likely to strike most of us again. Both COVID-19 and the flu are contagious respiratory illnesses that have similar symptoms, making it difficult to distinguish between the two viral infections without a lab test. Testing is the only way to know which virus is causing your symptoms. In fact, labs are working to create one test that can detect both COVID-19 and the flu. As a nursing professor with experience in public health promotion, I am often asked about the differences between the flu and COVID-19. This year I am fielding many questions about the timing of getting the new COVID-19 booster and the flu shot and whether they can be given together. Parsing the symptoms Symptoms of both COVID-19 and the flu can range from mild – or no noticeable symptoms at all – to severe. While flu infection does not typically affect one’s ability to taste or smell, loss of taste or smell has been a common symptom associated with COVID-19 infection. Both infections can cause fevers, chills, body aches and fatigue. More severe symptoms of either infection include difficulty breathing and subsequent infections like pneumonia. During the 2021-2022 flu season, the term “flurona” made its way into the COVID-19 vernacular. Flurona refers to a simultaneous infection with both the flu and COVID-19. While only a few cases of co-infections have been reported, it would not be surprising to see more of them this coming flu season. Vaccination for both the flu and COVID-19 is your best protection against both. What flurona is – and isn’t. Timing the shots With the newly formulated COVID-19 booster shot now available and flu season just around the corner, a natural question is whether there is an optimal timing for the two shots. The answer to that question is to get both as soon as possible. It is important to consider that it takes approximately two weeks after vaccination for the body to develop antibodies from both the COVID-19 vaccines and the flu vaccine. As long as you have completed your primary COVID-19 vaccine series and it has been at least eight weeks since your last COVID-19 booster, now is the time to get the updated COVID-19 vaccine that targets both the original strain of SARS-CoV-2 – the virus that causes COVID-19 – and the most recent omicron subvariants. The original COVID-19 vaccines and booster series have dramatically reduced the number of COVID-19 infection and death rates, as well as cases of severe COVID-19 that lead to hospitalization. While everyone 6 months of age and older are recommended to receive both the COVID-19 and flu vaccines, certain populations have a higher risk for severe infection, such as pregnant women, and should be extra vigilant about getting vaccinated. Further, among those vaccinated against COVID-19, symptoms during an infection tend to be milder. However, due in part to the quickly evolving nature of the virus, it’s become clear that immune protection from COVID-19 vaccination or infection does not last forever. While studies show that the primary COVID-19 series maintains efficacy against severe disease and death six months after vaccination, protection against infection decreases by between 20% to 30% by six months after vaccination. This decline in immune protection is exactly why booster shots are so critical. Without a large uptake of booster shots in the population, COVID-19 infection rates could surge again. The updated COVID-19 booster shots are now available. Timing is also important with the flu vaccine. Flu cases typically begin to rise in October and peak between December and February, but can last through May. Ideally, people should get vaccinated before flu begins to spread, making September or early October the ideal flu vaccination time. A difficult flu season ahead Due to lockdowns, reduced travel, school closures and mask mandates in the first and second years of the pandemic, both the 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 flu seasons were estimated to have fewer hospitalizations and deaths from the flu compared to many of the pre-pandemic years. In the fall of 2021, experts became concerned about the potential for a COVID-19 and flu “twindemic,” especially as COVID-19 restrictions were lifting and masks were coming off. Fortunately, the worst didn’t bear out – flu numbers in the 2021-2022 season did not return to pre-pandemic levels. However, the possibility of a “twindemic” is not out of the picture for the coming flu season. Flu seasons are inherently difficult to predict. With most people traveling again, schools open, mask mandates lifted and workers headed back to the office, people are undoubtedly going to be exposed to germs that they have been more protected from for the last two and a half years. To further compound this, flu vaccine rates have been lower during the pandemic, suggesting that Americans may be out of the habit of getting their annual flu shot. Pairing the shots Many are also wondering whether they can or should get both the updated COVID-19 booster and the flu shot at the same time. The good news is, yes, it is safe for both adults and children 12 years of age and up who are eligible for the updated COVID-19 booster to get these vaccines simultaneously. A recent study found that common vaccine side effects such as pain at the injection site occurred at slightly higher rates when someone received the flu vaccine and a COVID-19 vaccine at the same time, as opposed to receiving only a COVID-19 booster. However, those reactions, including fatigue and headache, were mild and resolved within a day or two. You don’t need to make two separate vaccine visits as long as you are due for your next COVID-19 shot. However, I don’t recommend waiting to get your flu shot if you are not yet due for a COVID-19 booster. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggests everyone receive their flu vaccine by the end of October. But if you miss that deadline, it is absolutely better to get vaccinated later in the season than not at all. Community matters too Getting the flu and COVID-19 vaccines isn’t just about your own health, it’s about family and community health too. Communities with higher vaccination rates have fewer opportunities to spread the virus. Keep in mind that many people cannot be vaccinated because they have weakened immune systems or are undergoing treatments. They depend on those around them for protection. While one person may experience mild symptoms if they contract the flu or COVID-19, they could spread the virus to others who could become severely ill. Because it’s impossible to predict how people will react if they get sick, getting the flu and COVID-19 vaccines is the best prevention strategy. Vaccines Flu Respiratory illness Antibodies Flu symptoms Flu season Flu shot COVID-19 COVID-19 symptoms COVID-19 testing COVID-19 death rates COVID-19 vaccines Flu vaccines Vaccine side effects mRNA vaccines COVID-19 booster shots COVID-19 boosters Coinfections Bivalent Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationFlu season 2022: When does it start in the United States? - silive.com Skip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseQuick Look-Change your current location »Current -Mostly SunnyTonightLow -Mostly SunnyTomorrowHigh -Mostly SunnyView full weather reportSubscribeNewsFlu season 2022: When does it start in the United States?Published: Sep. 18, 2022, 12:00 p.m.Cole Cullen, 5, of Memphis, gets his flu shot administered by Carol Sherwood at the Wegmans drive-thru flu shot clinic at the New York State Fairgrounds, Geddes, N.Y., Saturday October 3, 2020. Scott Schild | sschild@syracuse.By Annalise Knudson | aknudson@siadvance.comSTATEN ISLAND, N.Y. — Seasonal flu viruses are detected year-round in the United States, but the flu is most common during the fall and winter — also known as flu season.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the exact timing and duration of flu seasons may vary, but activity often begins to increase in October. Most of the time, flu activity peaks between December and February. Significant activity can last as late as May.The flu is a contagious respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses that infect the nose, throat, and sometimes the lungs, the CDC states. It can cause mild to severe illness, and at times, can lead to death.The overall health impact — such as infections, hospitalizations, and deaths — of flu varies from season to season, the CDC stated. The agency collects, compiles,and analyzes information on flu activity year-round in the U.S. to produce FluView, a weekly surveillance report, and FluView Interactive, which allows for more in-depth exploration of influenza surveillance data.HOW CAN I PREVENT THE FLU?The best way to prevent yourself and your family from getting the flu is by getting a flu vaccine each year, the CDC recommends. It’s recommended for everyone 6 months and older, with few exceptions.September and October are generally the best times to be vaccinated, but the CDC said everyone should be vaccinated by the end of October.Flu shots have been shown to reduce flu-related illnesses and the risk of serious flu complications that can result in hospitalization or death. The CDC also recommends everyday preventive actions, like hand-washing, covering coughs and sneezes, and staying away from people who are sick, to help slow the spread of germs.While the CDC does not recommend a particular flu vaccine for people under 65 years old, this year three flu vaccines are “preferentially recommended” for people 65 and older. These are Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent vaccine, Flublok Quadrivalent recombinant flu vaccine and Fluad Quadrivalent adjuvanted flu vaccine.If the three are not available, the CDC recommends getting any available vaccine.HOW DOES IT SPREAD?People with the flu are most contagious in the first three to four days after illness begins.People with the flu can spread it to others up to about six feet away. Most experts, according to the CDC, think that flu viruses spread mainly by droplets made when people with flu cough, sneeze, or talk. These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.Less often, a person might get the flu by touching a surface or object that has flu virus on it and then touching his or her own mouth, nose, or possibly eyes.The different flu viruses change from year to year, so the makeup of the U.S. flu vaccines is reviewed annually and updated to try and match those viruses that are evident.WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS?Symptoms can begin in about two days, but can range from one to four days, after the virus enters the body. That means you can pass on the flu to someone else before you know you are sick. Some people infected with the flu virus have no symptoms, but they can still spread influenza to others.Influenza is different from a cold — the flu usually comes on suddenly.People who have flu often feel some or all of these symptoms:Fever or feeling feverish/chillsCoughSore throatRunny or stuffy noseMuscle or body achesHeadachesFatigue (tiredness)Some people may have vomiting and diarrhea, though this is more common in children than adults.RECOMMENDED•silive.comElon Musk? RFK Jr.? Marco Rubio? 6 people who could be in Trump’s cabinetNov. 8, 2024, 8:00 a.m.FDA cinnamon recall: Don’t consume these 11 products; throw them awayNov. 9, 2024, 1:38 p.m.It’s important to note, the CDC states, that not everyone who has the flu gets a fever.FOLLOW ANNALISE KNUDSON ON FACEBOOK AND TWITTER.If you purchase a product or register for an account through a link on our site, we may receive compensation. By using this site, you consent to our User Agreement and agree that your clicks, interactions, and personal information may be collected, recorded, and/or stored by us and social media and other third-party partners in accordance with our Privacy Policy.Footer NavigationAbout UsCommunity RulesContact UsAdvertise with usAbout SILive.comAccessibility StatementSubscriptionsSILive.comStaten Island AdvanceNewslettersAlready a SubscriberManage Your SubscriptionPlace a Vacation HoldMake a PaymentDelivery FeedbackReprintsView E-EditionSILive.com SectionsEntertainmentHigh School SportsBusinessSportsBettingNewsOpinionRentalsAutosClassifiedsObituariesJobsReal EstateMobileMobile appsMore on SILive.comVideosWeather NewsPost a jobArchivesLocal LifeSpecial SectionsPost a classified adSellent your homeSearchSell your carSponsor ContentFollow UsFacebookTwitterYouTubeInstagramRSSCookie Settings|Privacy Policy|User Agreement|Ad ChoicesDisclaimerUse of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement, (updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights (updated 7/1/2024).© 2024 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.Ad ChoicesThere’s a change in flu shot guidance for some adults this year: What you need to know - al.com Skip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseQuick Look-Change your current location »Current -Mostly SunnyTonightLow -Mostly SunnyTomorrowHigh -Mostly SunnyView full weather reportBirminghamHuntsvilleMobileMontgomeryTuscaloosaAnniston/GadsdenBeachesAlabamaSubscribeSubscribeThe Birmingham NewsThe Huntsville TimesPress-RegisterMore local news for Birmingham, Huntsville, and Mobile – Start Today for $1NewsThere’s a change in flu shot guidance for some adults this year: What you need to knowUpdated: Sep. 20, 2022, 6:50 a.m.|Published: Sep. 20, 2022, 6:44 a.m.For people 65 and older, there are three flu vaccines the CDC is recommending over the standard dose unajuvanated versions. (Stuart Ramson/AP)By Leada Gore | lgore@al.comFor many people, one flu vaccine is as good as another. New this year, however, is guidance for specific types of vaccines for those ages 65 and older.For people 6 months to 65 years, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said you can use any licensed, age-appropriate influenza vaccine. The options include inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV), recombinant influenza vaccine (RIV), or live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV), with no preference for any flu vaccine over another.READ MORE: Why some children need 2 flu shots this yearFor people 65 and older, however, there are three flu vaccines the CDC is recommending over the standard dose unajuvanated versions. Those vaccines are Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent vaccine, Flublok Quadrivalent recombinant flu vaccine and Fluad Quadrivalent adjuvanted flu vaccine. Quadrivalent vaccines contain four different strains of the influenza virus, an effort to better combat the versions expected to circulate this year.RECOMMENDED•al.comAlabama schools hit with whooping cough outbreaks: What parents need to knowNov. 8, 2024, 12:19 p.m.Poachers exploit demand for eagle feathers, sacred among Native AmericansNov. 7, 2024, 9:00 a.m.These vaccines are made with an egg-based adjuvant, an ingredient that helps create a stronger immune system. According to the CDC, studies suggest that adjuvanted flu vaccines are potentially more effective for the 65 and older age group. If none of those are available, however, any age-appropriate vaccine is recommended over none at all.It’s recommended everyone 6 months and older in the U.S. – with rare exceptions – receive a flu vaccine. The best time to get the vaccine is before the end of October as it takes up to two weeks for it to become fully effective.You can see more on the flu vaccine here.If you purchase a product or register for an account through a link on our site, we may receive compensation. By using this site, you consent to our User Agreement and agree that your clicks, interactions, and personal information may be collected, recorded, and/or stored by us and social media and other third-party partners in accordance with our Privacy Policy.Footer NavigationAbout UsAbout Alabama Media GroupJobs at Alabama Media GroupAdvertise with usAbout AL.comFrequently Asked QuestionsAccessibility StatementContact UsOnline StoreSubscriptionsAL.comThe Birmingham NewsThe Huntsville TimesPress-RegisterNewsletterAlready a SubscriberManage your SubscriptionPlace a Vacation HoldMake a PaymentDelivery FeedbackAL.com SectionsNewsBusinessSportsHigh School SportsAlabama Life & CultureOpinionArchivesObituariesJobsAutosYour Regional News PagesAnniston/GadsdenBirminghamHuntsvilleMobileMontgomeryTuscaloosaGulf Coast BeachesOn the GoMobile AppsTablet AppsFollow UsPinterestTwitterFacebookInstagramRSSCustomer ServiceSend us an emailSubmit a news tipBuy newspaper front pages, posters and moreMore on AL.comVideosWeather NewsSite Map & searchSponsor ContentPost a jobCookie Settings|Privacy Policy|User Agreement|Ad ChoicesDisclaimerUse of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement, (updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights (updated 7/1/2024).© 2024 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.Ad ChoicesOmicron: The coronavirus variant may protect against flu | New Scientist Close Advertisement Skip to content Sign in Search the website Events Tours Shop Courses Jobs Subscribe now Explore by section News Features Newsletters Podcasts Video Comment Culture Crosswords | This week's magazine Explore by subject Health Space Physics Technology Environment Mind Humans Life Mathematics Chemistry Earth Society Explore our products and services Events Tours Shop Courses Jobs Subscribe now Subscribe now Health The omicron coronavirus variant may protect against flu In a laboratory study, the H1N1 seasonal flu virus didn't take hold in bronchial cells containing the omicron coronavirus variant, but the flu virus did replicate in cells containing the delta variant By Carissa Wong 19 September 2022 Facebook / Meta Twitter / X icon Linkedin Reddit Email A coloured scanning electron micrograph of a cell (green) infected with the omicron variant of the coronavirus (purple)NIAID / NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY Being infected with the omicron variant of the coronavirus may give some protection against flu. Martin Michaelis at the University of Kent in the UK and his colleagues collected bronchial cells from a person with emphysema, a condition where the lungs’ air sacs are damaged, but the bronchi airways are unaffected. The cells were extracted as part of a standard diagnostic or treatment procedure. With the bronchi being unaffected by emphysema,… Advertisement Sign up to our weekly newsletter Receive a weekly dose of discovery in your inbox! We'll also keep you up to date with New Scientist events and special offers. Sign up To continue reading, subscribe today with our introductory offersUnlock this articleNo commitment, cancel anytime*Offer ends 15 January 2025.*Cancel anytime within 14 days of payment to receive a refund on unserved issues.Inclusive of applicable taxes (VAT)orExisting subscribersSign in to your account Advertisement More from New Scientist Explore the latest news, articles and features Life Tiny animal revived after 24,000 years entombed in Siberian permafrost NewsFree Life Ancient puppy found in permafrost still has its fur and whiskers NewsFree Humans Mammoth ivory pendant is oldest decorated jewellery found in Eurasia NewsFree Health The omicron coronavirus variant may protect against flu NewsSubscriber-only Popular articles Trending New Scientist articles 1 DNA analysis rewrites the stories of people buried in Pompeii 2 The complete guide to cooking oils and how they affect your health 3 Chimps do better at difficult tasks when they have an audience 4 Carbon emissions from private jets have exploded in recent years 5 Are fermented foods like kimchi really that good for your gut? 6 The sci-fi films and TV that explore AI in eerily prescient ways 7 Conspiracy theorists are turning their attention back to HPV vaccines 8 Cancer deaths expected to nearly double worldwide by 2050 9 Watch elephants use a hose to shower themselves – and prank others 10 The real reason VAR infuriates football fans and how to fix it Advertisement Download the app Find us on social media Instagram Facebook X / Twitter Tiktok LinkedIn WhatsApp Subscriptions Subscriber benefits Gift Student & graduate Educational Corporate Support Contact us Help About us Press room Advertise Write for us Tools Events Science Jobs CoLab Syndication RSS feeds Legal and privacy Complaint policy Privacy policy Cookie policy Terms & conditions Cookie Settings © Copyright New Scientist Ltd. Back to the topGet a free flu shot on campus Campus & Community Campus Updates Faculty & Staff Student Life University Circle University News Awards Publications & Presentations Appointments Op-ed Research Health & Wellness Science & Tech Business, Law & Politics Humanities, Art & Social Sciences Events People About Editorial Guidelines Submit to The Daily Vaccine or flu shot in injection needle. Doctor working with patient's arm. Physician or nurse giving vaccination and immunity to virus, influenza or HPV with syringe. Appointment with medical expert.Get a free flu shot on campusSeptember 19, 2022Campus Updates· Flu shots are available for free to all Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland Institute of Art and Cleveland Institute of Music students, and CWRU faculty and staff. All participants need to bring their CWRU ID. Individuals are asked to wear an outfit that allows the upper arm to be easily exposed. For a list of all flu clinic dates, visit the University Health & Counseling Services website. For those who prefer a scheduled time, appointments are available on Fridays from 9 to 11:30 a.m. and 1 to 3:30 p.m. starting Friday, Sept. 30, in Health Services Clinic B (Dental Research Building, Ground Floor) log in to myhealthconnect.case.edu to schedule. flu shotsUniversity Health and Counseling Serviceswellness programRelated Posts Mindful Activity Hour November 8, 2024Events· University Health and Counseling Services to offer two T.H.I.N.K suicide prevention training sessions this month November 6, 2024Campus Updates· Archives Archives Select Month November 2024 October 2024 September 2024 August 2024 July 2024 June 2024 May 2024 April 2024 March 2024 February 2024 January 2024 December 2023 November 2023 October 2023 September 2023 August 2023 July 2023 June 2023 May 2023 April 2023 March 2023 February 2023 January 2023 December 2022 November 2022 October 2022 September 2022 August 2022 July 2022 June 2022 May 2022 April 2022 March 2022 February 2022 January 2022 December 2021 November 2021 October 2021 September 2021 August 2021 July 2021 June 2021 May 2021 April 2021 March 2021 February 2021 January 2021 December 2020 November 2020 October 2020 September 2020 August 2020 July 2020 June 2020 May 2020 April 2020 March 2020 February 2020 January 2020 December 2019 November 2019 October 2019 September 2019 August 2019 July 2019 June 2019 May 2019 April 2019 March 2019 February 2019 January 2019 December 2018 November 2018 October 2018 September 2018 August 2018 July 2018 June 2018 May 2018 April 2018 March 2018 February 2018 January 2018 December 2017 November 2017 October 2017 September 2017 August 2017 July 2017 June 2017 May 2017 April 2017 March 2017 February 2017 January 2017 December 2016 November 2016 October 2016 September 2016 August 2016 July 2016 June 2016 May 2016 April 2016 March 2016 February 2016 January 2016 December 2015 November 2015 October 2015 September 2015 August 2015 July 2015 June 2015 May 2015 April 2015 March 2015 February 2015 January 2015 December 2014 November 2014 October 2014 September 2014 August 2014 July 2014 June 2014 May 2014 April 2014 March 2014 February 2014 January 2014 December 2013 November 2013 October 2013 September 2013 August 2013 July 2013 June 2013 May 2013 April 2013 March 2013 February 2013 January 2013 December 2012 November 2012 October 2012 September 2012 August 2012 July 2012 June 2012 May 2012 April 2012 March 2012 February 2012 January 2012 December 2011 November 2011 October 2011 September 2011 August 2011 July 2011 June 2011 May 2011 Upcoming Events “Gaza Before and After: Genocide and the International Political Order” “Wings of Wonder” Plum Market Kitchen seasonal beer and eggnog tasting View all Events Recently Featured A childhood dream: Engineering student wins Project for Peace grant to establish technology center in Tanzania November 6, 2024 Higher ed finance leader named Case Western Reserve’s next executive VP, CFO November 5, 2024 View all Recently Featured © 2023 Case Western Reserve University 10900 Euclid Ave. Cleveland, Ohio 44106 216.368.2000 (legal notice) Submit To The Daily Submit an Article Editorial Guidelines Subscribe Subscribe to The Daily Follow Us Campus & Community Campus Updates faculty & staff Student Life University Circle University News Awards Publications & Presentations Appointments Op-ed Research Health & Wellness Science & Tech Business, Law & Politics Humanities, Art & Social Sciences Events People About Submit to The Daily Editorial Guidelines Type to search or hit ESC to close See all resultsOctober the best time to get COVID boosters, flu shots, experts say - ABC News ABC NewsVideoLiveShowsElections538ShopStream onLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 11, 1:13 AM ETNational Election Results: presidential Projection: Trump is President-elect226312226312Harris71,146,679270 to winTrump74,675,378Expected vote reporting: 94%Recent ProjectionsColo. Dist. 8Projected WinnerGabe Evans•R8 hours agoAriz.PresidentProjected WinnerDonald Trump•R1 day agoNational Election Results: house205214205214Dem.214 up for electionLost: 2218 for controlestimateRep.221 up for electionGained: 2Election 2024 updates: With Arizona, Trump sweeps all 7 swing statesLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 9, 9:49 PM ET9:46 PMWith Arizona, Trump sweeps all 7 swing states8:59 PMTrump projected winner in ArizonaOctober the best time to get COVID boosters, flu shots, experts sayIt’s safe for people to get both shots during the same visit, experts say.ByYouri BenadjaoudSeptember 21, 2022, 6:02 AM0:42Gustavo Perez gets an influenza vaccine from pharmacist Patricia Pernal during an event hosted by the Chicago Department of Public Health at the Southwest Senior Center, Sept. 9, 2022, in Chicago.Scott Olson/Getty ImagesWith doctor's offices and pharmacies now offering seasonal flu shots and updated COVID-19 boosters, experts are urging Americans to get both, with many saying October is the best time.While experts say October may be an ideal window to boost immunity, they are also emphasizing the importance of getting vaccinated, period -- whenever you are able. It's safe for people to get both shots during the same visit for added convenience, experts say.White House COVID coordinator Dr. Ashish Jha told ABC News the best time to get a newly updated COVID-19 booster is "no later than the end of October for maximum protection," which aligns with flu shot timing recommendations.MORE: Best to get new booster before Halloween, White House COVID coordinator Dr. Jha saysThe "Goldilocks moment" for the flu shot is also October, said Dr. Peter Chin-Hong, an infectious disease specialist at the University of California, San Francisco. However, anyone who gets the shot in September should still expect protection during the flu season, which typically lasts until spring."I think my general advice is, get it [when] it's convenient," Chin-Hong said.Experts also say not to worry if you can't get your flu shot before Halloween."If you for whatever reason cannot get a flu shot by the end of October, it's not too late," said Dr. Alok Patel, a pediatrician at Stanford Children's Health and an ABC News medical contributor.Bad flu season on the horizon?Some experts predict that the seasonal influenza virus -- following two years of mild activity during the COVID-19 pandemic -- is expected to be back in full force this season.A typical pre-pandemic year would see around 8% of the U.S. population sick from flu, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Deaths can exceed more than 50,000, as they did most recently in the 2017-2018 season.Gustavo Perez gets an influenza vaccine from pharmacist Patricia Pernal during an event hosted by the Chicago Department of Public Health at the Southwest Senior Center, Sept. 9, 2022, in Chicago.Scott Olson/Getty ImagesThose most at risk of severe illness from influenza are the elderly and immunocompromised."What we're concerned about, of course, are people who are older, over age 65. They account for about 15-17% of the population but 80% of the [flu] deaths and hospitalizations," said Dr. William Schaffner, a professor of infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University Medical Center.But even young, otherwise healthy people benefit from the flu shot, which also lowers the risk of spreading the virus to others."A lower risk does not mean no risk. By getting vaccinated, you really do reduce the likelihood that you will be the dreaded spreader," Schaffner said.MORE: CDC signs off on new COVID-19 boosters ahead of fall booster campaignMeanwhile, becoming ill with the flu can not only put a damper on holiday plans, but it also often leads to unwanted symptoms that last for multiple days."For anybody who's gotten the flu, it's definitely not a walk in the park," Chin-Hong said.Getting vaccinated in October or early November is ideal because "[you want] your annual vaccination to extend throughout the winter, well through February into March, and even into April," Schaffner said."The only other sort of change with the timing might be for people who are pregnant," Chin-Hong said. He explained that pregnant women may want to try and have a flu shot before delivery, which allows the newborn to benefit from the mother's antibodies, especially given that infants under 6 months old cannot be vaccinated.Experts say flu shots may be especially important for children this year given concerns about how the relaxation of pandemic-era restrictions may impact children."Given the fact that schools are back open, COVID-19 restrictions have been lifted, and kids are back to their normal rambunctious selves [they] are at risk of catching influenza this year," Patel said. "Parents should not generalize influenza as a common cold. Thousands of kids are hospitalized every year from influenza with young infants and kids with underlying medical conditions being at highest risk."Updated COVID-19 boosters may also become annual shotsThe Food and Drug Administration recently authorized the first updated COVID-19 booster shots -- the first major upgrade to COVID-19 vaccines. Because protection from COVID-19 fades slowly over time, the White House has previously stated that variant-specific COVID shots may also become an annual reality, similar to seasonal flu shots.The new COVID-19 boosters are designed to be a better match against currently circulating COVID-19 variants, and are currently authorized for everyone 12 and older who had their last COVID-19 shot at least two months ago. People previously infected with COVID may also consider waiting 90 days before receiving their booster shot, according to the CDC. The authorization of updated boosters for younger children is expected in "a matter of weeks," according to Dr. Peter Marks, the director of the group within the FDA responsible for assuring the safety and efficacy of vaccines.Although it is not clear if there will be another COVID-19 surge this fall, more than 350 people still die every day of COVID-19. Compared to young adults, those over the age of 65 are 60 times more likely to die from COVID-19, according to the CDC. The death rate is 340 times higher for those over the age of 85.Is it safe to get the COVID booster and flu shot at the same time?Experts say that getting both your COVID booster and flu shot at the same time won't weaken your body's immune capacity to fight either virus."If you give the body two signals, it's not going to make less [immunity] because it's concentrating on another signal," Chin-Hong said.Although children under 12 are not yet eligible for the new booster shots, many are still getting their original COVID-19 vaccines, which are authorized for children 6 months and older.Similar to the guidance for adults, pediatricians say it's safe to give young children COVID-19 shots and flu shots in the same doctor's visit."This may even be a more convenient option for busy parents," Patel added.Youri Benadjaoud is an MPH candidate at Brown University and a member of the ABC News Medical Unit.Related TopicsCOVID-19 VaccinePopular ReadsCalifornia fire grows over 20,000 acresNov 7, 9:47 PMSeattle stabbings: 10 attacked in 2 daysNov 8, 7:04 PMMissing American tourist in Hungary killed: PoliceNov 9, 1:36 PMFEMA probing supervisor over Trump sign orderNov 9, 3:46 PM538's final forecasts for the 2024 electionNov 5, 7:49 AMABC News Live24/7 coverage of breaking news and live eventsABC News NetworkAbout Nielsen MeasurementChildren's Online Privacy PolicyContact UsDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationInterest-Based AdsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseYour US State Privacy Rights © 2024 ABC NewsJason Alexander: Yadda, Yadda, Yadda ... Get Your Flu Shot HealthlineHealth ConditionsFeaturedAllBreast CancerIBD MigraineMultiple Sclerosis (MS)Rheumatoid ArthritisType 2 DiabetesSponsored TopicsArticlesAllAcid RefluxADHDAllergiesAlzheimer's & DementiaBipolar DisorderCancerCrohn's DiseaseChronic PainCold & FluCOPDDepressionFibromyalgiaHeart DiseaseHigh CholesterolHIVHypertensionIPFOsteoarthritisPsoriasisSkin Disorders and CareSTDsDiscoverWellness TopicsAllNutritionFitnessSkin CareSexual HealthWomen's HealthMental Well-BeingSleepProduct ReviewsAllVitamins & SupplementsSleepMental HealthNutritionAt-Home TestingCBDMen’s HealthOriginal SeriesAllFresh Food FastFood hacks to make eating healthier, easier.Diagnosis DiariesReal diagnosis stories from people who get it.You’re Not AloneStories from real people that destigmatize mental health conditions.Present TenseReal-world mindfulness for busy people.Video SeriesAllYouth in FocusMental health challenges facing our youth.Healthy HarvestMeet your food, from farm to table.Through An Artist's EyeA breast cancer story told through art.Future of HealthInnovations shaping the future of health.PlanHealth ChallengesMindful EatingSugar SavvyMove Your BodyGut HealthMood FoodsAlign Your SpineFind CareAllPrimary CareMental HealthOB-GYNDermatologistsNeurologistsCardiologistsOrthopedistsLifestyle QuizzesWeight ManagementAm I Depressed? A Quiz for TeensAre You a Workaholic?How Well Do You Sleep?Tools & ResourcesHealth NewsFind a DietFind Healthy SnacksDrugs A-ZHealth A-ZConnectFind Your Bezzy CommunityBezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.AllBreast CancerInflammatory Bowel DiseaseCOPDMigraineMultiple SclerosisPsoriasisFollow us on social mediaCan't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.SubscribeNutritionMeal KitsOverviewDietsMeal KitsPrepared MealsComparisonsGrocery DeliverySpecial DietsHealthy EatingFood FreedomConditionsFeel Good FoodProductsVitamins & SupplementsSustainabilityWeight ManagementHealth NewsFact CheckedJason Alexander: Yadda, Yadda, Yadda ... Get Your Flu ShotWritten by Cathy Cassata on September 21, 2022 — Fact checked by Dana K. CassellShare on PinterestThe ‘Seinfeld’ actor says his mother would be very proud of his new role as the face of a campaign to raise awareness about the importance of getting your annual flu shot. Image Provided by Not Today FluActor Jason Alexander is speaking out about the importance of the flu vaccine.Alexander teamed up with the Not Today, Flucampaign to spread awareness.He shares experiences of how the flu interfered with key acting jobs.Actor Jason Alexander is best known for his iconic role as George Costanza in the hit television show Seinfeld. But growing up, he considered a different career path besides acting.“[My] mom was interested in me having a medical career because that’s a life that she found and she valued a life that was in service to other people. All her life she was a nurse and spent many years as a nurse educator,” Alexander told Healthline.During her career, his mom established and ran a school of nursing in Livingston, New Jersey. She also worked alongside medical researcher Jonas Salk, who developed the first successful polio vaccine.“[So] there was no nonsense about vaccinations in my house when I was growing up. My mom was an advocate and believer in these breakthroughs,” said Alexander.While performing and acting turned out to be his true calling, his mom would be proud of his latest endeavor.Alexander teamed up with the American Nurses Association (ANA) and Sanofi for their Not Today, Flucampaign, which empowers people to get the flu shot to help lower their risk of flu and its complications, including flu-related hospitalizations, pneumonia, and worsening of chronic conditions, such as congestive heart failure, asthma, and diabetes.“I was delighted to be asked to be part of it,” he said. “It’s one of the very rare good uses of celebrity — to stand next to things that are actually important.”As part of the campaign, Alexander is featured in a lighthearted and funny video.“Comedy is very healing. Comedy is very bonding…when you can get it right…[and] if it makes somebody laugh, laughter is still (they’re not kidding) it’s really good medicine,” he said.His passion for comedy draws him closer to his mom’s passion for helping others. Over the years, he realized that while acting, directing, and telling stories were not the same kind of service work his mom provided, they allowed him an avenue to help others.“[Doing] these kinds of public service work, talking about things that have value, that may or may not get enough attention in of themselves, and being a face for it or being a voice for it, that is exactly the kind of stuff my mother would have said, ‘good for you, little Jason. That’s exactly the way to do this,’” he said.The fact that in this case, the Not Today, Flu campaign is about something that his mom would have been passionate about makes it all the more meaningful to him.Why the flu vaccine is importantAlthough the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends annual flu vaccination for everyone 6 months and older (with few exceptions), it reports that less than half of eligible Americans get a flu shot.Ernest Grant, PhD, RN, president of the ANA, pointed out that certain groups are at increased risk of flu-related complications, including:Pregnant womenInfants and childrenPeople over 65 years oldPeople with comorbiditiesPeople from certain racial or ethnic groups, such as Black, Hispanic or Latino, and American Indian or Alaska Native persons“There is also a high probability that this flu season may be particularly severe due to the reduced exposure of the population to the flu virus during the past two flu seasons,” Grant told Healthline. “Communicable diseases and viral variants are always emerging and are unpredictable. You may not be able to prevent from catching other viruses and suffering potential devastating complications, but the flu shouldn’t be one of them.”Alexander’s bad cases of the fluFor the past 20 years, Alexander has gotten the flu shot regularly. But he recalled two key instances early in his career when the flu derailed his performances. As a person with asthma, he said illnesses that affect his bronchial tubes are “a big deal and almost every time as an adult that I’ve had flu, it’s turned into bronchitis.”Most memorable was when he was performing in the Jerome Robbin’s Broadway musical, for which he won a Tony Award for in 1989.“[But I] almost didn’t [win] because I got the flu during Tony voting season and I missed over a week of shows…and I came back and was performing the show with bronchitis,” he said. “It turned out fine, but it would have been so much easier if I had just taken the vaccine.”Years later, while filming a movie during his time on Seinfeld, he got the flu.“[It] didn’t derail me, but the medications that I had to take to be able to work while having the flu, I felt like a zombie…It’s so unnecessary; you don’t have to get the flu and if you do, you can make it such an inconsequential thing,” said Alexander.The instances occurred while he was in his 20s and 30s, a time when he was “much more cavalier” about his health. Now, that he’s in his 60s, he said, he’s more realistic about his health.“I’m so lucky to have the health profile that I’ve got, but I also know that they’re fragile and it just takes a bad illness and your whole health profile can change,” he said.According to the CDC, about 90% of influenza-related deaths and 50 to 70% of influenza-related hospitalizations occur among people 65 and older.“People 65 years old and older are at an increased risk of developing serious illness, hospitalization, and death from the flu. It is important to get your flu shot as it will decrease the chance of hospitalization or serious illness from the flu,” Dr. Sindhu Aderson, medical director of Northwestern Medicine Immediate Care, told Healthline.For Alexander, protecting his health with preventive measures like the flu shot is also about protecting the health of his loved ones, such as the elderly and babies in his life.“If you have the flu and flu is contagious, you can wind up giving it to somebody who is vulnerable and somebody you adore, and you don’t have to do that…You just take it out of the realm of possibility; you’re not going to be that person,” he said.The flu shot is easy, safe, and fast actingAderson explained that the flu vaccine causes the body to develop antibodies against influenza approximately two weeks after getting the shot. “These antibodies work at neutralizing and fighting the flu,” she said.While the CDC reports that side effects of the flu vaccine are generally mild and last only a few days, common side effects might include:Soreness, redness, and/or swelling from the shotHeadacheFeverNauseaMuscle achesIn rare cases, faintingIf you want more information about the vaccine, Grant suggested consulting with “a trusted voice to help guide you in your decision and explain your options.”And if you’re ready to schedule a shot, you can find one offered in your area by visiting here.Alexander said, for the record, George Costanza would have his appointment set.“George…was a bit of a hypochondriac, so he would want to make sure nothing got him, but the most important thing is in many, many, many instances, the flu shot is free. So, free? That’s George’s big word. I mean come on, he would have taken anything for free,” said Alexander. “He’d certainly go get the vaccine, that’s for sure.”How we reviewed this article:HistoryShare this articleWritten by Cathy Cassata on September 21, 2022 — Fact checked by Dana K. CassellRead this nextQ&A: Flu Vaccine or COVID-19 Booster? Which Shot Should You Get First This Fall?Experts say research indicates it's OK to get the flu shot and a COVID-19 booster vaccine at the same time, although it's not necessary to do soREAD MOREWhat to Know About Having Influenza A When You’re PregnantInfluenza A is the most common variant of the flu and the one you’re most likely to get during pregnancy. A flu shot is the best protection against…READ MOREThe Difference Between Stomach Flu and InfluenzaMedically reviewed by Angelica Balingit, MDThe stomach flu and influenza can both cause similar symptoms. Learn more about how you can tell them apart. READ MOREInfluenza Spread: Airborne, Droplet, and Contact Transmission ExplainedMedically reviewed by Avi Varma, MD, MPH, AAHIVS, FAAFPYes, the influenza virus is airborne, but it also spreads by other methods. Keep reading to learn more, including prevention tips. READ MORECan the Flu Shot Give You Influenza?Medically reviewed by Alana Biggers, M.D., MPHThe flu shot won’t give you influenza because it contains inactive forms of the virus. However, you might have side effects like headaches, fevers…READ MOREQuiz: When Should I Get My Flu Shot?Medically reviewed by Angelica Balingit, MDIt's generally best to get your flu shot toward the beginning of fall. READ MORE8 Easy Ways to Get Rid of Mucus in Your ChestMedically reviewed by the Healthline Medical NetworkHere are 8 tips to help get rid of mucus in your chest. From vapor rub and hot shower steam to essential oils and decongestants, these may help.READ MORE10 Natural Remedies for Flu SymptomsMedically reviewed by Cynthia Cobb, DNP, APRN, WHNP-BC, FAANPWhile there's no cure for the flu, here are several natural remedies that might help soothe flu symptoms, from easing a sore throat and irritated…READ MORECan You Die from the Flu?Medically reviewed by Daniel Murrell, M.D.Seasonal flu is a viral infection that tends to start spreading in the fall and hits its peak during the winter months. It can continue into the…READ MOREAbout UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsSitemapMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzyFlu While Pregnant: Symptoms & Safe Treatments Sign UpSign Out Getting PregnantPregnancyFirst YearToddlerFamilyBaby NamesRegistry BuilderBaby ProductsCommunity Groups News TopicsFertilityOvulationPreparing for PregnancyPreconception HealthInfertilitySee All Getting Pregnant TopicsRecommended ReadingWhat is Implantation Bleeding and When Does It Occur?Implantation bleeding can mimic period bleeding, but it could also mean that you're pregnant. Here’s how to tell whether spotting or light bleeding is a sign of pregnancy, your period or something else.Ovulation Symptoms: 10 Signs of OvulationSigns of ovulation can include increased basal body temperature, mild cramps and more. Here's what to expect — and how to use this information to increase your chances of getting pregnant.Does a Faint Line on a Pregnancy Test Mean You're Pregnant?Taking a home pregnancy test is always a nail-biter. How accurate the results are depend a lot on when you take it and what the lines in the window reveal.When Does Implantation Occur?Learn more about the possible signs and symptoms of implantation during pregnancy, plus when and why it happens.How to Have a Boy or a GirlOn team blue or pink? Find out if these ways to choose baby's sex really work and whether it's a good idea to try them.ToolsOvulation CalculatorIVF Due Date CalculatorTopicsPregnancy Week-by-WeekPregnancy SymptomsLabor & DeliveryPreparing for BabyFetal DevelopmentScreenings & TestsBaby’s Zodiac SignBaby ShowersPregnancy ComplicationsSee All Pregnancy TopicsRecommended ReadingEarly Signs of PregnancyIf you’re trying to get pregnant, here’s a timeline of the early signs of pregnancy to look for, including tender breasts, fatigue, nausea and bloating.Managing Morning Sickness and Nausea During PregnancyHere are the symptoms and causes of morning sickness, plus what you can do to relieve it.Signs of LaborNot sure how to know if you're in labor? Look for these clues that it's almost show time!Changes or Decreases in Fetal MovementHave your baby's movements changed? Find out what's normal and when to call the doctor.Signs You Are Having a Boy or GirlHere are some clues to whether you're having a boy or a girl that have research behind them.Braxton Hicks Contractions and False LaborHow to tell the difference between these false labor signs and the real deal.ToolsPregnancy Due Date CalculatorConception Date CalculatorPregnancy Weight Gain CalculatorChinese Gender PredictorTopicsBaby Month-by-MonthPostpartum RecoveryNewbornsMilestonesBreastfeedingBottle-FeedingIntroducing SolidsBaby SleepVaccinesSleep SchedulesFeeding SchedulesSee All First Year TopicsRecommended ReadingWhen Do Baby Growth Spurts Happen?You're not imagining it! Find out what happens during baby’s growth spurts.How to Help a Gassy BabyHere's why your baby may be gassy and infant-safe treatments for baby gas.11 Reasons Your Baby Won't SleepSolutions to issues that may be keeping your baby from sleeping through the night.Gripe Water for BabiesLearn about this herbal treatment for gassy, fussy infants and see if it's safe.What is Sleep Regression?Here's when they happen, how long they last and what you can do to help baby sleep better.ToolsBaby TrackerTopicsToddler Month-by-MonthHealth and SafetyGrowth and DevelopmentFeeding Your ToddlerToddler SleepPotty TrainingActivities and PlayLearningSee All Toddler TopicsRecommended ReadingWhy Is Your Toddler Waking Up Too Early and What Should You Do About It?Use these tips to adjust your early riser's sleep schedule.How to Potty Train Your Toddler in Three DaysHeard about the 3-day potty training method? Here's how to make it work.How to Handle Toddler Night TerrorsHere’s what these sleep episodes are and some easy ways to handle them in your child.Why Toddlers Refuse to Eat and What to DoShe used to gobble up everything you put on her plate — but now your toddler who won’t eat.What to Do if Your Toddler Refuses to PoopYou wait, but it's a no-go. What to do if your toddler has trouble pooping on the potty.TopicsAdoptionFamily FinancesSecond Time ParentsChildproofingMental Health in ChildrenCar SafetyTraveling With KidsRelationshipsFamily ChangesRecipesSee All Family TopicsRecommended ReadingWhat is the Best Age Gap Between Kids?While there’s no "ideal" age gap between children, there are things to think about.10 Best Second Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Baby Number Two (or Three!)Big feelings and big siblings!Where to Find Financial Help as a Single MomThese services provide financial aid to low- and middle-income single mothers.Do Babies Need Passports?Everything you need to know in order to get a U.S. passport for a baby.When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower?There's no right or wrong time to celebrate your new arrival.TopicsTop Baby Names for BoysTop Baby Names for GirlsBest Gender-Neutral NamesUncommon Baby NamesUnique Girl NamesUnique Boy NamesSee All Baby Names TopicsRecommended ReadingTop Baby Boy Names That Start With ASee the most popular baby boy names that start with the letter A.Top Baby Girl Names That Start With JSee the most popular baby girl names that start with the letter J.Top Baby Girl Names That Start With MSee the most popular baby girl names that start with the letter M.Top Baby Girl Names That Start With SSee the most popular baby girl names that start with the letter S.Top Baby Boy Names That Start With KSee the most popular baby boy names that start with the letter K.TopicsCustom ChecklistMy RegistriesMy PerksTake the QuizRegistry 101See All Registry BuilderTopicsAmazon Prime DayCar SeatsMaternity ClothesNursing & FeedingDiaperingBaby MonitorsBaby CarriersBaby CareNurseryToysStrollersSee All Baby ProductsRecommended ReadingBest Pregnancy PillowsFinally get some sleep with one of these comfortable, supportive body pillows.Best Prenatal VitaminsHere’s how to choose the best prenatal vitamin for you, according to doctors.Free Baby SamplesBringing home baby isn't cheap, but these freebies can help you save big.Best Baby DealsWe scoured the web for the best markdowns on brands that What to Expect parents love.Best Breast PumpsFinding the right breast pump can make feedings easier for you and baby.ToolsFirst Trimester Must-HavesSecond Trimester Must-HavesThird Trimester Must-HavesTopicsFeatured & PopularBirth Month GroupsGetting PregnantPregnancyFirst YearFamilyHealthStagesInternationalUnited StatesAll Groups A-ZSee All Community Groups Sign UpSign Out Getting PregnantPregnancyFirst YearToddlerFamilyBaby NamesRegistry BuilderBaby ProductsCommunity Groups News Getting PregnantFertilityOvulationPreparing for PregnancyPreconception HealthInfertilitySee All Getting Pregnant TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGWhat is Implantation Bleeding and When Does It Occur?Ovulation Symptoms: 10 Signs of OvulationDoes a Faint Line on a Pregnancy Test Mean You're Pregnant?When Does Implantation Occur?How to Have a Boy or a GirlTOOLSOvulation CalculatorIVF Due Date CalculatorPregnancyPregnancy Week-by-WeekPregnancy SymptomsLabor & DeliveryPreparing for BabyFetal DevelopmentScreenings & TestsBaby’s Zodiac SignBaby ShowersPregnancy ComplicationsSee All Pregnancy TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGEarly Signs of PregnancyManaging Morning Sickness and Nausea During PregnancySigns of LaborChanges or Decreases in Fetal MovementSigns You Are Having a Boy or GirlBraxton Hicks Contractions and False LaborTOOLSPregnancy Due Date CalculatorConception Date CalculatorPregnancy Weight Gain CalculatorChinese Gender PredictorFirst YearBaby Month-by-MonthPostpartum RecoveryNewbornsMilestonesBreastfeedingBottle-FeedingIntroducing SolidsBaby SleepVaccinesSleep SchedulesFeeding SchedulesSee All First Year TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGWhen Do Baby Growth Spurts Happen?How to Help a Gassy Baby11 Reasons Your Baby Won't SleepGripe Water for BabiesWhat is Sleep Regression?TOOLSBaby TrackerToddlerToddler Month-by-MonthHealth and SafetyGrowth and DevelopmentFeeding Your ToddlerToddler SleepPotty TrainingActivities and PlayLearningSee All Toddler TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGWhy Is Your Toddler Waking Up Too Early and What Should You Do About It?How to Potty Train Your Toddler in Three DaysHow to Handle Toddler Night TerrorsWhy Toddlers Refuse to Eat and What to DoWhat to Do if Your Toddler Refuses to PoopFamilyAdoptionFamily FinancesSecond Time ParentsChildproofingMental Health in ChildrenCar SafetyTraveling With KidsRelationshipsFamily ChangesRecipesSee All Family TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGWhat is the Best Age Gap Between Kids?10 Best Second Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Baby Number Two (or Three!)Where to Find Financial Help as a Single MomDo Babies Need Passports?When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower?Baby NamesTop Baby Names for BoysTop Baby Names for GirlsBest Gender-Neutral NamesUncommon Baby NamesUnique Girl NamesUnique Boy NamesSee All Baby Names TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGTop Baby Boy Names That Start With ATop Baby Girl Names That Start With JTop Baby Girl Names That Start With MTop Baby Girl Names That Start With STop Baby Boy Names That Start With KRegistry BuilderCustom ChecklistMy RegistriesMy PerksTake the QuizRegistry 101See All Registry BuilderBaby ProductsAmazon Prime DayCar SeatsMaternity ClothesNursing & FeedingDiaperingBaby MonitorsBaby CarriersBaby CareNurseryToysStrollersSee All Baby ProductsRECOMMENDED READINGBest Pregnancy PillowsBest Prenatal VitaminsFree Baby SamplesBest Baby DealsBest Breast PumpsTOOLSFirst Trimester Must-HavesSecond Trimester Must-HavesThird Trimester Must-HavesCommunity GroupsFeatured & PopularBirth Month GroupsGetting PregnantPregnancyFirst YearFamilyHealthStagesInternationalUnited StatesAll Groups A-ZSee All Community GroupsNewsPregnancy > Your HealthFlu While Pregnant: How to Stay Safe by Colleen de Bellefonds Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D. Medical Review PolicyAll What to Expect content that addresses health or safety is medically reviewed by a team of vetted health professionals. Our Medical Review Board includes OB/GYNs, pediatricians, infectious disease specialists, doulas, lactation counselors, endocrinologists, fertility specialists and more. We believe you should always know the source of the information you're reading. Learn more about our editorial and medical review policies. | September 19, 2022 Latest update:Medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.See moreStocksyHaving the flu while pregnant can be more than just uncomfortable — it can also lead to some complications. Here's how to prevent and treat it if you do get the flu during pregnancy.Back to Top In This Article What are symptoms of the flu in pregnancy? What causes the flu during pregnancy? Can I get the flu shot during pregnancy? What happens if I get the flu while pregnant? Safe medications for the flu during pregnancy Can the flu be dangerous during pregnancy?You've decorated the nursery, stockpiled diapers and finally found the perfect chair to rock your little bundle to sleep. Now here's another thing to add to your baby's-on-the-way checklist: preparing for and protecting yourself from the flu.That's because when you’re expecting, normal changes to your heart, lungs and immune system leave you more susceptible than usual to viruses than you were before. So even if you’re one of those people who usually sails through winter without so much as a sniffle, you may be likely to get sick with a cold, flu or other illness this season.The flu, which most often announces itself with body aches, fever and chills, among other symptoms, can be problematic for pregnant women, potentially leading to complications requiring hospitalization. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionFlu & PregnancySee All Sources [1] That’s why it’s so important that all expectant moms get the flu shot well before flu season hits, preferably in the fall.Whether you’ve already caught the flu or just want to know what to look out for and how to prevent it, here’s what you need to know to protect yourself and your baby. Most importantly, if you suspect that you do have the flu, call your doctor right away to get a firm diagnosis and the treatment you need (which may involve pregnancy-safe antiviral prescription medications for the flu) as soon as possible.What are symptoms of the flu in pregnancy?Influenza (aka the flu) is more severe and comes on more suddenly than a cold. Symptoms include: Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionFlu Symptoms & ComplicationsSee All Sources [2]Fever (usually 101 degrees Fahrenheit to 104 degrees F or higher; call your doctor if it climbs above 101 degrees F)Intense muscle achesChillsA sore throat that generally worsens by the second or third dayHeadacheGeneral weakness and fatigueOccasional sneezingCough that can become severeOccasionally nausea, vomiting and/or diarrheaHowever, some people who have the flu have respiratory symptoms without a fever. Continue Reading Below Read This Next Fever During Pregnancy The Flu Shot and Pregnancy Medications During Pregnancy: What’s Safe and What’s Not? Fever During Pregnancy The Flu Shot and Pregnancy Medications During Pregnancy: What’s Safe and What’s Not? Keep track of your medications with the My Journal tool in our free appSymptoms of the flu typically last two weeks, though they can go on for longer.What causes the flu during pregnancy?Cases of the flu are caused by an array of influenza viruses. Because the influenza virus is constantly mutating, there are an unlimited number of flu viruses — which also explains why the flu vaccine is different each year (and why even if you’ve had the shot in the past, you need to get a new one each flu season).Can I get the flu shot during pregnancy?Yes, it's safe to get the flu shot during pregnancy. In fact, you definitely should get it: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that all moms-to-be get the flu shot to keep safe during flu season. You can get the flu shot at any time during your pregnancy, and there is plenty of evidence that the vaccine is safe for you and your baby. As an added bonus, if you get immunized during the last trimester of pregnancy, you also help protect your baby from the flu for several months after he's born.The flu vaccine offers the most protection if it’s given before flu season or early on during it (preferably by the end of October). It’s never 100 percent effective because it protects only against the influenza viruses that are expected to cause the most problems in a particular year. Still, it greatly increases the chance that you’ll escape the season flu-free.Keep in mind that the nasal spray vaccine (FluMist, which is made from live "weakened" flu virus), should not be given while you are pregnant or nursing. Check with your doctor to learn more.If you're still not convinced about getting vaccinated against influenza — or COVID-19, for that matter — while you're pregnant, make no mistake about it: Both shots have been shown to be safe for moms (and growing babies) at every stage of pregnancy. You can even get them at the same time. Still concerned? Talk to your practitioner, who will assure you that it's not only fine for you and your little one, but a necessary preventative measure.What happens if I get the flu while pregnant?If you have flu symptoms, it's important to call your practitioner immediately. Often your primary care doctor or local urgent care will offer you a rapid flu test. Getting tested early on helps ensure you’re treated as early as possible and that your close contacts can receive preventative (prophylactic) treatment to stay healthy. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicFlu While PregnantSee All Sources [3]Because the flu can be serious in pregnant women, your doctor may want to treat you with an antiviral mediation like Tamiflu. Antiviral medications work best if you take them within two days of getting sick. The sooner you’re treated, the safer you and your baby will be.Otherwise, the same tips that can help keep you comfortable when you’ve got a cold can also be used when you’re down with a bout of the flu. They include:Keeping in close contact with your practitioner.Resting a lot.Drinking plenty of fluids to soothe your sore throat and replace what’s lost by fever.Taking the antiviral medication your doctor may prescribe according to his or her instructions.Eating well as much as you're able to. If you can stomach them, focus on eating lots of immune-boosting vitamin C foods (oranges, grapefruit, kiwis, pineapple, blackberries, raspberries, tomatoes, kale, broccoli and spinach) and foods that are high in zinc (lean red meat, chicken breast, fortified cereal, eggs, chickpeas, spinach, broccoli, kale and pumpkin seeds).Taking your prenatal vitamin, which offers a pregnancy-safe dose of vitamin C and zinc in addition to the folate, calcium and other nutrients you and your baby need.Having a couple spoonfuls of honey, which can be soothing and actually help suppress a cough as well as an OTC cough suppressant.Since a high fever can be potentially harmful, you’ll need to take steps to reduce it, including.Take a fever-reducing medication (acetaminophen — aka Tylenol — is the safest bet; see below for the medications you should avoid).Try a tepid bath or shower.Drink plenty of cool beverages.Keep clothing and bed covers light.Safe medications for the flu during pregnancyWhile many of the medications you used to reach for before you became pregnant are off-limits now, there are still some meds that are safe to take to relieve symptoms of the flu during pregnancy:Antivirals. Tamiflu and other antivirals are safe (and important to take) if prescribed by a practitioner who has diagnosed you with the flu. Trusted SourceFood & Drug AdministrationTamifluSee All Sources [4]Acetaminophen. If you're running a fever or suffering from nasty body aches or headaches, it's generally considered safe to take products containing acetaminophen, such as Tylenol. Just talk to your doctor about the proper dosing.Cough remedies. Expectorants (like Mucinex) as well as cough suppressants (such as Robitussin or Vicks 44) as well as most cough drops are considered safe during pregnancy, but ask your practitioner about whether they're okay for you and about dosing.Some nasal sprays. Most steroid-containing nasal sprays are fine to use during pregnancy, but check with your doctor about brands and dosing. Plain saline drops and sprays are always safe to take when you're expecting and can help clear and moisturize a stuffy nose.Some antihistamines. Benadryl and Claritin often get the green light during pregnancy, but be sure to check with your practitioner before taking them. Some doctors will advise staying away from those medications in the first trimester.Remember: Never take any medication (prescription, over the counter or homeopathic) without consulting with a doctor who knows you’re expecting.Some of the medications that could help with flu symptoms when you’re not pregnant are off the table for moms-to-be because they may cause harm to the unborn baby. These include:Some pain relievers. Aspirin, ibuprofen (Motrin or Advil) and naproxen (Aleve) aren't safe during pregnancy because they can be harmful to you and your baby.Most decongestants. Decongestants like Claritin-D, Sudafed and DayQuil should be avoided when you’re expecting (though those featuring phenylephrine and pseudoephedrine may be okay to take during pregnancy with your doctor’s approval). Even those experts who say it’s okay to take certain decongestants will caution that it’s only safe to use them after the first trimester and only as long as it’s used in a limited amount.Some nasal sprays. Steer clear of nonsteroidal nasal decongestant sprays containing oxymetazoline (like Afrin) unless given the green light by your practitioner. Many will tell you to avoid these sprays completely while you're expecting, while others will advise only limited use (one or two days at a time) after the first trimester.Homeopathic remedies. Never take echinacea or other supplements (like zinc and vitamin C) without medical approval.However, don’t put off calling your practitioner or refuse to take a medication he or she prescribes because you think all drugs are harmful in pregnancy. When it comes to the flu, the sooner you’re treated, the safer you and your baby will be.Can the flu be dangerous during pregnancy?Being pregnant definitely puts you at greater risk for the flu's more serious complications, like pneumonia. In fact, pregnant women are more likely to be hospitalized from complications of the flu than non-pregnant women of the same age (which is why getting the flu shot as a preventative measure is such a good idea).But what happens if you didn’t get the flu shot for some reason and then you do end up getting the flu? Your best bet is to see your practitioner right away to talk it all through and get the treatment you need so that you can be on the road to recovery as soon as possible.From the What to Expect editorial team and Heidi Murkoff, author of What to Expect When You're Expecting. What to Expect follows strict reporting guidelines and uses only credible sources, such as peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions and highly respected health organizations. Learn how we keep our content accurate and up-to-date by reading our medical review and editorial policy.SourcesReferences Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Flu & Pregnancy, August 2022. | Show in the articleCenters for Disease Control and Prevention, Flu Symptoms & Complications, August 2022. | Show in the articleCleveland Clinic, Flu While Pregnant, May 2022. | Show in the articleFood & Drug Administration, Tamiflu, October 2016. | Show in the articleWhat to Expect When You're Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff.WhatToExpect.com, Fever During Pregnancy, January 2021.WhatToExpect.com, How the Flu Shot During Pregnancy Protects You and Your Baby, February 2021.UpToDate, Seasonal Influenza in Pregnancy, June 2022.Updates history September 19, 2022Editor: Kathleen FeltonMinor copy and formatting changes.Medically reviewed to ensure accuracy. Was this article helpful? Yes No Thanks for your feedback!Related TopicsYour HealthPregnancyPregnancy GroupsJump to Your Week of PregnancyPregnancy Week 1 Pregnancy Week 2 Pregnancy Week 3 Pregnancy Week 4 Pregnancy Week 5 Pregnancy Week 6 Pregnancy Week 7 Pregnancy Week 8 Pregnancy Week 9 Pregnancy Week 10 Pregnancy Week 11 Pregnancy Week 12 Pregnancy Week 13 Pregnancy Week 14 Pregnancy Week 15 Pregnancy Week 16 Pregnancy Week 17 Pregnancy Week 18 Pregnancy Week 19 Pregnancy Week 20 Pregnancy Week 21 Pregnancy Week 22 Pregnancy Week 23 Pregnancy Week 24 Pregnancy Week 25 Pregnancy Week 26 Pregnancy Week 27 Pregnancy Week 28 Pregnancy Week 29 Pregnancy Week 30 Pregnancy Week 31 Pregnancy Week 32 Pregnancy Week 33 Pregnancy Week 34 Pregnancy Week 35 Pregnancy Week 36 Pregnancy Week 37 Pregnancy Week 38 Pregnancy Week 39 Pregnancy Week 40 Pregnancy Week 41 Pregnancy Week 42 Trending On What to ExpectSigns of Labor Pregnancy Calculator⚠️ You can't see this cool content because you have ad block enabled.Please whitelist our site to get all the best deals and offers from our partners.Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S.Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S.Braxton Hicks Contractions and False LaborFollow us on Opens a new window Opens a new window Opens a new window Opens a new window About What to Expect What to Expect Apps Popular Topics About Us Contact Us Press Center Advertise With Us About Heidi Murkoff Accessibility What to Expect Project Medical Review Policy What to Expect Bookstore Health Data Privacy Policy Advertising Policy Do Not Sell My Personal Information Help AdChoices Feedback Popular Articles Top Boy Names Top Girl Names Ovulation Symptoms Implantation Bleeding Early Signs of Pregnancy When Does Morning Sickness Start? Losing Your Mucus Plug What is a Rainbow Baby? When Do Babies Start Crawling? When Do Babies Start Talking? Round Ligament Pain Pitocin Induction Tools & Registry Due Date Calculator Ovulation Calculator Chinese Gender Predictor Registry Builder Best Prenatal Vitamins Best Baby Strollers Best Breast Pumps Best Pacifiers Best Baby Bouncers Best High Chairs Best Baby Sunscreen Amazon October Prime Day Baby Deals The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy. © 2005-2024 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.A property of Opens a new window Please Join Us to Keep ReadingSign up now to gain FREE unlimited access to all discussions.Sign UpAlready a member? Log InCongratulations!Enjoy your FREE unlimited access to all discussionsPleuropulmonary and Bronchial Infections Archives - Infectious Disease Advisor Menu SECTIONS News Features CME Conferences Clinical Tools Special Collections Multimedia Diagnosis & Disease Info Topics Abdominal Infections Bone and Joint Infections Cardiovascular Infections Central Nervous System Infections Covid 19 News & Insights Eye Infections Gastrointestinal Infections General Infectious Disease General Medicine Hepatitis HIV/AIDS Infection Control and Prevention Nosocomial Infections Pleuropulmonary and Bronchial Infections Practice Management Reproductive Organ Infections and Sexually Transmitted Infections Sepsis Skin and Soft Tissue Infection Upper Respiratory Tract Infections Urinary Tract Infection Vector-Borne Illnesses Haymarket Medical Network Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMedical BagMPRNeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Search for: COVID-19 News CME Drugs Calculators Charts Resources Multimedia Meetings Jobs Part of the News and Features CME Conferences Clinical Tools Special Collections Multimedia Pleuropulmonary and Bronchial Infections Latest Pleuropulmonary and Bronchial Infections News More News Pediatric RSV Off-Season Outbreaks and Infection Rates During Pandemic in China COVID-19-Associated Arrhythmia, Autonomic Dysfunction: An AHA Scientific Statement Risk for Meniere Disease Increased With Upper Respiratory Infections Booster Doses of COVID-19 Vaccine Are Linked to Lower Incidence of Symptoms RSV Vaccine Linked to Better Outcomes in Older Adults With IBD In a National First, an Idaho Health Department Is Refusing to Give COVID Vaccines Ensitrelvir Looks Promising for COVID-19 Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Influenza Vaccine Coverage 80.7% for Health Workers in Acute Care Hospitals Recurrent Pneumonia in Children: Etiology, Risk Factors Differ by Area of Recurrence Arexvy Looks Promising for RSV Protection in Younger At-Risk and Immunocompromised Adults Influenza-Linked Hospitalization Rates Vary Across Seasons, Highest in Adults Aged 65 Years and Older Global TB Cases Hit Record High, TB Becomes Top Infectious Disease Killer Latest Pleuropulmonary and Bronchial Infections Features More Features Respiratory Virus Diagnosis Guidelines Issued by ADLM By Colby Stong The ADLM guidance document on laboratory diagnosis of respiratory viral infections addresses which tests to use, which patients to test, and interpretation of results. RSV: Symptoms, Diagnostic Testing, Treatment, Prevention, and Patient FAQs By Angela Schettini This easy-to-read fact sheet provides patients with an overview of respiratory syncytial virus, covering symptom presentation, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment options. National Academies Releases New Definition for Long COVID By Clinical Advisor Contributing Writer National Academies releases new definition for Long COVID to better serve researchers, clinicians, patients, and policymakers. RSV in Pregnancy: Vaccinations, Prevention, and Treatment Recommendations By Catherine Rivera This patient fact sheet on RSV in pregnancy discusses protecting mothers and babies from RSV, symptoms, treatments, and vaccination. Avian Flu in Cattle: Concerns Surrounding the Newly Emerging Bovine H5N1 Influenza Virus By Nitish Boodhoo Experts advise the public to avoid direct contact with infected/ dead wild birds to minimize avian influenza virus transmission. Conference Coverage MORE MEETINGS Featured Conference IDWeek Clinical Tools Powered by Powered by Drug Look-up Select a category Bacterial infections Fungal infections Helmintic infections Drug Comparison Charts Select a category Bacterial infections Fungal infections Calculators Select a category Bacterial infections MORE CLINICAL TOOLS Cookie Settings ABOUT ADVERTISE CONNECT Remarkable healthcare content Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMcKnight’s Home CareMcKnight’s Long-term CareMcKnight’s Senior LivingMedical BagMPRmyCMENACENeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Copyright © 2024 Haymarket Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in any form without prior authorization. Your use of this website constitutes acceptance of Haymarket Media’s Privacy Policy and Terms & Conditions. Close more info about Pediatric RSV Off-Season Outbreaks and Infection Rates During Pandemic in China Loading... Close more info about Pediatric RSV Off-Season Outbreaks and Infection Rates During Pandemic in China Loading...With bad flu season potentially ahead, health experts urge shotsSkip to main content HomeElection 2024Voter GuidePoliticsLocalPublic SafetyEducationGrowth and DevelopmentPositively RICourtStateNation & World Health experts urge you to get vaccinated for a 'pretty bad flu season'G. Wayne Miller | The Providence JournalShow Caption Hide Caption Flu season is coming back to the US this year. Here's what we know.After a two-year hiatus, health experts say the flu may be back this season. Here's why the U.S. could see an uptick in flu cases.USA TODAY, USA TODAYExperts are predicting a bad flu season this year. Here's what Rhode Islanders need to know.What is the basis for the prediction?Experience in the Southern Hemisphere, which is just now finishing winter. Rates of infection were higher than in previous years in Australia and New Zealand, and this could be a predictor of what awaits the north.In a recent interview with Bloomberg News, President Joe Biden's medical adviser, Dr. Anthony Fauci, said America should prepare for a “pretty bad flu season” that will dovetail with the continuing COVID pandemic.What factors are in play?Unlike in 2020 and 2021, when the pandemic was particularly punishing and people were taking many precautions, mask-wearing as we head into fall and winter is less common – and residents, including schoolchildren, are back in congregate settings where transmission is more likely. Also, with far fewer flu cases in 2020 and 2021, natural immunity to influenza has waned.COVID booster shots: The new COVID booster shots are in Rhode Island. What to know and how to get oneWhat steps should RI residents take?“Rhode Island should learn from this experience and everyone should get their flu shot in September or October,” Rhode Island Medical Society president Dr. Elizabeth B. Lange told The Journal in an email. “Flu vaccines are available at primary care offices (pediatrics, internal medicine, family medicine) and local pharmacies.”Do benefits of flu shots extend beyond those receiving one?Yes, according to Anne Brown, an official with CVS, the nation’s largest pharmacy chain, who says “individuals can help protect themselves against seasonal flu, contribute to the overall health of the community and help minimize the impact on health care resources.”Who should get flu shots?According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “everyone 6 months and older should get a flu vaccination every season with rare exceptions … flu vaccination has important benefits. It can reduce flu illnesses, visits to doctor’s offices and missed work and school due to flu, as well as make symptoms less severe and reduce flu-related hospitalizations and deaths.”More news: A bad heart could have killed Jennifer Link. A pioneering surgery in Fall River saved herWho should not?Children younger than six months, the CDC says, along with “people with severe, life-threatening allergies to any ingredient in a flu vaccine (other than egg proteins)” and others, described at www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/whoshouldvax.htm. If in doubt, consult with your health care provider.How long before full protection is achieved?"It takes two weeks for your body to build an immune response," according to state Health Department spokesman Joseph Wendelken. "People may experience mild symptoms after getting vaccinated. That is just your body building an immune response."Monkeypox vaccine: What to know about getting a monkeypox vaccine in Rhode IslandWhy do I need a shot every year?"Because flu viruses evolve so quickly, last year's vaccine may not protect you from this year's viruses," according to the Mayo Clinic. "New flu vaccines are released every year to keep up with rapidly adapting flu viruses."Can flu shots be co-administered with COVID shots?Yes.More news: Justin McGloin, 11, sick with leukemia, waits at Hasbro Children's for bone-marrow donorWhat is the recent history of flu in Rhode Island?Influenza season Adult flu-associated deaths Inpatient Influenza hospitalizations2021-2022 3 2702020-2021 0 22019-2020 20 9492018-2019 39 1,032 2017-2018 60 1,390Source: Rhode Island Department of HealthTo learn more about flu, visit https://health.ri.gov/flu/ Facebook Twitter EmailHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices© Copyright Gannett 2024This Face Mask Can Alert You If Viruses Like Influenza And Coronavirus Are Present In The Air | TheHealthSite.com ENG LatestNewsDiseasesType 1 DiabetesType 2 DiabetesCancerHeart AttackPneumoniaDiseases A-ZDiet & FitnessPregnancyConceivingInfertilityLabour & DeliveryPregnancy week-by-weekBreastfeedingBaby NamesWomen's HealthMen's HealthSexual HealthVideosMental HealthYogaPhotosWeb StoriesHome remediesAYUSHHerbsUnaniSiddhaHomeopathyNaturopathyParentingAyurveda LatestNewsDiseasesType 1 DiabetesType 2 DiabetesCancerHeart AttackPneumoniaDiseases A-ZDiet & FitnessPregnancyConceivingInfertilityLabour & DeliveryPregnancy week-by-weekBreastfeedingBaby NamesWomen's HealthMen's HealthSexual HealthVideosMental HealthYogaPhotosWeb StoriesHome remediesAYUSHHerbsUnaniSiddhaHomeopathyNaturopathyParentingAyurveda Select Language English इंग्लिश Hindi हिंदी Home News This Face Mask Can Alert You If Viruses Like Influenza And Coronavirus Are Present In The Air Chinese researchers who created the face mask say it can detect as little as 0.3 microliters of liquid containing surface proteins of SARS-CoV-2, H5N1, and H1N1. cold and air pollution Written by Longjam Dineshwori |Updated : September 20, 2022 10:59 AM IST Common respiratory viruses, including those that cause COVID-19 and H1N1 influenza, mainly spread through tiny droplets and aerosols released when infected people talk, cough, or sneeze. Research has shown that SARS-COV2 can remain suspended in the air for hours. Hence, health experts have been encouraging people to wear face masks to reduce the risk of contracting the disease and spreading it. Now, scientists have created a face mask that can alert you if such contagious viruses are present in the surrounding air. Yin Fang, a material scientist at Shanghai Tongji University, and his colleagues presented their invention in the journal Matter. They inventors claimed that their highly sensitive mask can detect the presence of pathogens like influenza and coronavirus in the air and alert the wearers about it via their mobile phones within 10 minutes. How the new face mask works As described by the scientists, the face mask consists of a small sensor that is designed with three types of aptamers (synthetic molecules) that can identify surface proteins on SARS-CoV-2, H5N1, and H1N1. When these aptamers bind to the target proteins in the air, a highly sensitive ion-gated transistor sends the signal and alert the wearers through their phones. The innovative mask can detect even trace levels of viruses in the air within 10 minutes, they stated. Also Read 57-Year-Old Man Dies Of Swine Flu While Undergoing Treatment: Officials Say People With Comorbidities Are At RiskWorld Pneumonia Day 2022: Infectious Diseases Like COVID-19, H1N1, Influenza Often Lead To PneumoniaSwine Flu Claims 4 Lives In Ludhiana, 2 Deaths Reported In 48 Hours More News Fang said that the mask can detect as little as 0.3 microliters of liquid containing viral proteins, much less than the volume of liquid produced by sneezing, coughing or talking. Further, he claimed that the mask can work "really well" in spaces with poor ventilation, such as elevators or enclosed rooms, where the risk of contracting viruses is high. Also, the sensor's design can be easily updated for detecting any respiratory virus that emerges in the future. TRENDING NOW Next, the team is hoping to optimize the design of the polymers and transistors to further increase the sensitivity of the sensor so that it can detect viruses even faster. You may like to read COVID-19 virus face masks H1N1 Influenza SARS-CoV-2 Don’t Miss Out on the Latest Updates. Subscribe to Our Newsletter Today! Subscribe Now Subscribe Now Enroll for our free updates Thank You for Subscribing Thanks for Updating Your Information Latest Articles High Cholesterol Management Diet Tips: 5 Dry Fruits To Clear Clogged Arteries And Prevent Heart Attack Kidney Damage Cure Tips: 5 Ayurvedic Drinks To Manage Kidney Damage Symptoms At Night High Cholesterol Symptoms In Morning: 5 Empty Stomach Drinks To Clear Clogged Arteries Naturally Without Surgery Recognizing And Managing Fatigue In Neurological Conditions Raisin Water On Empty Stomach: 5 Amazing Health Benefits of Drinking Soaked Raisins Daily In The Morning Delhi Weather and AQI Level Today: Smog Blankets City, Visibility Impacted Due To Dangerous Air Pollution View more Latest Articles in Hindi लौकी के साथ भूलकर भी नहीं खानी चाहिए ये 5 चीजें, वरना बिगड़ सकती है सेहत नसों में जमा कॉलेस्ट्रॉल को पूरी तरह साफ कर देगी लहसुन की ये स्पेशल चटनी, मिनटों में ऐसे करें तैयार रोज 1 हरी मिर्च खाने से क्‍या होता है? जानिए शरीर के लिए कितना फायदेमंद है हरी मिर्च खाना सोने से पहले दूध में दालचीनी मिलाकर पीने से दूर होंगी ये 5 समस्याएं, इस तरह करें सेवन Kidney Stone Risk: इन लोगों को रहता है किडनी में पथरी होने का ज़्यादा ख़तरा शरीर में जल्दी खून बढ़ाने के लिए खाएं ये 5 चीजें, टॉ​निक से भी जल्दी होगा असर View more Popular Baby Names Hindu Baby Names Hindu Baby Names Starting With A Muslim Baby Names Hindu Baby Girl Names Hindu Baby Boy NamesView more By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookie Policy. Reject all Accept all cookiesHong Kong faces Covid and flu winter double whammy, health chief warns, even as latest wave subsides and hospitals are set to restore some interrupted services | South China Morning Post AdvertisementCoronavirus Hong KongHong KongHealth & EnvironmentHong Kong faces Covid and flu winter double whammy, health chief warns, even as latest wave subsides and hospitals are set to restore some interrupted services Lo Chung-mau and officials urge residents to get vaccinated against influenza ahead of seasonal surge, assuring public the shots can be combined with doses for Covid City records 5,990 new coronavirus infections, including 163 imported ones, as well as 17 more related fatalities Reading Time:3 minutesWhy you can trust SCMP58Victor TingPublished: 3:31pm, 22 Sep 2022Updated: 9:49pm, 22 Sep 2022Hong Kong is facing a double whammy of Covid-19 and seasonal flu in a coming winter surge, the city’s health minister has warned, even as the current coronavirus wave subsides and public hospitals are set to restore 20 per cent of interrupted services.AdvertisementIn a press briefing after receiving their fourth Covid-19 vaccine shot and a flu jab at the government’s general outpatient clinic in Sai Wan Ho on Thursday, Secretary for Health Lo Chung-mau and top officials under him revealed the influenza vaccination drive would start on October 6, with a million doses already procured.“Both jabs can be taken at the same time … It’s very convenient and we felt very good after resting for 15 minutes,” Lo said, before delivering his stark message.“A lot of statistics have shown that co-infection of Covid-19 and flu will lead to a very high risk of severe illness and death.”Hong Kong health minister Lo Chung-mau has received his fourth Covid-19 jab, together with a flu shot. Photo: K. Y. ChengLo said mask-wearing and social-distancing practices in the past two years of the pandemic had kept flu rates low, adding: “But because of that, residents’ immunity to flu has fallen a lot … I urge all residents to get vaccinated before the winter surge.”AdvertisementDistinguishing Egg-Based Vs Cell-Based Vaccines NewsFDA UpdatesLaw and AdvocacyTechnology TrendsViewpointsAll NewsMediaAround the PracticeIn-Depth InsightsK-CastsScript-EdExpert InterviewsPodcastsConferencesConference CoverageConference ListingResourcesDisease Awareness White Board VideoAmerican Pharmacists MonthSponsored ResourcesCME/CEPartnersPublicationsDrug Topics JournalTotal Pharmacy JournalEventsVirtual EventsTotal Pharmacy Solutions SummitBusinessBusiness StrategiesPatient ServicesPharmacy InventoryLaw and RegulationsTechnology and DataAll Business NewsPractice TypeIndependent PharmacyChain PharmacySpecialty PharmacyHealth System PharmacyPharmacy TechniciansSubscribeChoose SpecialtyAllergyAutoimmune DiseasesBiosimilarsCOVID-19Cannabidiol (CBD)CardiologyCompoundingContinuous Glucose MonitoringDermatologyDiabetesDigestive HealthEndocrinologyEye HealthGenericsHIVHeadache and MigraineImmunizationInfectious DiseaseInfluenzaMedical DevicesMental and Behavioral HealthNeurologyOTCObesity ManagementOncologyPain ManagementPain ManagementPediatricsPublic HealthRare DiseasesRespiratoryRheumatologyShinglesSubstance Use DisorderTechnology and DataVeterinary Pharmacy Women's HealthSpotlight - American Pharmacists MonthNCPA Annual ConventionChoose SpecialtyAllergyAutoimmune DiseasesBiosimilarsCOVID-19Cannabidiol (CBD)CardiologyCompoundingContinuous Glucose MonitoringDermatologyDiabetesDigestive HealthEndocrinologyEye HealthGenericsHIVHeadache and MigraineImmunizationInfectious DiseaseInfluenzaMedical DevicesMental and Behavioral HealthNeurologyOTCObesity ManagementOncologyPain ManagementPain ManagementPediatricsPublic HealthRare DiseasesRespiratoryRheumatologyShinglesSubstance Use DisorderTechnology and DataVeterinary Pharmacy Women's Health SpotlightNewsMediaConferencesResourcesPublicationsEventsBusinessPractice TypeSubscribeAdvertisementThe Evolving Landscape of Influenza Immunizations : Episode 10Distinguishing Egg-Based Vs Cell-Based VaccinesSeptember 20, 2022Video Distinctions between vaccine types are explored, as well as considerations such as egg-based allergies.EP: 1.Prevalence of COVID-19 Affecting Perception of VaccinesEP: 2.Innovative Strategies to Manage Increased Pharmacist WorkloadEP: 3.Mandates Contributing to Vaccine HesitancyEP: 4.A Collaborative Approach to Pediatric Vaccine AdministrationEP: 5.Anticipating the Prevalence of the Coming Flu SeasonEP: 6.A Strategic Approach to Patient Education Regarding Influenza Vaccine EfficacyEP: 7.ACIP Recommendations for Senior Patient PopulationEP: 8.Influenza Vaccine Administration Considerations for Senior PatientsEP: 9.Navigating Concerns Around Influenza Vaccination and Adverse EventsNow ViewingEP: 10.Distinguishing Egg-Based Vs Cell-Based VaccinesEP: 11.Identifying Patient Populations Benefiting Most From Influenza VaccinationEP: 12.Disparities in Public Access to Vaccines Across Patient DemographicsEP: 13.Expanding the Reach of Public Health to Assist Influenza Immunization RatesEP: 14.Opportunities for Improving Seasonal Vaccination StrategyMitchel Rothholz, RPh, MBA: There are different versions of the flu vaccine available this season, whether it’s adjuvant, quadrivalent primarily this year, or trivalent in the past. There was a period where we had both trivalent and quadrivalent available at the same time. Then we’ve got recombinant and egg based. Randy, could you give our audience some perspective of some of the differences between the different vaccines and how to best manage them within their practice?Randy McDonough, PharmD, MS, BCGP, BCPS, FAPhA: I appreciate that question, Mitch, because we get questions from patients. As patients ask me about the different vaccines, I say the egg-based vaccines are the ones that have been around. There’s a long history. We have extensive experience in large-scale production and being able to streamline that production and automation of a highly standardized process. Plus, we’ve got extensive safety data.The challenge with using egg-based, obviously, is patients who have true egg allergies. It’s a very labor-intensive technology. There’s a length of time to produce. When we look at what happened with the COVID-19 pandemic, with egg-based technology, we wouldn’t be able to get vaccine out as fast as we did. There’s a potential interruption of supply, plus there’s a possibility that viruses can mutate, so the vaccine may not be as effective as it needs to be.As we look at recombinant DNA, what’s nice about that from a benefit is we aren’t dependent on egg supply anymore. The manufacturing process could be much faster. During a pandemic, as we saw with COVID-19, we were able to produce large volumes of the vaccine in a relatively short time. It also avoids the mutations that occur. Plus, we’ve seen that people may have a greater antibody response, especially older patients.The challenge with recombinant DNA, as far as the limitation, is that it’s approved for patients 18 years of age and older. It’s a newer technology, so there’s a lot of misunderstanding and misperceptions about how it’s made, what it’s going to do, and how it works in your body. Cell based is the same thing with the same type of benefits. It’s manufactured in a different way so you don’t worry about the egg allergies anymore. Make sure people understand that it’s a newer technology. If there are any misunderstandings, misperceptions, or myths about what this can do in your body, then we have to address that with patients.I’ll also address that it isn’t just the difference in the flu vaccines. We have to make sure we’re careful about how we store them and which ones we’re picking out. If we’re dealing with children, make sure we aren’t giving them a vaccine that hasn’t been approved for the age group. It’s very complicated compared with a COVID-19 vaccination program for children. To minimize any errors, not only in the storage but also in the administration, we’ve scheduled certain times of the day when we do certain age groups. That way, only that particular age group, vial, or color code is out, and we minimize any type of error that could occur. We’ve done a lot of work to minimize and avoid errors within the pediatric population.Mitchel Rothholz, RPh, MBA: Randy, you talked about the pediatric population, and we talked earlier about the timing of when somebody should get their vaccine. We recommend it later in the season. But with the pediatric vaccine, especially a naïve child, what’s the recommendation? Is it OK to start earlier in the season? Do those individuals have to get more than 1 vaccine? Give a little insight into that.Randy McDonough, PharmD, MS, BCGP, BCPS, FAPhA: Yes, with those pediatric patients, with anyone who’s 9 years of age or younger, we have to be cognizant that if they’re vaccine naïve, especially as we talk about influenza vaccine, they will need 2 shots at least 4 weeks apart. It doesn’t even have to be within the same season. If they’ve had 2 shots over 2 subsequent seasons, then for their next shot, they’ll be eligible for just the 1 shot. It’s more important that we get that started for the child and then get them that second shot to get them the full protection for that season.Mitchel Rothholz, RPh, MBA: Thanks, Randy. Any additional insights from our panel?John Beckner, RPh: When you get into the different types of vaccines, there are operational considerations with regard to inventory. Depending on the pharmacy and their ability to handle the carrying costs for that inventory, there may be some reluctance to carry every single vaccine. There are some operational considerations that come into play.Jeff Goad, PharmD, MPH: Absolutely. I was going to add a little to what Randy was saying. Some of the other reported advantages of our non-egg-cell or egg-based vaccines was that you could make them faster if we had a drifted strain and we got word to the manufacturers. We haven’t done that, but the potential is still there for them to reconfigure the vaccine and produce it faster than the egg-based technology, which takes quite a bit longer to do.The other challenge we’ve seen lately is egg adaptation, where the egg-based vaccines have to grow in a hen egg. They have to learn to live in that environment. Sometimes it changes their immunogenicity, and their ability to create the immune response in humans doesn’t do the same as what we thought it did when we tested the egg. The challenge is that egg-based technology is susceptible to egg adaptation, which can change its ability to work well, whereas the recombinant or cell-based vaccines don’t have that. There are trade-offs. I definitely agree with Randy. We should also consider the long history of egg-based vaccines. But there are some advantages as we learn more about the non-egg-based vaccine.Randy McDonough, PharmD, MS, BCGP, BCPS, FAPhA: Getting back to what John talked about, we’ll be ordering every type of vaccine. We hadn’t really ordered the cell-based [vaccine] this year. But we started talking about whether there could be a patient who would benefit from it, especially if there’s an egg allergy or if they’re younger. The recombinant vaccine isn’t going to be for that younger patient. Can we give them a cell-based [vaccine]? It’s a safer alternative. We have to think about this from a patient’s perspective: who will benefit from that vaccine? How much do I carry? Then you could start making better decisions about the inventory.Mitchel Rothholz, RPh, MBA: Great perspectives, gentlemen.Transcript edited for clarity.Recent VideosRelated Content Why Vaccination Uptake is Crucial During the Winter SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 6th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, sat down with Drug Topics to discuss the importance of COVID-19 and influenza vaccination.Good Neighbor Pharmacy Customers Across the US Reflect and Look ForwardSeptember 20th 2021PodcastGood Neighbor Pharmacy customers from rural, suburban, and city areas reflect on the past year and discuss the future of independent pharmacy. Q&A: Understanding the Cause of Declining Vaccination Rates Amidst Flu SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 4th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, discussed declining influenza and COVID-19 vaccination rates and how it has created a looming threat for public health officials.Q&A: The Importance of Vaccine Literacy, Uptake During Flu SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 4th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, discussed the importance of annual vaccination and overall health awareness and literacy during the winter flu season.Independent Pharmacies Should Expand Their Vaccination Programs | NCPA 2024Killian MearaOctober 31st 2024ArticleA conversation with David Ha, PharmD, BCIDP, at the National Community Pharmacists Association 2024 Annual Convention and Expo.Top Tips for Pharmacy Vaccination Clinics | NCPA 2024Lauren Biscaldi, MS, Managing EditorOctober 28th 2024ArticleBefore marketing your pharmacy’s immunizations services, check out these takeaways from NCPA. Related Content Why Vaccination Uptake is Crucial During the Winter SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 6th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, sat down with Drug Topics to discuss the importance of COVID-19 and influenza vaccination.Good Neighbor Pharmacy Customers Across the US Reflect and Look ForwardSeptember 20th 2021PodcastGood Neighbor Pharmacy customers from rural, suburban, and city areas reflect on the past year and discuss the future of independent pharmacy. Q&A: Understanding the Cause of Declining Vaccination Rates Amidst Flu SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 4th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, discussed declining influenza and COVID-19 vaccination rates and how it has created a looming threat for public health officials.Q&A: The Importance of Vaccine Literacy, Uptake During Flu SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 4th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, discussed the importance of annual vaccination and overall health awareness and literacy during the winter flu season.Independent Pharmacies Should Expand Their Vaccination Programs | NCPA 2024Killian MearaOctober 31st 2024ArticleA conversation with David Ha, PharmD, BCIDP, at the National Community Pharmacists Association 2024 Annual Convention and Expo.Top Tips for Pharmacy Vaccination Clinics | NCPA 2024Lauren Biscaldi, MS, Managing EditorOctober 28th 2024ArticleBefore marketing your pharmacy’s immunizations services, check out these takeaways from NCPA. AboutAdvertiseEditorialContact UsTerms and ConditionsPrivacyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationContact Info2 Commerce Drive Cranbury, NJ 08512609-716-7777© 2024 MJH Life Sciences All rights reserved.When is the best time to get a flu shot? Here’s what doctors say.Skip to main contentAdvertisement24/7 HelpFor premium support please call:800-290-4726more ways to reach usSign inMail24/7 HelpFor premium support please call:800-290-4726more ways to reach usMailSign inSubscriptionsAnimalsBusinessElectionsEntertainmentFitnessFoodGamesHealthHome & GardenLighter SideMedicarenewNewsScience & TechShoppingSportsWeatherSign inSubscriptionsAnimalsBusinessElectionsEntertainmentFitnessFoodGamesHealthHome & GardenLighter SideMedicarenewNewsScience & TechShoppingSportsWeatherWhen is the best time to get a flu shot? Here’s what doctors say.Rachel Grumman BenderUpdated September 20, 2022 at 5:20 AMFlu shots help protect against hospitalization and death. (Photo: Getty Images) (Getty Images/EyeEm)Fall season usually means the start of people wearing cozy sweaters, sipping pumpkin spice lattés — and getting the flu.It’s something most people haven't had to deal with for the past couple of years because of the pandemic. During the 2020-2021 flu season, flu activity was “unusually low,” according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), thanks to COVID safety measures, such as more people wearing masks, upping their hand washing hygiene and staying home.However, as life has started returning to normal for many, flu cases are expected to climb this fall and winter, which is why experts recommend getting the flu vaccine.But when exactly should you get one? And can you get a flu shot at the same time as the Omicron booster? Here’s what experts say.First, why do people need a flu shot each year?The flu is actually caused by several different influenza viruses. The two types of viruses responsible for most people getting seasonal flu are influenza A and influenza B, and they each have their own subtypes and groups.Because flu viruses are constantly changing, along with the fact that immunity wanes over time, the flu vaccine is reformulated each year for better protection. There’s even an organization — The World Health Organization’s Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System, which was established in 1952 — that monitors the frequent changes in influenza viruses.Dr. Pedro Piedra, professor of molecular virology and microbiology and of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine, tells Yahoo Life that it’s a “good surveillance network globally that looks at what viruses are circulating, and then they formulate the best guess as to what needs to be changed in the vaccine” for that year.Piedra explains that, generally, the vaccine will have an “almost perfect match” with one of the strains that’s circulating. He adds: “It’s always hard to have a perfect vaccine for all of the viruses that are circulating. But you don’t always have to have a perfect match to have cross protection.”How effective is the flu vaccine?Flu vaccines have been shown to reduce the risk of having to go to the doctor with flu by 40% to 60%, according to the CDC. “Flu shot reduces the risk of severe flu symptoms, hospitalization, ICU admission and death,” Dr. Riza Conroy, a family medicine physician at the Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, tells Yahoo Life.The vaccine can also help protect those who are the most vulnerable to complications from flu viruses, which typically target children 6 months to 5 years old, as well as adults age 65 and older, according to the Mayo Clinic. In fact, the CDC states that flu vaccination can be “lifesaving” for children. A 2022 study found that flu vaccination reduced children’s risk of life-threatening influenza by 75%.“Children can also die from flu,” says Piedra. “Generally, the children who have died from flu have been children that have not been vaccinated.” He adds that “it’s not only older folks” that can die from the flu. “Children have a greater risk of more severe complications, just like pregnant women do.”When is the best time to get a flu shot?Although influenza viruses are detected year-round, they circulate more widely during the fall and winter months. Conroy points out that flu season “peaks December to February but has been seen to go up in cases around March, too, and may still be noted all the way to May.”According to Conroy, “The best time to get the flu vaccine is around October” so you’re protected for flu season, noting that the flu shot is “usually in full effect two weeks after receiving the vaccine.”Peidra agrees that October is “a good month” to get vaccinated. But in general, experts say there’s no time like the present. “This year we’re already seeing flu activity,” says Peidra, “and it’s early.”Flu vaccine is effective for about five to six months, notes Conroy.Who should get a flu shot?Everyone 6 months or older should get the flu vaccine that’s appropriate for their age, says Conroy, unless your health care provider indicates otherwise.There are several flu vaccines approved for use in those as young as 6 months old and older, while there are two vaccines approved only for adults 65 years and older, according to the CDC. The nasal influenza vaccine, FluMist, is available for children and adults ages 2 to 49. It’s also worth noting that some children 6 months to 8 years old need two doses of flu vaccine.Can you get the Omicron booster and flu shot at the same time?Yes, say experts. “You can get the flu shot and Omicron booster at the same time. There is no contraindication giving both vaccines together,” says Conroy,However, if you haven’t already gotten your recommended doses of the COVID-19 vaccine, the CDC recommends getting them as soon as possible, followed by a flu vaccine by the end of October.Wellness, parenting, body image and more: Get to know the who behind the hoo with Yahoo Life's newsletter. Sign up here.Show commentsAdvertisementAdvertisementIn Other NewsEntertainmentEntertainmentTown & CountryDid John Dutton die on 'Yellowstone'?EntertainmentNY PostElon Musk slams Dana Carvey’s ‘SNL’ impression, says ‘dying’ show is ‘out of touch wi…FinanceFinanceBankrateHow to start (and build) an emergency fundFinanceReutersBitcoin breaks $81,000 as Trump's election turbocharges cryptocurrenciesFoodFoodSouthern LivingThe $6 pantry staple you must have for ThanksgivingFoodSouthern LivingThis is the best casserole for FriendsgivingNewsNewsReutersUkraine's Zelenskiy says strength must come with diplomacy to achieve peaceNewsFox NewsIsrael’s new defense minister says country has defeated HezbollahSportsSportsUSA TODAY Sports32 things we learned in NFL Week 10: Who will challenge for NFC throne?SportsAssociated PressJake Bates makes 52-yarder as time expires, Lions overcome Jared Goff's 5 INTs to bea…WeatherWeatherAssociated PressBomberos describen condiciones angustiosas en el incendio forestal en CaliforniaWeatherNBC Universal18-year-old parks employee killed while battling New York wildfireAdvertisementAdvertisementAdvertisementRelated articlesShow commentsAdvertisementAdvertisementRelated articlesShow commentsAdvertisementAdvertisementRelated articlesShow commentsAdvertisementFeedbackHelpJoin AOLAccessibilityEU Digital Services ActTerms and Privacy PolicyPrivacy DashboardAbout UsAbout our AdsAdvertisingSitemap© 2024 Yahoo. All rights reserved.Flu season is upon us - here is how to protect yourself and others - Pine Bush Central School District Skip to content Student Registration Stay Connected with ParentSquare Whom to Contact and When Access Your Student’s Gmail Account Pine Bush Central School District Contact Us Directions Employment Staff Resources GO Schools CirclevilleElementary EJ RussellElementary PakanasinkElementary Pine BushElementary CirclevilleMiddle School CrispellMiddle School Pine BushHigh School Home About Us Academics Athletics Board of Education Departments News Parent / Community Pine Bush Central School District > Archive > Flu season is upon us – here is how to protect yourself and others Posted on September 20, 2022December 6, 2022 by linda.smithFlu season is upon us – here is how to protect yourself and others Flu, or influenza, spreads easily and can make people very sick, especially children. Flu symptoms include: fever or chills body aches cough sore throat headache runny or stuffy nose feeling very tired stomach problems and diarrhea (especially in children)) Unlike a cold, the flu comes on very suddenly. Prevent flu Flu vaccine is the best protection against the flu. It’s recommended every year for everyone six months and older. Get the flu vaccine for you and your children every year, It helps make flu sickness milder or prevents it all together Getting the vaccine early in the fall means you and your children will be protected when flu season starts. Ask people close to your children, like babysitters and relatives, to get the vaccine, too. The vaccine is especially important for people with certain health conditions, like asthma, diabetes, heart or lung conditions because the flu can make them even sicker If your child gets the flu Your child will need plenty of rest and lots of fluids. Keep your child home from school for at least 24 hours after their fever is one without using fever-control medicine. This helps avoid giving the flu to others. Talk with your child’s health care provider before giving a child any over-the-counter medicine. Never give your child or teenager aspirin or any medicine that has aspirin in it. Aspirin can cause serious problems. If your child gets flu symptoms and is younger than age 5 or has a medical condition like asthma, diabetes, or heart or lung disease, call their health care provider. Young children and those with certain medical conditions are at greater risk for getting seriously ill from the flu. Ask their health care provider if they recommend an antiviral drug. If you are worried about your child, call their health care provider. Don’t spread flu Wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water aren’t handy, use an alcohol-based hand rub. Cough or sneeze into a tissue or your elbow, not your hands. Put used tissues in the trash. Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth. That’s how germs spread. Stay away from people who are sick. To learn more from the Centers for Disease Control: Key Facts About Flu (CDC) The Flu – A Guide for Parents CategoriesArchive, Circleville Elementary, Circleville Middle School, Crispell Middle School, District News, Edward J Russell Elementary, Pakanasink Elementary, Pine Bush Elementary, Pine Bush High School Post navigation Previous Post Previous Post Kindness, empathy are encouraged at PBE for Start With Hello kickoff Next Post Next Post Let’s hear it for our summer readers! About Us District Overview District Goals Academics Assessments Annual Professional Performance Review Special Programs Summer School Schedule Athletics Athletic Forms Concussion Information Family ID Game Schedules Board of Education About the Board Board Agendas & Minutes Board Policies Budget Meeting Calendar Roles of the Board Voter Information Watch Recent Meetings Departments Business Office Central Registration Continuing Education Curriculum and Instruction Educational Technology School Nutrition HR / Employment Operations and Maintenance Safety and Security Transportation Parent / Community Annual Notifications Emergency Closings Engage NY Forms Publications School-Based Satellite Clinics Tax Inquiries Volunteering Pine Bush Central School DistrictState Route 302, Pine Bush, NY 12566 Phone: (845) 744-2031Fax: (845) 744-6189Amy Brockner Interim Superintendent of Schools This website is maintained by Public Information Specialist Linda Smith. It is the goal of the Pine Bush Central School District that this website is accessible to all users. View our accessibility statement. The district is not responsible for facts or opinions contained on any linked site. Some links and features on this site require the Adobe Acrobat Reader to view. Visit the Adobe website to download the free Acrobat Reader. This website was produced by Capital Region BOCES Engagement & Development Services, Albany, NY. Copyright © 2024. All rights reserved.Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W37 2022 (Sep 12-Sep 18) - Fiji | ReliefWeb Skip to main content Help Log in ReliefWeb Content Search What are you looking for? Search|t Updates Countries Disasters Organizations Topics Jobs Training Informing humanitarians worldwide 24/7 — a service provided by UN OCHA Fiji + 22 more Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W37 2022 (Sep 12-Sep 18) Format Situation Report Source WHO Posted 23 Sep 2022 Originally published 23 Sep 2022 Attachments Download Report (PDF | 499.52 KB) Alerts : AFR: Vanuatu (4 cases) CNMI (1 Case) COVID-19 : Cook Islands, CNMI, Palau Influenza-like Illness (ILI) PSSS, EPI - WK 37, 2022 Influenza-like Illness (ILI) cases compared to WK 36, 2022 ILI cases are as tabulated as below for comparison. For an added perspective on the figures and trends percentage, country sentinel sites reporting for WKs 36 & 37 are also shown. Please refer Seasonal Influenza for regional updates. Actual increase in the number of ILI cases is seen in Wallis & Futuna, Tuvalu, New Caledonia and CNMI. The increase seen in Solomon Islands and Vanuatu may be due to the increased number of sites reporting for the week. Reduction in the number of ILI cases is seen in Samoa and Palau. The decrease seen in Tonga and Fiji may be due to the decreased number of sites reporting for the week. No ILI cases were reported from Cook Islands and Pitcairn Islands for the week. No reports were available from French Polynesia, FSM, RMI, Niue, Tokelau and Kiribati for the week. American Samoa, Guam and Nauru have not participated in the surveillance. Surveillance figures are not intended to capture all country cases but to describe trends over time and are invaluable when trends rise beyond country baselines which should then trigger alerts and timely actions to characterize the actual nature and magnitude of the disease. For maintenance of surveillance for influenza and monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 adapting the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) and sentinel systems during the COVID-19 pandemic: Interim guidance WHO guidelines for the implementation of the Influenza and SARS-CoV-2 Multiplex RT PCR Assay into the influenza and COVID-19 integrated surveillance Refer here SARI (Severe Acute Respiratory Illness) Severe acute respiratory illness (SARI) as reported from sentinel surveillance (5/18) sites through PSSS. COVID -19 As of September 22, 2022 a total of 618,896,635 cases of COVID-19 have been confirmed including 6,535,367 (1%) deaths and 598,769,870(99%) recoveries from 215 Countries and Territories. Out of this, currently 13,551,150(99.7%) are mild cases and 40,248 (0.3%) are serious cases. As of September 22, 2022, in the Western Pacific Region, there were 88,712,060 confirmed COVID-19 cases and 268,782 deaths. Pacific Island Countries COVID-19 situation report as follows: Report details Primary country Fiji Other countries American SamoaCook IslandsFrench Polynesia (France)GuamKiribatiMarshall IslandsMicronesia (Federated States of)NauruNew Caledonia (France)New ZealandNiue (New Zealand)Northern Mariana Islands (The United States of America)PalauPapua New GuineaPitcairn IslandsSamoaSolomon IslandsTokelauTongaTuvaluVanuatuWallis and Futuna (France) Source World Health Organization Format Situation Report Theme Health Disaster type Epidemic Languages EnglishFrench Share Share this on Facebook Share this on X Post this on LinkedIn Related Content Fiji + 29 more Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W44 2024 (Oct 28-Nov 8) [EN/FR] Format Situation Report Source WHO Posted 11 Nov 2024 Originally published 11 Nov 2024 Vanuatu Vanuatu: Watery Diarrhoea in Efate- Situation Update 02 - Report Date: 08 November 2024 I Covering Period from 01 January - 03 November 2024 Format News and Press Release Source Govt. Vanuatu Posted 8 Nov 2024 Originally published 8 Nov 2024 PNG DTM Aiya Local Level Government, Southern Highlands Province, Papua New Guinea - Round 01 - Flooding and Landslip Rapid Assessment Report | 01-Nov-2024 Format Assessment Source IOM Posted 8 Nov 2024 Originally published 1 Nov 2024 Kiribati + 3 more AUD 4.9 million to fortify Pacific region against health impacts of climate change Format News and Press Release Source SPREP Posted 8 Nov 2024 Originally published 8 Nov 2024 Blog Labs About Us Terms Contact Facebook X LinkedIn Instagram Telegram OCHA Services Related Platforms Humanitarian Action Central Emergency Response Fund Other OCHA Services Financial Tracking Service Humanitarian Data Exchange Humanitarian ID ReliefWeb Response Inter-Agency Standing Committee OCHA website ReliefWeb Virtual OSOCC More OCHA Services Opens in a new window Service provided by United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs UN OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OCHA coordinates the global emergency response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. ReliefWeb's Terms & Conditions. © 2024 all rights reserved.PM urges preparedness to deal with potential double epidemic of COVID-19, flu - The Korea Times The Korea Times National Politics Foreign Affairs Multicultural Community Defense Environment & Animals Law & Crime Society Health & Science Business Tech Bio Companies Finance Companies Economy Markets Cryptocurrency Opinion Editorial Columns Thoughts of the Times Cartoon Today in History Blogs Tribune Service Blondie & Garfield Letter to the Editor Lifestyle Travel & Food Trends People & Events Books Around Town Fortune Telling Entertainment & Arts K-pop Films Shows & Dramas Music Theater & Others Sports World SCMP Asia Video Howdy Korea Korean Storytellers POPKORN Culture People News Photos Photo News Darkroom The Korea Times National Politics Foreign Affairs Multicultural Community Defense Environment & Animals Law & Crime Society Health & Science Business Tech Bio Companies Finance Companies Economy Markets Cryptocurrency Opinion Editorial Columns Thoughts of the Times Cartoon Today in History Blogs Tribune Service Blondie & Garfield Letter to the Editor Lifestyle Travel & Food Trends People & Events Books Around Town Fortune Telling Entertainment & Arts K-pop Films Shows & Dramas Music Theater & Others Sports World SCMP Asia Video Howdy Korea Korean Storytellers POPKORN Culture People News Photos Photo News Darkroom Login Register Login Register The Korea Times search all menu Login SubscribePhotosVideoWorldSportsOpinionEntertainment & ArtLifestyleFinanceBusinessNationalNorth Korea 1How Rose's chant of 'Apateu' became global sensation 3K-pop group Seventeen honored by Los Angeles for contribution to music 52 umbrella unions stage large-scale rallies in Seoul 7N. Korea jams GPS signals, affecting ships, civilian aircraft: JCS 9Korea's ski tourism loses momentum amid population decline, climate crisis 11Sungjin of DAY6 proves musical prowess in his first solo album '30' 13Joseon court music exhibit travels to Sweden 15Trump put Elon Musk on phone with Ukraine's Zelenskyy during congratulatory call, official says 17Wonsan - A stamp of disapproval: Part 2 19Trump has not asked Lighthizer to reprise US trade chief post: sources 2Rough road ahead for Korea's travel balance over China's visa-free policy 4Lisa claims two awards, Jimin wins K-pop at MTV EMA 2024 6INTERVIEW'Health without intense exercise? Wishful thinking. Don't walk, run!'8KOREAN TEMPLE ADVENTURESDongguk Temple remains a reminder of Korea's tumultuous past10Have you ever been to a Korean wedding? 12Authorities continue nighttime search for 12 missing from fishing boat 14Fire erupts at POSCO Pohang plant; 1 worker injured16Over 3,700 N. Koreans visited Russia in Q3 for 'studies': RFA 18Korean essay on 'ramyeon' to be published in UK 20Playoff-bound teams set in K League 2 with Suwon Samsung stuck for another season Close for 24 hours The Korea Times search all menu Login SubscribePhotosVideoWorldSportsOpinionEntertainment & ArtLifestyleFinanceBusinessNationalNorth Korea National PoliticsForeign AffairsMulticultural CommunityDefenseEnvironment & AnimalsLaw & CrimeSocietyHealth & Science Mon, November 11, 2024 | 17:36 PM urges preparedness to deal with potential double epidemic of COVID-19, flu Posted : 2022-09-20 11:03 Updated : 2022-09-20 16:37 Prime Minister Han Duck-soo, left, speaks during a Cabinet meeting at the government complex in Seoul, Sept. 20. YonhapPrime Minister Han Duck-soo on Tuesday called for thorough preparedness to deal with a potential double epidemic of COVID-19 and the flu, with health authorities warning the specter of a "twindemic." The government should "prepare thoroughly for the possibility of simultaneous outbreaks of the flu and COVID-19," Han told a Cabinet meeting. Han urged people to get influenza vaccines, saying vaccines could effectively lessen the danger of a double epidemic of COVID-19 and the flu. Health authorities have issued an advisory over a possible seasonal influenza outbreak across the country, the first of its kind since 2019, amid growing concerns of a "twindemic." The Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) requested child care facilities, schools and nursing facilities strengthen influenza prevention and management schemes.The KDCA plans to begin administering seasonal flu shots to high-risk groups ― children aged 6 months through 13 years old, pregnant mothers and seniors over 65 ― this week at some 20,000 hospitals and medical facilities nationwide. (Yonhap) Most Read in National 1Korea to launch economic consultative bodies to brace for Trump 2.0 22 umbrella unions stage large-scale rallies in Seoul 3Concerns grow over AI textbooks as digital dependence increases among students 4Yoon grapples with growing unpopularity at halfway mark 5Fire erupts at POSCO Pohang plant; 1 worker injured Top 10 Stories 1Korea to launch economic consultative bodies to brace for Trump 2.0 2Korean essay on 'ramyeon' to be published in UK 3Ukraine reveals intercepted radio communications of NK soldiers in Russia 4Trump speaks to Putin, warns against escalating in Ukraine: report 5Fencer Oh Sang-uk, chef Edward Lee to receive 2025 Korea Image Awards 6Putin finalizes N. Korea defense deal 7Consultative body on doctors' walkout aims for 'meaningful' results by late December8Another body found in search for missing aboard sunken fishing boat 9Chinese man released from police custody after questioning over filming NIS building with drone10Exports fall 18% in Nov. 1-10 period despite strong chip sales DARKROOM Bayern Munich beat Tottenham Hotspur in Seoul Tottenham 4-3 K-League All-Stars World Water Day 2024 Busan World Team Table Tennis Championships Finals Super Bowl 2024 CEO & Publisher: Oh Young-jin Digital News Email: webmaster@koreatimes.co.kr Tel: 02-724-2114 Online newspaper registration No: 서울,아52844 Date of registration: 2020.02.05 Masthead: The Korea Times Copyright © koreatimes.co.kr. All rights reserved. About Us Introduction History Contact Us Products & Services Subscribe E-paper RSS Service Content Sales Site Map Policy Code of Ethics Ombudsman Privacy Statement Terms of Service Copyright Policy Family Site Hankook Ilbo Dongwha GroupWhy COVID Is Still Worse Than Flu - The AtlanticSkip to contentSite NavigationThe AtlanticPopularLatestNewslettersSectionsPoliticsIdeasFictionTechnologySciencePhotoBusinessCulturePlanetGlobalBooksAudioHealthEducationProjectsFeaturesFamilyEventsWashington WeekProgressNewslettersExplore The Atlantic ArchivePlay The Atlantic crosswordListen to Podcasts and ArticlesThe Print EditionLatest IssuePast IssuesGive a GiftSearch The AtlanticQuick LinksDear TherapistCrossword PuzzleMagazine ArchiveYour SubscriptionPopularLatestNewslettersSign InSubscribeHealthThe ‘End’ of COVID Is Still Far Worse Than We ImaginedEven now, the coronavirus is killing three times as many people as the flu.By Sarah ZhangTyler Comrie / The AtlanticSeptember 22, 2022 ShareSave When is the pandemic “over”? In the early days of 2020, we envisioned it ending with the novel coronavirus going away entirely. When this became impossible, we hoped instead for elimination: If enough people got vaccinated, herd immunity might largely stop the virus from spreading. When this too became impossible, we accepted that the virus would still circulate but imagined that it could become, optimistically, like one of the four coronaviruses that cause common colds or, pessimistically, like something more severe, akin to the flu.Instead, COVID has settled into something far worse than the flu. When President Joe Biden declared this week, “The pandemic is over. If you notice, no one’s wearing masks,” the country was still recording more than 400 COVID deaths a day—more than triple the average number from flu.This shifting of goal posts is, in part, a reckoning with the biological reality of COVID. The virus that came out of Wuhan, China, in 2019 was already so good at spreading—including from people without symptoms—that eradication probably never stood a chance once COVID took off internationally. “I don’t think that was ever really practically possible,” says Stephen Morse, an epidemiologist at Columbia. In time, it also became clear that immunity to COVID is simply not durable enough for elimination through herd immunity. The virus evolves too rapidly, and our own immunity to COVID infection fades too quickly—as it does with other respiratory viruses—even as immunity against severe disease tends to persist. (The elderly who mount weaker immune responses remain the most vulnerable: 88 percent of COVID deaths so far in September have been in people over 65.) With a public weary of pandemic measures and a government reluctant to push them, the situation seems unlikely to improve anytime soon. Trevor Bedford, a virologist at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, estimates that COVID will continue to exact a death toll of 100,000 Americans a year in the near future. This too is approximately three times that of a typical flu year.I keep returning to the flu because, back in early 2021, with vaccine excitement still fresh in the air, several experts told my colleague Alexis Madrigal that a reasonable threshold for lifting COVID restrictions was 100 deaths a day, roughly on par with flu. We largely tolerate, the thinking went, the risk of flu without major disruptions to our lives. Since then, widespread immunity, better treatments, and the less virulent Omicron variant have together pushed the risk of COVID to individuals down to a flu-like level. But across the whole population, COVID is still killing many times more people than influenza is, because it is still sickening so many more people.Bedford told me he estimates that Omicron has infected 80 percent of Americans. Going forward, COVID might continue to infect 50 percent of the population every year, even without another Omicron-like leap in evolution. In contrast, flu sickens an estimated 10 to 20 percent of Americans a year. These are estimates, because lack of testing hampers accurate case counts for both diseases, but COVID’s higher death toll is a function of higher transmission. The tens of thousands of recorded cases—likely hundreds of thousands of actual cases every day—also add to the burden of long COVID.The challenge of driving down COVID transmission has also become clearer with time. In early 2021, the initially spectacular vaccine-efficacy data bolstered optimism that vaccination could significantly dampen transmission. Breakthrough cases were downplayed as very rare. And they were—at first. But immunity to infection is not durable against common respiratory viruses. Flu, the four common-cold coronaviruses, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and others all reinfect us over and over again. The same proved true with COVID. “Right at the beginning, we should have made that very clear. When you saw 95 percent against mild disease, with the trials done in December 2020, we should have said right then this is not going to last,” says Paul Offit, the director of the Vaccine Education Center at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. Even vaccinating the whole world would not eliminate COVID transmission.This coronavirus has also proved a wilier opponent than expected. Despite a relatively slow rate of mutation at the beginning of the pandemic, it soon evolved into variants that are more inherently contagious and better at evading immunity. With each major wave, “the virus has only gotten more transmissible,” says Ruth Karron, a vaccine researcher at Johns Hopkins. The coronavirus cannot keep becoming more transmissible forever, but it can keep changing to evade our immunity essentially forever. Its rate of evolution is much higher than that of other common-cold coronaviruses. It’s higher than that of even H3N2 flu—the most troublesome and fastest-evolving of the influenza viruses. Omicron, according to Bedford, is the equivalent of five years of H3N2 evolution, and its subvariants are still outpacing H3N2’s usual rate. We don’t know how often Omicron-like events will happen. COVID’s rate of change may eventually slow down when the virus is no longer novel in humans, or it may surprise us again.In the past, flu pandemics “ended” after the virus swept through so much of the population that it could no longer cause huge waves. But the pandemic virus did not disappear; it became the new seasonal-flu virus. The 1968 H3N2 pandemic, for example, seeded the H3N2 flu that still sickens people today. “I suspect it’s probably caused even more morbidity and mortality in all those years since 1968,” Morse says. The pandemic ended, but the virus continued killing people.Ironically, H3N2 did go away during the coronavirus pandemic. Measures such as social distancing and masking managed to almost entirely eliminate the flu. (It has not disappeared entirely, though, and may be back in full force this winter.) Cases of other respiratory viruses, such as RSV, also plummeted. Experts hoped that this would show Americans a new normal, where we don’t simply tolerate the flu and other respiratory illnesses every winter. Instead, the country is moving toward a new normal where COVID is also something we tolerate every year.In the same breath that President Biden said, “The pandemic is over,” he went on to say, “We still have a problem with COVID. We’re still doing a lot of work on it.” You might see this as a contradiction, or you might see it as how we deal with every other disease—an attempt at normalizing COVID, if you will. The government doesn’t treat flu, cancer, heart disease, tuberculosis, hepatitis C, etc., as national emergencies that disrupt everyday life, even as the work continues on preventing and treating them. The U.S.’s COVID strategy certainly seems to be going in that direction. Broad restrictions such as mask mandates are out of the question. Interventions targeted at those most vulnerable to severe disease exist, but they aren’t getting much fanfare. This fall’s COVID-booster campaign has been muted. Treatments such as bebtelovimab and Evusheld remain on shelves, underpublicized and underused. At the same time, hundreds of Americans are still dying of COVID every day and will likely continue to die of COVID every day. A cumulative annual toll of 100,000 deaths a year would still make COVID a top-10 cause of death, ahead of any other infectious disease. When the first 100,000 Americans died of COVID, in spring 2020, newspapers memorialized the grim milestone. The New York Times devoted its entire front page to chronicling the lives lost to COVID. It might have been hard to imagine, back in 2020, that the U.S. would come to accept 100,000 people dying of COVID every year. Whether or not that means the pandemic is over, the second part of the president’s statement is harder to argue with: COVID is and will remain a problem.About the AuthorSarah Zhang is a staff writer at The Atlantic.More StoriesA ‘Crazy’ Idea for Treating Autoimmune Diseases Might Actually WorkAbortion Pills Have Changed the Post-Roe CalculusSeasonal flu shots begin and for many they are free "> quickmenu search GO kcampus celeb Newsletter Subscribe Free Sample korea joongAng daily National Korea JoongAng Daily GO Home > National > Social Affairs dictionary + A - A Seasonal flu shots begin and for many they are free Published: 21 Sep. 2022, 19:10 Updated: 21 Sep. 2022, 19:34 A baby receives a flu shot at a hospital in Daegu on Wednesday. The vaccination program for children aged 6 months through 13 started across the nation on the same day. [NEWS1] Korea began administering free seasonal flu shots to high-risk groups Wednesday amid growing worries over a potential double epidemic of Covid-19 and the flu. The country started the 2022-2023 seasonal flu vaccination campaign Wednesday, which will run through April 30, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA). Eligible recipients are children between six months and 13 years old, pregnant women, and people 65 or older, including foreign nationals. These groups can get vaccinated at some 20,000 medical facilities nationwide. Inoculations started Wednesday for children between six months to nine years old who have not been vaccinated before. They need a second shot with a four-week interval. From Oct. 5, children aged six months to 13 years old and pregnant women who only need one shot will be able to receive a flu shot. People 65 or older will be eligible starting Oct 12. People 75 or older can get vaccinated from Oct. 12, followed by people between the ages of 70 to 74 from Oct. 17 and people between the ages of 65 and 69 from Oct. 20. Foreigners in Korea on long-term stays are eligible for free shots if they fall in the selected age groups, the KDCA told the Korea JoongAng Daily. To receive a shot, foreigners must have a visa and a foreign registration number. Children and pregnant women can receive free vaccinations until April 30 next year, while shots for older age group will only be available through the end of this year. Flu shots can be received at designated medical institutions or public health centers across the country regardless of a person's home address. People not eligible for free shots can pay at a clinic. The KDCA said the flu shot and the Covid-19 vaccine can be done at the same time, in different arms. “The flu vaccine is more important than ever this year due to concerns over a simultaneous outbreak with Covid-19,” the KDCA said. Korea is also offering Moderna's new Covid-19 vaccine designed to protect against the Omicron variant from next month, health authorities announced Wednesday. The vaccine, which is responsive to both the initial coronavirus strains and Omicron BA.1, is planned to be given as a booster for people who are deemed to be at higher risk, such as the elderly and immunocompromised people. The bivalent vaccine was approved by the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety on Monday, and the country received an initial shipment of 1.61 million doses. Reservations will be taken from Sept. 27 for people over the age of 59; immunocompromised people; and residents and employees at nursing homes, mental hospitals, facilities for people with disabilities and for the homeless. Vaccines will be administered beginning Oct. 11. People who have passed four months since the last shot or infection are recommended for the Omicron-specific vaccine. Health authorities said they will establish a vaccination plan for the rest of the general population. BY SEO JI-EUN [seo.jieun1@joongang.co.kr] Korea flu shot seasonal influenza Covid-19 Omicron More in Social Affairs Test booklets and answer sheets prepared for delivery ahead of CSAT exam Health Ministry, WHO begin World Bio Summit in Incheon Seoul unveils plan to complete flying taxi network by 2035 Defense agency employee attempts suicide after humiliating sexual assault hearing: Report U.S. streamer Johnny Somali handed to Korean prosecutors for convenience store outburst Related Stories WHO chief says end of Covid-19 pandemic is 'in sight' Flu vaccines left out of the fridge, program halted 78-year-old dies within 24 hours of getting flu shot Patients with flu-like symptoms increase 45% on week Number of people affected by faulty flu shots jumps to over 2,300 You might also like Log in to select media account Log in to Twitter or Facebook account to connect with the Korea JoongAng Daily Social comment? s To write comments, please log in to one of the accounts. Standards Board Policy (0/250자) To write comments, please log in to one of the accounts. 등록 Korea JoongAng Daily SitemapSpecial fever camps held at 268 locations in Salem district - The Hindu India World Elections Technology e-Paper Menu Science Data Opinion SEARCH FREE TRIALGIFT a Subscription Subscribe LOGIN ACCOUNT PREMIUM Open in The Hindu AppFREE TRIALLOGINGIFT a Subscription ACCOUNT PREMIUM Subscribe Science Data Opinion SEARCH India World Elections Technology e-Paper Science Data Opinion SEARCH News Business Entertainment Life & Style Society Technology Videos Sport Cities States Science Show More Chennai Delhi Bengaluru Hyderabad Movies Food Children Data Kochi Books Education Podcast Brandhub To enjoy additional benefitsFREE TRIALGIFT a Subscription Subscribe LOGIN ACCOUNT PREMIUM ShowcaseSubscribe to NewslettersCrossword+CONNECT WITH US Home News Cities Coimbatore Special fever camps held at 268 locations in Salem district Residents in all 60 wards of Salem Corporation have been urged to attend the fever camps that are to be held till the end of North East MonsoonUpdated - September 21, 2022 07:08 pm IST - SALEM The Hindu Bureau Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER Remove SEE ALL PRINT Special fever camp is being held at Manakadu Kamarajar Municipal Girls Higher Secondary School in Salem on September 21, 2022. | Photo Credit: E. LAKSHMI NARAYANAN With influenza cases on the rise in the State, special fever camps were conducted at 268 locations across the district here on Wednesday. Salem District Collector A. Karmegam inspected the camp held at Kottai Government Girls Higher Secondary School. He told media persons that due to rains, seasonal diseases were spreading, particularly influenza. He said various precautionary measures were being taken by the health department and special fever camps were being held across the district. Special fever camps to be held at 1,000 places in Tamil Nadu on Wednesday In the district, special camps were held at 240 places in all the 20 panchayat unions, while they were conducted at 28 places in corporation limits. He asked people to boil the drinking water and consume it.“If people are suffering from fever, they should not go for self-medication and should immediately visit the nearest government hospital,” he added. Mr. Karmegam urged the students suffering from fever to consult a doctor and take rest at home. Also, teachers in all the schools should ask students to follow healthy practices, he added. In Corporation limit, Mayor A. Ramachandran, MLA R. Rajendran and Corporation Commissioner T. Christuraj visited the camp held at Manakadu Kamarajar Municipal Girls Higher Secondary School. Special fever camp is being held at Manakadu Kamarajar Municipal Girls Higher Secondary School in Salem on September 21, 2022. | Photo Credit: E. LAKSHMI NARAYANAN Corporation officials said the camps were being held at 16 urban primary health centres, eight camps in schools and four public places. People were screened for fever, cough and cold and medicines were provided to the needy. Also, oral rehydration solutions (ORS) and kabasura kudineer were given to the people who visited the camps.Officials asked people in all the 60 wards to attend the camps in their areas, as they are be held till the end of North East Monsoon. Health officials said the camps were also being held at places where more than three fever cases were reported in the last two weeks. People with other flu-like symptoms should visit the nearest camp without fail, they added. Published - September 21, 2022 02:16 pm IST Read Comments Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER Remove SEE ALL PRINT Related Topics Tamil Nadu / Salem / disease prevention / viral diseases / Coimbatore Top News Today0 / 0 Read in App The Hindu About Us Code of Editorial Values News Archive Sitemap Print Subscription Digital Subscription Subscribe to Newsletters Rss Feeds Readers Editor-Terms of Reference Authors & Contributors Frame Front page Contact us Contact Us Social Media Advertise With Us Group News Sites Business Line BL on Campus Sportstar Frontline இந்து தமிழ் திசை The Hindu Centre Young World Club The Hindu ePaper Business Line ePaper Crossword + Free Games Other Products RoofandFloor STEP Images Classifieds - Print Bookstore & Special Publications Popular Sections Elections Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2023 Latest News National News International News Videos Life & Style Food Podcast Showcase Opinion Editorial Columns Comment Cartoon Letters Interview Lead Business Agri-Business Industry Economy Markets Budget Sport Cricket Football Hockey Tennis Athletics Motorsport Races Other Sports Sci-Tech Science Technology Health Agriculture Environment Gadgets Internet States Andhra Pradesh Karnataka Kerala Tamil Nadu Telangana Cities Bengaluru Chennai Coimbatore Delhi Hyderabad Kochi Kolkata Kozhikode Madurai Mangaluru Mumbai Puducherry Thiruvananthapuram Tiruchirapalli Vijayawada Visakhapatnam Trending on The Hindu News Hamas Chief Yahya Sinwar killing LIVE Full list of Haryana ministers Kolkatan who returns to Durga Puja after 20 years EC to announce schedule for Maharashtra, Jharkhand polls Waqf row Did not want to blow up India ties: Justin Trudeau RSS, Togadia decide to work together to ‘unite’ Hindus Five Eyes support Canada India Canada row Trending on Group sites Stock Market Live Updates Stocks to buy today Hockey Mogun Bagan Paralympics 2024 Gold Rate Today Silver Rate Today Sexual Harassment in Telugu Film Industry Mango: The Michael Jackson of Fruits Frontline Current Issue Terms of Use Privacy Policy Copyright© 2024, THG PUBLISHING PVT LTD. or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. BACK TO TOPSign in to unlock member-only benefits!Access 10 free stories every monthSave stories to read laterAccess to comment on every storySign-up/manage your newsletter subscriptions with a single clickGet notified by email for early access to discounts & offers on our products✕Looks like you are already logged in from more than 3 devices!To continue logging in, remove at least one device from the below listLog outLog Out from all devicesTerms & conditions | Institutional SubscriberCommentsComments have to be in English, and in full sentences. They cannot be abusive or personal. Please abide by our community guidelines for posting your comments. We have migrated to a new commenting platform. If you are already a registered user of The Hindu and logged in, you may continue to engage with our articles. If you do not have an account please register and login to post comments. Users can access their older comments by logging into their accounts on Vuukle.Bird flu detected in portion of Sturgeon County - Athabasca, Barrhead & Westlock News Skip to content × WINNERS: Best of Town&CountryJoin Our Newsletters Sign in or register for your free account Messages Post a Listing Your Listings Your Profile Your Subscriptions Your Likes Your Business Payment History Sign Out Registered Users Already have an account? Sign In New Users Create a free account. Register Sign up for Daily Headlines Sign up for Notifications Contact Us HomeNews#JasperStrongLocal NewsLocal SportsAthabasca NewsBarrhead NewsWestlock NewsAlberta NewsAlberta SportsIndigenous AlbertaNational NewsNational SportsBeyond LocalOpinionNational BusinessLocal BusinessClimateNational EntertainmentFeaturesSpotlightContestsRoad ReportLowest Gas PricesAdopt a PetAthabasca Advocate E-EditionBarrhead Leader E-EditionWestlock News E-EditionDear AbbyHoroscopesBabies of the YearBest of Town&Country Readers' Choice AwardsHot Summer GuideCool Winter GuidePLAY: The Great Alberta Hockey PoolHow To Cook A TurkeyMovemberObitsObituariesIn MemoriamEventsView EventsSubmit an EventAdvertise in CalendarDiscover LocalDiscover LocalRestaurantsJob ListingsPetsClassifiedsAll ListingsPost an AdMy AdsMy AccountToday's AdsSpecial OccasionsGarage SalesJobsEatsLunchBreakfastDeliveryBarbecueDinerGreekSandwiches & SoupSeafoodSteakhouseSushiAll RestaurantsPublic NoticesGeneral NoticesLegal NoticesMunicipal NoticesProvincial NoticesConnectAbout UsContact UsSign up for FREE daily headlinesSign up for notificationsAdvertisingGreat West Digital AgencyMake Us Your Home PageAthabasca Advocate on FacebookAthabasca Advocate on XAthabasca Advocate on ThreadsAthabasca Advocate on LinkedINBarrhead Leader on FacebookBarrhead Leader on XWestlock News on FacebookWestlock News on XTownandCountryTODAY on Threads Search Type Site Listings Directory Search Home Beyond Local Bird flu detected in portion of Sturgeon County A serious strain of avian influenza that swept through North America for the first time ever earlier this year has surfaced again in a specific area of Sturgeon County. Jack Farrell Sep 20, 2022 3:35 PM Share by Email Share on Facebook Share on X Share on LinkedIn Print Share via Text Message On Sept. 1, 2022, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency declared an outbreak of H5N1 — a highly pathogenic strain of avian influenza — throughout Redwater, Eastgate, Amelia, and the farmland in between. SCREEN/Photo Listen to this article 00:05:50 A serious strain of avian influenza that swept through North America for the first time ever earlier this year has surfaced again in a specific area of Sturgeon County. On Sept. 1, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) declared an outbreak of H5N1 — a highly pathogenic strain of avian influenza — throughout Redwater, Eastgate, Amelia, and the farmland in between. The boundaries of the detected outbreak down to specific range and township roads, as well as geographical coordinates, can be found on the CFIA's website. In the designation order published by the CFIA, it states that the outbreak applies to commercial and non-commercial poultry. "This includes day-old poultry and hatching eggs, eggs and other products or by-products of such captive domestic poultry, and things that have been exposed to such a bird, and other captive birds (including birds that are raised in captivity for racing, exhibitions, zoological collections, competitions, or pets) if movements may result in contact with commercial or non-commercial poultry or their facilities." the designation order reads. In an email to The Gazette, the CFIA said, "cases of avian influenza are confirmed through laboratory testing when a producer or veterinarian reports signs of the disease in domestic birds.” The CFIA said it does not share information about the specific operation, farm, or premises the disease was detected in. "It is believed that infections have been associated with separate incidents of exposure to wild birds, either through direct contact or the virus being present in the environment near poultry operations and then unintentionally introduced into the barn." As there is currently no treatment for avian influenza, infected birds or birds suspected of infection in an outbreak zone are required to be killed as part of the CFIA's disease management protocol. "To date, [1,075,000] domestic birds in Alberta have been ordered destroyed or died from being infected with avian influenza,” the CFIA said in the email. Virus of concern Katharine Magor, a biological sciences professor at the University of Alberta who specializes in the study of avian influenza, says this particular strain of avian influenza presents significant challenges. “What is spreading avian influenza is wild waterfowl, particularly ducks and geese," Magor said. "They brought it through Alberta in the spring, and we saw a lot of outbreaks and many commercial farms affected in the spring, but now those birds are coming back for their fall migration, and I think that that’s probably why we’re starting to see some cases and outbreaks.” On Sept. 6 the CFIA also declared an outbreak in Strathcona County east of Fort Saskatchewan. Information on that outbreak can also be read on the CFIA website. “In a commercial operation they keep very, very tight biosecurity to try and prevent any avian flu getting into a commercial operation," Magor explained. Biosecurity measures for a commercial poultry operation include strict control of the clothing and equipment worn by people in the facility, as well as intensive cleaning measures. "It’s unusual that this [strain] persists through the season, and I really don’t know what that means for the future of chicken farming and also our potential exposure to wild birds," she said. "It’s definitely a virus of concern." Magor explained that the virus does not easily infect people, nor does it easily spread between people. “There’s relatively low danger to us currently because the strain does not spread easily between humans," she said. "If it did spread easily between humans, it would be a very, very serious virus." In May of this year, the National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health (NCCEH), a Canadian publicly funded health agency, reported that the mortality rate of H5N1 in humans is around 53 per cent. The NCCEH publication states that, up until May of this year, there were 862 reported cases in people worldwide between 2003 and 2021, resulting in 455 deaths. Supporting farmers Mike Froese, an Albertan egg farmer and member of the Alberta Poultry Industry Emergency Management Team (APIEMT), said in an interview that the experience of going through an outbreak as a farmer can be devastating. "‘Why me? How can this happen? I’ve done everything right? What’s going on?’ — all of those things are the first thoughts," Froese said. "That would be every single solitary farmer’s first thoughts.” The team, which is formed through members of Alberta Chicken Producers, Alberta Hatching Egg Producers, Alberta Turkey Producers, and Egg Farmers of Alberta, works with the CFIA and Alberta Agriculture to investigate cases of the disease and mitigate the risk of spreading. Froese's role, he said, is to provide mental health and peer support to farmers dealing with an outbreak. "It’s very hard on a farmer to go through this in the beginning," Froese explained. "You’re sitting there farming one day and then the next you're dealing with the government and CFIA and compensation and cleaning and disinfecting and none of it’s easy. "My role is just to talk to people and let them know it’s going to be alright.” As part of the CFIA's disease management strategy, farmers who have lost their flock can access financial assistance to recover after an outbreak. "I know that in previous outbreaks they’ve been helpful, and I have nothing to say but good things about my experience dealing with CFIA," Froese said. "I found that the people in charge, the boots on the ground, the everyday people that you meet within the organization, all want to do the right thing and help you. "That said, not everything goes as planned and some farmers have been frustrated with the process ... people do get the help they need, it just takes a lot longer than you think.” See a typo/mistake? Have a storyip? This story was important to me or our community: view results > Not Very Slightly Fairly Very Extremely This has been shared 0 times 0 Shares Share by Email Share on Facebook Share on X Share on LinkedIn Print Share via Text Message Sign up for our FREE Daily Headlines Newsletter Email Sign Up More Beyond Local First presumptive human case of avian flu acquired in Canada detected in teen Nov 10, 2024 5:15 PM 5 smart things wealthy baby boomers do with their money—how many do you do? Nov 10, 2024 3:44 PM Alberta mother, daughter might be first to referee university hockey together Nov 10, 2024 10:14 AM Comments Sort Oldest Newest Add Show Latest Poll Should the province allow resorts to lease public land? view related story Yes No Not Sure Vote Results > Archives > News#JasperStrongLocal NewsLocal SportsAthabasca NewsBarrhead NewsWestlock NewsAlberta NewsAlberta SportsIndigenous AlbertaNational NewsNational SportsBeyond LocalOpinionNational BusinessLocal BusinessClimateNational EntertainmentFeaturesSpotlightContestsRoad ReportLowest Gas PricesAthabasca Advocate E-EditionBarrhead Leader E-EditionWestlock News E-EditionDear AbbyHoroscopesBabies of the YearBest of Town&Country Readers' Choice AwardsHot Summer GuideCool Winter GuidePLAY: The Great Alberta Hockey PoolHow To Cook A TurkeyMovemberObitsObituariesIn MemoriamEventsView EventsSubmit an EventAdvertise in CalendarDiscover LocalDiscover LocalRestaurantsJob ListingsPetsClassifiedsAll ListingsPost an AdMy AdsMy AccountToday's AdsSpecial OccasionsGarage SalesJobsEatsLunchBreakfastDeliveryBarbecueDinerGreekSandwiches & SoupSeafoodSteakhouseSushiAll RestaurantsPublic NoticesGeneral NoticesLegal NoticesMunicipal NoticesProvincial NoticesConnectAbout UsContact UsSign up for FREE daily headlinesSign up for notificationsAdvertisingGreat West Digital AgencyMake Us Your Home PageAthabasca Advocate on FacebookAthabasca Advocate on XAthabasca Advocate on ThreadsAthabasca Advocate on LinkedINBarrhead Leader on FacebookBarrhead Leader on XWestlock News on FacebookWestlock News on XTownandCountryTODAY on Threads About About UsAdvertisingCommunity GuidelinesContact UsPrivacy PolicyTerms of Service Visit our network of sites: Airdrie City View/Rocky View Weekly Cochrane Eagle Jasper Fitzhugh Lakeland Today Mountain View Today Rocky Mountain Outlook St. Albert Gazette Town and Country Today Western Wheel © 2024 TownAndCountryToday.com × Be the first to read breaking stories. Enable push notifications on your device. Disable anytime. No thanks Subscribe No thanks SubscribePublic urged to be wary of possible cases of Avian Influenza (bird flu) Skip to content November 11, 2024 Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Tumblr News from Wales Wales Community and Business News from Need To See it Primary Menu News from Wales Home Business News Aerospace Business Advice Charity & CSR Construction Education Energy Engineering Environment News Finance HR Investment Law Manufacturing Marketing & PR Outdoor Activities Property Training Health Care Care Home News Disability Healthcare News Hospice News Wellbeing Jobs Transport Driving, EVs and Automotive News Other News Animals Camping and Caravanning News Entertainment Environment News Food & Drink Gambling Gaming Hair and Beauty History and Heritage Homelessness Leisure Libraries Music Science Sport Travel Welsh language Regional News Mid Wales Brecon Machynlleth Newtown North Wales Bangor Clwyd Colwyn Bay Conwy Llandudno Deeside Denbighshire LLangollen Prestatyn Rhyl St. Asaph Flintshire Mold Pwllheli Porthmadog Wrexham South Wales Bridgend Caerphilly Cardiff Cornelly Gower Maesteg/Caerau Merthyr Tydfil Monmouthshire Neath Port Talbot News Neath Port Talbot Newport Porthcawl Rhondda Cynon Taf Swansea Torfaen Cwmbran Vale of Glamorgan Barry Dinas Powys West Wales Property Homes & Homeowner Advice Interior Design Property News Tech AI Apps Cryptocurrency Cybersecurity IT Services Tech Events Telecoms Share Your News Search for: Carmarthenshire Public urged to be wary of possible cases of Avian Influenza (bird flu) Lisa Baker, Editor, Welsh Business News & News from Wales September 21, 2022 Members of the public are being urged not to come into contact with sick or dead birds, following confirmed cases of Avian Influenza, otherwise known as Avian Flu or Bird Flu, in neighbouring authorities. Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) is a highly contagious viral disease. Do not touch or pick up any dead or visibly sick wild birds that you find. Natural Resources Wales has issued the following guidance to the public: Do not handle sick or dead birds Try not to disturb wild birds and do not approach large flocks Disinfect footwear Keep dogs on a lead If you find dead wild birds, you should report them to the Defra helpline on 03459 33 55 77 and notify Natural Resources Wales by calling 0300 065 3000. You should call the Defra helpline (03459 33 55 77) if you find: One or more dead bird of prey or owl 3 or more dead gulls or wild waterfowl (swans, geese and ducks) 5 or more dead birds of any species Sick or injured wild birds should not be reported to the Defra helpline. Instead, please contact the RSPCA (in Wales and England) on 0300 1234 999, who may be able to offer assistance. For further information, please visit the Welsh Government website Avian influenza (bird flu): latest update | GOV.WALES Continue Reading Previous Carmarthenshire County Council Proclamation of the new SovereignNext Ysgol Gymraeg Brynsierfel in Llwynhendy, Llanelli receives prestigious UNICEF UK Award Business Advice Articles Business Advice How to Leverage Local Resources as a Startup Business Lisa Baker, Editor, Welsh Business News & News from Wales November 5, 2024 Business Advice Technology The Importance Of A Software Security Assessment Lisa Baker, Editor, Welsh Business News & News from Wales November 4, 2024 Business Business Advice Business Advice for SMEs Economy & Jobs News The Budget – key next steps for businesses NTSI Publishing Team October 31, 2024 Accountancy & Accounts Business Business Advice Economy & Jobs News Finance Finance and Banking Finance News Budget 2024; Did Halloween come early? Hear the reaction from the Hazlewoods Cardiff Tax team NTSI Publishing Team October 31, 2024 Entertainment Articles Entertainment Events News Swansea Award Nominated comedian and actor Colin Hoult to perform in Swansea on 1st November Lisa Baker, Editor, Welsh Business News & News from Wales October 30, 2024 Entertainment Gambling Flutter Raises Concerns Over Specific Aspects Of Ireland’s New Gambling Regulation Bill Lisa Baker, Editor, Welsh Business News & News from Wales October 22, 2024 Entertainment Gambling Gaming How Online Casinos Are Transforming the Welsh Economy: Jobs, Revenue & Regulations Lisa Baker, Editor, Welsh Business News & News from Wales October 9, 2024 Carmarthenshire Entertainment News Local Talent Takes the Stage: Welsh Horror Film “Scopophobia” to Premiere in Carmarthen Lisa Baker, Editor, Welsh Business News & News from Wales September 3, 2024 Commercial Property Commercial Property News Entertainment Pontypool Casino Goes Under the Hammer Next Month Lisa Baker, Editor, Welsh Business News & News from Wales August 19, 2024 Please note, we do not ‘recommend’ or endorse any business or products shown on this site. Check out our other news sites: Travel Newsdesk South West News Welsh Business News Yellow Business News Creative Business News Marches News Online City News Sustainable Business News Tech News International Mums News Global Business Newsdesk News from Scotland Blooming Fifties UK Tech News Education News Climate News Tech User Magazine International Business News News from Wales Cardiff Newsdesk North Wales Business News Charity News Desk Employer News Wellbeing News Healthcare Newsdesk South West Business News News From The North South East Online West Wales Newsdesk Camping in Britain Business In The News SME Business News UK Business News Telecoms News UK Property News Driving News Homes Ad Hoc Get Real on Climate Change Taste At 55 Top Style Shop All Posts News London Newsdesk Bridgend-Local Tea Talk Magazine Daily Business Now Always Finance Builder Master UK News Latest Business in the Midlands Image Partners This site is proudly owned by Lisa Baker, Owner of Need to See IT Publishing. We would like to thank our image providers: Canva Storyblocks Deposit Photos Freepik Pixabay Pexels Unsplash As well as the many talented photographers, too many to mention, whose work is shared by storytellers and credited in the story. Need to contact our team? Get in touch PR Want us to cover your news? We ask for a small admin fee to cover our costs. Please email: laura.lewis@newsfromwales.com Ads/Guest Posts For advertorial or guest post services, please contact: guestpostservices@newsfromwales.com Press Releases You are welcome to send news releases to news@newsfromwales.com ADMIN ONLY If you need to contact our admin/management team about something other than news, please email premium@newsfromwales.com, Disclaimer The information provided by this news site is for general informational purposes only and is not intended to be a substitute for appropriate professional or legal advice. All information on the Site is provided in good faith, however we make no representation or warranty of any kind, express or implied, regarding the accuracy, adequacy, validity, reliability, availability or completeness of any information on the Site. WP AutoTerms Legal Pages Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Tumblr Copyright © All rights reserved. | CoverNews by AF themes. We use cookies on our website to give you the most relevant experience by remembering your preferences and repeat visits. By clicking “Accept All”, you consent to the use of ALL the cookies. However, you may visit "Cookie Settings" to provide a controlled consent.Cookie SettingsAccept AllManage consent Close Privacy Overview This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may affect your browsing experience. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. These cookies ensure basic functionalities and security features of the website, anonymously. CookieDurationDescriptioncookielawinfo-checkbox-analytics11 monthsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Analytics".cookielawinfo-checkbox-functional11 monthsThe cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Functional".cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessary11 monthsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookies is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".cookielawinfo-checkbox-others11 monthsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Other.cookielawinfo-checkbox-performance11 monthsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Performance".viewed_cookie_policy11 monthsThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data. Functional Functional Functional cookies help to perform certain functionalities like sharing the content of the website on social media platforms, collect feedbacks, and other third-party features. Performance Performance Performance cookies are used to understand and analyze the key performance indexes of the website which helps in delivering a better user experience for the visitors. Analytics Analytics Analytical cookies are used to understand how visitors interact with the website. These cookies help provide information on metrics the number of visitors, bounce rate, traffic source, etc. Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement cookies are used to provide visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns. These cookies track visitors across websites and collect information to provide customized ads. Others Others Other uncategorized cookies are those that are being analyzed and have not been classified into a category as yet. SAVE & ACCEPT Terms and Conditions - Privacy PolicyAvian flu suspected in deaths of 3 swans in Stratford, Ont. | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Avian flu suspected in deaths of 3 swans in Stratford, Ont. | CBC News LoadedLondonAvian flu suspected in deaths of 3 swans in Stratford, Ont.Officials with the City of Stratford, Ont., believe H5N1 avian influenza is behind the recent deaths of three of its dearest mute swans.1st swan was found dead in the Avon River on Saturday, city officials sayIsha Bhargava · CBC News · Posted: Sep 21, 2022 5:49 PM EDT | Last Updated: September 22, 2022Stratford, Ont., officials believe the H5N1 avian flu is behind the deaths of three of their swans since Saturday. (Quin Malott/City of Stratford)Social SharingStratford, Ont., officials believe H5N1 avian influenza is behind the recent deaths of three of its dearest mute swans.Quin Malott, the city's parks, forestry, and cemetery manager, said the first swan was found dead in the Avon River on Saturday, but his team didn't connect the dots until two other swans got sick on the following days. "We didn't think much of it at that point because it was just the one bird, and then Sunday we saw another one was looking a little lethargic, the same on Monday, and they both ended up passing away," Malott said. Malott said the pond that the swans use is frequented by a lot of wild ducks, and believes the flu might have been brought in by one of them. Although testing is underway to confirm cause of death of the swans, Malott said their local veterinarian and avian pathologists at the University of Guelph believe avian flu is the most likely scenario.Beth MacDougall-Shackleton, a biology professor at Western University in London, Ont., said the deaths appear to be a case of the flu, which is especially harmful this year to birds that get infected. "Avian flu is always circulating in wild birds and domestic birds just like the human flu is always circulating among us, but it's a nasty disease, this pathogenic version of it," she said.Human activity, gatherings causing spreadMacDougall-Shackleton said signs a bird may have avian flu include: Not moving around as much or reacting to human activity around them. Shaking with tremors and losing co-ordination. In the final stages, they may be gasping for air, struggling to breathe. MacDougall-Shackleton said the disease is transmitted by direct physical contact with an infected bird, its feces or secretions, and that spring and fall tend to be prime seasons for the flu."Any time we have a lot of birds coming into close contact, especially if it's birds of different species, we see a big spike in transmission."Malott said the ability of the virus to spread quickly is hard to control, and added that so far, it hasn't spread to any other swans. "We have birds on the river with all kinds of wild foul around them, so it could be one duck that's a carrier, and just the way it might interact with one swan that's in an enclosed area with other swans, it's going to spread quickly," he said.A mute swan lands at the Titicus Reservoir in Purdys, N.Y., in 2014 in this file photo. Human interaction through mass feedings of birds can contribute to the spread of the avian flu, experts say. (Eduardo Munoz/Reuters)Human interaction with wild birds may seem harmless, but it can contribute to the spread of flu because it encourages birds to gather together, MacDougall-Shackleton said. "As humans, what we do affects the behaviour of everything around us, so if we set out mass feeding stations that attract migratory birds, or even if you're simply feeding bread and encouraging them to congregate around you, you're bringing them into close contact."Malott said Stratford residents have been co-operative when told about the dangers of mass bird feeding. His staff will start feeding the swans indoors and are considering enclosing the area to ensure wild animals don't get in.Although MacDougall-Shackleton expects a spike in transmission before migration season ends by late October, she said there should be fewer cases once birds have migrated south. ABOUT THE AUTHORIsha BhargavaReporterIsha Bhargava is a multiplatform reporter for CBC News and has worked for its Ontario newsrooms in Toronto and London. She loves telling current affairs and human interest stories. You can reach her at isha.bhargava@cbc.ca CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowIn Nigeria These Three Diseases Have Killed More People than Malaria | Dataphyte Monday, November 11, 2024 No Result View All Result Home Economy Governance Climate Extractive Security Health Reports Projects Anfani CMEDIA Open Data COVID19 #ENDSARS Gender Elections Products Goloka Dataplex Dataphyte Academy Dataphyte Store Visualisation Elections Platform Newsletters Divided We Stand Pocket Science SenorRita Marina and Maitama Five Figures of Speech Data Dive Home Economy Governance Climate Extractive Security Health Reports Projects Anfani CMEDIA Open Data COVID19 #ENDSARS Gender Elections Products Goloka Dataplex Dataphyte Academy Dataphyte Store Visualisation Elections Platform Newsletters Divided We Stand Pocket Science SenorRita Marina and Maitama Five Figures of Speech Data Dive No Result View All Result No Result View All Result Home » Latest Reports » Health » In Nigeria These Three Diseases Have Killed More People than Malaria In Nigeria These Three Diseases Have Killed More People than Malaria by Ode Uduu September 22, 2022 2 min read 0 (Source: The Guardian Newspaper) Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn Malaria remains one of the highest killers globally, claiming the lives of 627,000 people globally. The World Health Organisation (WHO) has identified Nigeria as one region with high malaria prevalence globally. It has been reported that about 100,693 persons died of malaria in 2020. This figure accounted for 6.82% of the total deaths in the years, and Nigeria is ranked 27th out of 178 on the global scale of deaths to malaria. However, malaria, though a deadly disease, is only the fourth highest killer in Nigeria. Influenza/pneumonia, diarrhea, and tuberculosis have individually resulted in the death of more Nigerians than malaria. Influenza/pneumonia led to the death of 207,281 Nigerians in 2020, representing 14% of the total deaths reported by causes in the country and holding the number 1 position. Nigeria has a global ranking of 28th of 178 countries on influenza/pneumonia. Diarrhea holds the second position, claiming the lives of 144,724 Nigerians in 2020. This figure is equivalent to 9.77% of the total death to causative diseases. On the global ranking, Nigeria is ranked 13 out of 178 in deaths from diarrhea. Tuberculosis was reported to kill 127,335 persons in Nigeria in 2020, representing 8.6% of the total deaths. Nigeria has a global ranking of 6th of 178 in tuberculosis deaths in 2020. Birth trauma took the lives of 100,186 Nigerians in 2020 making up 6.76% of deaths and in fifth position after malaria. The total deaths recorded in 2020 placed Nigeria in the 2nd of 178 countries globally. There were eleven diseases in which Nigeria had poor world rankings. Of these diseases, out of 178 countries that recorded deaths, Nigeria falls between 2nd to 17th in each of them. Nigeria was found in the top five in four diseases and ranked 2nd in deaths to birth trauma in 2020. The country was 5th in deaths for drug use, congenital anomalies, and low birth weight. Drug abuse killed 6,273 Nigerians, which made up 0.42% of the total deaths, while congenital anomalies and low birth weight killed 44,646 persons and 95,959 persons, respectively. Congenital anomalies and low birth weight accounted for 5.36% and 6.48% of the total deaths. However, of the top five diseases that had the highest fatalities in Nigeria, only malaria and tuberculosis have notable interventions. There is no known government intervention for influenza/pneumonia, diarrhea, or birth trauma despite their high ranking positions among diseases with high fatalities. Ode Uduu ShareTweetShare Get real time update about this post categories directly on your device, subscribe now. Unsubscribe Ode Uduu Related Posts Education What is driving the trend of out-of-school children in Kano? November 8, 2024 Economy On Cordoso’s One Year in Office November 8, 2024 Data Card #DailyDataCard: Facts About the New Terror Group in Nigeria November 8, 2024 Data Card #DailyDataCard: Nigeria’s Chiefs of Army Staff since 1999 November 7, 2024 Development FEMALE REPRESENTATION IN NIGERIA’S LOCAL GOVERNMENTS November 7, 2024 Development How Much Can States Fund their Budget? November 7, 2024 Load More Next Post #DailyDataCard: Nigeria's Inflation rate in August 2022 increased by 1.77% compared to July 2022 Nigeria's Life Expectancy Rates have Increased in the Last 2 Decades Despite Many Odds Nigeria’s Tax Expenditure to Reach N21.815 Trillion by 2023 #DailyDataCard: Nigeria's total mineral export value 2020 Search No Result View All Result CategoryCategory Select Category Aviation (3) Book Review (1) Chart of the Day (96) Editorial (271) Data Dive (129) Marina and Maitama (41) Pocket Science (41) Senorrita (39) Housing (1) Investigations (68) Latest Reports (2,216) #ENDSARS (17) Agriculture (49) Audit (41) Budget (38) Business (28) Climate (68) COVID19 (96) Development (319) Population (20) Economy (425) Export (5) Taxation (7) Education (64) Elections (137) Energy (69) Electricity (16) Renewable Energy (11) Environment (26) Extractive (123) Oil and Gas (46) Fact Check (2) Finance (153) CBN Cashless Policy Reports (16) Gender (56) Governance (310) Health (124) International (28) Judiciary (9) Lifestyle (6) Media (15) Monday Rundown (5) Numbers To Ponder (60) Opportunities (15) Policy Brief (8) Public Procurement (40) Road Safety (6) SDGs (33) Security (82) Special Report (98) Reports (14) Sport (13) Technology (16) Telecoms (4) Transportation (11) Visualisation (444) 2021 budget visualisation (7) Data Card (390) Water (9) MSME (4) Nubia AI (1) Projects (22) CMEDIA (17) Media Fellowship (2) About Us Dataphyte is a media research and data analytics organisation with the mission to deploy data tools and technology for the socio-economic development of Nigeria. About Us Contact Editorial Trust Meet Our Authors Join us Privacy Policy Terms and conditions © 2024 Dataphyte No Result View All Result Home Economy Governance Climate Extractive Security Health Reports Projects Anfani CMEDIA Open Data COVID19 #ENDSARS Gender Elections Products Goloka Dataplex Dataphyte Academy Dataphyte Store Visualisation Elections Platform Newsletters Divided We Stand Pocket Science SenorRita Marina and Maitama Five Figures of Speech Data Dive © 2024 Dataphyte Login to your account below Forgotten Password? Fill the forms bellow to register All fields are required. Log In Retrieve your password Please enter your username or email address to reset your password. Log InGeorgian health authorities launching free anti-flu vaccination for individuals in risk groups home analysis special reports government multimedia in pictures infographic life pressscanner blogs Time in Tbilisi: November 11, 2024 12:36 Time in Tbilisi: November 11, 2024 12:36 news politics Georgia-EU foreign affairs economy tourism energy environment justice defence education healthcare culture agriculture innovation sport society elections good news Occupied Territories news politics Georgia-EU foreign affairs economy tourism energy environment justice defence education healthcare culture agriculture innovation sport society elections good news Occupied Territories ... news articles blogs NEWS Georgian health authorities launching free anti-flu vaccination for individuals in risk groups The Georgian health ministry said the country had already purchased 200,000 doses of Sanofi pasteur quadrivalent influenza vaccine, recommended by the World Health Organisation, for the purpose. Photo: Nino Alavidze/Agenda.ge. Tweet Share Agenda.ge, 21 Sep 2022 - 15:15, Tbilisi,Georgia Pregnant women, doctors, patients on dialysis, individuals with diabetes, HIV/AIDS and those in risk groups will receive vaccines against flu free of charge starting on Wednesday, the Georgian health ministry has announced. The state body noted Georgia had already purchased 200,000 doses of Sanofi pasteur quadrivalent influenza vaccine, recommended by the World Health Organisation, for the purpose. Individuals in the risk groups have been asked to apply to medical institutions in Tbilisi and other regions for the vaccines, with the list of venues providing the services listed on the official website of the national centre for disease control. RELATED Fewer than expected get seasonal flu shot in Georgia 23 Nov 2021 Only 95,000 doses of flu vaccine have been administered in Georgia since early October, though the government purchased 200,000 doses and encouraged at-risk groups and their families to receive the vaccine, head of Georgia’s National Centre for Disease Control Amiran Gamkrelidze says. READ MORE Pregnant women, vulnerable individuals to receive anti-flu drug Tamiflu free of charge 05 Jan 2020 The Georgian Health Ministry has announced that pregnant women and socially vulnerable individuals will receive antiviral medication Tamiflu free of charge upon doctor’s prescription. READ MORE Seasonal flu infection level increases in Georgia 13 Jan 2020 The amount of patients applying hospitals with flu symptoms have increased in the second week of January, announced the Head of National Disease Control Centre, Amiran Gamkrelidze today. READ MORE Georgia to purchase double amount of anti-flu vaccines for 2019-20 09 Jan 2019 Georgia will purchase double amount of anti-flu vaccines for 2019-2020 and this will be 80,000 vaccines instead of the 41,000 which were purchased for 2018-2019, head of the National Disease Control Centre Amiran Gamkrelidze has told Netgazeti. READ MORE Healthcare official: so-called Hong Kong virus, flu, “much more dangerous” for children than current coronavirus variant 20 Nov 2022 Ivane Chkhaidze, the medical director of Iashvili children’s hospital on Saturday said the “overwhelming” majority of flu cases have been the so-called Hong Kong H3-N2 virus, which appears to be more severe in children, unlike the current coronavirus variant. READ MORE Public urged to get seasonal flu shots amid surge of viruses 12 Jan 2023 Georgian healthcare authorities have called on the public to ensure they are vaccinated against seasonal flu amid increasing numbers of cases of various virus types across the country. READ MORE Children’s Hospital Head says flu cases have doubled across Georgia 05 Jan 2024 Ivane Chkhaidze, the Medical Director of the Tbilisi-based Iashvili Children's Hospital, on Friday said the number of flu cases had doubled across the country. READ MORE Home News In pictures About Contact News Politics Economy Society Justice Foreign affairs Elections Culture Sport Good news Analysis Special reports In pictures Life Pressscanner Twitter Facebook Youtube Flickr Rss Digg copyright © 2013 - 2024 AGENDA.GEAvian flu claims the lives of three Stratford swans | CTV News Skip to main content Live LONDON Search CTVNews.ca Search News Latest News All News Weather Community Calendar Contests Photo Galleries London Attack 2018 World Junior Charges Video Latest All Video CTV News Live Video Help Shows News Programs CTV News at Six CTV News at 11 About Who We Are About Us Advertise with Us Contact Us Social Facebook Twitter Instagram Across Canada Other Cities Atlantic Barrie Calgary Edmonton Guelph Kingston Kitchener Lethbridge London Montreal Nanaimo Newfoundland and Labrador Northern Ontario Ottawa Pembroke Prince Albert Red Deer Regina Saskatoon Sault Ste. Marie Toronto Vancouver Vancouver Island Windsor Winnipeg Search CTVNews.ca Search London Stratford, Ont.'s beloved swans are being killed by kindness Share Three of Stratford, Ont.’s mute swans have died since Saturday of avian influenza (H5N1). It’s suspected that the adult birds died after contracting the bird flu from migrating ducks visiting the area around Lake Victoria and the Avon River. “Avian flu is back in the area,” explains Quin Malott, Stratford’s Parks, Forestry, and Cemetery manager. “This is the most likely cause of what’s happening to these birds.” The behaviour of some visitors to the waterfront is putting more swans at risk. Feeding waterfowl along the water encourages the swans to mingle with contagious ducks and geese — easily passing the deadly virus between species. One of Stratford’s famous mute swans, as seen on September 20, 2022. It’s suspected that the adult birds died after contracting the bird flu from migrating ducks visiting the area around Lake Victoria and the Avon River. (Daryl Newcombe/CTV News London) “To protect the rest of our birds, let’s quit feeding the birds along the river,” urges Malott. Professor Shayan Sharif from the University of Guelph says the risk that a human may contract H5N1 influenza is low — but viruses can mutate. “In general for poultry and birds it is highly contagious, but not for humans. Not at least at this point in time,” he tells CTV News London. The swans are not wild. During the winter they are housed in a special facility by the municipality, but the presence of avian flu in the area may change how they are cared for this year. “This winter maybe we’ll feed them inside, locked in, and then once they are done eating we’ll let them out, just so the ducks can’t get in there,” says Sharif. Avian flu has been carried by migratory birds to most Canadian provinces in recent years. Malott says his team has a bond with the swans, and doesn’t want to see people feeding them in the park lead to more deaths. “We can’t do a lot, but let’s do what we can. This is a loss for us. Staff and myself aren’t taking this well,” he adds. Anyone who discovers a sick, injured, or deceased swan is asked to contact 519-271-0250 ext. 246. Meanwhile in Owen Sound, city staff noticed a bird in the sanctuary at Harrison Park showing signs of possible Avian Influenza which has now been confirmed by Canadian Food Inspection Agency. — With files from CTV News London's Kristylee Varley (Source: City of Stratford/Facebook) To help prevent the spread of Avian Influenza, residents are encouraged to: Report sick or dead birds to the agencies listed above Do not touch or feed wild birds by hand Clean backyard feeders and baths regularly using a weak solution of domestic bleach and water Separate domestic and wild birds where possible London Top Stories Serious injuries after 401 crash involving tractor trailer St. Thomas area crash sends two people to hospital VIDEO VIDEO | Teenage girls assaulted by woman on school property Middlesex resident scammed out of $200,000 last month, here's how you can protect yourself from fraud Hit and run crash being investigated in Huron County Fatal crash reported in Lambton County, one person dead 'I'd just end up on the street somewhere': Disabled Londoner fears impact of council's new restriction on indoor resting spaces LDCSB confirms 'Leadership Planning Session' cost over $16,000 CTVNews.ca Top Stories U.S. Justice Department brings criminal charges in Iranian murder-for-hire plan targeting Donald Trump The Justice Department on Friday disclosed an Iranian murder-for-hire plot to kill Donald Trump, charging a man who said he had been tasked by a government official before this week's election with planning the assassination of the Republican president-elect. Canada rent report: What landlords are asking tenants to pay Average asking rents declined nationally on a year-over-year basis for the first time in more than three years in October, said a report out Thursday. N.S. school 'deeply sorry' for asking service members not to wear uniforms at Remembrance Day ceremony An elementary school in the Halifax area has backed away from a request that service members not wear uniforms to the school's Remembrance Day ceremony. 48,584 space heaters recalled in Canada after burn injury in U.S. Health Canada has announced a recall for electric space heaters over potential fire and burn risks, a notice published Thursday reads. Israeli soccer fans were attacked in Amsterdam. The violence was condemned as antisemitic Israeli fans were assaulted after a soccer game in Amsterdam by hordes of young people apparently riled up by calls on social media to target Jewish people, Dutch authorities said Friday. Five people were treated at hospitals and dozens were arrested after the attacks, which were condemned as antisemitic by authorities in Amsterdam, Israel and across Europe. 'Big frustration': How a limited MAID window affects Alzheimer's patients A move by Quebec to allow a person with a serious and incurable illness like Alzheimer's to request MAID months or years before their condition leaves them unable to consent has been met with praise, confusion and criticism. Winnipeg teacher who faces voyeurism charge now accused of sexually assaulting former student A Winnipeg teacher previously charged with voyeurism and a number of other offences has been charged with sexual assault and sexual exploitation of a former student. Beyonce leads the 2025 Grammy noms, becoming the most nominated artist in the show's history Welcome to Beyonce country. When it comes to the 2025 Grammy Award nominations, 'Cowboy Carter' rules the nation. 107-year-old temperature record among dozens broken across Canada Canadians are experiencing a wave of warm weather across multiple provinces well into the fall season, shattering dozens of temperature records. Shopping Trends The Shopping Trends team is independent of the journalists at CTV News. We may earn a commission when you use our links to shop. Read about us. Editor's Picks 30 Stocking Stuffers That'll Impress Just About Anyone The Ultimate 2024 Holiday Gift Guide for In-Laws 19 Gift Add-Ons Under $10 That’ll Take Their Present To The Next Level Home 15 Must-Haves To Order If You're Travelling This Fall 17 Of The Absolute Best Cat Toys You Can Find Online Right Now Our Guide To The Best Artificial Christmas Trees You Can Get In Canada Gifts Our Guide To The Best Advent Calendars For Kids In 2024 The Best Fitness Gifts Under $150 The Best Eco-Conscious Gifts To Give In 2024 Beauty The Best Red Lipsticks, Ranked And Rated Is It Too Dramatic To Say This CND Cuticle Oil Changed My Life? Little Luxuries Are Important, So Let Me Introduce You To A Few Body Washes That Smell Amazing Deals This Smart Security Camera System Will Help You Keep An Eye On Your Home (And It's On Sale For 62% Off Right Now) From The Bay to Best Buy: Here Are The Best Deals You'll Find Online This Week From Fossil To Frank And Oak: Here Are The Best Deals You'll Find Online This Week Kitchener Costco opens first location in Brantford Holiday markets to visit in Kitchener Stolen vehicle rams police cruisers in Kitchener Barrie Wasaga Beach mayor seeks provincial support for redevelopment plans SIU invokes mandate after officer-related shooting in Orillia, 1 dead, 1 seriously injured Orillia resident wins Princess Margaret Home Lottery Bonus Prize Windsor Windsor police seek suspect in west Windsor armed robbery investigation 99 McNaughton residents get a date to return home Historic performance: Windsor, Ont. youth musicians to perform newly discovered Mozart music Northern Ontario Three charged in One Direction singer Liam Payne's death Crews quickly extinguish morning vehicle fire on Hwy. 17 near North Bay Elliot Lake man charged with harassing neighbour in 'road rage' incident Sault Ste. Marie Three young offenders in the Sault charged with vicious assault Two Cochrane men fined $1,100 for starting rural grass fire Elliot Lake man charged with harassing neighbour in 'road rage' incident Ottawa Police investigating discovery of a body in Orleans park Federal union warns government 'widening the net' to reduce spending Extension cord malfunction blamed for sparking fire that damaged three homes in Orleans Toronto 'A big bombshell': Toronto parents scrambling to find child care after daycares warn of huge fee hikes in January Toronto man facing murder charge in deadly stabbing at Scarborough social housing complex Man accused of trafficking two women throughout GTA, police believe there may be more victims Montreal Police watchdog investigates after Longueuil police shot and injured someone Canada rent report: What landlords are asking tenants to pay 107-year-old temperature record among dozens broken across Canada Atlantic N.S. school 'deeply sorry' for asking service members not to wear uniforms at Remembrance Day ceremony Houston and PC’s release election platform, including provincial cap on power rates Nova Scotia RCMP seek man wanted on provincewide arrest warrant Winnipeg Winnipeg teacher who faces voyeurism charge now accused of sexually assaulting former student Serious assault prompts Friday morning road closures in Winnipeg Pair of Manitoba towns smash previous heat records Calgary BREAKING BREAKING | Calgary to host 2026 Grey Cup festival 12 calves killed in central Alberta rollover Alberta appoints Ray Gilmour as interim CEO of AIMCo Edmonton Alberta appoints Ray Gilmour as interim CEO of AIMCo 12 calves killed in central Alberta rollover 'I feel empty': Transgender skier worries Alberta bill would ban her from competing Regina One person killed, two hurt in Moose Jaw single-vehicle crash, SIRT investigating Sturgis, Sask. student wins national award for Remembrance Day poem Sask. drilling company fined $15K after violating health and safety regulations Saskatoon Saskatoon Police Service suspends 5 officers with pay following 'off-duty incident' 'It's heartbreaking': Saskatchewan powwow dancer offers $500 reward for stolen regalia Meet Saskatoon mayoral candidate Don Atchison...again Vancouver Crash closes Highway 1 in both directions in Chilliwack, B.C. Abbotsford Remembrance Day ceremony altered due to nearby encampment Pedestrian killed in South Surrey hit-and-run crash, RCMP say Vancouver Island Results expected in B.C. election recounts, confirming if NDP keeps majority 23 Commonwealth War Grave headstones in Nanaimo will be resurrected You can now own your own little piece of Duncan's iconic Big Stick Stay Connected Search CTV News Advertise on CTVNews.ca Political Ads Registry About CTV Careers CTV News Stox Press Room Editorial Standards & Policies Contact Us CTV News App Video Help Accessibility Shopping Trends Stay up to date on the latest, breaking news Subscribe to newsletter CTV News Programs CTV National News Power Play W5 CTV Question Period CTV News Channel Local News Atlantic Barrie Calgary Edmonton Guelph Kitchener Lethbridge London Montreal Northern Ontario Ottawa Prince Albert Red Deer Regina Saskatoon Toronto Vancouver Vancouver Island Windsor Winnipeg Yorkton © 2024 All rights reserved. Use of this Website assumes acceptance of Terms & Conditions and Privacy PolicyInfluenza cases on the rise: Classes 1-8 in Puducherry shut till Sep 25 All Sections Home India World Business Sports Entertainment Opinion Law Lifestyle Dainik Statesman More Technology Exclusive Interviews Features Photo Videos Cities Travel Education Law Epaper Bhubaneswar Delhi Kolkata Siliguri Dainik Statesman Home India World Business Sports Entertainment Opinion Law Lifestyle Dainik Statesman More Technology Exclusive Interviews Features Photo Videos Cities Travel Education Law Epaper Bhubaneswar Delhi Kolkata Siliguri Dainik Statesman Home India World Business Sports Entertainment Opinion Law Lifestyle Dainik Statesman More Technology Exclusive Interviews Features Photo Videos Cities Travel Education Law Epaper Bhubaneswar Delhi Kolkata Siliguri Dainik Statesman Search # India Influenza cases on the rise: Classes 1-8 in Puducherry shut till Sep 25 The closure was initiated after the state Health Department gave a recommendation to this effect and the decision was made by Chief Minister, N. Rangasamy, and Minister for Education, A. Namassivayam. IANS | Puducherry | September 18, 2022 10:33 am File Photo The Union Territory of Puducherry has suspended classes for students from standards 1 to 8 till September 25, after a hike in the number of influenza cases in the territory. The closure was initiated after the state Health Department gave a recommendation to this effect and the decision was made by Chief Minister, N. Rangasamy, and Minister for Education, A. Namassivayam. The Directorate of School Education in a statement on Saturday said that the holidays will be applicable for LKG, and UKG students as well. Advertisement Health Department officials told IANS that in the past week, there was an estimated increase of 50 per cent in cases of influenza among children who are visiting various health clinics. The officials added that most of the children are arriving with high fever and cough and the spread is on the rise. Dr. R. Santhanakrishnan of a Government hospital at Karaikkal, while speaking to IANS said: “The flu-like illness is spreading when children inhale droplets from infected persons or when they are in direct contact with mucous from patients. This has led to the high spread among children attending schools. He said that children must stay at home, use face masks, maintain social distancing, and regularly wash hands with soap to prevent the spread of the disease. The Puducherry Health Department has also opened dedicated fever clinics in government clinics and PHCs across the territory. It has also ensured that doctors are present in all fever clinics and PHCs. According to a study conducted by the Puducherry Health Department, after the decline in the number of Covid-19 cases, people throng markets and public places without masks and this has led to the spread of flu-like fever. The authorities have directed patients infected with fever to wear face masks and to isolate themselves from other members of the family to prevent the spread. Advertisement ChildrenInfluenza cases Related posts # India Don’t let technology enslave you, embrace books: CM Yogi urges children Organised in collaboration with the National Book Trust and the Lucknow Development Authority, the festival will run from November 9 to 17. # Bengal 4-year-old girl raped in Murshidabad by teenager A four-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a 15-year-old boy, who was arrested by the police under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act in Murshidabad. # India Liquor contractor shoots wife and three children dead in Varanasi It has come to light that Rajendra was in contact with some tantric who is said to have told him that his wife and children were a hindrance in his progress. You might be interested in Modi mantra of ”Ek hai toh safe hai” to nullify ‘divisive politics’ of Congress Justice Sanjiv Khanna sworn-in as 51st CJI Trump tells Putin not to escalate Ukraine war in first phone conversation after winning elections Advertisement Top Headlines Modi mantra of ”Ek hai toh safe hai” to nullify ‘divisive politics’ of Congress Justice Sanjiv Khanna sworn-in as 51st CJI Trump tells Putin not to escalate Ukraine war in first phone conversation after winning elections Delhi’s air quality in ‘very poor’ category, AQI over 400 in many areas OPINION India’s Roadmap Inflation Woes Global Reset Railways safer than ever before Could euphoria over win be a problem for Trump? Balancing Trade thestatesman.com PEOPLE'S PARLIAMENT, ALWAYS IN SESSION Address The Statesman Net Private Limited Statesman House, First Floor 148 Barakhamba Road New Delhi – 110001 (+91) (011) 41605781, 41605958 Follow us: News India World Business Technology Sports Lifestyle Health Lifestyle Fashion Entertainment Entertainment Bollywood Hollywood Bengali Cinema Southern Cinema © 2023, thestatesman.com | All rights reserved Advertise with us About Privacy Policy Contact