National influenza surveillance systems in five European countries: a qualitative comparative framework based on WHO guidance | BMC Public Health | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search BMC Public Health Home About Articles Submission Guidelines Collections Join the Editorial Board Submit manuscript National influenza surveillance systems in five European countries: a qualitative comparative framework based on WHO guidance Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 09 June 2022 National influenza surveillance systems in five European countries: a qualitative comparative framework based on WHO guidance Thierry Rigoine de Fougerolles1, Oliver Damm2, Filippo Ansaldi3, Maria Chironna4, Pascal Crépey5, Simon de Lusignan6,7, Ian Gray8, José Maria Guillen9, George Kassianos7, Anne Mosnier10, Raul Ortiz de Lejarazu11, Elena Pariani12, Joan Puig-Barbera13, Jörg Schelling14, Francesca Trippi15, Philippe Vanhems16,17, Klaus Wahle18, John Watkins19, Anvar Rasuli20, Olivier Vitoux1 & …Hélène Bricout20 Show authors BMC Public Health volume 22, Article number: 1151 (2022) Cite this article 3450 Accesses 6 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundInfluenza surveillance systems vary widely between countries and there is no framework to evaluate national surveillance systems in terms of data generation and dissemination. This study aimed to develop and test a comparative framework for European influenza surveillance.MethodsSurveillance systems were evaluated qualitatively in five European countries (France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom) by a panel of influenza experts and researchers from each country. Seven surveillance sub-systems were defined: non-medically attended community surveillance, virological surveillance, community surveillance, outbreak surveillance, primary care surveillance, hospital surveillance, mortality surveillance). These covered a total of 19 comparable outcomes of increasing severity, ranging from non-medically attended cases to deaths, which were evaluated using 5 comparison criteria based on WHO guidance (granularity, timing, representativeness, sampling strategy, communication) to produce a framework to compare the five countries.ResultsFrance and the United Kingdom showed the widest range of surveillance sub-systems, particularly for hospital surveillance, followed by Germany, Spain, and Italy. In all countries, virological, primary care and hospital surveillance were well developed, but non-medically attended events, influenza cases in the community, outbreaks in closed settings and mortality estimates were not consistently reported or published. The framework also allowed the comparison of variations in data granularity, timing, representativeness, sampling strategy, and communication between countries. For data granularity, breakdown per risk condition were available in France and Spain, but not in the United Kingdom, Germany and Italy. For data communication, there were disparities in the timeliness and accessibility of surveillance data.ConclusionsThis new framework can be used to compare influenza surveillance systems qualitatively between countries to allow the identification of structural differences as well as to evaluate adherence to WHO guidance. The framework may be adapted for other infectious respiratory diseases. Peer Review reports BackgroundSeasonal influenza represents a significant clinical and economic burden globally, with an attack rate estimated of 5–10% in adults and 20–30% in children [1] and up to 650,000 deaths globally and 72,000 deaths in Europe resulting from influenza-associated complications in all ages each year [2]. Although surveillance systems that continuously monitor the virology and epidemiology of seasonal influenza are now in place in most countries [3, 4], these are associated with varying degrees of success due to the unpredictable nature of influenza epidemics, the multiple data sources involved, and the varied degree of sophistication and funding in national surveillance systems [5]. The main purpose of such surveillance is to anticipate and protect the population and health systems from the threat of seasonal epidemics of influenza virus. The coronavirus infectious disease (COVID-19) pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has highlighted the importance of surveillance and detection capabilities to mitigate and tackle the spread of infectious disease.In its Global Influenza Strategy 2019–2030 [6], the World Health Organization (WHO) included influenza surveillance as part of its strategic objectives, as a key component to support public health policy making, feed influenza research, and anticipate pandemics .Historically, influenza surveillance systems have been mainly focused on identifying influenza virus circulation patterns (antigenic drift and antigenic shift monitoring) and providing virology information to WHO Collaborating Centres. In 2009, the H1N1 pandemic provided a catalyst to improve the methods for measuring the overall impact of influenza including associated severe outcomes such as hospital admissions and deaths [7]. In developed countries, influenza has been monitored for several decades using sentinel networks where selected general practitioners (GPs) and hospitals collect swab samples from patients with influenza-like illness (ILI) or acute respiratory infection (ARI) in line with WHO guidance [8, 9]. Most advanced surveillance systems also use digital tools [10] and diverse statistical methods [11] to complement data from healthcare systems. In addition to data generation, the WHO encourages dissemination of data in a regular manner through consolidated and structured weekly and annual influenza surveillance reports [12,13,14,15,16,17], the data from which are often used in influenza public health awareness campaigns. Such continuous communication is particularly important for a seasonal disease such as influenza for which vaccine prevention exists. Public health agencies, as reliable public sources of data on influenza burden, play a key role in providing public information regarding the importance of protection against the influenza viruses. However, despite guidance and coordination efforts from the WHO through the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) [18] and further coordination by the European Centre for Disease Protection and Control (ECDC) through the European Influenza Surveillance Network (EISN) [19] and Flu News Europe [4] (which use the European Surveillance System [TESSy] database), data generation and dissemination from influenza surveillance systems vary widely between countries. Guidance and tools to standardize, characterize and evaluate national influenza surveillance system were developed such as those from the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [20, 21], and the handbook of methods and applications from the ECDC [22], in complement to the biennial publication of Influenza Surveillance Country Profiles in Europe [23].The purpose of this qualitative study was to develop a comparative framework that capitalizes on the WHO guidance and provides countries with a platform for comparison of their influenza surveillance systems across a set of evaluation criteria. The aims were also to identify structural differences in the collection and dissemination of data on the burden of influenza, based on a comparative, qualitative evaluation of the influenza surveillance systems in place in five of the largest European countries (France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom [UK]).MethodsSurveillance scope and comparative outcomes were first defined. Further criteria and sub-criteria were then defined to form a qualitative evaluation framework for influenza surveillance in France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the UK to allow a qualitative comparison between countries. The evaluation was conducted between June 2019 and November 2020.Surveillance sub-systems and outcomes to be comparedThe influenza surveillance sub-systems for which key outcomes were to be compared qualitatively were identified based on WHO guidance (virological surveillance, primary care surveillance and hospital surveillance) [8, 9] and the existing ECDC framework [23]. Four additional sub-systems were added: non-medically attended community surveillance [24], community surveillance, outbreak surveillance, and mortality surveillance (Table 1). These additional sub-systems considered the whole clinical spectrum of influenza disease and were based on surveillance tools used in the five countries and complemented by pan-European initiatives including the use of digital tools for influenza monitoring in the Influenzanet network [25] and excess mortality modelling as part of the EuroMOMO project [26]. The resulting set of 7 surveillance sub-systems was discussed and agreed by co-authors, including Sanofi Pasteur and a panel of influenza surveillance experts and researchers from each country (Table 2). Experts were chosen based on their experience and knowledge of influenza surveillance systems in the five countries. A roundtable event was held in October 2019 at which approximately 30 experts (including the 21 authors) reviewed, discussed, and adjusted the framework and the results of the comparative analyses. The group of experts included epidemiologists, virologists, general practitioners, public health researchers and pharmaceutical industry medical experts from the five countries included in the analysis (ie, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the UK). The selection of the authors from the group of experts was based on their agreement to fulfil the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) criteria for authorship.Table 1 Influenza surveillance sub-systems and comparative outcomesFull size tableTable 2 Sources of information by countryFull size tableTogether these 7 surveillance sub-systems created a scope of case reporting reflecting increasing case severity, from non-medically attended cases in the community to fatal cases. For these 7 sub-systems, a total of 19 outcomes were defined to be used as a basis for comparison between countries. The 7 surveillance sub-systems and their associated outcomes are listed in Table 1.Selection of comparison criteria and definition of sub-criteriaA further 5 criteria were developed to qualitatively evaluate each of the surveillance sub-systems and outcomes described above, based on three criteria from the WHO manual for estimating disease burden associated with seasonal influenza [9] (completeness, representativeness, and accuracy of case count; a fourth criterion in the WHO manual assessing the potential for bias was excluded due to the lack of publicly available evidence to evaluate it). Two criteria were reworded to best fit the underlying sub-criteria, completeness into timing and accuracy into sampling strategy. Two further criteria were included to align with the WHO global epidemiological surveillance standards for influenza [8]: data granularity (to include how data are stratified by age, strain, chronic condition, and influenza vaccination status) and data dissemination (to include how data are shared by relevant Health Authorities through weekly and annual reports in line with WHO guidance) [6]. This resulted in the following 5 qualitative comparison criteria and associated sub-criteria for the evaluation of data for each of the surveillance sub-systems (for further details of the criteria, sub-criteria, and associated WHO guidance see Table 3): Granularity: stratification of data by age, gender and risk condition, insights on the geographical location, breakdown per virus type, subtype, and lineage, further patient details such as the severity of the infection (e.g. need for mechanical ventilation), the treatment administered, and vaccination status if available. Timing: continuity and frequency of data collection over a defined period. Representativeness: geographical and population representativeness based on the territory and population groups covered by sentinel systems and other surveillance components. For sentinel schemes, the number and proportion of facilities involved. Sampling strategy: based on the surveillance type and syndromic surveillance criteria used (ILI or ARI), the strategy to collect specimens and the type of laboratory test performed. Communication: availability in weekly and annual surveillance reports in a timely and open access manner for further use by researchers, the media, and other stakeholders. Table 3 Criteria and sub-criteria (primary care surveillance example)Full size tableData collectionBased on the qualitative comparative framework, the following 3-step process was used to ensure the quality and accuracy of information collected from the five countries: 1. The framework was completed using publicly available information from national influenza surveillance methodologies, weekly and annual reports of influenza surveillance [12,13,14,15,16]. 2. Telephone or face-to-face interviews of approximately 1 hour were conducted with 2–5 influenza experts and researchers in each country. The interviewees included but were not limited to the co-authors and were selected based on their clinical experience of influenza and their expertise of national surveillance systems (see earlier). 3. The data collected from the framework were discussed with the panel of influenza experts and researchers from the five countries at the roundtable event described earlier. This allowed the structure of the framework to be further refined and for each country’s input to be adjusted where necessary. Details on the number of experts interviewed and participants at the roundtable for each country are presented in Table 2. ResultsUsing the qualitative framework described, detailed data for the comparison criteria are presented for each surveillance sub-system (non-medically attended community surveillance, virological surveillance, community surveillance, outbreak surveillance, primary care surveillance, hospital surveillance, and mortality surveillance) in the additional file. A synthetic overview of these data for each country is presented in Table 4.Table 4 Overview of the comparative framework of influenza surveillance systemsFull size tableOverview of the comparative frameworkFrance and the UK (England and Wales) had the widest scope across all 7 surveillance systems, monitoring 16 out of 19 outcomes, thanks to the breadth of the outcomes covered in hospital surveillance. All of the five countries included in the analysis met the basic WHO requirements, with well-established networks of laboratories and sentinel schemes for primary care and hospital surveillance.For virological surveillance (surveillance sub-system 2: Table 4), each country had one or more WHO National Influenza Centers (NIC) to perform typing and subtyping of strains, sequence the whole genome, and evaluate the antiviral drug resistance of the influenza samples provided by sentinel schemes.Primary care surveillance (surveillance sub-system 5: Table 4) was also well developed with all countries having sentinel GP systems (including pediatricians) reporting and testing patients with ARI and/or ILI symptoms. No data were collected for influenza-associated excess GP visits or absenteeism except for Germany where statistical modelling was in place for primary care surveillance.Hospital surveillance (surveillance sub-system 6: Table 4) was also implemented in all countries, but with differences in terms of breadth of the scope covered. In France, England and Wales, surveillance systems routinely monitored ILI emergency department (ED) visits. German surveillance included statistical modelling for influenza-associated hospitalizations, but did not cover ED visits and Intensive Care Unit (ICU) admissions. In Spain, hospital surveillance included all outcomes except ED visits and statistical modelling for influenza related hospitalizations. In Italy hospital surveillance was focused on the most severe outcomes, reporting only data on ICU admissions and with no published data on other outcomes from this sub system.All countries had non-medically attended community surveillance and mortality surveillance systems in place (although in Spain web survey data had not been published since 2016) (surveillance sub-systems 1 and 7: Table 4). These were coordinated by the InfluenzaNet and EuroMOMO European initiatives, respectively. Worth noting is that Italy and Spain modelled excess mortality for all causes using EuroMOMO model, whereas France, England and two German states (Berlin and Hesse) produced excess mortality estimates attributable to influenza using the FluMOMO model. However, the Robert Koch Institute uses its own model to estimate influenza attributable excess mortality estimates.There were significant differences across the five countries for community surveillance and outbreak surveillance (surveillance sub-systems 3 and 4: Table 4). Biologically or laboratory-confirmed cases were notified by sentinel laboratories in France, Spain and the UK and suspected or laboratory-confirmed influenza outbreaks in some closed settings (e.g. schools or nursing homes) were published on a weekly basis. Germany mandated notification for any community-notified laboratory-confirmed cases and outbreaks in closed settings. In Italy, data for mandatory notification were either not collected (notified laboratory-confirmed cases) or not published by the health authorities (outbreaks in closed settings).No country performed the collection of data on complications and events after hospitalization, i.e. the pathway of care.Performance across the 5 comparison criteriaThe main findings for the qualitative comparison criteria (granularity, timing, representativeness, sampling strategy, and communication [as defined in Table 3]) for each surveillance sub-system are described below. Further details are included in the additional file.Data granularity was below WHO standards in most countries, especially regarding the stratification by risk condition (defined in Table 3), which was available in France and Spain for some outcomes but not in the UK, Germany, and Italy (see additional file for details). Except in the UK and some regions of Spain, the absence of information on influenza immunization status was also common; this was particularly apparent in France, Italy, and Germany due to a lack of both a vaccination registry and standardized vaccination software tools in GP and pediatric practices.The timing of the data was well aligned between countries, with surveillance starting usually at Week 40 (end of September) and ending at Week 20 (mid-May) the following year and most outcomes provided on a weekly basis.The representativeness of the data would be expected to be affected by major differences in the proportion of the population covered by sentinel surveillance by GPs and pediatricians. Coverage of the territory and population also varies for influenza hospital surveillance, with 60 to 70% of the French population and about 50% of the Spanish population but only 6% of the German population covered by national hospital influenza surveillance schemes. Data were not available for Italy and the UK at the time of the study.The sampling strategy was overall aligned across countries although there were nuances in terms of syndromic criteria (ARI, ILI, or severe ARI) used in hospital surveillance and the swabbing strategy applied by sentinel GPs and pediatricians. However, the use of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing was the main standard for virological analysis coordinated by influenza national reference centres in each country.Communication of data was inconsistent between the five countries. In the UK, France, Germany, and Spain, consolidated weekly and annual reports were provided in a timely manner that were easily accessible and manageable, except national excess mortality estimates in Germany which only were available with a delay of one year. In contrast, in Italy influenza surveillance data were issued in multiple formats, in a range of reports, and via various web pages. All five countries shared weekly surveillance data, including outside the usual epidemic period, on influenza circulation and virology with the WHO and ECDC.Country-specific observationsFranceIn general, a wide scope of surveillance sub-systems was used, especially for virological, outbreak, primary and secondary care surveillance. Multiple tools were used for community surveillance, but the use of modelling for influenza-associated events was limited, except for estimating mortality. There was a high level of data granularity, especially for risk conditions, and the representativeness of the data was good due to extensive sentinel networks in hospital surveillance. This hospital surveillance included alert thresholds regarding the number of patients admitted to EDs that triggered different responses based on hospital-specific strategies. Insights on post-hospitalization events (e.g. the impact on frailty/autonomy) and effect of influenza on the economy and healthcare systems were limited.GermanyOverall, a large number of surveillance outcomes was covered (including excess consultations and absenteeism), but ED visits were not included in the surveillance and there was very limited information available for ICU admissions. Excess mortality estimates did not include a break down by age, and the European FluMOMO model [26] was only used in two federal states (Berlin and Hesse).There was a lack of granularity for risk condition and vaccination status and limited insights into complications and treatment.Data accuracy in hospital surveillance was affected by a wide syndromic surveillance scheme that included influenza as well as other acute lower respiratory tract infections, and by excess hospitalization estimates relying on data shared by primary care GPs that likely leads to an underestimation of cases. The communication of some surveillance data graphically rather than in tabular format impedes their use in further research.ItalyThere was no systematic notification of influenza cases in the community, whilst outcomes related to ARI / ILI outbreaks in closed settings, ED visits and hospital admissions were collected but not disseminated publicly. There was a lack of granularity by age and risk condition, the latter not being collected by a form used for GP sentinel surveillance and information on the severity of influenza among cases admitted in ICU was limited.SpainVirological, outbreak, primary care, hospital and mortality surveillance are all covered, whilst non-medically attended community ILI surveillance web survey data had been performed for the previous 8 influenza seasons [25, 27] but not published since 2016. Cases of ILI reported by all GPs through mandatory notification Enfermedades de Declaración Obligatoria (EDO) were not included in the annual report as ILI incidence data from sentinel GPs was preferred. For hospital surveillance, there was no information on ED visits due to influenza. Despite the standardized influenza surveillance methods across regions coordinated by the Spanish Institute of Public Health [28], regional disparities were observed in terms of data granularity and the proportion of the population covered by sentinel networks, and Galicia, Murcia, and Aragόn did not provide data on ILI as they did not have GP sentinel surveillance networks in place at the time of the research [29].United KingdomThere was a large variety of surveillance tools used to cover all sub-systems and a high level of data granularity, except for data on risk condition that were not made public, except in research articles. However, as for the other countries, the surveillance did not extend to post-hospital follow-up of discharged patients, i.e. the pathway of care.DiscussionThe qualitative framework that we describe is more detailed than the resources available via the WHO and could be used as a standardised tool to systematically evaluate a country’s influenza infrastructure against WHO standards and other countries. The development and evaluation of this new framework allows stakeholders to use 7 sub-systems and 19 outcomes as well as 5 comparison criteria to identify and develop areas for possible improvement in influenza surveillance in terms of data collection and dissemination. The framework was largely developed before the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has since been applied to compare SARS-CoV-2 and seasonal influenza surveillance in the same five European countries that are included in the present evaluation (ie, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and UK) [30]. Additionally, the framework has been used to compare influenza surveillance systems in Asia-Pacific countries (Australia, China, and Malaysia) [31].The five comparison criteria (granularity, timing, representativeness, sampling strategy, and communication) and sub-criteria also provide a means to qualitatively evaluate adherence to WHO standards and to objectively assess and compare the subsystems between countries. The compilation of these criteria is broader than has been reviewed in the literature, which focuses on granularity and timing [7, 32] or sampling strategy (i.e. harmonization of case definitions) [33]. Although updates on guidance related to influenza surveillance are issued regularly by the WHO as part of the GISRS [18] and Joint External Evaluations are performed, there are no explicit mechanisms for national public health agencies to perform comparative assessments of their systems to drive improvements in surveillance. A review of influenza surveillance systems in 2014 focused on lower and middle income countries [34] and a standard country surveillance profile regularly covers European Union Member States [23] but to our knowledge there is no available tool allowing universal comparisons of the current breadth of influenza surveillance systems using a structured list of criteria based on WHO guidance.The qualitative variability of the influenza surveillance systems used by the 5 Western European countries included in our study was high. This is a direct result of the different sources used to collect the data in the different countries, the health system infrastructure, the health pathway, and in some cases the lack of available information. In the first subsystem, the use of digital tools for monitoring the incidence of non-medically attended ARI/ILI symptoms in the community was not always in place despite their relevance for the early detection of the seasonal influenza intensity and the understanding of the overall burden of influenza beyond patients attending medical facilities [24, 35]. In the second sub-system, virological surveillance, all five countries had WHO NICs contributing to the GISRS in line with WHO basic requirements, relying on laboratory-confirmed influenza samples collected through sentinel and/or non-sentinel sources. In the third sub-system, community surveillance, biologically and/or laboratory-confirmed influenza cases had to be notified only in Germany, whereas only sentinel laboratories notified such cases in France, Spain and the UK. In Italy, there was no such notification system nor were data published. For sub-system four, biologically or laboratory-confirmed outbreaks in settings such as nursing homes and long-term care facilities were not always well captured or published, despite a high death toll in the vulnerable elderly population due to influenza viruses [36]. Primary care surveillance through GP or paediatrician sentinel schemes (the fifth subsystem) was the most established across the five countries, and these data were well communicated at both the European and country level. Hospital surveillance, the sixth subsystem, is key to understanding severe influenza outcomes, but was inconsistent across the five countries despite WHO guidance being in place for over a decade [7]. In the seventh subsystem, mortality surveillance was complemented by all-cause excess mortality monitoring through the EuroMOMO project in Spain and Italy [26], but the FluMOMO model to estimate the share attributable to seasonal influenza was used in France and some parts of the UK (England only) and Germany (Berlin and Hesse) [37, 38].Influenza surveillance data play a key role to inform populations of the possible threats of seasonal influenza, to feed research to improve the understanding of the disease, and to inform policy-making through impact and health economics assessments of vaccination programmes and non-pharmaceutical interventions [39, 40]. The influenza vaccine coverage rate (VCR) in Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries has declined from 49 to 42% between 2007 and 2017 in adults aged 65 years and above [41]. A recent evaluation of four countries with high-performing influenza vaccination programs showed that a well-documented burden of influenza captured by robust surveillance systems and a high disease awareness among the lay public through communication from multiple stakeholders were key components to increasing VCR [42].Furthermore, the value of well-established routine influenza surveillance systems that have been re-purposed for pandemic surveillance [43] could be further explored in light of the lessons learnt from the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. A comparison of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza surveillance in France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and UK has been published separately [30]. As has been evidenced during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, individual preventative behaviour can also be important in the control of the spread of disease, and better awareness of the burden of influenza disease is likely to play a role in such behaviour [39, 40]. In the countries we evaluated, the economic impact of influenza (except for the assessment of absenteeism in Germany) and the disruption caused by influenza to the healthcare system in the winter are not routinely covered as part of the surveillance, nor is the pathway of care. Using economic impact and healthcare indicators could also prove valuable not only to better understand disease impact but also to better calibrate the efforts in terms of prevention and pandemic preparedness, and the WHO has issued a manual for estimating the economic burden of seasonal influenza [44] but which is yet to be included in the mandate of national surveillance systems.The strength of our study is the development of a standardized, complete and enhanced framework to evaluate and compare influenza surveillance systems in different countries. Furthermore, the analysis was ambitious in scope and the data included in the additional file provide and in-depth assessment of 5 large European countries using the new framework. The data we describe are useful for routine influenza surveillance systems but also are adaptable for other emerging diseases, e.g. for the improvement of systems and allocation of healthcare resources, modelling, predictions, seasonality, and interactions with other diseases surveyed. Lastly, this framework may also be used to highlight strengths and identify gaps in existing systems that could be adapted in the surveillance of other circulating infectious respiratory pathogens such as respiratory syncytial virus or the newly emerged Omicron variant of SARS-CoV-2 [30]. It is not the intention of this framework, however, to determine whether certain data sets are considered to be more important or meaningful than others nor how the data should be used for research or communication purposes.Our study has a number of limitations. First, it was developed using 5 European countries with mature influenza surveillance systems and remains to be tested in countries with less advanced influenza surveillance systems. Second, the analysis was largely conducted before the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, since which time some influenza surveillance systems have been repurposed and synergies identified for influenza and SARS-CoV-2 surveillance; these have been described in a separate analysis [30]. Third, the decentralized nature of the healthcare systems in some countries, such as Spain and Italy, or the different systems across the nations of the UK, may require the assessment to also be performed at a more granular level. Fourth, the exclusion of the assessment of potential for bias from the comparison criteria was necessary due to the limited public availability of information, although access may be better for public health agencies. Fifth, the framework does not cover all aspects that could lead to substantial improvements of influenza surveillance [45]. For instance, an evaluation of testing capacity and non-sentinel strategies, case definitions, swabbing protocols, compliance of healthcare professionals’ with guidelines in reporting data, the role of financial compensation for data reporting, or a comparison of paper-based or electronic reporting systems could enhance the analysis. Also, the FAIR principles (findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable) [46] and the requirement for sentinel systems to adapt in the face of situations such as the recent SARS-CoV-2 pandemic could be considered.ConclusionsIn conclusion, we developed and tested a qualitative comparative framework to evaluate influenza surveillance systems in five countries, adapted from WHO guidance, which has identified structural differences between countries. This qualitative framework could encourage the adaptation and standardization of surveillance systems to improve the allocation of healthcare resources, and to further characterize the influenza burden. Following the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and the emergence of variants, including the newly emerged Omicron variant, we believe that the conclusions of this work might help move toward a more integrated, coordinated, and homogeneous European surveillance model for respiratory infectious diseases based on the systems currently in place for influenza. Availability of data and materials All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published article and its additional file. AbbreviationsAGI: Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Influenza (influenza working group) CépiDC: Centre d’épidémiologie sur les causes médicales de décès (epidemiological center on medical causes of deaths) CGHCG: Casos graves hospitalizados confirmados de gripe (severe hospitalised influenza cases) EDO: Enfermedades de Declaración Obligatoria (disease under mandatory notification) EDSSS: Emergency Department Syndromic Surveillance System Ehpad: Etablissement d’Hébergement pour Personnes Âgées Dépendantes (nursing home) GP: General practitioner ICOSARI: Hospital surveillance system for severe acute respiratory infections ICU: Intensive care unit IfSG: Infektionsschutzgesetz (law on protection against infectious diseases) ILI: Influenza-like illness MOMO: Mortality Monitoring MOSA: Medical Officers of Schools Association NHS: National Health System NIC: National Influenza Center OSCOUR: Organisation de la Surveillance COordonnée des Urgences (organisation for coordinated emergency department surveillance) PH: Public health PHE: Public Health England RCGP RSC: Royal College of General Practitioners Research and Surveillance Centre RKI: Robert Koch Institute RT-PCR: Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (S)ARI: (Severe) acute respiratory illness Sismg: Sistema di Sorveglianza della Mortalità Giornaliera (daily mortality surveillance system) SurSaUD: Surveillance Sanitaire des Urgences et des Décès (public health surveillance of emergencies and deaths) SVGE: Sistema Centinela de Vigilancia de Gripe en España (Spanish influenza surveillance sentinel system) USISS: UK Severe Influenza Surveillance System ReferencesWorld Health Organization. Influenza (Seasonal) Fact Sheets. 2018. Available from: https://www.who.intews-room/fact-sheets/detail/influenza-(seasonal). Accessed 28 Jan 2022.Iuliano AD, Roguski KM, Chang HH, Muscatello DJ, Palekar R, Tempia S, et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet. 2018;391(10127):1285–300.Article Google Scholar Mook P, Meerhoff T, Olsen SJ, Snacken R, Adlhoch C, Pereyaslov D, et al. Alternating patterns of seasonal influenza activity in the WHO European Region following the 2009 pandemic, 2010-2018. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2020;14(2):150–61.Article Google Scholar World Health Organization. Flu News Europe. Available from: https://flunewseurope.org/. Accessed 11 January 2022.World Health Organization. Why measure influenza burden of disease (BoD). Available from: https://www.who.inteams/global-influenza-programme/surveillance-and-monitoring/burden-of-disease. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.World Health Organization. Global influenza strategy 2019–2030. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/311184. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.World Health Organization. WHO Regional Office for Europe guidance for sentinel influenza surveillance in humans. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/349780. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.World Health Organization. Global epidemiological surveillance standards for influenza. 2013. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241506601. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.World Health Organization. A manual for estimating disease burden associated with seasonal influenza. 2015. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/178801. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.Chorianopoulos K, Talvis K. Flutrack.org: Open-source and linked data for epidemiology. Health Informatics J. 2016;22(4):962–74.Article Google Scholar Thompson WW, Comanor L, Shay DK. Epidemiology of seasonal influenza: use of surveillance data and statistical models to estimate the burden of disease. J Infect Dis. 2006;194(Suppl 2):S82–91.Article Google Scholar Public Health England. Surveillance of influenza and other respiratory viruses in the UK: winter 2018 to 2019. Available from: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/839350/Surveillance_of_influenza_and_other_respiratory_viruses_in_the_UK_2018_to_2019-FINAL.pdf. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.Bernard-Stoecklin S. Surveillance de la grippe en France, saison 2017-2018/Influenza activity in France, season 2017-2018. Santé publique France. Bulletin Epidémiologique Hebdomadaire. 2018;n°. 34:664–74.Robert Koch Institut. Bericht zur Epidemiologie der Influenza in Deutschland Saison 2018/19 [German]. Available from: https://edoc.rki.de/handle/176904/6253. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.Epicentro. FluNews - Italia: Rapporto della sorveglianza integrata dell’influenza Stagione 2019/2020 [Italian]. Available from: https://www.epicentro.iss.it/influenza/flunews. Accessed 28 January 2022.Centro Nacional de Epidemiologia Instituto de Salud Carlos III. Informe de vigilancia de la gripe en España temporada 2018–2019 [Spanish]. Available from: http://vgripe.isciii.es/documentos/20182019/InformesAnuales/Informe_Vigilancia_GRIPE_2018-2019_22julio2019.pdf. Accessed 28 January 2022.de Lusignan S, Correa A, Smith GE, Yonova I, Pebody R, Ferreira F, et al. RCGP Research and Surveillance Centre: 50 years' surveillance of influenza, infections, and respiratory conditions. Br J Gen Pract. 2017;67(663):440–1.Article Google Scholar World Health Organization. Global influenza surveillance and response system. Available from: https://www.who.int/initiatives/global-influenza-surveillance-and-response-system. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.European Centre for Disease Protection and Control. European Influenza Surveillance Network (EISN). Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/about-us/partnerships-and-networks/disease-and-laboratory-networks/eisn. Accessed 28 January 2022.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Influenza (flu). Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/internationalools.htm. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. International influenza surveillance assessment tool. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pdf/international/cdc-flu-surveillance-tool-508-final.pdf. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.European Centre for Disease Protection and Control. Data quality monitoring and surveillance system evaluation - A handbook of methods and applications. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/data-quality-monitoring-and-surveillance-system-evaluation-handbook-methods-and. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.World Health Organization. Influenza surveillance country, territory, and area profiles. Available from: www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0016/402082/InfluenzaSurveillanceProfiles_2019_en.pdf?ua=1. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.Guerrisi C, Turbelin C, Blanchon T, Hanslik T, Bonmarin I, Levy-Bruhl D, et al. Participatory syndromic surveillance of influenza in Europe. J Infect Dis. 2016;214(suppl_4):S386–S92.Article Google Scholar Influenzanet Analytics. Welcome to InfluenzaNet. Available from: http://influenzanet.info/#page/home. Accessed 28 January 2022.EuroMOMO. EuroMOMO Bulletin. Available from: https://www.euromomo.eu/. Accessed 28 January 2022.GripeNet. Influenzanet: a system to monitor the activity of infuenza-like-illness (ILI) with the aid of volunteers via the internet [Spanish]. Available from: https://gripenet.es/es/. Accessed 28 January 2022.Instituto de Salud Carlos III. Gripe y otros virus respiratorios [Spanish]. Available from: https://www.isciii.es/QueHacemos/Servicios/VigilanciaSaludPublicaRENAVE/EnfermedadesTransmisibles/Paginas/Gripe.aspx. Accessed 28 January 2022.Instituto de Salud Carlos III. Guía de procedimientos para la vigilancia de gripe en España [Spanish]. Available from: https://www.isciii.es/QueHacemos/Servicios/VigilanciaSaludPublicaRENAVE/EnfermedadesTransmisibles/Documents/GRIPE/GUIAS/Gu%C3%Ada%20de%20procedimientos%20para%20la%20vigilancia%20de%20gripe%20en%20Espa%C3%B1a_marzo%202019.pdf. Accessed 28 January 2022.Rigoine de Fougerolles T, Puig-Barbera J, Kassianos G, Vanhems P, Schelling J, Crepey P, et al. A comparison of coronavirus disease 2019 and seasonal influenza surveillance in five European countries: France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2021;16(3):417–28. https://doi.org/10.1111/irv.12941.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar El Guerche-Seblain C, Rigoine De Fougerolles T, Sampson K, Jennings L, Van Buynder P, Shu Y, et al. Comparison of influenza surveillance systems in Australia, China, Malaysia and expert recommendations for influenza control. BMC Public Health. 2021;21(1):1750.Article Google Scholar Broberg EHO, Schweiger B, Prosenc K, Daniels R, Guiomar R, Ikonen N, et al. Improving influenza virological surveillance in Europe: strain-based reporting of antigenic and genetic characterisation data, 11 European countries, influenza season 2013/14. Eurosurveillance. 2016;21(41):30370.Article Google Scholar Aguilera JF, Paget WJ, Mosnier A, Heijnen ML, Uphoff H, van der Velden J, et al. Heterogeneous case definitions used for the surveillance of influenza in Europe. Eur J Epidemiol. 2003;18(8):751–4.Article CAS Google Scholar Sanicas M, Forleo E, Pozzi G, Diop D. A review of the surveillance systems of influenza in selected countries in the tropical region. Pan Afr Med J. 2014;19:121.Article Google Scholar Paolotti D, Carnahan A, Colizza V, Eames K, Edmunds J, Gomes G, et al. Web-based participatory surveillance of infectious diseases: the Influenzanet participatory surveillance experience. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014;20(1):17–21.Article CAS Google Scholar Lansbury LE, Brown CS, Nguyen-Van-Tam JS. Influenza in long-term care facilities. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2017;11(5):356–66.Article Google Scholar EuroMOMO. FluMOMO. Available from: https://euromomo.eu/how-it-works/flumomo. Accessed 28 January 2022.Nielsen J, Krause TG, Molbak K. Influenza-associated mortality determined from all-cause mortality, Denmark 2010/11-2016/17: The FluMOMO model. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2018;12(5):591–604.Article Google Scholar Cowling BJ, Ali ST, Ng TWY, Tsang TK, Li JCM, Fong MW, et al. Impact assessment of non-pharmaceutical interventions against coronavirus disease 2019 and influenza in Hong Kong: an observational study. Lancet Public Health. 2020;5(5):e279–e88.Article Google Scholar Lei H, Xu M, Wang X, Xie Y, Du X, Chen T, et al. Non-pharmaceutical interventions used to control COVID-19 reduced seasonal influenza transmission in China. J Infect Dis. 2020;222(11):1780–3.Article CAS Google Scholar Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. Health at a glance 2019: OECD indicators. Available from: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-glance-2019_4dd50c09-en. Accessed 28 January 2022.Kassianos G, Banerjee A, Baron-Papillon F, Hampson AW, McElhaney JE, McGeer A, et al. Key policy and programmatic factors to improve influenza vaccination rates based on experience from four high-performing countries. Drugs Context. 2021;10:2020–9.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar de Lusignan S, Lopez Bernal J, Zambon M, Akinyemi O, Amirthalingam G, Andrews N, et al. Emergence of a novel coronavirus (COVID-19): protocol for extending surveillance used by the Royal College of General Practitioners Research and Surveillance Centre and Public Health England. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2020;6(2):e18606.Article Google Scholar World Health Organization. WHO Manual for estimating the economic burden of seasonal influenza. 2016. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/250085. Accessed 28 Jan 2022.Beaute J, Ciancio BC, Panagiotopoulos T. Infectious disease surveillance system descriptors: proposal for a comprehensive set. Eurosurveillance. 2020;25(27):1900708.Article Google Scholar Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJ, Appleton G, Axton M, Baak A, et al. The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. Sci Data. 2016;3:160018.Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank the following for their valuable input in the discussion of the surveillance sub-systems at the roundtable event: Marie-Cécile Levant, Sanofi Pasteur, Lyon; Bruno Lina, Lyon University, Lyon, France; Bogdana Coudsy, Sanofi Pasteur, Lyon, France; Alice Pauc, Sanofi Pasteur, Lyon, France; Sorin Abrudan, Sanofi Pasteur, Lyon, France; Tatiana Stellacci, Sanofi Pasteur, Lyon, France; Martin Ungerstedt, Sanofi Pasteur, Lyon, France; Jeremy Miles, CVA, London, UK.This manuscript was prepared with the assistance of a professional medical writer, Dr. Andrew Lane (Lane Medical Writing), in accordance with the European Medical Writers Association guidelines and Good Publication Practice and funded by Sanofi Pasteur.FundingThe work was funded by Sanofi Pasteur.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsCVA, Paris, FranceThierry Rigoine de Fougerolles & Olivier VitouxSanofi-Aventis Deutschland GmbH, Berlin, GermanyOliver DammUniversity of Genoa, Genoa, ItalyFilippo AnsaldiDepartment of Interdisciplinary Medicine – Hygiene Section, University of Bari, Bari, ItalyMaria ChironnaUniversité de Rennes, EHESP, CNRS, Inserm, Arènes - UMR 6051, RSMS – U 1309, Rennes, FrancePascal CrépeyUniversity of Oxford, Oxford, UKSimon de LusignanRoyal College of General Practitioners, London, UKSimon de Lusignan & George KassianosSanofi Pasteur, Reading, UKIan GraySanofi Pasteur, Madrid, SpainJosé Maria GuillenOpen Rome, Paris, FranceAnne MosnierCentro Nacional de Gripe, Valladolid, SpainRaul Ortiz de LejarazuDepartment of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Milan, ItalyElena ParianiFisabio, Valencia, SpainJoan Puig-BarberaLudwig Maximilians University, Munich, GermanyJörg SchellingSanofi Pasteur, Milan, ItalyFrancesca TrippiCIRI, Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, (Team (PHE3ID), Univ Lyon, Inserm, U1111, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, UMR5308, ENS de Lyon, F-69007, Lyon, FrancePhilippe VanhemsHospices Civils de Lyon and Hospices Civils de Lyon (HCL), Lyon, FrancePhilippe VanhemsWestfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Munich, GermanyKlaus WahleCardiff University, Cardiff, WalesJohn WatkinsSanofi Pasteur, Lyon, FranceAnvar Rasuli & Hélène BricoutAuthorsThierry Rigoine de FougerollesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarOliver DammView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFilippo AnsaldiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMaria ChironnaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPascal CrépeyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSimon de LusignanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIan GrayView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJosé Maria GuillenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGeorge KassianosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnne MosnierView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRaul Ortiz de LejarazuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarElena ParianiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJoan Puig-BarberaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJörg SchellingView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFrancesca TrippiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPhilippe VanhemsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKlaus WahleView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJohn WatkinsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnvar RasuliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarOlivier VitouxView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHélène BricoutView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsTRdF structured and performed the comparative analysis across the 5 countries, sourced and reviewed the available evidence, carried out the interviews and co-developed the comparative framework. He interpreted the findings, structured the key messages, reviewed, and approved the manuscript. HB co-developed the comparative framework, reviewed the comparative analysis across the 5 countries. She interpreted the findings, structured the key messages, reviewed and approved the manuscript. OD was involved in the data extraction and the development of the comparative framework. He interpreted the findings, structured the key messages, reviewed, and approved the manuscript. OV structured the comparative analysis across the 5 countries, reviewed the available evidence, and co-developed the comparative framework. He interpreted the findings, structured the key messages, reviewed, and approved the manuscript. All other authors (FA, MC, PC, SdeL, IG, J-MG, GK, AM, ROL, EP, JP-B, AR, JS, FT, PV, KW, JW, and AV) critically reviewed and approved the manuscript. All authors were accountable for the accuracy and integrity of the manuscript. The author(s) read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Hélène Bricout.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests No author received any direct payment from Sanofi Pasteur with regard to their contributions to this manuscript, but could receive expenses for attendance at expert meetings or conferences for the presentation of data from this study. OD, HB, IG, J-MG, and AR are employees of Sanofi Pasteur. TRdeF and OV are employees of CVA, Paris. MC has received grants from Sanofi Pasteur MSD for taking part to advisory boards, expert meetings, and for acting as a speaker and/or organizer of meetings/congresses. PC reports personal fees from Sanofi Pasteur outside the submitted work. SdeL is Director of the Royal College of General Practitioners Research and Surveillance Centre. SdeL has received research funding through his University from Astra Zeneca, GSK, Lilly, MSD, Novo Nordisk, and Takeda, and for advisory Boards for Sanofi and Seqirus; all outside the submitted work. GK is the Royal College of General Practitioners National Immunisation Lead, British Global and Travel Health Association President, Board Member of the European Scientific Group on Influenza (ESWI), and chairs the Pan-European Influenza Group RAISE [Raise Awareness of Influenza Strategies in Europe]; has participated in advisory boards or lectured at meetings organised by MSD, Sanofi Pasteur, AstraZeneca, GSK, Valneva, and Seqirus; and has lectured at meetings organised by ESWI and the NHS. AM has participated in advisory boards or lectured at meetings organised by Sanofi Pasteur and Mylan. She is member of the French GEIG scientific Committee. As an employee of Open Rome, she has been involved in flu epidemiological studies funded by Sanofi. ROL is Scientific Advisor at the National Influenza Centre, Valladolid, Spain and is a member of the RAISE Pan-European Influenza Group and of the Scientific Committee of seventh ESWI conference. He has participated in advisory boards or lectured at meetings held by Astra-Zeneca, Crucell, GSK, Novavax, Sanofi and Seqirus. JS reports personal fees from Sanofi Pasteur, MSD, Pfizer, GSK, and Seqirus outside the submitted work. PV reports grants from ANIOS, personal fees from Sanofi, personal fees from Pfizer, grants from Merck Sharpe & Dohme, personal fees from Biosciences, and personal fees from Astellas, all outside the submitted work. JW reports personal fees from Sanofi during the conduct of the study and outside the submitted work. EP, FA, FT, JP-B, and KW have nothing to disclose. Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary Information Additional file 1. Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articlede Fougerolles, T.R., Damm, O., Ansaldi, F. et al. National influenza surveillance systems in five European countries: a qualitative comparative framework based on WHO guidance. BMC Public Health 22, 1151 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-13433-0Download citationReceived: 10 December 2020Accepted: 13 May 2022Published: 09 June 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-13433-0Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsComparisonEuropeInfluenzaQualitative evaluation frameworkSurveillance systems Download PDF Advertisement BMC Public Health ISSN: 1471-2458 Contact us General enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.USDA ERS - Embargoes From Past Avian Flu Outbreaks Reduced Demand for U.S. Chicken Meat Skip to navigation Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( LockA locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Economic Research Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Menu Home Topics Topics Animal Products Crops Farm Bill Farm Economy Farm Practices & Management Food & Nutrition Assistance Food Choices & Health Food Markets & Prices Food Safety International Markets & U.S. Trade Natural Resources & Environment Rural Economy & Population Data Products Data Products View by Topic: Animal Products Crops Farm Economy Farm Practices & Management Food & Nutrition Assistance Food Choices & Health Food Markets & Prices Food Safety International Markets & U.S. Trade Natural Resources & Environment Rural Economy & Population Publications Publications View by Topic: Animal Products Crops Farm Economy Farm Practices & Management Food & Nutrition Assistance Food Choices & Health Food Markets & Prices Food Safety International Markets & U.S. Trade Natural Resources & Environment Rural Economy & Population Newsroom Newsroom Contact ERS Press Office Trending Topics Multimedia Calendar Calendar Today's Releases This Month's Releases Next Month's Releases Amber Waves Magazine Amber Waves Magazine Amber Waves Home All Articles About ERS Careers at ERS FAQs Contact Us Search small Search Home Amber Waves Embargoes From Past Avian Flu Outbreaks Reduced Demand for U.S. Chicken Meat Amber Waves Home All Articles About Amber Waves Finding: Poultry & Eggs June 06, 2022 Embargoes From Past Avian Flu Outbreaks Reduced Demand for U.S. Chicken Meat by Matthew MacLachlan, Wendy Zeng, and Samantha Padilla On February 9, 2022, the USDA, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) confirmed highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in a commercial turkey flock in Indiana. HPAI spreads rapidly, is transmittable across different species of birds, and is often lethal to infected birds. Since 2000, outbreaks of HPAI in the United States occurred in 2004 and again in 2014–15. More animals were lost in the 2014–15 outbreak than in any other infectious animal disease event in U.S. history. These events affected poultry commerce on a global scale, decimating international demand for U.S. poultry products and reducing incomes of affected U.S. producers as well as producers whose flocks did not contract HPAI. Government efforts to mitigate the disease were effective but costly. Based on recommendations provided by the World Organization for Animal Health (known by its previous acronym OIE), importers of U.S. poultry products responded to the 2004 and 2014–15 outbreaks by imposing embargoes and other trade restrictions. Some importers required U.S. poultry products to be heat-treated. These measures restricted access to international markets for all U.S. poultry products and led to declines in domestic prices, even in regions where HPAI was not contracted. Researchers at USDA and Oklahoma State University studied the impact of the embargoes and trade restrictions during these past outbreaks to help producers and policymakers understand how markets respond to small and large outbreaks. They determined that changes occurred at or near the end of the disease outbreaks and persisted for several months afterward. These findings can give a sense of the potential effect of the current HPAI outbreak on the poultry industry. During both the 2004 and 2014–2015 outbreaks, the U.S. broiler (chicken) industry lost less than a fraction of 1 percent of the broiler flock. Because of this limited loss in the supply of chicken meat, researchers were able to isolate and estimate the effect that reduced international demand had on prices. They were also able to study the timing and duration of those price impacts. In 2004, exports decreased more than 20 percent. That amounts to about 200,000 tons during the period that OIE guidelines recommended restrictions or embargoes on U.S. broiler meat. During this time, U.S. prices for chicken meat rose slightly. The slight rise was probably because the U.S. outbreak was relatively brief and other countries also reported outbreaks of HPAI. Also, consumers did not place a significant value on fresh (not frozen) chicken meat, which allowed broiler meat to be stored until after trade restrictions were lifted. Researchers established that export declines occurred immediately after the first observed case of HPAI in 2004. The left panel in the chart below illustrates the relatively brief market response to the 2004 outbreak, which receded quickly. In 2015, smaller percentage declines in exports occurred compared with 2004 but lasted twice as long—10 months instead of 5. The most severe declines were observed near the end of the outbreak and in the following months, probably because of the spike in HPAI cases observed near the end of May and beginning of June 2015. Researchers estimated the decrease in the export volume of chicken meat at approximately 145,000 tons over the 10-month outbreak window. For the 2014–15 outbreak, researchers looked at two possible periods when HPAI impacted broiler markets. The first period was calculated when OIE guidelines were imposed at the first confirmed case of HPAI among commercial poultry in January 2015. This lasted until October, about 4 months after the last observed case in June. That period is shown with the solid lines in the right panel below. Researchers determined the second period, indicated in the chart by dotted lines, occurred during the largest declines in exports and prices in the broiler market. That occurred between July and November 2015 and lasted about 5 months. With these time windows in mind, the research team estimated broiler producers’ losses in 2015 at either $332 million using the OIE guidelines period or at $472 million when considering the period reflecting the largest changes in the broiler market. Not only were substantial price effects observed from lost access to international markets, but their effects also were compounded by the direct losses from lost birds, biosecurity costs, and disease control efforts. APHIS estimated these losses at $879 million for the 2014–15 outbreak. Producer losses from HPAI in 2004 were not estimated in this study. Embed this chart Download larger size chart (2048 pixels by 2600, 144 dpi) This article is drawn from... “Market Responses to Export Restrictions from Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Outbreaks”, by Boussios, D., A. D. Hagerman, and M. MacLachlan, Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, January 2022 You may also be interested in... Impacts of the 2014-2015 Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Outbreak on the U.S. Poultry Sector, by Sean E. Ramos, Matthew MacLachlan, and Alex Melton, ERS, December 2017 Return to top ERS Links ERS Home Accessibility Careers Contact Us E-Mail Updates Help Information Quality Site Map Privacy Policy & Non-Discrimination Statement USDA Links FOIA Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline Inspector General Plain Writing USDA.gov USA.gov WhiteHouse.gov Sign Up for Updates Subscribe Economic Research Service U.S. Department of AgricultureH5N1 Avian Influenza: Q&A With the CDC's Tim Uyeki, MD News & Perspective Drugs & Diseases CME & Education Video Decision Point ﻿ Specialty: Multispecialty Allergy & Immunology Anesthesiology Cardiology Critical Care Dermatology Diabetes & Endocrinology Emergency Medicine Family Medicine Gastroenterology General Surgery Hematology - Oncology HIV/AIDS Hospital Medicine Infectious Diseases Internal Medicine Multispecialty Nephrology Neurology Ob/Gyn & Women's Health Oncology Ophthalmology Orthopedics Pathology & Lab Medicine Pediatrics Plastic Surgery Psychiatry Public Health Pulmonary Medicine Radiology Rheumatology Transplantation Urology Today on Medscape Business of Medicine Medical Lifestyle Science & Technology Medical Students Nurses Pharmacists Residents Edition: English Medscape English Deutsch Español Français Português UKNew Univadis Log In Sign Up It's Free! English Edition Medscape English Deutsch Español Français Português UKNew Univadis X Univadis from Medscape Register Log In No Results No Results Monday, November 11, 2024 News & Perspective Drugs & Diseases CME & Education Video Decision Point close Please confirm that you would like to log out of Medscape. If you log out, you will be required to enter your username and password the next time you visit. Log out Cancel Perspective > CDC Expert Commentary COMMENTARY H5N1 Avian Influenza: Q&A With the CDC's Tim Uyeki, MD, MPH, MPP Tim Uyeki, MD, MPH, MPP Disclosures June 08, 2022 Editorial Collaboration Medscape & What is the current state of H5N1 infections among wild and domestic birds in the United States and internationally? In the United States, highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) virus has been detected in wild birds in 41 states. This includes migratory waterfowl, such as ducks and geese, as well as other bird species, including resident birds of prey like owls, eagles, hawks, and falcons. These infections generally have not been detected in suburban or urban birds that you might see coming to a bird feeder. There are 36 states with detected H5N1 infections in commercial poultry or backyard bird flocks in 2022. Noncommercial backyard flocks can be ducks, chickens, and turkeys not raised for commercial purposes, as well as nonpoultry bird species, such as pheasants, geese, and guineafowl. Commercial poultry outbreaks or noncommercial backyard bird flock outbreaks have been confirmed in 36 states. What is the current state of H5N1 infections among humans? There has been one human infection reported in England in January of this year (2022) that occurred in December 2021. That infection was detected in an 80-year-old man who raised ducks. After a few of his ducks became sick with H5N1 virus infection, the man also was found to have the virus but was asymptomatic. In April 2022, a Colorado man involved with poultry disposal operations reported fatigue and had an upper respiratory tract specimen collected, which tested positive for H5N1 virus. When he was resampled, however, he tested negative for influenza. He was isolated and treated with oseltamivir, which is an antiviral drug used for treatment of seasonal influenza. It is unclear whether he was actually infected or if the test was positive because of transient detection of H5N1 virus contamination. There have been no other cases of H5N1 virus infection reported worldwide with the currently circulating virus. So, it appears that H5N1 virus infection, at least with this virus that's circulating in birds, referred to as clade 2.3.4.4b, is very rare in people. The CDC considers the risk to the public to be low. Nevertheless, we are working with local and state public health partners to monitor people that have been exposed to H5N1 virus–infected birds. So far, there have been more than 3000 people monitored by local state health partners in collaboration with CDC after exposure to birds with the virus infection. About 90 people who developed symptoms after their exposures were tested and none of them had detection of H5N1 except for this one individual in Colorado. It's important to remember that there are many other causes of acute respiratory illness symptoms in humans, which include common respiratory virus infections and SARS-CoV-2. Are H5N1 infections generally seasonal or perennial? Previous H5N1 viruses have circulated in wild birds and infected poultry during cooler months, so in the fall, winter, and spring, but not exclusively. But it's important to note that the viruses causing these backyard and commercial flock outbreaks are different than H5N1 viruses from previous years. These current-clade 2.3.4.4b viruses circulating not only in the US but in other places in the world appear to the quite well adapted to spread in wild birds, and they appear to be less well adapted to infect people than previous H5N1 viruses. How does the number of cases we have seen so far in 2022 compare with previous years? From 2003-2021, there were 864 sporadic H5N1 cases with 456 deaths reported to the World Health Organization in 19 countries. Since 2020, there have been very few (three) reported human cases of H5N1, and one person died in 2021. There was one case and one death reported globally in 2019, no cases reported in 2018, four cases and two deaths reported in 2017, and 10 cases and three deaths in 2016. In 2015, there were 145 reported cases of H5N1 virus infections in humans worldwide, and 42 people died. But as I mentioned before, the H5N1 viruses that caused human infections before 2020 are different from the clade 2.3.4.4b viruses that are spreading in wild birds now, which appear to be less adapted to infect humans. What does H5N1 infection look like in birds? Highly pathogenic avian influenza A viruses, which includes H5N1 virus, can cause a range of illness when they infect wild birds: anywhere from no illness (asymptomatic infection) to death. (The categorization of 'highly pathogenic' in this context only refers to how a virus can cause severe disease and mortality in infected birds and is based upon specific virus characteristics; it does not apply to disease severity in infected people.) These avian viruses can infect domestic poultry and cause outbreaks with high mortality in certain poultry species, like chickens and turkeys. Signs of infection include loss or lack of energy, lack of appetite, difficulties in coordination, purple discoloration and/or swelling of different body parts, diarrhea, and rapid death. H5N1 viruses are present in respiratory secretions and feces of infected birds and can be present in bird tissues and contaminate their feathers. How contagious is H5N1? H5N1 viruses are very contagious among birds. However, it has been very uncommon for H5N1 virus to spread from a bird, whether it's a wild bird or poultry, to infect a human. When that has occurred, it has been in the context of unprotected, close, or direct exposure, meaning the person was not wearing personal protective equipment. There is either aerosolization of the virus and then inhalation of the virus, or an individual could potentially self-infect themselves by having the virus on their hands and fingers and, by contact transmission, infect their mucous membranes. Human-to-human H5N1 virus transmission is even rarer. These infections have been limited and nonsustained, meaning that the infection stopped after one or two infections and did not spread in the community. Most of these clusters of H5N1 virus infection in humans have occurred in blood-related family members through prolonged unprotected close exposures. These infections have occurred in households or when a family member is taking care of a hospitalized infected individual for a prolonged period without using personal protective equipment. There have been two instances of third-generation transmission, or where one individual infected another person who then infected a third person, all in blood relatives. Though these are very rare, H5N1 clusters are of great concern and it's very, very important to investigate every single case and follow and monitor the close contacts very closely to assess whether additional infections have occurred. We think the risk of both bird-to-human transmission is low and risk of human-to-human transmission is very low and lower with currently circulating H5N1 viruses compared with those in the past. Are symptoms of H5N1 infections in humans different from more common types of influenza? Is H5N1 infection more worrisome? Historically, people with H5N1 virus infections start out with signs of upper respiratory tract infection, cough, and sore throat, and many will have a fever. This can progress to lower respiratory tract disease, manifesting in symptoms such as a worsening dry cough, shortness of breath, and difficulty breathing. Some of these people can also have gastrointestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea and vomiting. H5N1 virus infections can lead to severe disease, such as viral pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and respiratory failure. This can progress to multi-organ failure, septic shock, and death. Other rare complications have included altered mental status and seizures with encephalitis, progressing to loss of consciousness. All of these signs and symptoms have also been observed in people with seasonal influenza virus infection with the most severe complications, but the mortality in reported H5N1 cases is so much higher than seasonal influenza. Since 1997, there have been more than 880 cases of H5N1 and case fatality has been about 53%. Is H5N1 treated differently than seasonal influenza? Ideally for seasonal influenza or for H5N1, you want to initiate antiviral treatment as soon as possible. One of the challenges is that in countries that have reported H5N1 human cases, there's often a delay in when antiviral treatment can be started because diagnosis of H5N1 was delayed. Often, treatment is started a few days after a patient is admitted to the hospital with pneumonia, which is typically at day 5-7 of the illness. Otherwise, clinical management for seasonal influenza and for H5N1 patients consists of supportive care of complications. With seasonal influenza, we recommend that patients self-isolate until 24 hours after their fever is reduced without use of fever-reducing medications and they are clinically better and able to return to school or work. For hospitalized seasonal influenza patients, we typically recommend isolation for 7 days after symptom onset, and their healthcare providers should wear a medical face mask (droplet precautions) and patients should wear a facemask for source control. Whereas, if there was a hospitalized H5N1 case in the US, we would recommend isolation of that individual until testing is negative and they're fully recovered and not an infectious risk to others. We also don't put seasonal influenza patients in the same kind of isolation as H5N1 patients when hospitalized. People sick with H5N1 are placed in a negative pressure airborne room and healthcare personnel caring for the patient would be recommended to wear additional personal protective equipment, such as an N95 respirator, goggles, gown, and gloves. Do current flu vaccines protect against H5N1? The influenza vaccines that are available are for prevention of seasonal influenza; they do not protect against H5N1 virus infection, and there are no available H5N1 vaccines. Accessing the evolution of influenza A viruses in birds as well as pigs that may cause pandemic threats is an ongoing process. The CDC has developed a vaccine candidate that would be protective against the clade 2.3.4.4b H5N1 viruses currently circulating in wild birds right now. As the virus evolves and other viruses evolve, the CDC and partners worldwide will continue to further develop vaccine candidate viruses for pandemic preparedness. What do healthcare professionals and members of the public need to know about preventing or treating H5N1? People should avoid contact with wild birds. Ideally, just observe them from a distance. This applies to wild birds in general, because some birds can be infected with H5N1 viruses and appear well. If possible, people should avoid contact with sick or dead poultry and surfaces that appear to be contaminated with feces from wild or domestic birds. If someone has to handle wild birds or poultry that may be sick or dead, they should minimize contact by wearing gloves, respiratory protection such as a medical face mask, and eye protection like googles. People should wash their hands with soap and water after touching birds and monitor themselves for 10 days after exposure. If they develop respiratory symptoms after contact with wild birds or poultry, they should report those to their physician and to local public health for potential H5N1 virus testing. But, as I mentioned, there are many different causes of acute respiratory illness symptoms in people that may not be related at all to bird exposures, such as such as respiratory viruses that circulate among people, including seasonal influenza A and B viruses and SARS-CoV-2. Testing for these viruses should also be considered. Besides a vaccine, what other actions would the US government take in reaction to H5N1 spreading amongst humans? Currently, this risk is very low. Right now, the CDC is working closely with state and public health partners to monitor and conduct H5N1 virus testing of exposed individuals. If there were additional sporadic H5N1 cases that were detected in the US, and especially if there was any suggestion of human-to-human transmission, the CDC would work very closely with state and local public health partners to assist and expand surveillance and H5N1 testing, conduct contact tracing, and educate the public and clinical community about prevention, testing, and early antiviral treatment for H5N1 virus infections in people. Additional actions would depend upon whether new cases reflect sporadic avian-to-human or human-to-human H5N1 virus transmission. Additional Resources Bird Flu Current Situation Summary Human Infection with Avian Influenza A Virus: Information for Health Professionals and Laboratorians Credits:Lead image: Sebastian Kaulitzki/Dreamstime Public Information from the CDC and Medscape Cite this: H5N1 Avian Influenza: Q&A With the CDC's Tim Uyeki, MD, MPH, MPP - Medscape - Jun 08, 2022. Tables Authors and Disclosures Authors and Disclosures Author Tim Uyeki, MD, MPH, MPP Chief Medical Officer, Influenza Division, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GeorgiaDisclosure: Tim Uyeki, MD, MPH, MPP, has disclosed no relevant financial relationships. My Alerts You have already selected for My Alerts Add Other Topics Click the topic below to receive emails when new articles are available. Add You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive email when new content is published. Manage Email Alerts Share Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email Close Print Add to Email Alerts processing.... What to Read Next on Medscape Special Coverage: COVID-19 Latest Perspective Guidelines Drugs & Diseases Global Coverage Additional Resources Cases & Quizzes Should This Pregnant Woman Get the RSV Vaccine? Patient Thinks He Gets Too Many Vaccines, but I Have to Recommend More How to Distinguish Among COVID, Flu, and RSV in a High-Risk Patient Latest News & Perspective Preventing severe Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) infections in infants by maternal vaccination Guidance for Practicing Primary Care: World Health Organization's Updated Influenza Guidelines for 2024 Indications for using updated COVID-19 vaccines in the post-pandemic era CDC Makes Public Influenza A Wastewater Data to Assist Bird Flu Probe Epidemiology of RSV: Accurate Diagnosis, Treatment Options, and Risk Factors Recommended Reading 2010audenz-influenza-a-h5n1-vaccine-999586 Drugs influenza A (H5N1) vaccine 2010fluarix-quadrivalent-fluzone-quadrivalent-influenza-virus-vaccine-quadrivalent-999829 Drugs influenza virus vaccine quadrivalent 2010flublok-influenza-virus-vaccine-trivalent-recombinant-999830 Drugs influenza virus vaccine trivalent, recombinant 2010flucelvax-influenza-virus-vaccine-trivalent-cell-cultured-4000462 Drugs influenza virus vaccine trivalent, cell-cultured 2001/viewarticle/cdc-makes-public-influenza-wastewater-data-assist-bird-flu-2024a100095q news CDC Makes Public Influenza A Wastewater Data to Assist Bird Flu Probe 2001/viewarticle/guidance-practicing-primary-care-world-health-organizations-2024a1000ibp news Guidance for Practicing Primary Care: World Health Organization's Updated Influenza Guidelines for 2024 Related Conditions & Procedures Influenza Pediatric Influenza Influenza Antiviral Therapy Haemophilus Influenzae Infections Diagnostic Influenza Tests Pediatric Haemophilus Influenzae Infection Recommendations 2001 Bird Flu Puts Organic Chickens Into Lockdown From Pennsylvania to France 2001 CDC Reports First Human Case of H5 Bird Flu in the US 2001 H5N1 Vaccine Readied for a Possible Influenza Pandemic b:curatedcuratedHasData : true Email This Feedback Help us make reference on Medscape the best clinical resource possible. Please use this form to submit your questions or comments on how to make this article more useful to clinicians. Your Name: Your Email: Send me a copy Recipient's Email: Subject: Optional Message Comment or Suggestion(Limited to 1500 Characters) Send Send Feedback Pleasedo not use this form to submit personal or patient medical information or to report adverse drug events. You are encouraged to report adverse drug event information to the FDA. Your Name is required. Subject is required. Please enter a Recipient Address and/or check the Send me a copy checkbox. Your email has been sent. is an Invalid Email Address. Find Us On About About Medscape Privacy Policy Editorial Policy Cookies Manage Preferences Terms of Use Advertising Policy Help Center Membership Become a Member About You Professional Information Newsletters & Alerts Advertise Market Research App Medscape Editions English Deutsch Español Français Português All material on this website is protected by copyright, Copyright © 1994-2024 by WebMD LLC. This website also contains material copyrighted by 3rd parties. CloseNo more 'flu for you? | University of California Skip to main content University of California Return to home page menu mobile menu open Main Navigation Campuses & locations Toggle subnavigation for Campuses & locations Find your place at UC Student success Toggle subnavigation for Student success FirstGen Graduate students Transfer students Undergraduate research Undocumented students Alumni outcomes Health and well-being Impact Toggle subnavigation for Impact Economy Education Affordability Opportunity Research Health Public service Climate leadership About us Toggle subnavigation for About us Leadership Information center Sustainability Get involved Toggle subnavigation for Get involved Advocate Double the Pell For alumni UC Votes Top Menu Admissions Jobs News Search Home News No more 'flu for you? No more 'flu for you? June 9, 2022Holly Ober, UC Riverside Credit: iStock A team of bioengineers has found a way to block a strain of the influenza virus from accessing a human protein it needs to replicate in cells. It happens every year, especially in winter. A virus saunters into your wide-open respiratory tract, worms its way into lung cells, and, next thing you know, you’re lying in bed with a fever, aches, and chills—classic symptoms of influenza, or flu. Research led by UC Riverside bioengineers may help stop that cycle. The team has just found a way to block one strain of the influenza virus from accessing a human protein it needs to replicate in cells. The discovery could lead to highly effective ways to treat the flu and could also apply to other respiratory viruses, such as SARS-CoV-2, which causes Covid-19. While the flu is miserable but not life-threatening for many, it nonetheless kills tens of thousands of people each year, often the youngest and oldest members of a population. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that flu causes 12,000 to 50,000 deaths in U.S. each year. Flu vaccines, which work by teaching the body’s immune system how to recognize and attack the virus when it enters the body, are not always effective for reasons scientists don’t yet fully understand but are likely related to the complexities of the immune system and viral mutations. The new research, published in the journal “Viruses,” does not rely on the immune system to stop the virus. In order to make a person sick, the influenza virus has to infect cells in the body, where it replicates and infects more cells. Jiayu Liao, an associate professor of bioengineering at UC Riverside, previously discovered that the two most common types of flu virus, Influenza A and Influenza B, require a unique human protein to proliferate in cells and then infect more cells. The current work has identified a way to prevent Influenza B virus replication by blocking this necessary protein. Without the protein, virus amplification is blocked completely in cells. The Influenza B virus uses a human cellular process called SUMOylation to modify a gene called M1, which plays multiple roles in the influenza viral life cycle. SUMOylation occurs when small ubiquitin-like modifier, or SUMO, proteins attach to and detach from other proteins to change their biochemical activities and functions. Liao’s experiments found that a SUMOylation inhibitor called STE025 can completely block Influenza B virus replication. The work was done with doctoral student Runrui Dang; Victor Rodgers, also a UCR professor of bioengineering; and Adolfo García-Sastre at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Influenza B virus treated with the SUMOyaltion inhibitor showed lack of SUMOylation on the M1 protein and was incapable of replicating in human cells. Influenza A also has SUMOylated proteins and could be susceptible to the SUMOyaltion inhibitor as well. Though more work is needed for a thorough understanding of Influenza B’s dependence on SUMOylation, the finding that STE025 inhibits SUMOylation and prevents flu virus replication brings science one big step closer to making flu flee forever. The open-access paper, “Human SUMOylation Pathway Is Critical for Influenza B Virus,” is available here. Jiayu Liao, an associate professor of bioengineering at UC Riverside. Keep reading Thursday, June 2, 2022 Antibiotics wreak havoc on athletic performance Knocking out gut bacteria deflates the will, ability to exercise, researchers find. Wednesday, August 12, 2020 ‘AeroNabs’ Promise Powerful, Inhalable Protection Against… Scientists have devised a novel approach to halting the spread of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease. The University of California opened its doors in 1869 with just 10 faculty members and 40 students. Today, the UC system has more than 295,000 students and 265,000 faculty and staff, with 2.0 million alumni living and working around the world. Subscribe to our newsletter Email address Subscribe UC quick links Campuses & locations Student success About us Get involved Press releases Contact us External resources Apply or transfer Office of the President Academic Senate Board of Regents UCnet: Employee resources Footer Links 2 Accessibility Terms of Use Copyright © The Regents of the University of California Social Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok YouTube LinkedInCanadian Immunization Guide Chapter on Influenza and Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2022–2023 - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Vaccines and immunization National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI): Statements and publications Canadian Immunization Guide Chapter on Influenza and Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2022–2023 Download in PDF format (777 KB, 78 pages) Organization: Public Health Agency of Canada Published: 2022-06-08 An Advisory Committee Statement (ACS) National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) Important notice: Update to age indication for InfluvacⓇ Tetra (BGP Pharma ULC, operating as Mylan, d.b.a. Viatris Canada): InfluvacⓇ Tetra egg-based, subunit, quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine is now authorized by Health Canada for use in 6 months and older. Refer to the product monograph for further details. This updated authorized age for use supersedes the information for InfluvacⓇ Tetra found in Table 2, Table 3 and various other sections within the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) Canadian Immunization Guide Chapter on Influenza and Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2022–2023 Important notice: Update to age indication for FlucelvaxⓇ Quad (Seqirus): FlucelvaxⓇ Quad (Seqirus) standard dose mammalian cell culture-based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine is now authorized by Health Canada for use in persons 6 months and older. Refer to the product monograph for further details. This updated authorized age for use supersedes the information for FlucelvaxⓇ Quad found in Table 2, Table 3 and various other sections within the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) Canadian Immunization Guide Chapter on Influenza and Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2022–2023 Table of Contents Introduction I.1 New or Updated Information for 2022–2023 I.2 Abbreviations for Influenza Vaccines I.3 Background Canadian Immunization Guide chapter on influenza: clinical information for vaccine providers II.1 Key Information II.2 Epidemiology II.3 Vaccine Products Authorized for Use in Canada II.4 Efficacy, Effectiveness, and Immunogenicity II.5 Choice of Seasonal Influenza Vaccine II.6 Vaccine Administration II.7 Vaccine Safety and Adverse Events II.8 Travellers Particularly recommended vaccine recipients: additional information III.1 People at High Risk of Influenza-Related Complications or Hospitalization III.2 People Capable of Transmitting Influenza to Those at High Risk of Influenza-Related Complications or Hospitalization III.3 Others Vaccine preparations authorized for use in Canada: additional information IV.1 Inactivated Influenza Vaccine (IIV) IV.2 Recombinant quadrivalent influenza vaccine (RIV4) IV.3 Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (LAIV) IV.4 Schedule IV.5 Concurrent Administration with Other Vaccines IV.6 Additional Vaccine Safety Considerations Choice of seasonal influenza vaccine: additional information V.1 Children V.2 Adults List of abbreviations Acknowledgments Appendix A: characteristics of influenza vaccines available for use in Canada, 2022–2023 References Preamble The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) provides the Public Health Agency of Canada (hereafter referred to as PHAC) with ongoing and timely medical, scientific, and public health advice relating to immunization. In addition to burden of disease and vaccine characteristics, PHAC has expanded the mandate of NACI to include the consideration of programmatic factors in developing evidence-based recommendations to facilitate timely decision-making for publicly funded vaccine programs at provincial and territorial levels. The additional factors to be considered by NACI include: economics, ethics, equity, feasibility, and acceptability. Over the coming years NACI will be refining methodological approaches to include these factors. Not all NACI Statements will require in-depth analyses of all programmatic factors. As NACI works towards full implementation of the expanded mandate, select Statements will include varying degrees of programmatic analyses for public health programs. PHAC acknowledges that the advice and recommendations set out in this statement are based upon the best current available scientific knowledge and is disseminating this document for information purposes. People administering the vaccine should also be aware of the contents of the relevant product monograph(s). Recommendations for use and other information set out herein may differ from that set out in the product monograph(s) of the Canadian manufacturer(s) of the vaccine(s). Manufacturer(s) have sought approval of the vaccine(s) and provided evidence as to its safety and efficacy only when it is used in accordance with the product monographs. NACI members and liaison members conduct themselves within the context of PHAC's Policy on Conflict of Interest, including yearly declaration of potential conflicts of interest. I. Introduction This document, the “Advisory Committee Statement: Canadian Immunization Guide Chapter on Influenza and National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2022–2023”, updates NACI's recommendations regarding the use of seasonal influenza vaccines. I.1 New or Updated Information for 2022–2023 Use of seasonal influenza vaccine in the context of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Guidance on the use of seasonal influenza vaccine in the presence COVID-19 Seasonal influenza presents an ongoing disease burden in Canada during the fall and winter months, however the epidemiology of influenza has changed during the course of the pandemic. Influenza vaccine is the most effective way to prevent influenza illness and influenza-related complications, and is an important component of managing health care system capacity during the influenza season in the context of any ongoing COVID-19 activity. PHAC, in consultation with NACI and the Canadian Immunization Committee, has developed guidance on the administration of seasonal influenza vaccine to support provincial and territorial vaccine programs and primary care providers during the COVID-19 pandemic: Guidance on the use of seasonal influenza vaccine in the presence of COVID-19 The guidance on this page is based on currently available scientific evidence and expert opinion and will be updated and added to as necessary throughout the influenza season as new evidence emerges. This web page should be considered in concert with recommendations regarding the use of seasonal influenza vaccines provided in this NACI Statement. Guidance on concurrent administration of influenza and COVID-19 vaccines NACI guidance outlines that administration of COVID-19 vaccines may occur at the same time as, or at any time before or after influenza immunization (including all seasonal influenza vaccines or LAIV) for those aged 5 years and older. NACI currently recommends that, as a precautionary measure, children 6 months to 5 years of age wait at least 14 days between COVID-19 vaccines and non-COVID-19 vaccines, including the influenza vaccine. Readers should consult the Canadian Immunization Guide (CIG) COVID-19 chapter for updated NACI guidance and further information on concurrent administration of COVID-19 vaccines with influenza vaccines across all eligible age groups. Inclusion of recombinant quadrivalent seasonal influenza vaccine Supemtek™ (RIV4) is a recombinant quadrivalent seasonal influenza vaccine produced by Sanofi Pasteur that was authorized for use in Canada on January 14, 2021, in adults 18 years of age and older. Supemtek is the first and, to date, the only recombinant influenza vaccine licensed in Canada. Based on a review of available pre-licensure and post-market clinical trial and surveillance data, NACI has concluded that Supemtek may be considered for use among the quadrivalent influenza vaccines offered to adults 18 years of age and older (Discretionary NACI Recommendation). Refer to the NACI Supplemental Statement: Recombinant Influenza Vaccines, for additional information supporting this recommendation. Updated recommendations on mammalian cell culture-based quadrivalent influenza vaccine FlucelvaxⓇ Quad (IIV4-cc) is the first and, to date, the only mammalian cell culture-based inactivated seasonal influenza vaccine available for use in Canada. It was first authorized for use in Canada in adults and children 9 years of age and older on November 22, 2019. Recommendations and supporting evidence on the use of Flucelvax Quad in adults and children 9 years of age and older can be found in the NACI Supplemental Statement – Mammalian Cell Culture-Based Influenza Vaccines and were also incorporated into the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2021–2022. On March 8, 2021, Health Canada approved an expanded age indication for the use of Flucelvax Quad in children down to 2 years of age and older. Based on a review of Health Canada assessments of clinical trial evidence submitted by the manufacturer in support of the age indication extension, NACI has concluded that Flucelvax Quad may be considered among the quadrivalent influenza vaccines offered to adults and children 2 years of age and older. Refer to section IV.1 Inactivated Influenza Vaccine (IIV) later in the statement for additional information supporting this recommendation. I.2 Abbreviations for Influenza Vaccines The abbreviations used in this document for the different influenza vaccines are as follows: Table 1. NACI influenza vaccine abbreviations Influenza vaccine category Formulation Type Current NACI abbreviationTable 1 Footnote a Inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) Trivalent (IIV3) Standard doseTable 1 Footnote b, unadjuvanted, IM administered, egg-based IIV3-SD AdjuvantedTable 1 Footnote c, IM administered, egg-based IIV3-Adj High doseTable 1 Footnote d, unadjuvanted, IM administered, egg-based IIV3-HD Quadrivalent (IIV4) Standard doseTable 1 Footnote b, unadjuvanted, IM administered, egg-based IIV4-SD Standard doseTable 1 Footnote b, unadjuvanted, IM administered, cell culture-based IIV4-cc High doseTable 1 Footnote d, unadjuvanted, IM administered, egg-based IIV4-HD Recombinant influenza vaccine (RIV) Quadrivalent (RIV4) RecombinanteTable 1 Footnote e, unadjuvanted, IM administered RIV4 Live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) Trivalent (LAIV3) Unadjuvanted, nasal spray, egg-based LAIV3 Quadrivalent (LAIV4) Unadjuvanted, nasal spray, egg-based LAIV4 Abbreviations: IIV: inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV3: trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV3-Adj: adjuvanted egg-based trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV3-HD: high-dose egg-based trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV3-SD: standard-dose egg-based trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4: quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-cc: standard-dose cell culture-based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-HD: high-dose egg-based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-SD: standard-dose egg-based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IM: intramuscular; LAIV: live attenuated influenza vaccine; LAIV3: egg-based trivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine; LAIV4: egg-based quadrivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine. Table 1 Footnote a The numeric suffix denotes the number of antigens contained in the vaccine (“3” refers to the trivalent formulation and “4” refers to the quadrivalent formulation). The hyphenated suffix “-SD” (where “SD” is used to denote “standard dose” for an IIV) is used when referring to IIV products that do not have an adjuvant, contain 15 µg hemagglutinin (HA) per strain and are administered as a 0.5 mL dose by intramuscular injection; “-cc” (where “cc” denotes “cell culture”) refers to an IIV product that is made from influenza virus grown in cell cultures instead of chicken eggs (FlucelvaxⓇ Quad); “-Adj” (where “Adj” is used to abbreviate “adjuvanted”) refers to an IIV with an adjuvant (IIV3-Adj for FluadⓇ or Fluad PediatricⓇ); and “-HD” refers to an IIV that contains higher antigen content than 15 µg HA per strain standard IIV dose (IIV3-HD for FluzoneⓇ High-Dose or IIV4-HD for FluzoneⓇ High-Dose Quadrivalent). Table 1 Return to footnote a referrer Table 1 Footnote b 15 µg HA per strain. Table 1 Return to footnote b referrer Table 1 Footnote c 7.5 µg (in 0.25 mL) or 15 µg (in 0.5 mL) HA per strain. Table 1 Return to footnote c referrer Table 1 Footnote d 60 µg HA per strain. Table 1 Return to footnote d referrer Table 1 Footnote e 45 µg HA per strain. Table 1 Return to footnote e referrer I.3 Background The World Health Organization’s (WHO) recommendations on the composition of influenza virus vaccines are typically available in February of each year for the upcoming season in the Northern Hemisphere. The WHO recommends that three influenza strains be included in the trivalent seasonal influenza vaccine: one influenza A(H1N1), one influenza A(H3N2), and one influenza B. Quadrivalent seasonal influenza vaccines should contain the three strains recommended for the trivalent vaccine, as well as an influenza B virus from the lineage that is not included in the trivalent vaccine. Annual recommendations on the use of influenza vaccine in Canada are developed by the NACI Influenza Working Group (IWG) for consideration by NACI. Recommendations are developed based on a review of a variety of issues, which can include: the burden of influenza illness and the target populations for vaccination; efficacy, effectiveness, immunogenicity, and safety of influenza vaccines; vaccine schedules; and other aspects of influenza immunization. In addition, PHAC has expanded the mandate of NACI to include the consideration of programmatic factors in developing their recommendations to facilitate timely decision-making for publicly funded vaccine programs at provincial and territorial levels. These programmatic factors include economics, ethics, equity, feasibility, and acceptability. Details regarding NACI's evidence-based process for developing a statement are outlined in Evidence-based Recommendations for Immunization − Methods of the National Advisory Committee on Immunization. Health care providers in Canada should offer the seasonal influenza vaccine as soon as feasible after it becomes available in the fall, since seasonal influenza activity may start as early as October in the Northern Hemisphere. Decisions regarding the precise timing of vaccination in a given setting or geographic area should be made according to local epidemiologic factors (influenza activity, timing, and intensity), opportune moments for vaccination, as well as programmatic considerations. Further advice regarding the timing of influenza vaccination programs may be obtained through consultation with local public health agencies. Although vaccination before the onset of the influenza season is strongly preferred, influenza vaccine may still be administered up until the end of the season. Delayed administration may result in lost opportunities to prevent infection from exposures that occur prior to vaccination, and individuals seeking vaccination should be informed that vaccine administered during an influenza outbreak may not provide optimal protection. Vaccine providers should use every opportunity to administer influenza vaccine to individuals at risk who have not already been vaccinated during the current season, even after influenza activity has been documented in the community. Every year, individuals with influenza and influenza-related complications increase the demand on the healthcare system in the fall and winter months. During the COVID-19 pandemic, influenza vaccination remains a critical tool to minimize the morbidity and mortality related to potential influenza and COVID-19 co-circulation and to reduce the burden on the Canadian health care system to enhance the capacity to respond to ongoing COVID-19 activity. II. Canadian Immunization Guide Chapter on Influenza: Clinical Information for Vaccine Providers The Canadian Immunization Guide (CIG) is written primarily for health care providers (frontline clinicians and public health practitioners) but it is also used by policy makers, program planners, and the general public. The CIG has been a trusted, reader-friendly summary of the vaccine statements provided by NACI since 1979. The information in this section replaces the influenza chapter of the CIG. With a new NACI Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine required each year, readers will have quick access to the information that they require within one document, whether it is the relevant influenza vaccine information written primarily for frontline vaccine providers as is found in this section, or the more detailed technical information that is found in the rest of this statement, commencing in Section III. II.1 Key Information The following highlights key information for vaccine providers. Please refer to the remainder of this statement for additional details. What Influenza in humans is a respiratory infection caused primarily by influenza A and B viruses. Seasonal influenza epidemics occur annually in Canada, generally in the late fall and winter months. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, influenza occurred globally with an annual attack rate estimated at 5–10% in adults and 20–30% in childrenFootnote 1. Symptoms of influenza typically include the sudden onset of fever, cough, and muscle aches. Other common symptoms include headache, chills, loss of appetite, fatigue, and sore throat. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may also occur, especially in children. Most people will recover within a week to 10 days, but some people are at greater risk of severe complications, such as pneumonia or death. Influenza infection can also worsen certain chronic conditions, such as heart diseaseFootnote 2. Inactivated influenza vaccines (IIV) (which include standard dose, high dose, cell culture-based or adjuvanted vaccines), recombinant influenza vaccine (RIV), and live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) are all authorized for use in Canada; some protect against 3 strains of influenza (i.e., trivalent formulations, IIV3) and some protect against 4 strains of influenza (i.e., quadrivalent formulations: IIV4, RIV4, or LAIV4). The influenza vaccines are safe and well-tolerated. The IIV cannot cause influenza illness because IIV do not contain live virus. Similarly, the RIV does not contain live influenza virus but instead contains non-infectious viral proteins. The live attenuated influenza vaccines contain weakened viruses. Who NACI makes the following recommendations for individual-level and public health program-level decision making. Individual-level recommendations are intended for people wishing to protect themselves from influenza or for vaccine providers wishing to advise individual patients about preventing influenza. Program-level recommendations are intended for provinces and territories responsible for making decisions on publicly funded immunization programs. Individual-level and program-level recommendations may differ, as the important factors to consider when recommending a vaccine for a population (e.g., population demographics, economic considerations) may be different than for an individual. Recommendation for individual-level decision making NACI recommends that influenza vaccine should be offered annually to anyone 6 months of age and older who does not have contraindications to the vaccine, with focus on the groups for whom influenza vaccination is particularly recommended (see List 1). These groups include: people at high risk of severe disease, influenza-related complications or hospitalization; people capable of transmitting influenza to those at high risk; people who provide essential community services; and people in direct contact with poultry infected with avian influenza during culling operations. In infants less than 6 months of age influenza vaccine is less immunogenic than in older children and adults and does not confer sufficient protection to make the vaccine useful in this age groupFootnote 3. Currently, authorized influenza vaccines are not indicated for use in infants less than 6 months of age. For these reasons, NACI recommends that influenza vaccine should not be offered to infants less than 6 months of age. However, as infants less than 6 months of age are at high risk of influenza-related illness, the influenza vaccine should be offered to individuals who are pregnant, and any household contacts and care providers of infants (see List 1). Recommendation for public health program-level decision-making The national goal of the annual influenza immunization programs in Canada is to prevent serious illness caused by influenza and its complications, including death. Programmatic decisions to provide influenza vaccination to target populations as part of publicly funded provincial and territorial programs depend on many factors, such as cost-effectiveness evaluation and other programmatic and operational factors. NACI recommends that influenza vaccine should be offered as a priority to the groups for whom influenza vaccination is particularly recommended (see List 1 in the section below). List 1: Groups for whom influenza vaccination is particularly recommended People at high risk of influenza-related complications or hospitalization All children 6–59 months of age Adults and children with the following chronic health conditionsList 1 Footnote a: cardiac or pulmonary disorders (includes bronchopulmonary dysplasia, cystic fibrosis, and asthma); diabetes mellitus and other metabolic diseases; cancer, immune compromising conditions (due to underlying disease, therapy, or both, such as solid organ transplant or hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients); renal disease; anemia or hemoglobinopathy; neurologic or neurodevelopment conditions (includes neuromuscular, neurovascular, neurodegenerative, neurodevelopmental conditions, and seizure disorders [and, for children, includes febrile seizures and isolated developmental delay], but excludes migraines and psychiatric conditions without neurological conditions); morbid obesity (BMI of 40 and over); and children 6 months to 18 years of age undergoing treatment for long periods with acetylsalicylic acid, because of the potential increase of Reye’s syndrome associated with influenza. All pregnant individuals; People of any age who are residents of nursing homes and other chronic care facilities; Adults 65 years of age and older; and Indigenous peoples. People capable of transmitting influenza to those at high risk Health care and other care providers in facilities and community settings who, through their activities, are capable of transmitting influenza to those at high risk; Household contacts, both adults and children, of individuals at high risk, whether or not the individual at high risk has been vaccinated: household contacts of individuals at high risk; household contacts of infants less than 6 months of age, as these infants are at high risk but cannot receive influenza vaccine; members of a household expecting a newborn during the influenza season; Those providing regular child care to children 0–59 months of age, whether in or out of the home; and Those who provide services within closed or relatively closed settings to people at high risk (e.g., crew on a ship). Others People who provide essential community services; and People who are in direct contact with poultry infected with avian influenza during culling operations. List 1 Footnote a Refer to Immunization of Persons with Chronic Diseases and Immunization of Immunocompromised Persons in Part 3 of the CIG for additional information about vaccination of people with chronic diseases. List 1 Return to footnote a referrer How The benefits and risks of influenza vaccination should be discussed prior to vaccination, including the risks of not being immunized. Choice of influenza vaccine A variety of influenza vaccines are authorized for use in Canada, some of which are authorized for use only in specific age groups. Therefore, the choice of influenza vaccine has become more complex. Refer to Section II.5 for recommendations on the choice of influenza vaccine by age group. Dose and route of administration The dose and route of administration vary by influenza vaccine product (see Section II.6 for details). For recommendations on which vaccines are recommended in different age groups, refer to Table 2. With the exception of IIV4-HD, most unadjuvanted IIVs are administered as a 0.5 mL intramuscular (IM) injection for everyone 6 months of age and older, The following IIVs are administered as a 0.5 mL IM injection but are only authorized in older age groups: AfluriaⓇ Tetra (5 years and older), InfluvacⓇ Tetra (3 years and older), and FlucelvaxⓇ Quad (2 years and older); IIV4-HD (FluzoneⓇ High-Dose Quadrivalent) is administered as a 0.7 mL IM injection for adults 65 years of age and older; MF59-adjuvanted IIV3 (FluadⓇ) is administered as a 0.5 mL IM injection for adults 65 years of age and older. A pediatric formulation is also available (Fluad PediatricⓇ), and is administered as a 0.25 mL IM injection for children 6–23 months of age; RIV4 (Supemtek™) is administered as a 0.5 mL IM injections for adults 18 years of age and older; LAIV (FluMistⓇ Quadrivalent) is administered as 0.2 mL given intranasally (0.1 mL in each nostril) for individuals 2–59 years of age. Schedule NACI recommends that: Adults and children 9 years of age and older should receive 1 dose of influenza vaccine each year; and Children 6 months to less than 9 years of age who have never received the seasonal influenza vaccine in a previous influenza season should be given 2 doses of influenza vaccine in the current season, with a minimum interval of 4 weeks between doses. Children 6 months to less than 9 years of age who have been properly vaccinated with one or more doses of seasonal influenza vaccine in any previous season should receive 1 dose of influenza vaccine per season thereafter. Contraindications For all influenza vaccines (IIV, RIV4 and LAIV), NACI recommends that influenza vaccination should not be given to: People who have had an anaphylactic reaction to a specific influenza immunization, or to any of the components of a specific influenza vaccine, with the exception of egg (refer to Section II.7 for more information); If an individual is found to have an anaphylactic reaction to a component in one influenza vaccine, consideration may be given to offering another influenza vaccine that does not contain the implicated component, in consultation with an allergy expert. Individuals who have an allergy to substances that are not components of the influenza vaccine are not at increased risk of allergy to influenza vaccine. Egg allergy is not a contraindication for influenza vaccination, as there is a low risk of adverse events (AEs) associated with the trace amounts of ovalbumin allowed in some influenza vaccines manufactured using eggs. Egg-allergic individuals may be vaccinated against influenza using any age-appropriate product, including LAIV, without prior influenza vaccine skin test and with the full dose, irrespective of a past severe reaction to egg, and in any setting where vaccines are routinely administered. The IIV4-cc and RIV4 are completely egg-free (ovalbumin-free). As with any vaccine product, vaccine providers should be prepared for managing possible allergic reactions including anaphylaxis, and have the necessary equipment to respond to a vaccine emergency at all times. People who have developed Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) within 6 weeks of a previous influenza vaccination (refer to Section II.7 for more information), unless another cause was found for the GBS. For those people, the potential risk for a recurrent episode of GBS associated with influenza vaccination must be balanced against the risk of GBS associated with influenza infection itself and the benefits of influenza vaccination. For LAIV, in addition to the above-mentioned contraindications, NACI also recommends that LAIV should not be given to: People with immune compromising conditions, with the exception of children with stable HIV infection on anti-retroviral therapy (ART) "[also sometimes referred to as highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART)]" and with adequate immune function (see Section IV.2 for more information); Immune compromising conditions may be due to underlying disease, therapy, or both. People with severe asthma (defined as currently on oral or high-dose inhaled glucocorticosteroids or active wheezing) or medically attended wheezing in the 7 days prior to the proposed date of vaccination, due to increased risk of wheezing following administration of LAIV; LAIV is not contraindicated for people with a history of stable asthma or recurrent wheeze, which is not active. Children less than 24 months of age, due to increased risk of wheezing following administration of LAIV; Children 2–17 years of age currently receiving aspirin or aspirin-containing therapy, because of the association of Reye’s syndrome with aspirin and wild-type influenza infection; Pregnant individuals; because it is a live attenuated vaccine and there is a lack of safety data at this time: LAIV is not contraindicated in breastfeeding (lactating) individuals; however, there is limited data for the use of LAIV in this population LAIV should not be administered until 48 hours after antiviral agents active against influenza (e.g., oseltamivir, zanamivir) are stopped, and those antiviral agents, unless medically indicated, should not be administered until 2 weeks after receipt of LAIV so that the antiviral agents do not inactivate the replicating vaccine virus. If these anti-viral agents are administered within this time frame (i.e., from 48 hours pre-vaccination with LAIV to 2 weeks post-vaccination), re-vaccination should take place at least 48 hours after the antivirals are stopped, or IIV could be given at any time. Refer to Contents of Immunizing Agents Available for Use in Canada in Part 1 of the CIG for a list of all vaccines authorized for use in Canada and their contents and to Vaccine Safety in Part 2 of the CIG for information regarding the management of adverse events (AEs), including anaphylaxis. Precautions NACI recommends that: Influenza vaccination should usually be postponed in people with serious acute illnesses until their symptoms have abated; In a regular influenza season, vaccination should not be delayed because of minor or moderate acute illness, with or without fever. During the COVID-19 pandemic, immunizers should refer to Guidance on the use of influenza vaccine in the presence of COVID-19 for additional advice on this issue from the Public Health Agency of Canada. If significant nasal congestion is present that might impede delivery of LAIV to the nasopharyngeal mucosa, IIV can be administered or LAIV can be deferred until resolution of the congestion; LAIV recipients should avoid close association with people with severe immune compromising conditions (e.g., bone marrow transplant recipients requiring isolation) for at least 2 weeks following vaccination, because of the theoretical risk for transmitting a vaccine virus and causing infection; and LAIV recipients who are less than 18 years of age should avoid the use of aspirin-containing products for at least 4 weeks after receipt of LAIV. Refer to Section II.7 for additional information on influenza vaccine-related precautions Concurrent administration with other vaccines NACI recommends that: Administration of COVID-19 vaccines may occur at the same time as, or at any time before or after influenza immunization (including all seasonal influenza vaccines or LAIV) for those aged 5 years and older. Readers should consult the Canadian Immunization Guide (CIG) COVID-19 chapter for updated NACI guidance on the concurrent administration of influenza and COVID-19 vaccines as the number of authorized COVID-19 vaccines and the age groups eligible to receive them expand. It should be noted that no studies have been conducted on the co-administration of recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV) with adjuvanted or high-dose influenza vaccine. No immune response interference or safety concerns have been demonstrated when RZV is administered concurrently with standard dose, unadjuvanted vaccineFootnote 4. Different injection sites and separate needles and syringes should be used for concurrent parenteral injections. Why Vaccination is the most effective way to prevent influenza and its complications. Vaccinated individuals who are protected from influenza will not pass infection to others. Although most people will recover fully from influenza infection in 7–10 days, influenza can lead to severe disease, and/or complications, including hospitalization and death. Annual vaccination is required because the specific strains in the vaccine are reviewed each year by WHO and are often changed to provide a better match against the viruses expected to circulate in that given year, and because the body's immune response to influenza vaccination is transient and may not persist beyond a year. II.2 Epidemiology Disease description Influenza is a respiratory illness caused by the influenza A and B viruses in humans and can cause mild to severe illness, which can result in hospitalization or death. Certain populations, such as young children, older adults, and those with chronic health conditions, may be at higher risk for serious influenza complications such as viral pneumonia, secondary bacterial pneumonia, and worsening of underlying medical conditions. Infectious agent There are two main types of influenza virus that cause seasonal epidemics in humans: A and B. Influenza A viruses are classified into subtypes based on two surface proteins: hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). Three subtypes of HA (H1, H2, and H3) and two subtypes of NA (N1 and N2) are recognized among influenza A viruses as having caused widespread human disease over the decades. Immunity to the HA and NA proteins reduces the likelihood of infection and together with immunity to the internal viral proteins, lessens the severity of disease if infection occurs. Influenza B viruses have evolved into two antigenically distinct lineages since the mid-1980s, represented by B/Yamagata/16/88-like and B/Victoria/2/87-like viruses. Viruses from both the B/Yamagata and B/Victoria lineages contribute variably to influenza illness each year. Globally, influenza circulation has been at a historical low since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, and with the implementation of non-pharmaceutical public health measures against COVID-19 in Canada. There has been a virtual absence of any B/Yamagata detections globallyFootnote 5. Over time, antigenic variation (antigenic drift) of strains occurs within an influenza A subtype or a B lineage. The ever-present possibility of antigenic drift, which may occur in one or more influenza virus strains, requires seasonal influenza vaccines to be reformulated annually, with one or more vaccine strains changing in most seasons. Transmission Influenza is primarily transmitted by aerosols and droplets spread through coughing or sneezing, and through direct or indirect contact with respiratory secretions. The incubation period of seasonal influenza is usually about 2 days but can range from 1–4 daysFootnote 6. Adults may be able to spread influenza to others from 1 day before symptom onset to approximately 5 days after symptoms start. Children and people with weakened immune systems may be infectious longer. Risk factors The people at greatest risk of influenza-related complications are adults and children with chronic health conditions (see List 1), residents of nursing homes and other chronic care facilities, adults 65 years of age and older, children 0–59 months of age, pregnant individuals, and Indigenous peoples. Seasonal and temporal patterns Influenza activity in Canada is usually low in the late spring and summer, begins to increase over the fall, and peaks in the winter months. Depending on the year, one or more peaks may occur as early as the fall and into the spring. Influenza season in Canada can last for many months, and more than one influenza strain typically circulates each season. Spectrum of clinical illness Symptoms typically include the sudden onset of fever, cough, and muscle aches. Other common symptoms include headache, chills, loss of appetite, fatigue, and sore throat. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may also occur, especially in children. Most people will recover within a week or 10 days. More rarely, central nervous system involvement, acute myositis, myocarditis or pericarditis have been described. In addition, complications including pneumonia, respiratory failure, cardiovascular complications, or worsening of underlying chronic medical conditions may occur. Disease incidence Global Worldwide, annual epidemics result in approximately one billion cases of influenza, three to five million cases of severe illness, and 290,000 to 650,000 deaths. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the global annual attack rate was estimated to be 5–10% in adults and 20–30% in childrenFootnote 1. For current international influenza activity information, refer to WHO's Global Influenza Program website. National Together, influenza and pneumonia are ranked among the top 10 leading causes of death in CanadaFootnote 7. The FluWatch program is Canada's national surveillance system, which monitors the spread of influenza and influenza-like illnesses (ILI) continually throughout the year. In the five seasons prior to the COVID-19 pandemic (2014–2015 to 2018-2019 season), an average of 40,000 laboratory-confirmed cases of influenza were reported to FluWatch each year. Although the burden of influenza can vary from year to year, it is estimated that there are an average of 12,200 hospitalizations related to influenza and approximately 3,500 deaths attributable to influenza annuallyFootnote 8Footnote 9. Current influenza activity information can be found on the FluWatch website. It should be noted that the incidence of influenza is often underreported since the illness may be confused with other viral illnesses and many people with ILI do not seek medical care or have viral diagnostic testing done. II.3 Vaccine Products Authorized for Use in Canada This section describes the influenza vaccine products that are authorized for use in Canada for the 2022–2023 season. All influenza vaccines available in Canada have been authorized by Health Canada. However, not all products authorized for use are necessarily available in the marketplace. The vaccine manufacturers determine whether they will make any or all of their products available in a given market. Provincial and territorial health authorities then determine which of the products available for purchase will be used in their respective publicly funded influenza immunization programs and for which population groups. The antigenic characteristics of circulating influenza virus strains provide the basis for selecting the strains included in each year's vaccine. Vaccine selection by the WHO generally occurs more than 6 months prior to the start of the influenza season to allow time for the vaccine manufacturers to produce the required quantity of vaccine. All manufacturers that distribute influenza vaccine products in Canada confirm to Health Canada that the vaccines to be marketed in Canada for the upcoming influenza season contain the WHO's recommended antigenic strains for the Northern Hemisphere. Vaccine producers may use antigenically equivalent strains because of their growth properties. The strains recommended for egg-based products may differ somewhat from the strains chosen for cell-culture based products to account for differences in the production platforms. There are three categories of influenza vaccine authorized for use in Canada: IIV, RIV, and LAIV. Trivalent (3-strain) vaccines contain one A(H1N1) strain, one A(H3N2) strain, and one influenza B strain from one of the two lineages. Quadrivalent (4-strain) vaccines contain the strains in the trivalent vaccine plus an influenza B strain from the other lineage. Most influenza vaccines currently authorized for use in Canada are made from influenza viruses grown in chicken eggs. However, there are two exceptions. The influenza viruses used to produce Flucelvax Quad are propagated in a mammalian cell line (Madin-Darby Canine Kidney cells), while the Supemtek vaccine technology uses recombinant HA produced in a proprietary insect cell line using a baculovirus vector for protein expression. A summary of the characteristics of influenza vaccines available in Canada during the 2022–2023 influenza season can be found in Appendix A. For complete prescribing information, readers should consult the product monographs available through Health Canada's Drug Product Database. Inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) IIVs currently authorized for use in Canada are a mix of split virus and subunit vaccines. In split virus vaccines, the virus has been disrupted by a detergent. In subunit vaccines, HA and NA have been further purified by removal of other viral components. All IIVs currently available in Canada are produced in eggs, with the exception of FlucelvaxⓇ Quad (IIV4-cc), which is a mammalian cell culture-based quadrivalent inactivated, subunit influenza vaccine that is prepared from viruses propagated in mammalian cell lines [proprietary 33016-PF Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cell lines] adapted to grow freely in suspension in culture medium. The production of IIV4-cc does not depend on egg supply as it does not require egg-grown candidate vaccine viruses. The IIVs available in Canada are in a standard dose formulation or in a formulation designed to enhance the immune response in specific age groups, through the use of a higher dose of HA antigen or the inclusion of an adjuvant. Refer to Basic Immunology and Vaccinology in Part 1 of the CIG for more information about inactivated vaccines. Standard-dose IIVs are available in Canada as quadrivalent formulations (IIV4-SD: AfluriaⓇ Tetra, FlulavalⓇ Tetra, FluzoneⓇ Quadrivalent, and InfluvacⓇ Tetra; IIV4-cc: FlucelvaxⓇ Quad). These vaccines are unadjuvanted, contain a standard dose of antigen (15 µg HA per strain), and are administered as a 0.5 mL dose by IM injection. Influvac Tetra may be administered by IM or deep subcutaneous injection. The adjuvanted IIVs (IIV-Adj) currently authorized for use in Canada are trivalent subunit IIVs that contain the adjuvant MF59, which is an oil-in-water emulsion composed of squalene as the oil phase that is stabilized with the surfactants polysorbate 80 and sorbitan triolate in citrate buffer. IIV-Adj contains 7.5 µg HA per strain administered as a 0.25 mL dose by IM injection for children 6–23 months of age (Fluad PediatricⓇ) or 15 µg HA per strain administered as a 0.5 mL dose by IM injection for adults 65 years of age and older (FluadⓇ). Other IIVs do not contain an adjuvant. There is one high-dose IIV (IIV-HD) currently authorized for use in Canada; a quadrivalent unadjuvanted, split virus IIV that contains 60 µg HA per strain and is administered as a 0.7 mL dose by IM injection (FluzoneⓇ High-Dose Quadrivalent). Recombinant influenza vaccine (RIV) There is currently only one RIV authorized for use in Canada: Supemtek™ (RIV4), a quadrivalent unadjuvanted, baculovirus-expressed seasonal influenza vaccine that contains 45 µg HA per strain and is administered as a 0.5 mL dose by IM injection for adults 18 years of age and older. RIV contains recombinant HAs produced in an insect cell line using genetic sequences from cell-derived influenza viruses. The production of RIV does not depend on egg supply as it does not require egg-grown candidate vaccine viruses. Live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) LAIV is given as an intranasal spray. The influenza viruses contained in LAIV are attenuated so that they do not cause influenza and are cold-adapted and temperature sensitive, so that they replicate in the nasal mucosa rather than the lower respiratory tract. LAIV contains standardized quantities of fluorescent focus units (FFU) of live attenuated reassortants and is given as a 0.2 mL dose (0.1 mL in each nostril). A quadrivalent product (LAIV4; FluMistⓇ Quadrivalent) is authorized for use in Canada for children 2–17 years of age and adults 18–59 years of age. The trivalent formulation (LAIV3) is no longer available in Canada. II.4 Efficacy, Effectiveness, and Immunogenicity Efficacy and effectiveness Influenza vaccine has been shown in randomized controlled clinical trials to be efficacious in providing protection against influenza infection and illness. However, the effectiveness of the vaccine—that is, how it performs in settings that are more reflective of usual health care practice—can vary from season to season and by influenza vaccine strain type and subtype. Influenza vaccine effectiveness (VE) depends on how well the vaccine strains match with circulating influenza viruses, the type and subtype of the circulating virus, as well as the health and age of the individual receiving the vaccine. Even when there is a less-than-ideal match or lower VE against one strain, the possibility of lower VE should not preclude vaccination, particularly for people at high risk of influenza-related complications and hospitalization, since vaccinated individuals are still more likely to be protected compared to those who are unvaccinated. Immunogenicity Antibody response after vaccination depends on several factors, including the age of the recipient, prior and subsequent exposure to antigens, and the presence of immune compromising conditions. Protective levels of humoral antibodies, which correlate with protection against influenza infection, are generally achieved by 2 weeks after vaccination; however, there may be some protection afforded before that time. II.5 Choice of Seasonal Influenza Vaccine The decision to include specific influenza vaccines as part of publicly funded provincial and territorial programs depends on several factors, including cost-effectiveness evaluation and other programmatic and operational factors, such as implementation strategies. Not all products will be made available in all jurisdictions and availability of some products may be limited; therefore, officials in individual provinces and territories should be consulted regarding the products available in individual jurisdictions. With the availability of influenza vaccines that are designed to enhance immunogenicity in specific age groups, the choice of product has become more complex. Choice of influenza vaccine by age group Recommendations for individual-level decision making NACI recommends that influenza vaccine should be offered annually to anyone 6 months of age and older who does not have a contraindication to the vaccine. Table 2 provides age group-specific recommendations for the age-appropriate influenza vaccine types authorized for use in Canada. Recommendations for public health program-level decision making NACI recommends that any of the age-appropriate influenza vaccine types available for use may be considered for people without contraindications to the vaccine. Table 2 provides age group-specific recommendations for the age-appropriate influenza vaccine types authorized in Canada. Table 2: Recommendations on choice of influenza vaccine type for individual- and public health program-level decision making by age group Recipient by age group Vaccine types authorized for use Recommendations on choice of influenza vaccine 6–23 months IIV3-SDTable 2 Footnote a IIV3-Adj IIV4-SD A quadrivalent influenza vaccine authorized for this age group should be used in infants and young children without contraindications, given the burden of influenza B disease in this age group and the potential for lineage mismatch between the predominant circulating strain of influenza B and the strain in a trivalent vaccine. If a quadrivalent vaccine is not available, any of the available trivalent vaccines licensed for this age group should be used 2–17 yearsTable 2 Footnote b IIV3-SDTable 2 Footnote a IIV4-SD IIV4-cc LAIV4 An age appropriate quadrivalent influenza vaccine (IIV4-SD, LAIV4, or IIV4-cc) should be used in children without contraindications or precautions (see text below applicable to LAIV), including those with chronic health conditions, given the burden of influenza B disease in this age group and the potential for lineage mismatch between the predominant circulating strain of influenza B and the strain in a trivalent vaccine. LAIV4 may be given to children with: stable, non-severe asthma; cystic fibrosis who are not being treated with immunosuppressive drugs (e.g., prolonged systemic corticosteroids); and stable HIV infection, if the child is currently being treated with ART (i.e., HAART) and has adequate immune function. LAIV should not be used in children or adolescents for whom it is contraindicated or for whom there are warning and precautions such as those with: severe asthma (defined as currently on oral or high-dose inhaled glucocorticosteroids or active wheezing); medically attended wheezing in the 7 days prior to vaccination; current receipt of aspirin or aspirin-containing therapy; immune compromising conditions, with the exception of stable HIV infection, i.e., if the child is treated with HAART (for at least 4 months) and has adequate immune function. pregnancy In pregnancy, IIV4-SD or IIV4-cc should be used instead. If IIV4-SD, IIV4-cc, and LAIV4 are not available, IIV3-SD should be used. 18–59 years IIV3-SDTable 2 Footnote a IIV4-SD IIV4-cc RIV4 LAIV4 Any of the available influenza vaccines authorized for this age group should be used in adults 18-59 years without contraindications or precautions, noting the following consideration and exceptions: There is some evidence that IIV may provide better efficacy than LAIV in healthy adults; and LAIV is not recommended for: pregnant individuals; adults with any of the chronic health conditions identified in List 1, including immune compromising conditions; and health care workers 60–64 years IIV3-SDTable 2 Footnote a IIV4-SD IIV4-cc RIV4 Any of the available influenza vaccines authorized for this age group should be used in adults 60-64 years without contraindications. 65 years and olderTable 2 Footnote c IIV3-SDTable 2 Footnote a IIV3-Adj IIV4-SD IIV4-HDTable 2 Footnote d IIV4-cc RIV4 Individual-level decision-making IIV-HD should be used over IIV-SD, given the burden of influenza A(H3N2) disease and the good evidence of IIV3-HD providing better protection compared to IIV3-SD in adults 65 years of age and older. Other than a recommendation for using IIV-HD over IIV-SD formulations, NACI has not made comparative individual-level recommendations on the use of the other available vaccines in this age group. In the absence of a specific product, any of the available age appropriate influenza vaccines should be used. Public health program-level decision-making Any of the available influenza vaccines authorized in this age group should be used. There is insufficient evidence on the incremental value of different influenza vaccines (i.e. cost-effectiveness assessments have not been performed by NACI) to make comparative public health program-level recommendations on the use of the available vaccines. Abbreviations: ART: antiretroviral therapy; HAART: highly active antiretroviral therapy; IIV: inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV3-Adj: adjuvanted trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV3-SD: standard-dose trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-cc: quadrivalent mammalian cell –culture-based inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-HD: high-dose quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-SD: standard-dose quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; RIV4: quadrivalent recombinant influenza vaccine; LAIV: live attenuated influenza vaccine; LAIV4: quadrivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine. Table 2 Footnote a IIV3-SD formulations will not be available for use in Canada during the 2022-2023 influenza season Table 2 Return to footnote a referrer Table 2 Footnote b Refer to Table 4 for a summary of vaccine characteristics of LAIV compared with IIV in children 2–17 years of age. Table 2 Return to footnote b referrer Table 2 Footnote c Refer to Table 5 for a comparison of the vaccine characteristics of influenza vaccine types available for use in adults 65 years of age and older. Table 2 Return to footnote c referrer Table 2 Footnote d IIV3-HD formulations will not be authorized or available for use in Canada during the 2022-2023 influenza season. Table 2 Return to footnote d referrer II.6 Vaccine Administration Dose, route of administration, and schedule With the variety of influenza vaccines available for use in Canada, it is important for vaccine providers to note the specific differences in age indication, route of administration, dosage, and schedule for the products that they will be using (see Table 3). Key relevant details and differences between vaccine products are also highlighted in Appendix A. For influenza vaccines given by the IM route, the anterolateral thigh muscle is the recommended site in infants 6–12 months of age. The anterolateral thigh or the deltoid muscle can be used for toddlers and older children. The deltoid muscle of the arm is the preferred injection site in adolescents and adults. For more information on vaccine administration, please refer to Vaccine Administration Practices in Part 1 of the CIG. Table 3: Recommended dose and route of administration, by age, for influenza vaccine types authorized for the 2022–2023 influenza season Age group Influenza vaccine type (route of administration) Number of doses required IIV3-SDTable 3 Footnote a or IIV4-SDTable 3 Footnote b (IM) IIV4-ccTable 3 Footnote c (IM) IIV3-AdjTable 3 Footnote d (IM) IIV4-HDTable 3 Footnote e (IM) RIV4Table 3 Footnote f (IM) LAIV4Table 3 Footnote g (intranasal) 6–23 months 0.5 mLTable 3 Footnote h - 0.25 mL - - - 1 or 2Table 3 Footnote i 2–8 years 0.5 mL - - - - 0.2 mL (0.1 mL per nostril) 1 or 2Table 3 Footnote i 9–17 years 0.5 mL 0.5 mL - - - 0.2 mL (0.1 mL per nostril) 1 18–59 years 0.5 mL 0.5 mL - - 0.5 mL 0.2 mL (0.1 mL per nostril) 1 60–64 years 0.5 mL 0.5 mL - - 0.5 mL - 1 65 years and older 0.5 mL 0.5 mL 0.5 mL 0.7 mL 0.5 mL - 1 Abbreviations: IIV3-Adj: adjuvanted trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-cc: quadrivalent mammalian cell-culture based inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-HD: high-dose quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV3-SD: standard-dose trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-SD: standard-dose quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; RIV4: quadrivalent recombinant influenza vaccine; IM: intramuscular; LAIV4: quadrivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine. Table 3 Footnote a IIV3-SD formulations (AgrifluⓇ [6 months and older] and InfluvacⓇ [3 years and older]) are authorized but will not be available for use in Canada during the 2022-2023 influenza season. Table 3 Return to footnote a referrer Table 3 Footnote b AfluriaⓇ Tetra (5 years and older), FlulavalⓇ Tetra (6 months and older), FluzoneⓇ Quadrivalent (6 months and older), InfluvacⓇ Tetra (3 years and older). Table 3 Return to footnote b referrer Table 3 Footnote c FlucelvaxⓇ Quad (2 years and older) Table 3 Return to footnote c referrer Table 3 Footnote d Fluad PediatricⓇ (6–23 months) or FluadⓇ (65 years and older) Table 3 Return to footnote d referrer Table 3 Footnote e FluzoneⓇ High-Dose Quadrivalent (65 years and older) Table 3 Return to footnote e referrer Table 3 Footnote f Supemtek™ (18 years and older) Table 3 Return to footnote f referrer Table 3 Footnote g FluMistⓇ Quadrivalent (2–59 years) Table 3 Return to footnote g referrer Table 3 Footnote h Evidence suggests moderate improvement in antibody response in infants, without an increase in reactogenicity, with the use of full vaccine doses (0.5 mL) for unadjuvanted inactivated influenza vaccinesFootnote 10Footnote 11. This moderate improvement in antibody response without an increase in reactogenicity is the basis for the full dose recommendation for unadjuvanted inactivated vaccine for all ages. For more information, refer to Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2011–2012. Table 3 Return to footnote h referrer Table 3 Footnote i Children 6 months to less than 9 years of age receiving seasonal influenza vaccine for the first time in their life should be given 2 doses of influenza vaccine, with a minimum interval of 4 weeks between doses. Children 6 months to less than 9 years of age who have been properly vaccinated with one or more doses of seasonal influenza vaccine in the past should receive 1 dose of influenza vaccine per season thereafter. Table 3 Return to footnote i referrer Booster doses and revaccination Booster doses are not required within the same influenza season. However, children 6 months to less than 9 years of age who have not previously received the seasonal influenza vaccine require 2 doses of influenza vaccine, with a minimum of 4 weeks between doses (see Table 3). Only one dose of influenza vaccine per season is recommended for everyone else. Two doses of seasonal influenza vaccine in older adults do not appear to improve the immune response to the vaccine compared to one doseFootnote 12. Serological testing Serologic testing is not necessary or recommended before or after receiving seasonal influenza vaccine. Storage requirements Influenza vaccine should be stored at +2°C to +8°C and should not be frozen. Refer to the individual product monographs for further details. Refer to Storage and Handling of Immunizing Agents in Part 1 of the CIG for additional information. Concurrent administration with other vaccines All seasonal influenza vaccines, including LAIV, may be given at the same time as, or at any time before or after administration of other vaccines (either live or inactivated), including COVID-19 vaccines for those aged 5 years and older. Refer to the CIG and latest NACI COVID-19 vaccine guidance for any additional emerging guidance on concurrent administration with COVID-19 vaccines as new products emerge or there are COVID-19 age eligibility expansions. In theory, the administration of two live vaccines sequentially within less than 4 weeks could reduce the efficacy of the second vaccine. Studies have been done showing no interference when administering LAIV3 concurrently with: measles, mumps, rubella (MMR); measles, mumps, rubella, varicella (MMRV); or live oral polio vaccinesFootnote 13Footnote 14Footnote 15. No studies have been done to assess the possibility of interference between LAIV and other live vaccines during concurrent administration, or on LAIV effectiveness given before or after other live vaccines. Additional information regarding concurrent administration with other vaccines can be found in Section IV.5 of this statement. Given the lack of data for immune interference, and based on expert opinion, NACI recommends that LAIV can be given together with or at any time before or after the administration of any other live attenuated or inactivated vaccine. However, some vaccine providers may continue to choose to give LAIV and other live vaccines separated by at least 4 weeks, based on the theoretical possibility of immune interference, although NACI does not believe that this precaution is necessary for LAIV. The use of an inactivated influenza vaccine would avoid this theoretical concern. Note that the timing rules related to two parenteral live vaccines (e.g., MMR and varicella vaccines) still apply. For more information regarding vaccination administration timing rules, please refer to Timing of Vaccine Administration in Part 1 of the CIG. When more than one injection is given at a single clinic visit, it is preferable to administer them in different limbs. If it is not possible to do so, injections given in one limb should be separated by a distance of at least 2.5 cm (1 inch). A separate needle and syringe should be used for each injection. The target groups for influenza and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines overlap considerably. Vaccine providers should take the opportunity to vaccinate eligible people against pneumococcal disease when influenza vaccine is given. Concurrent administration with other adjuvanted vaccines Data are limited regarding concurrent administration of adjuvanted vaccines with other adjuvanted or nonadjuvanted vaccines. RZV is an example of a recombinant adjuvanted subunit herpes zoster vaccine (ShingrixⓇ, GlaxoSmithKline) that is authorized for use in Canada in adults 50 years of age and older; therefore, the target age group for herpes zoster vaccine and influenza vaccine overlap. RZV has been shown to be safe and effective when given concurrently with unadjuvanted, standard dose influenza vaccinesFootnote 4. However, no studies have been conducted that have assessed the co-administration of RZV with adjuvanted or high dose influenza vaccineFootnote 16. It should be noted that RZV and IIV-adj currently authorized for use in Canada contain the adjuvants AS01B and MF59 respectively. How these adjuvants may interact when RZV and IIV-adj are administered concurrently is not known and some providers may prefer to use non-adjuvanted influenza vaccine in this situation. NACI will continue to review the evidence and update guidance accordingly. II.7 Vaccine Safety and Adverse Events Post-marketing surveillance of influenza vaccines in Canada has shown that seasonal influenza vaccines have a safe and stable profile. In addition to routine surveillance, every year during the seasonal influenza vaccination campaigns, PHAC and the Federal/Provincial/Territorial Vaccine Vigilance Working Group (VVWG) of the Canadian Immunization Committee conduct weekly expedited surveillance of adverse events following immunization (AEFI) for current influenza vaccines in order to identify vaccine safety signals in a timely manner. Refer to the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS) web page for more information on post-marketing surveillance and AEFIs in Canada. In addition, the Canadian National Vaccine Safety (CANVAS) Network, a national network of sites across Canada for active vaccine safety surveillance, collects and analyzes information on AEFIs after influenza vaccination to provide influenza vaccine safety information to public health authorities during the core weeks of the annual influenza vaccination campaign. All influenza vaccines currently authorized for use in Canada are considered safe for use in people with latex allergies. The multi-dose vial formulations of inactivated influenza vaccine that are authorized for use in Canada contain minute quantities of thimerosal, which is used as a preservative Footnote 17Footnote 18 to keep the product sterile. Large cohort studies of administrative health databases have found no association between childhood vaccination with thimerosal-containing vaccines and neurodevelopmental outcomes, including autistic-spectrum disordersFootnote 19. All single dose formulations of IIV and LAIV are thimerosal-free. Refer to Vaccine Safety in Part 2 of the CIG for additional information. Common adverse events With IM administered influenza vaccines, injection site reactions are common but are generally classified as mild and transient. IIV3-Adj tends to produce more extensive injection site reactions than unadjuvanted IIV3, but these reactions are also generally mild and resolve spontaneously within a few days. IIV-HD tends to induce higher rates of systemic reactions compared to IIV-SD, but most of these reactions are mild and short-lived. Recombinant vaccines appear to have a similar safety profile to IIVs. The most common AEs experienced by recipients of LAIV3 are nasal congestion and runny nose, which are also reported for LAIV4. Refer to the relevant subsections of Section IV for additional information. Less common and serious or severe adverse events Serious adverse events (SAEs) are rare following influenza vaccination, and in most cases, data are insufficient to determine a causal association. Allergic responses to influenza vaccine are a rare consequence of hypersensitivity to some components of the vaccine or its container. Refer to Section IV.5 below for additional information. Other reported adverse events and conditions Guillain-Barré syndrome Studies suggest that the absolute risk of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) in the period following seasonal and A(H1N1)pdm09 influenza vaccination is about one excess case per million vaccinationsFootnote 20Footnote 21, and that the risk of GBS associated with influenza illness (about 17 cases per million influenza-coded health care encounters, which are a proxy for influenza illness) is higher than that associated with influenza vaccinationFootnote 21. Although the evidence considering influenza vaccination and GBS is inadequate to accept or reject a causal relation between GBS in adults and seasonal influenza vaccination, avoiding subsequent influenza vaccination of individuals known to have had GBS without other known etiology within 6 weeks of a previous influenza vaccination appears prudent at this time. However, the potential risk of GBS recurrence associated with influenza vaccination must be balanced against the risk of GBS associated with influenza infection itself and the benefits of influenza vaccination. Oculorespiratory syndrome Oculorespiratory syndrome (ORS), the presence of bilateral red eyes and one or more associated respiratory symptoms (cough, wheeze, chest tightness, difficulty breathing, difficulty swallowing, hoarseness, or sore throat) that starts within 24 hours of vaccination, with or without facial oedema, was identified during the 2000–2001 influenza seasonFootnote 22. Since then, there have been far fewer cases per year reported to CAEFISSFootnote 23. ORS is not considered to be an allergic response. People who have an occurrence or recurrence of ORS upon vaccination do not necessarily experience further episodes with future vaccinations. Individuals who have experienced ORS without lower respiratory tract symptoms may be safely revaccinated with influenza vaccine. Individuals who experienced ORS with lower respiratory tract symptoms should have an expert review. Health care providers who are unsure whether an individual previously experienced ORS versus an immunoglobulin E (IgE) mediated hypersensitivity immune response should seek advice. Data on clinically significant AEs do not support the preference of one vaccine product over another when revaccinating those who have previously experienced ORS. Allergic reactions to previous vaccine doses Expert review of the benefits and risks of vaccination should be sought for those who have previously experienced severe lower respiratory symptoms (wheeze, chest tightness, difficulty breathing) within 24 hours of influenza vaccination, an apparent significant allergic reaction to the vaccine, or any other symptoms that could indicate a significant allergic reaction (e.g., throat constriction, difficulty swallowing) that raise concern regarding the safety of revaccination. This advice may be obtained from experts in infectious disease, allergy, and immunology, or public health that can be found in various health settings, including the Special Immunization Clinic (SIC) network. In view of the considerable morbidity and mortality associated with influenza and rarity of true vaccine allergy, a diagnosis of allergy to an influenza vaccine should not be made without confirmation, which may involve consultation with an allergy or immunology expert. Drug interactions Although influenza vaccine can inhibit the clearance of warfarin and theophylline, clinical studies have not shown any adverse effects attributable to these drugs in people receiving influenza vaccine. Statins have effects on the immune system in addition to their therapeutic cholesterol-lowering actions. Two published studies have found that adults who are regular statin users (at least 65 years of ageFootnote 24 in one study and 45 years and older in the otherFootnote 25 ) had an apparent decreased response to influenza vaccination as measured by reduced geometric mean titres (GMT)Footnote 24 or reduced VE against medically attended acute respiratory illnessFootnote 25. Statins are widely used in the same adult populations who are also at-risk for influenza-related complications and hospitalizations. Therefore, if these preliminary findings are confirmed in future studies, concurrent statin use in adult populations could have implications for influenza VE and how this use is assessed in the measurement of VE. NACI will continue to monitor the literature related to this issue. Guidance on reporting adverse events following immunization To ensure the ongoing safety of influenza vaccines in Canada, reporting of AEFIs by vaccine providers and other clinicians is critical, and in most jurisdictions, reporting is mandatory under the law. An AEFI is any untoward medical occurrence that follows vaccination and that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the usage of a vaccine. The AEFI may be any unfavourable or unintended sign, abnormal laboratory finding, symptom, or disease. In general, any AEFI felt to be temporally related to vaccination and for which there is no other clear cause at the time of reporting should be reported. Of particular interest are those AEFIs which are considered serious or unexpected. A serious AEFI is an adverse event that is life threatening or results in death, requires hospitalization or prolongation of an existing hospitalization, results in residual disability or causes congenital malformationFootnote 26. An unexpected AEFI is an event that is not listed in the approved product monograph but may be due to the vaccination, or one whose nature, severity, specificity, or outcome is not consistent with the term or description used in the product monographFootnote 26. Vaccine providers are asked to report AEFIs through local public health officials and to check for specific AEFI reporting requirements in their province or territory. If there is any doubt as to whether or not an event should be reported, a conservative approach should be taken and the event should be reported. For influenza vaccines, the following AEFIs are of particular interest: ORS; and GBS within 6 weeks following vaccination. Refer to Reporting Adverse Events Following Immunization (AEFI) in Canada for additional information about AEFI reporting and to Vaccine Safety in Part 2 of the CIG for general vaccine safety information. II.8 Travellers Influenza occurs year-round in the tropics. In temperate northern and southern countries, influenza activity generally peaks during the winter season (November to March in the Northern Hemisphere and April to October in the Southern Hemisphere). NACI recommends that influenza vaccine should be offered annually to anyone 6 months of age and older, including travellers, who does not have a contraindication to the vaccine, with focus on the groups for whom influenza vaccination is particularly recommended (see List 1). Vaccines prepared specifically for use in the Southern Hemisphere are not available in Canada, and the extent to which recommended vaccine components for the Southern Hemisphere may overlap with those in available Canadian formulations will vary. A decision for or against revaccination (i.e., boosting) of travellers to the Southern Hemisphere between April and October, if they had already been vaccinated in the preceding fall or winter with the Northern Hemisphere's vaccine, depends on individual risk assessment, the similarity between the Northern and Southern Hemisphere vaccines, the similarity between the Northern Hemisphere vaccine strains and currently circulating strains in the Southern Hemisphere, and the availability of a reliable and safe vaccine at the traveller's destination. Refer to Immunization of Travellers in Part 3 of the CIG for additional general information. This concludes the summary of relevant influenza vaccine information typically found in the Canadian Immunization Guide. Additional technical information related to seasonal influenza vaccine can be found in the remainder of this statement. III. Particularly Recommended Vaccine Recipients: Additional Information The groups for whom influenza vaccination is particularly recommended are presented in List 1 of Section II. Additional information regarding these particularly recommended recipients is provided below. III.1 People at High Risk of Influenza-Related Complications or Hospitalization All children 6–59 months of age On the basis of existing data, NACI recommends the inclusion of all children 6–59 months of age among those for whom influenza vaccine is particularly recommended. Refer to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2011–2012 for additional details on children 6–23 months of age and to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2012–2013 for children 24–59 months of age. Adults and children with chronic health conditions A number of chronic health conditions, as noted in List 1, are associated with increased risk of influenza-related complications, and influenza can lead to exacerbation of the chronic disease. Influenza vaccination can induce protective antibody levels in a substantial proportion of adults and children with immune compromising conditions, including transplant recipients, those with proliferative diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphatic systems, and HIV-infected people. Vaccine effectiveness may be lower in people with immune compromising conditions than in healthy adults. Neurologic or neurodevelopment conditions Neurologic or neurodevelopment conditions (NNCs) that pose increased risk for severe disease or complications from influenza include neuromuscular, neurovascular, neurodegenerative, neurodevelopment conditions, and seizure disorders (and, for children, include febrile seizures and isolated developmental delay), but exclude migraines and psychiatric conditions without neurological conditions. Based on reviews of evidence and expert opinion, NACI includes adults and children with NNCs among the groups for whom influenza vaccination is particularly recommended. Refer to the NACI Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2018–2019 for a summary of the rationale supporting this decision and the Literature Review on Individuals with Neurologic or Neurodevelopment Conditions and Risk of Serious Influenza-Related Complications for additional details of the evidence reviews. All pregnant individuals NACI recommends the inclusion of all pregnant individuals, at any stage of pregnancy, among those who are particularly recommended to receive IIV. This is due to the risk of influenza-associated morbidity amongst those who are pregnant,Footnote 27Footnote 28Footnote 29Footnote 30Footnote 31 evidence of adverse neonatal outcomes associated with respiratory hospitalization during pregnancy or influenza during pregnancyFootnote 32Footnote 33Footnote 34Footnote 35, evidence that vaccination of pregnant individuals protects their newborns from influenza and influenza-related hospitalizationFootnote 36Footnote 37Footnote 38Footnote 39 and evidence that infants born during influenza season to vaccinated individuals are less likely to be premature, small for gestational age, and of low birth weight than if born to individuals that had not received an influenza vaccineFootnote 40Footnote 41Footnote 42Footnote 43. The risk of influenza-related hospitalization increases with length of gestation (i.e., it is higher in the third trimester than in the second). The safety of IIV during pregnancy has been reviewedFootnote 42. Active studies of influenza vaccination during pregnancy have not shown evidence of harm to the pregnant individual or fetus associated with influenza vaccinationFootnote 44. Although the cumulative sample size of active studies of influenza vaccination in pregnant individuals is relatively small, particularly in the first trimester, passive surveillance has not raised any safety concerns despite widespread use of IIV during pregnancy over several decadesFootnote 29Footnote 30Footnote 45Footnote 46. Surveillance following the use of both adjuvanted and unadjuvanted 2009 pandemic influenza A(H1N1) vaccines in more than 100,000 pregnant persons in Canada and more than 488,000 pregnant persons in EuropeFootnote 47 has not revealed any safety concerns. Very limited peer-reviewed, published data pertaining to safety of vaccination with RIV4 during pregnancy is currently available to inform vaccine-associated risks. Refer to the Supplemental Statement on Recombinant Influenza Vaccines, for more information. Refer to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2011–2012 and the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2012–2013 for further details on influenza vaccination during pregnancy. People of any age who are residents of nursing homes and other chronic care facilities Residents of nursing homes and other chronic care facilities often have one or more chronic health conditions and live in institutional environments that may facilitate the spread of influenza. Adults 65 years of age and older Hospitalization attributable to influenza in this age group is estimated at 125–228 per 100,000 healthy peopleFootnote 48, and influenza-attributed mortality rates increase with increased ageFootnote 49. Indigenous peoples Based on a body of evidence indicating a higher rate of influenza-associated hospitalization and death among Indigenous peoples, NACI recommends the inclusion of this population among those for whom the influenza vaccine is particularly recommended. it has been proposed that the increased risk of severe influenza outcomes in the Indigenous populations is a consequence of many factors, including high prevalence of chronic health conditions (e.g., diabetes, chronic lung disease, end-stage kidney disease, cardiovascular disease, obesity)Footnote 50, delayed access to health care, and increased susceptibility to disease because of poor housing and overcrowdingFootnote 51Footnote 52Footnote 53. Refer to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2011–2012 for further details. III.2 People Capable of Transmitting Influenza to Those at High Risk of Influenza-Related Complications or Hospitalization People who are potentially capable of transmitting influenza to those at high risk should receive annual vaccination, regardless of whether the high-risk individual has been vaccinated. Vaccination of Health Care Workers (HCW) decreases their own risk of illnessFootnote 54Footnote 55, as well as the risk of death and other serious outcomes among the individuals for whom they provide careFootnote 56Footnote 57Footnote 58Footnote 59. Vaccination of HCWs and residents of nursing homes is associated with decreased risk of ILI outbreaksFootnote 60. People who are more likely to transmit influenza to those at high risk of influenza-related complications or hospitalization include: HCWs and other care providers in facilities and community settings who, through their activities, are capable of transmitting influenza to those at high risk; and Contacts, both adults and children, of individuals at high risk, whether or not the individual at high risk has been vaccinated. Health care workers and other care providers in facilities and community settings Vaccination of health care workers and other care providers For the purposes of this statement, HCWs and other care providers in facilities and community settings refers to HCWs, regular visitors, emergency response workers, those who work in continuing care or long-term care facilities or residences, those who provide home care for people at high risk, and students of related health care services. HCWs include any person, paid or unpaid, who provides services, works, volunteers, or trains in a hospital, clinic, or other health care facility. Transmission of influenza to patients at high risk of influenza-associated complications results in significant morbidity and mortality. Four cluster randomized controlled trials (RCTs) conducted in geriatric long-term care settings have demonstrated that vaccination of HCWs is associated with substantial decreases in influenza-like illnessFootnote 57Footnote 58Footnote 59 and all-cause mortalityFootnote 56Footnote 57Footnote 58Footnote 59 in the residents. In addition, due to their occupation and close contact with people who may be infected with influenza, HCWs are themselves at increased risk of infectionFootnote 61. As previously stated, children 0–59 months of age, adults and children with chronic health conditions, pregnant individuals, people of any age who are residents of nursing homes and other chronic care facilities, and adults 65 years of age and older are at greater risk of more severe complications from influenza or worsening of their underlying condition. Given the potential for HCWs and other care providers to transmit influenza to individuals at high risk and knowing that vaccination is the most effective way to prevent influenza, NACI recommends that, in the absence of contraindications, HCWs and other care providers in facilities and community settings should be vaccinated against influenza annually. NACI considers the receipt of influenza vaccination to be an essential component of the standard of care for all HCWs and other care providers for their own protection and that of their patients. This group should consider annual influenza vaccination as part of their responsibilities to provide the highest standard of care. Although current influenza vaccine coverage for HCWs is higher than in the general publicFootnote 62Footnote 63, it remains below the national goal of 80% coverage for HCWs in CanadaFootnote 64. Comprehensive vaccination programs should be adopted that address HCWs' acceptance of the vaccine and facilitate the process of vaccinating HCWs to improve uptake of the influenza vaccine beyond the current level. HCW influenza vaccination programs that have successfully increased vaccine coverage of HCWs have included a combination of education, increased awareness, accessible on-site vaccination delivery options for all HCWs, visible support from senior staff and other leaders, and regular review and improvement of vaccination strategiesFootnote 65Footnote 66Footnote 67Footnote 68Footnote 69Footnote 70. Outbreak management in health care facilities As noted in PHAC's Guidance: Infection Prevention and Control Measures for Healthcare Workers in Acute Care and Long-term Care Settings for seasonal influenza, all health care organizations should have a written plan for managing an influenza outbreak in their facilities. Inherent in such plans should be policies and programs to optimize HCW's influenza vaccinationFootnote 71. As part of outbreak management, the above-mentioned PHAC guidance suggests consideration of chemoprophylaxis for all unvaccinated HCWs, unless contraindications exist. Refer to the Association of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Disease Canada (AMMI Canada) website for guidelines regarding the use of antiviral medications for prophylaxis. Contacts of individuals at high risk of influenza complications Vaccination is recommended for contacts, both adults and children, of individuals at high risk of influenza-related complications or hospitalization (see List 1), whether or not the individual at high risk has been vaccinated. These contacts include: household contacts and care providers of individuals at high risk, household contacts and care providers of infants less than 6 months of age (as these infants are at high risk of complications from influenza but cannot receive influenza vaccine), members of a household expecting a newborn during the influenza season, household contacts and care providers (whether in or out of the home) of children 0–59 months of age, and providers of services within closed or relatively closed settings with people at high risk of influenza-related complications (e.g., crew on a ship). III.3 Others People who provide essential community services Vaccination for these individuals should be encouraged to minimize the disruption of services and routine activities during annual influenza epidemics. People who provide essential community services, including healthy working adults, should consider annual influenza vaccination, as this intervention has been shown to decrease work absenteeism due to respiratory and related illnessesFootnote 54Footnote 55Footnote 72Footnote 73Footnote 74. People in direct contact with poultry infected with avian influenza during culling operations Poultry workers Although seasonal influenza vaccination will not prevent avian influenza infection, some countriesFootnote 75and provinces have recommended influenza vaccination on a yearly basis for poultry workers, based on the rationale that preventing infection with human influenza strains may reduce the theoretical potential for human-avian reassortment of genes, should such workers become co-infected with human and avian influenza virusesFootnote 76. NACI recommends seasonal influenza vaccination for people who may be in direct contact with poultry infected with avian influenza during culling operations, as these individuals may be at increased risk of avian influenza infection because of exposure during the culling operationFootnote 77Footnote 78Footnote 79Footnote 80. Refer to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2013–2014 for further information supporting this recommendation. Direct contact may be defined as sufficient contact with infected poultry to allow transmission of an avian virus to the exposed person. The relevant individuals include those performing the cull, as well as others who may be directly exposed to the avian virus, such as supervising veterinarians and inspectors. It is recommended that biosecurity measures such as personal protective equipment and antivirals be used. Refer to Human Health Issues Related to Avian Influenza in Canada for PHAC recommendations on the management of domestic avian influenza outbreaks. Swine workers NACI has concluded that there is insufficient evidence at this time to recommend routine influenza vaccination specifically for swine workers; however, NACI recommends that influenza vaccination should be offered to anyone 6 months of age and older who does not have contraindications to the vaccine. Refer to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2013–2014 for further information supporting this recommendation. IV. Vaccine Preparations Authorized for Use in Canada: Additional Information The following sections describe information on the efficacy and effectiveness, immunogenicity, and safety of influenza vaccines that are authorized for use in Canada by type: IIV, RIV and LAIV. Refer to Appendix A for a summary of the characteristics of specific influenza vaccine products available in Canada for the 2022–2023 season. NACI acknowledges that evidence related to influenza vaccine performance, particularly with respect to vaccine efficacy and effectiveness, is constantly evolving with advances in research methodology and accumulation of data over many influenza seasons. Therefore, the evidence summarized in this section may not include the latest studies. However, in accordance with usual practice, NACI continues to closely monitor the emerging evidence on the efficacy and effectiveness, immunogenicity, and safety of influenza vaccines to update and to make recommendations when warranted. IV.1 Inactivated Influenza Vaccine (IIV) IIVs contain standardized amounts of the HA protein from representative seed strains of the two human influenza A subtypes (H3N2 and H1N1) and either one (for trivalent vaccines) or both (for quadrivalent vaccines) of the two influenza B lineages (Yamagata or Victoria). IIVs currently authorized for use in Canada are a mix of split virus and subunit vaccines, both consisting of disrupted virus particles. Split virus vaccines contain whole inactivated viruses split with detergent, ether, or both, while subunit vaccines are made of purified HA and NA. The amount of NA in the vaccines is not standardized. HA-based serum antibody produced to one influenza A subtype is anticipated to provide little or no protection against strains belonging to the other subtype. The potential for trivalent vaccine to stimulate antibody protection across B lineages requires further evaluation and may be dependent upon factors such as age and prior antigenic experience with the two B lineagesFootnote 81Footnote 82Footnote 83Footnote 84Footnote 85Footnote 86. Because of potential changes in the circulating influenza virus from year to year and waning immunity in vaccine recipients, annual influenza vaccination is recommended. Although NACI is aware of some recent studies that suggest that vaccine induced protection may be greater in individuals who have no recent vaccine history, optimal protection against influenza, season after season, is best achieved through annual influenza vaccinationFootnote 87Footnote 88. NACI will continue to monitor this issue. Immunological considerations related to children Young children have a high burden of illness and their vaccine-induced immune response is not as robust as older children. However, some studies suggest moderate improvement in antibody response in young children, without an increase in reactogenicity, with the use of a full vaccine dose (0.5 mL) for IIV-SDsFootnote 10Footnote 11Footnote 89. On the basis of this moderate improvement in antibody response without an increase in reactogenicity, NACI recommends the use of a 0.5 mL dose for all recipients of IIV-SDs, including young children. Immunological considerations related to older adults and those with immune compromising conditions Although the initial antibody response in older adults may be lower to some influenza vaccine components when compared to those in other age groups, a literature review identified no evidence for a subsequent antibody decline that was any more rapid in older adults than in younger age groupsFootnote 90. Influenza vaccination can induce protective antibody levels in a substantial proportion of adults and children with immune compromising conditions, including transplant recipients, those with proliferative diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphatic systems, and HIV-infected patientsFootnote 91Footnote 92Footnote 93Footnote 94. Most studies have shown that administration of a second dose of influenza vaccine in the same season to older adults or other individuals who may have an altered immune response does not result in a clinically significant antibody boostFootnote 13Footnote 95Footnote 96Footnote 97. Standard-dose, egg-based, trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV3-SD) Vaccines currently authorized for use: *AgrifluⓇ (Seqirus) *InfluvacⓇ (BGP Pharma ULC, operating as Mylan, doing business as (d.b.a.) Viatris Canada) *Vaccine is not currently available in Canada. Efficacy and effectiveness The NACI Literature Review on Influenza Vaccination in Healthy 5–18 Year Olds found that vaccine efficacy or vaccine effectiveness (VE) of IIV3-SD against laboratory-confirmed influenza was variable but was most frequently between 65–85%Footnote 98Footnote 99Footnote 100Footnote 101Footnote 102Footnote 103Footnote 104Footnote 105Footnote 106Footnote 107Footnote 108Footnote 109Footnote 110Footnote 111Footnote 112Footnote 113Footnote 114Footnote 115Footnote 116. In the NACI literature review on Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness, Immunogenicity, and Safety in Healthy Adults 19–64 Years Old, efficacy against laboratory-confirmed influenza for IIV3-SD in healthy adults 18–64 years of age ranged widely from as low as 15% to as high as 75%, with the majority of studies estimating efficacy at 50–60%. Refer to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2018–2019 for a more detailed summary of efficacy and effectiveness evidence for IIV3-SD in healthy children 5–18 years of age and healthy adults 19–64 years of age. In older adults, VE of IIV3-SD is about half of that in healthy adults and varies depending on the outcomes measured and the study populationFootnote 117Footnote 118. Systematic reviews have demonstrated that influenza vaccine decreases the incidence of pneumonia, hospital admissions, and deaths in older adultsFootnote 117 and reduces exacerbations in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary diseaseFootnote 119. The NACI Literature Review on the Comparative Effectiveness and Immunogenicity of Subunit and Split Virus Inactivated Influenza Vaccines in Adults 65 Years of Age and Older found no statistically significant differences in VE of subunit IIV3-SD compared with split virus IIV3-SD in adults 65 years of age and older against infection with any influenza virus strain, or against infection with influenza A(H1N1), A(H3N2), or B virus specifically. In observational studies, influenza vaccination has been shown to reduce the number of physician visits, hospitalizations, and deaths in adults 18–64 years of age with high-risk medical conditionsFootnote 120, hospitalizations for cardiac disease and stroke in adults 65 years of age and olderFootnote 121, and hospitalization and deaths in adults 18 years of age and older with diabetes mellitusFootnote 122 during influenza epidemics. Observational studies that use non-specific clinical outcomes or that do not take into account differences in functional status or health-related behaviours should be interpreted with cautionFootnote 123Footnote 124Footnote 125Footnote 126Footnote 127. Immunogenicity Both humoral and cell-mediated immune responses are thought to play a role in immunity to influenza. While humoral immunity is thought to play a primary role in protection against infection, cell-mediated immunity, notably cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses to internal viral components, is increasingly invoked as important in protecting against severe outcomes of influenza, particularly those associated with subtype HA variations (shift and drift)Footnote 128. The IM administration of IIV3-SD results in the production of circulating immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies to the viral HA and NA proteins, as well as a more limited cytotoxic T lymphocyte response. Safety Studies evaluating the safety of IIV3-SDs in healthy children have found a good safety profile with no SAE of noteFootnote 129. The most common solicited local reactions are pain and redness at the injection site, while the most common solicited systemic reactions are irritability, malaise, and headache. Mild injection site reactions, primarily soreness at the vaccination site, have been found to occur in 7% or less of healthy children who are less than 3 years of ageFootnote 130Footnote 131Footnote 132. Post-vaccination fever may be observed in 12% or less of vaccinated children 1–5 years of ageFootnote 103Footnote 132. For adults, IIV3-SDs have been demonstrated to have a good safety profile with acceptable reactogenicityFootnote 129. Common local reactions at injection site include redness, swelling, pain, and induration. These reactions last 2–3 days and rarely interfere with normal activities. Common systemic reactions include headache, malaise, myalgia, fatigue, arthralgia, and fever. Standard-dose, egg-based, quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV4-SD) Vaccines currently authorized for use: AfluriaⓇ Tetra (Seqirus) FlulavalⓇ Tetra (GlaxoSmithKline) FluzoneⓇ Quadrivalent (Sanofi Pasteur) InfluvacⓇ Tetra (BGP Pharma ULC, operating as Mylan, d.b.a. Viatris Canada) Efficacy and effectiveness In the NACI Literature Review on Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccines, only one study was identified that measured IIV4-SD efficacy. In that study, efficacy was estimated at 59% in children 3–8 years of age, in comparison to children who received hepatitis A vaccineFootnote 133. No literature was found in this review on efficacy or effectiveness directly comparing trivalent and quadrivalent formulations. Immunogenicity In the same review of the literature noted above, NACI reviewed the immunogenicity data for IIV4-SD produced by manufacturers who supplied influenza vaccine in Canada at the time of the literature review: AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and Sanofi Pasteur. The results of phase II and III trials that compared trivalent formulations to quadrivalent formulations generally showed non-inferiority of the quadrivalent products for the A(H3N2), A(H1N1), and B strain contained in the trivalent formulations. As expected, these studies showed that the immune response to the B strain that was not in the trivalent formulation was better in subjects who received the quadrivalent vaccine, which contained the additional B strain. These findings were consistent across age groups. Refer to the Literature Review on Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccines for additional details. In the phase III trials, recipients of the trivalent formulations showed, to a lesser degree, some immune response to the B strain not contained in the trivalent formulation. In one study of adults, both the trivalent and quadrivalent vaccines met all the European Medicines Agency Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use and the United States Food and Drug Administration criteria for evaluation of influenza vaccine immunogenicity, including for the B strain not in the trivalent vaccine. In all other studies, the trivalent vaccine failed at least one of the criteria for seroprotection or seroconversion for the missing B strain. It has been hypothesized that there is some level of cross-reactivity between B strains. The degree of cross protection against infection with one lineage provided by immunization against the other lineage is uncertainFootnote 134. Safety Pre-licensure clinical trials (refer to Literature Review on Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccines) and post-marketing surveillance showed that IIV4-SD had a similar safety profile to IIV3-SDFootnote 135. Standard dose mammalian cell culture-based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV-cc) Vaccine currently authorized for use: FlucelvaxⓇ Quad (Seqirus) Methods NACI reviewed the Health Canada assessment of a Phase 3/4 randomized clinical trial of Flucelvax Quad efficacy, immunogenicity and safety in children 2 years to less than18 years of age submitted by the manufacturer in support of an age extension for the use of the vaccine to adults and children 2 years of age and older. The clinical trial was conducted in 8 countries in Europe and South East Asia over three influenza seasons (Southern Hemisphere 2017 influenza season and the 2017–2018 and 2018–2019 Northern Hemisphere influenza seasons). Overall, the quality of the evidence was considered good. In support of the original recommendation for use of the Flucelvax Quad in adults and children 9 years of age and older, NACI conducted a systematic review of the literature to examine vaccine efficacy, effectiveness, immunogenicity, and safety data for this age group. Efficacy and effectiveness Four observational studies, two peer-reviewed and two not peer-reviewed (conference abstracts and posters) were identified through the systematic review, which assessed the VE of IIV4-cc compared to egg-based IIV against laboratory-confirmed influenza infection during the 2017–2018 influenza season in the United StatesFootnote 136Footnote 137Footnote 138Footnote 139.Of these four studies, two were of good qualityFootnote 137138, while the quality of the other two studiesFootnote 136Footnote 139 could not be assessed because they were published as conference abstracts or posters. IIV4-cc may be more effective than egg-based IIV3 and IIV4 influenza vaccines against non-laboratory confirmed influenza-related outcomes, including influenza-related health care interactions and ILI. Although some data suggests that IIV4-cc may be more effective against laboratory-confirmed influenza A(H3N2) virus infection than egg-based IIV, there was no consistent and statistically significant difference in effectiveness identified for adults or children vaccinated with IIV4-cc compared to egg-based IIV. Evidence for the efficacy of IIV4-cc is based on the efficacy studies for the trivalent formulation, IIV3-cc. Refer to the NACI Supplemental Statement on Mammalian Cell Culture-Based Influenza Vaccines for further details. The Phase 3/4 RCT of Flucelvax Quad for children 2 years to 18 years met the pre-defined success criterion for efficacy against PCR- or culture-confirmed influenza due to any strain starting 14 days after the last dose in these children. The overall estimate of vaccine efficacy did not differ significantly when analyzed by subgroup (e.g., age, sex, race, influenza vaccination history, influenza season). When analyzed by influenza subtype/lineage in children 2 years to less than 18 years of age, the vaccine was found to be more efficacious against influenza A/H1N1 than against either A/H3N2 or influenza B during the three influenza seasons. Estimates of efficacy by influenza subtype/lineage in children 2 years to less than 4 years of age and children 2 years to less than 9 years of age were comparable to the estimates in children 2 years to less than 18 years of age, although with wider confidence intervals around the point estimates (which included zero for estimates of efficacy against influenza A/H3N2). Immunogenicity The immunogenicity for IIV4-cc is supported by evidence from the clinical development program for the IIV3-cc (authorization never sought in Canada), which has been licensed in the US and Europe and is produced using the same Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) manufacturing platformFootnote 140Footnote 141Footnote 142Footnote 143. IIV3-cc has demonstrated non-inferiority to standard egg-based IIV3 comparators, for hemagglutinin inhibition antibody responses to A(H3N2), A(H1N1) and B strains in adults 18 years of age and older, and for A(H1N1) and B strains specifically, but not A(H3N2), in children, based on post-vaccination GMT ratios and seroconversion ratesFootnote 144Footnote 145Footnote 146Footnote 147. There is fair evidence that IIV4-cc has non-inferior immunogenicity to other inactivated influenza vaccines, based on direct and indirect evidence in adults and children 9 years of age and older. Two studiesFootnote 148Footnote 149 that assessed the immunogenicity of IIV4-cc compared to different IIV3-cc formulations (produced by Seqirus using the same MDCK cell culture-based manufacturing process) were identified in this review; one study was conducted with adult participants18 years of age and older, while the other study focused on pediatric participants. In both studies, Flucelvax Quad demonstrated non-inferiority, based on geometric mean titre rise and seroconversion rates, and met the threshold for seroprotection for all influenza strains contained in the IIV3-cc vaccines, including superior immunogenicity for the B strain not contained in IIV3-cc. In support of the use of the vaccine in adults and children 2 years of age and older, immunogenicity was assessed in a subset of the phase 3/4 RCT study participants 2 years to less than 9 years of age during the Northern Hemisphere influenza seasons (2017–2018 and 2018–2019), based on blood samples collected on the day of vaccination and 21 days after receipt of the last dose of vaccine. Participants experienced a substantial increase in antibody titres in response to vaccination, based on GMT ratios, seroconversion rates and seroprotection rates. The responses were generally highest against influenza A/H1N1 than for the other influenza subtypes/lineages. However, the immunogenicity results for influenza A/H3N2 were affected by differing hemagglutination abilities of the circulating strains and differences in the hemagglutination inhibition assays used in the two influenza seasons. Safety There is fair evidence that IIV4-cc is a safe and well-tolerated alternative to conventional egg-based influenza vaccines for children and adults. Two peer-reviewed randomized controlled trials assessed the safety of IIV4-cc; with one focused on healthy adultsFootnote 148 and the other on healthy childrenFootnote 149. Most systemic reactions were mild and resolved within 3 days. SAEs were rare and similar in frequency between cell culture-based and conventional egg-based influenza vaccines. Studies that assessed the safety of Flucelvax were considered to supplement the evidence base for safety. Overall, local and systemic solicited reactions as well as unsolicited AEs and SAE are comparable to those typically observed with other injectable egg-derived IIV3s. The evidence on safety was consistent across studies and showed that there was no significant difference in adults and children compared to comparator vaccines. Flucelvax, also has an established record of safety in other jurisdictions, and no new safety signals have been identified through routine pharmacovigilance in the US or Europe where the vaccine is licensedFootnote 144Footnote 145Footnote 150. The vaccine is safe to use during pregnancy, as no safety signals have been detected in this population. IIV4-cc is made using MDCK cells, which are developed from a canine source. An allergy to dogs is not considered a contraindication to the vaccine, based on a review of two in vitro allergenicity studiesFootnote 151Footnote 152. The analysis of vaccine safety in a clinical trial in children 2 years to less than 18 years of age were consistent with the findings of the previous NACI systematic literature review summarized above. The majority of solicited (local and systemic) and unsolicited adverse events were mild to moderate in severity and resolved spontaneously within 1 to 3 days post-vaccination, with no significant differences in rates between the Flucelvax Quad and comparator vaccine recipients. There were low (less than or equal to 1.3%) and comparable proportions of serious adverse events identified in Flucelvax Quad and comparator vaccine recipients, with no serious adverse events determined to be related to receipt of the assigned vaccine. Adjuvanted inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV-Adj) Vaccines currently authorized for use: FluadⓇ (Seqirus) Fluad PediatricⓇ (Seqirus) Fluad (adults 65 years of age and older) Efficacy and effectiveness There is fair evidence that the MF59-adjuvanted Fluad (IIV3-Adj) may be effective at reducing the risk of hospitalization for influenza and influenza complications in older adults compared to unvaccinated individuals. However, there is insufficient evidence that IIV3-Adj is more effective at reducing the risk of hospitalization for influenza and influenza complications in older adults compared to those who received unadjuvanted subunit IIV3-SD. Refer to the NACI Literature Review Update on the Efficacy and Effectiveness of High-Dose and MF59-Adjuvanted Trivalent Inactivated Influenza Vaccines in Adults 65 Years of Age and Older for more information on the efficacy and effectiveness of IIV3-Adj in adults 65 years of age and older. Immunogenicity The mechanism of action of MF59 is not fully determined and has primarily been studied using in vitro and mouse models. From these studies, it appears that MF59 may act differently from aluminum-based adjuvants. These studies show that MF59 acts in the muscle fibres to create a local immune-stimulatory environment at the injection siteFootnote 153. MF59 allows for an increased influx of phagocytes (e.g., macrophages, monocytes) to the site of injection. The recruited phagocytes are further stimulated by MF59, thereby increasing the production of chemokines to attract more innate immune cells and inducing differentiation of monocytes into dendritic cellsFootnote 154Footnote 155. MF59 further facilitates the internalization of antigen by these dendritic cellsFootnote 154Footnote 156. The overall higher number of cells available locally increases the likelihood of interaction between an antigen presenting cell and the antigen, leading to more efficient transport of antigen to the lymph nodes, with resulting improved T cell primingFootnote 154. There is evidence from RCTs that IIV3-Adj elicits non-inferior immune responses compared to the unadjuvanted subunit and split virus IIV3-SDs; however, superiority of IIV3-Adj to these vaccines by pre-defined criteria has not been consistently demonstrated. Refer to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2018–2019 for more information on the immunogenicity of IIV3-Adj in adults 65 years of age and older. Safety IIV3-Adj produces injection site reactions (pain, erythema, and induration) significantly more frequently than IIV3-SD, but they are classified as mild and transient. Systemic reactions (myalgia, headache, fatigue, and malaise) are comparable or more frequent with IIV3-Adj compared to IIV3-SD and are rated as mild to moderate and transient. SAEs were uncommon and were comparable to IIV3-SD. Refer to the Recommendations on the use of MF59-Adjuvanted Trivalent Influenza Vaccine (FluadⓇ): Supplemental Statement of Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2011–2012 for additional information on the safety of IIV3-Adj in adults 65 years of age and older. Fluad Pediatric (children 6–23 months of age) Efficacy and effectiveness A pre-licensure efficacy trial in children 6–71 months of age found a higher relative efficacy for IIV-Adj than the unadjuvanted IIV3-SDFootnote 157. However, the findings of this study should be interpreted with caution. The comparator unadjuvanted IIV3 used in this trial was shown, in an unrelated study, to induce a lower immune response compared to another unadjuvanted IIV3-SD. There were concerns raised by a European Medicines Agency inspection about the quality of diagnostic laboratory testing and validity of ascertainment of influenza cases. The study administered 0.25 mL doses of the comparator unadjuvanted IIV3-SD for children less than 36 months of age, which is lower than the dose of 0.5 mL of unadjuvanted IIV3-SD or IIV4-SD that is recommended for this age group in Canada. Refer to the NACI Literature Review on Pediatric FluadⓇ Influenza Vaccine Use in Children 6–72 Months of Age for more information on the efficacy and effectiveness of IIV3-Adj in children. Immunogenicity In children, there is limited but consistent evidence that IIV3-Adj is more immunogenic than IIV3-SD against both influenza A and BFootnote 157Footnote 158Footnote 159Footnote 160Footnote 161Footnote 162. In particular, a single dose of IIV3-Adj is more immunogenic than a single dose of IIV3-SD, and has been shown in one study to produce greater GMTs than 2 doses of IIV3-SD against influenza AFootnote 162. However, similar to IIV3-SD, IIV3-Adj generally induced a weaker hemagglutination-inhibition antibody response against B strains compared to A strains and therefore 2 doses of IIV3-Adj are still necessary for first-time recipients to achieve a satisfactory immune response against influenza B. Almost all of the pre-licensure pediatric studies used vaccine formulations of 0.25 mL in children 6–35 months of age, both for IIV3-Adj and the comparator unadjuvanted influenza vaccine (NACI recommends 0.5 mL dosage of IIV3-SD or IIV4-SD for all age groups). There is limited immunogenicity evidence comparing IIV3-Adj at 0.25 mL dose to IIV3-SD or IIV4-SD at 0.5 mL dose in the 6–23 month age group. Refer to the NACI Literature Review on Pediatric FluadⓇ Influenza Vaccine Use in Children 6–72 Months of Age for more information on the immunogenicity of IIV3-Adj in children. Safety The safety data in children are consistent with what is known about IIV3-Adj’s safety profile in adults. In pediatric trials, IIV3-Adj was more reactogenic than IIV3-SD, with recipients experiencing 10–15% more solicited local and systemic reactions. However, most reactions were mild and resolved quickly. A dose-ranging study of MF59-adjuvanted and unadjuvanted IIV3 and IIV4 did not find an increased risk of AEs associated with increased MF59 dose, antigen dose, or the addition of a second B strain; however, the reactogenicity of 15 µg formulations were slightly higher for both adjuvanted and unadjuvanted vaccines compared to the corresponding 7.5 µg formulationsFootnote 160. There are currently no data on the effects of long-term or repeated administration of adjuvanted influenza vaccines in children. The most significant experience with an adjuvanted influenza vaccine in children was the AS03-adjuvanted A(H1N1) pandemic vaccine that has been associated with an increased risk of narcolepsy. A study comparing two AS03-adjuvanted A(H1N1) vaccine products (Pandemrix and Arepanrix) has suggested that the underlying immune mediated mechanism associated with the increased narcolepsy risk may not be initiated by the adjuvant, but by the A(H1N1) nucleoprotein viral antigen, given that the study found significant antigenic differences between the two A(H1N1) pandemic vaccinesFootnote 163. However, the pandemic vaccine was a single strain adjuvanted vaccine administered only during one season, and it is unknown what effects a multi-strain adjuvanted vaccine or an adjuvanted vaccine administered for more than one season may have in young children. Refer to the NACI Literature Review on Pediatric FluadⓇ Influenza Vaccine Use in Children 6-72 Months of Age for additional information on the safety of IIV3-Adj in children. High-dose inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV-HD) Vaccines currently authorized for use: FluzoneⓇ High-Dose Quadrivalent (Sanofi Pasteur) Efficacy and effectiveness There is good evidence that Fluzone High-Dose (IIV3-HD) provides better protection compared with IIV3-SD in adults 65 years of age and older. Two studies found that IIV3-HD may provide greater benefit in adults 75 years of age and older compared to adults 65–74 years of ageFootnote 164Footnote 165. The efficacy results for IIV3-HD are inferred to IIV4-HD based on the non-inferior immunogenicity, described in the next section. Refer to the NACI Literature Review Update on the Efficacy and Effectiveness of High-Dose and MF59-Adjuvanted Trivalent Inactivated Influenza Vaccines in Adults 65 Years of Age and Older for more information on the efficacy and effectiveness of IIV3-HD in adults 65 years of age and older. Immunogenicity Five studies compared the rates of seroconversion for study participants receiving IIV3-HD and IIV3-SD among those 65 years of age and olderFootnote 166Footnote 167Footnote 168Footnote 169Footnote 170Footnote 171. Rates of seroconversion were found to be about 19% higher (ranging from 8–39% higher) for those receiving the higher dose vaccine across all three vaccine strains. Similarly, rates of seroconversion were higher for those receiving the high- compared to standard-dose vaccines for participants 75 years of age and older and for a cohort of participants with underlying cardiopulmonary disease. Eight studies reported higher rates of seroprotection for older adults receiving IIV3-HD compared to those vaccinated with IIV3-SDFootnote 166Footnote 167Footnote 168Footnote 169Footnote 170Footnote 171Footnote 172Footnote 173. Seroprotection was significantly higher for all 3 strains in the vaccine in three of five studies assessing significance. There were different results in the remaining studies. In the study by Couch et al., seroprotection was higher only against A(H1N1), possibly attributed to the fact that 78% of participants were vaccinated against the same influenza strains within 6 months prior to the studyFootnote 167. In Nace et al., seroprotection was higher against A(H3N2) and B but not A(H1N1); the lack of higher seroprotection against A(H1N1) may be attributed to strain circulation during the study that made it difficult to assess seroprotection against this subtypeFootnote 152. GMT ratios (GMTR) of participants’ responses to high- versus standard-dose influenza vaccines were reported in several studies and were calculated for those that provided group-specific, post-vaccination titres for each of the vaccinesFootnote 166Footnote 167Footnote 168Footnote 169Footnote 170Footnote 172Footnote 173. Seroresponse to the B strains in the vaccines was about 1.5 times greater (1.3–1.7) in the IIV3-HD recipients than the IIV3-SD recipients. The GMTR of the A strains was about 1.8 times higher for those receiving IIV3-HD compared to IIV3-SD, ranging from 1.6–2.3. There is good evidence that the immunogenicity for Fluzone High Dose Quadrivalent (IIV4-HD) is non-inferior to IIV3-HDFootnote 174Footnote 175. In a pivotal RCT, IIV4-HD met all non-inferiority criteria set by the US Food and Drug Administration, based on GMTR and seroconversion rates when compared to IIV3-HDFootnote 175. Immunogenicity for IIV4-HD was superior for the influenza B strain not contained within the trivalent high dose vaccineFootnote 175. Safety IIV3-HD has been observed to produce a higher rate of some systemic and local reactions than IIV3-SD. Studies have reported higher rates of malaise, myalgia, and moderate to severe fever. Most systemic reactions were mild and resolved within 3 days. SAEs were rare and similar in frequency between standard-dose and high-dose vaccines. When comparing the two high dose vaccine products, IIV4-HD has been shown to produce a comparable rate of systemic and local reactions compared to IIV3-HD. A comparable proportion of study participants also experienced unsolicited and serious AEsFootnote 175. Refer to NACI’s A Review of the Literature of High Dose Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for Adults 65 Years and Older for details on IIV3-HD. IV.2 Recombinant quadrivalent influenza vaccine (RIV4) Vaccines currently authorized for use: Supemtek™ (Sanofi Pasteur) Methods For the review of evidence relating to RIV, NACI used the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) framework to organize the information and develop recommendations for RIV. Further information on this framework can be found in the GRADE handbook. Efficacy and effectiveness One RCT was identified that assessed the relative vaccine efficacy (rVE) of RIV4 compared to egg-based IIV4 against laboratory confirmed influenza infection in adults 50 years of age and older during the 2014-2015 influenza season in the United StatesFootnote 176. The certainty of evidence for this outcome was rated as low and suggested that RIV4 may be more effective than egg-based IIV4 influenza vaccines against laboratory-confirmed influenza A virus infection, but not laboratory-confirmed influenza B virus infection in older adults. Overall, there is fair evidence (of low certainty) that the efficacy of RIV4 is non-inferior to traditional egg-based comparators, based on data in adults aged 50 years and older. Refer to the NACI Supplemental Statement on Recombinant Influenza Vaccines, for further details. Immunogenicity Eight RCTsFootnote 176Footnote 177Footnote 178Footnote 179Footnote 180Footnote 181Footnote 182Footnote 183 were identified that assessed the immunogenicity of RIV4. Of these studies, two were conducted during the 2014-2015 influenza seasonFootnote 176Footnote 179, three were conducted over the 2017-2018 influenza seasonFootnote 177Footnote 181Footnote 182, and three were conducted over the 2018-2019 influenza seasonFootnote 178Footnote 180Footnote 183. The RCTs were of good quality overall. Non-inferiority was assessed using the criteria specified by the US FDAFootnote 139. The eight RCTs compared rates of seroconversion for RIV4 recipients with IIV3-HD, IIV3-Adj, IIV4-SD, and IIV4-cc recipients aged 18 years of age or older. In fourFootnote 177Footnote 178Footnote 181Footnote 183 of the eight studies, rates of seroconversion were similar in those receiving RIV4 compared to those receiving IIV3-HD, IIV3-Adj, IIV4-SD, and IIV4-cc against influenza A/H1N1, A/H3N2, B/Yamagata lineage and B/Victoria lineage. There were different results in the remaining studies. The two studies by Dunkle et al.Footnote 176Footnote 179 demonstrated that, compared to IIV4-SD, RIV4 did not meet the non-inferiority threshold in HI antibody responses against B/Victoria lineage in adults 18 to 64 years of age. Additionally, rates of seroconversion following RIV4 did not meet the non-inferiority threshold compared to IIV4-SD against influenza A/H1N1 in adults 64 and olderFootnote 176. Non-inferiority could not be assessed for the remaining two RCTsFootnote 180Footnote 182 as these studies did not state confidence intervals for seroconversion estimates. Pooled seroconversion data from threeFootnote 176Footnote 178Footnote 181 of the eight RCTs identified in adult participants 50 years of age and older using a random-effects model revealed that RIV4 induced similar antibody responses compared to IIV4-SD, IIV3-HD, and IIV3-Adj. Four RCTs reported comparable or greater rates of seroprotection for study participants receiving RIV4 compared to those receiving IIV3-HD, IIV3-Adj, IIV4-SD, and IIV4-cc among adults 18 years of age and olderFootnote 176Footnote 177Footnote 178Footnote 183. The four studies had varying findings. In two of the four studies, RIV4 met the non-inferiority criteria specified by the US FDA for all tested influenza strains including A/H1N1, A/H3N2, B/Yamagata lineage, and B/Victoria lineageFootnote 178Footnote 183. Across the four RCTs, RIV4 met non-inferiority criteria against five of seven tested strains of A/H3N2. In the study by Belongia et al.Footnote 177, RIV4 demonstrated lower rates of seroprotection for older adults 65 to 74 years of age against two of four tested strains of A/H3N2. However, one limitation was the small sample size of the study. In the study by Dunkle et al. (2017a)Footnote 176, RIV4 met the non-inferiority threshold for seroprotection against influenza A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and B/Yamagata lineage, but not against influenza B/Victoria lineage in adults aged 50 and older. GMTR of participants’ responses to RIV4 versus IIV4-SD were reported in three RCTsFootnote 176Footnote 179Footnote 183Footnote 184. In one study, RIV4 met the non-inferiority criteria specified by the US FDA for all tested A/H1N1, A/H3N2, B/Yamagata lineage, and B/Victoria lineage influenza strainsFootnote 183. In two of the three studies, seroresponses to A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and B/Yamagata lineage in RIV4 recipients were comparable to seroresponses in IIV4-SD recipients based on the GMTRFootnote 176Footnote 179Footnote 184. However, the GMTR against B/Victoria lineage for IIV4-SD recipients compared to RIV4 recipients did not meet the non-inferiority criteria set by the US FDAFootnote 139. Overall, there is fair evidence (of moderate certainty) that the immunogenicity for RIV4 is non-inferior to traditional egg-based comparators, based on data in adults aged 18 years and older. Safety Six studiesFootnote 176Footnote 178Footnote 179Footnote 181Footnote 185Footnote 186 were identified that assessed the safety of RIV4 in adults, including five RCTs and one review of post-marketing surveillance data from the United States. Of these studies, two were conducted during the 2014-2015 influenza seasonFootnote 176Footnote 179, two were conducted during the 2017-2018 influenza seasonFootnote 181Footnote 186, one was conducted during the 2018-2019 influenza seasonFootnote 178, and one study reported data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) from July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2020Footnote 185. Most systemic reactions reported by the clinical trials were mild to moderate in severity and were transient in nature. Adverse events were similar in frequency between recombinant and conventional egg-based influenza vaccines. Although serious AEs were reported across clinical trials, none were considered by the authors to be related to the trial vaccines. RIV4 also has an established record of safety in other jurisdictions, and no safety signals have been identified through routine pharmacovigilance in the US, where the vaccine is licensedFootnote 185. Most AE reported to VAERS following RIV4 administration were non-serious. When data from two RCTsFootnote 176Footnote 178 conducted among adult participants 50 years of age and older were combined and weighted using a random-effects model, there was no difference in the odds of experiencing a SAE following administration of RIV4 and traditional egg-based IIV3-HD and IIV4-SD vaccine comparators. No published clinical data pertaining to safety of vaccination with RIV4 during pregnancy is currently available to inform vaccine-associated risks. Overall, there is evidence of moderate certainty that RIV4 is a safe and well-tolerated alternative to conventional egg-based influenza vaccines for adults. IV.3 Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (LAIV) LAIV contains standardized quantities of FFU of live attenuated influenza virus reassortants. The virus strains in LAIV are cold-adapted and temperature sensitive, so they replicate in the nasal mucosa rather than the lower respiratory tract, and they are attenuated, so they do not produce ILI. There have been no reported or documented cases, and no theoretical or scientific basis to suggest transmission of vaccine virus would occur to the individual administering LAIV. As a live replicating whole virus formulation administered intranasally, it elicits mucosal immunity, which may more closely mimic natural infection. Vaccine currently authorized for use: FluMistⓇ Quadrivalent (AstraZeneca) Efficacy and effectiveness After careful review of the available Canadian and international LAIV VE data over many influenza seasons, NACI concluded that the current evidence is consistent with LAIV providing comparable protection against influenza to that afforded by IIV and does not support a recommendation for the preferential use of LAIV in children 2–17 years of age. Observational studies from the United States found low effectiveness of LAIV against circulating post-2009 pandemic A(H1N1) (A(H1N1)pdm09), in 2013–2014 and 2015–2016; however, reduced LAIV effectiveness was not observed in Canada or any other countries that have investigated the issue. Manufacturer investigation identified potential reduced replicative fitness of the A(H1N1)pdm09-like LAIV viruses in the nasal mucosa from the two affected A(H1N1)-dominant seasons compared to pre-2009 pandemic influenza A(H1N1) LAIV viruses as contributing to the poor LAIV effectiveness against circulating A(H1N1),Footnote 187. This finding led to the manufacturer replacing the A(H1N1)pdm09 component of LAIV with new strains, with the A/Slovenia/2903/2015 being the strain that has been used since the 2017–2018 season. In adults, studies have found IIV-SD to be similarly or more efficacious or effective compared with LAIV. Refer to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2018–2019 for detailed information supporting this recommendation. Immunogenicity LAIV, which is administered by the intranasal route, is thought to result in an immune response that mimics that induced by natural infection with wild-type viruses, with the development of both mucosal and systemic immunity. Local mucosal antibodies protect the upper respiratory tract and may be more important for protection than serum antibody. Studies have demonstrated that the presence of a hemagglutination-inhibition antibody response after the administration of LAIV3 is predictive of protection. However, efficacy studies have shown protection in the absence of a significant antibody response as wellFootnote 188. In these studies, LAIV3 has generally been shown to be equally, if not more, immunogenic compared to IIV3-SD for all 3 strains in children, whereas IIV3-SD was typically more immunogenic in adults than LAIV3. Greater rates of seroconversion to LAIV3 occurred in baseline seronegative individuals compared to baseline seropositive individuals in both pediatric and adult populations, because pre-existing immunity may interfere with response to a live vaccine. Refer to the NACI Recommendations on the Use of Live, Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (FluMistⓇ): Supplemental Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2011–2012 for further details regarding the immunogenicity of LAIV3. LAIV4 has shown non-inferiority based on immunogenicity compared to LAIV3 in both children and adults. The immune response to the B strain found only in the quadrivalent formulation was better in children who received the quadrivalent vaccineFootnote 189Footnote 190Footnote 191. Safety The most common AEs experienced by recipients of LAIV3 are nasal congestion and runny nose, which are also reported for LAIV4. In a large efficacy trial, rates of wheezing were statistically higher among children 6–23 months of age for LAIV3 compared to IIV3-SD (188). This finding is expected to be the same for recipients of LAIV4; however, pre-licensure clinical studies for LAIV4 were conducted only in adults and children 2 years of age and older. LAIV4 is not authorized in children less than 2 years of age. Studies on LAIV3 have shown that vaccine virus can be recovered by nasal swab in children and adults following vaccination (i.e., “shedding”). The frequency of shedding decreases with increasing age and time since vaccination. Shedding is generally below the levels needed to transmit infection, although in rare instances, shed vaccine viruses can be transmitted from vaccine recipients to unvaccinated people. Refer to the NACI Recommendations on the Use of Live, Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (FluMistⓇ): Supplemental Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2011–2012 for more information on LAIV and viral shedding. Considerations related to individuals with HIV infection Following a review of the literature regarding the use of LAIV in HIV-infected individuals, NACI concluded that LAIV is immunogenic in children with stable HIV infection on HAART and with adequate immune function. In addition, NACI concluded that LAIV appears to have a similar safety profile as IIV in children on HAART and with stable HIV infection with regard to frequency and severity of AEsFootnote 192. As expected, injection site reactions were seen only with IIV and nasal symptoms were more common with LAIV. However, the evidence base is too small to effectively detect uncommon, rare, and very rare AEs related to the use of LAIV in in this population. Nasal spray may be preferable to IM injection for some individuals who are averse to receiving the vaccine by injection. Therefore, NACI recommends that LAIV may be considered as an option for children 2–17 years of age with stable HIV infection on HAART and with adequate immune function. LAIV should be considered only in children with HIV who meet the following criteria: Receiving ART for 4 months or longer; CD4 count equal to or greater than 500/µL if 2–5 years of age, or ≥200/µL if 6–17 years of age (measured within 100 days before administration of LAIV); and HIV plasma RNA less than 10,000 copies/mL (measured within 100 days before administration of LAIV). IM influenza vaccination is still considered the standard for children living with HIV by NACI and the Canadian Pediatric and Perinatal HIV/AIDS Research Group, particularly for those without HIV viral load suppression (i.e., plasma HIV RNA >40 copies/mL). However, if IM vaccination is not accepted by the individual or substitute decision maker, LAIV would be a reasonable option for children meeting the criteria listed above. Refer to the NACI Statement on the Use of LAIV in HIV-Infected Individuals for more information on the use of LAIV in this population. IV.4 Schedule The first time that children 6 months to less than 9 years of age receive seasonal influenza vaccination, a two-dose schedule is required to achieve protectionFootnote 193Footnote 194Footnote 195. Several studies have looked at whether these two initial doses need to be given in the same seasonFootnote 83Footnote 84Footnote 196. Englund et al. reported similar immunogenicity in children 6–23 months of age whether 2 doses were given in the same or separate seasons when there was no change, or only minor vaccine strain change, in vaccine formulation between seasonsFootnote 83Footnote 84. However, seroprotection rates to the B component were considerably reduced in the group that received only one dose in the subsequent season when there was a major B lineage change, suggesting that the major change in B virus lineage reduced the priming benefit of previous vaccinationFootnote 82Footnote 84. Issues related to effective prime-boost when there is a major change in influenza B lineage across sequential seasons require further evaluation Footnote 197. Because children 6–23 months of age are less likely to have had prior priming exposure to an influenza virus, special effort is warranted to ensure that a two-dose schedule is followed for previously unvaccinated children in this age group. IV.5 Concurrent Administration with Other Vaccines All seasonal influenza vaccines, including LAIV, may be given at the same time as, or at any time before or after administration of other vaccines, including COVID-19 vaccines for those aged 5 years and older. NACI will continue to monitor the evidence base, including ongoing and anticipated trials investigating influenza vaccines administered at the same time as, or any time before or after, COVID-19 vaccines and update its recommendations as needed. Refer to the NACI Statement on the Use of COVID-19 Vaccines and the CIG COVID-19 chapter for current recommendations concerning the use of COVID-19 vaccines and further information on concurrent administration of COVID-19 vaccines with other vaccines. In general, NACI recommends that two live parenteral vaccines be administered either on the same day or at least 4 weeks apartFootnote 198. This recommendation is based largely on a single study from 1965 that demonstrated immune interference between smallpox vaccine and measles vaccine administered 9–15 days apart. Subsequent studies have revealed conflicting results on immune interference between live vaccinesFootnote 199Footnote 200Footnote 201Footnote 202. No studies were found on potential immune interference between LAIV and other live attenuated vaccines (oral or parenteral) administered within 4 weeks. A few studies on concurrent administration of LAIV3 with MMR, varicella, and oral polio vaccines did not find evidence of clinically significant immune interferenceFootnote 12Footnote 14Footnote 15. One study reported a statistically significant but not clinically meaningful decrease in seroresponse rates to rubella antigen when administered concurrently with LAIV. In theory, the administration of two live vaccines sequentially within less than 4 weeks could reduce the efficacy of the second vaccine. Possible immune mechanisms include: the inhibitory and immunomodulatory effects of systemic and locally produced cytokines on B- and T-cell response and viral replication; immunosuppression induced by certain viruses (such as measles); and direct viral interference as a result of competition for a common niche. Mucosal vaccines may have less impact on a parenteral vaccine and vice versa. The immune response with a mucosal vaccine may be compartmentalized to the mucosa while that to a parenteral vaccine is systemic. It is likely that there is some interaction between the systemic and mucosal compartments; however, the extent to which this interaction occurs is not known. Given the lack of data for immune interference, and based on expert opinion, NACI recommends that LAIV can be given together with or at any time before or after the administration of any other live attenuated or inactivated vaccine. However, some vaccine providers may continue to choose to give LAIV and other live vaccines separated by at least 4 weeks, based on the theoretical possibility of immune interference, although NACI does not believe that this precaution is necessary for LAIV. The use of an inactivated influenza vaccine would avoid this theoretical concern. IV.6 Additional Vaccine Safety Considerations Influenza vaccine is safe and well tolerated. Contraindications, precautions, and common AEs are described in Section II. Additional information regarding egg-allergic individuals and GBS is provided below. Egg-allergic individuals After careful review of clinical and post-licensure safety data, NACI has concluded that egg-allergic individuals may be vaccinated against influenza using any influenza vaccine, including egg-based vaccines and LAIV, without prior influenza vaccine skin test and with the full dose, irrespective of a past severe reaction to egg and without any particular consideration, including vaccination setting. The amount of trace ovalbumin allowed in influenza vaccines that are authorized for use in Canada is associated with a low risk of AE, and in addition, two of the authorized products do not contain any ovalbumin. The observation period post-vaccination is as recommended in Vaccine Safety in Part 2 of the CIG. As with all vaccine administration, vaccine providers should be prepared with the necessary equipment, knowledge, and skills to respond to a vaccine emergency at all times. Refer to the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2018–2019 for safety data supporting this recommendation for IIV and LAIV. Guillain-Barré syndrome In a review of studies conducted between 1976 and 2005, the United States Institute of Medicine concluded that the 1976 “swine flu” vaccine was associated with an elevated risk of GBS. However, evidence was inadequate to accept or to reject a causal relation between GBS in adults and seasonal influenza vaccinationFootnote 203. The attributable risk of GBS in the period following seasonal and monovalent 2009 pandemic influenza vaccination is about one excess case per million vaccinationsFootnote 20Footnote 21. In a self-controlled study that explored the risk of GBS after seasonal influenza vaccination and after influenza health care encounters (a proxy for influenza illness), the attributable risks were 1.03 GBS admissions per million vaccinations compared with 17.2 GBS admissions per million influenza-coded health care encountersFootnote 21. This finding shows that both influenza vaccination and influenza illness are associated with small attributable risks of GBS, but the risk of GBS associated with influenza illness is notably higher than with influenza vaccination. The self-controlled study also found that the risk of GBS after vaccination was highest during weeks 2–4, whereas for influenza illness, the risk was greatest within the first week after a health care encounter and decreased thereafter, but remained significantly elevated for up to 4 weeks. The risk of GBS associated with influenza vaccination must be balanced against the risk of GBS associated with influenza infection itself and all the other benefits of influenza vaccinationFootnote 204Footnote 205Footnote 206Footnote 207. V. Choice of Seasonal Influenza Vaccine: Additional Information With the recent availability of a number of new influenza vaccines, some of which are designed to enhance immunogenicity in specific age groups, the choice of product is now more complex. Section II.5 summarizes NACI’s recommendations on the choice of currently authorized influenza vaccines. This section provides more details for these recommendations. V.1 Children Burden of disease in children Canadian surveillance data from 2001–2002 to 2012–2013 has shown that influenza B strains accounted for 17% of laboratory-confirmed tests for influenza in children, which is a higher proportion of disease burden due to influenza B infection compared to other age groups. Although children less than 24 months of age comprise approximately 2% of the Canadian populationFootnote 208, children 0–23 months of age averaged 10.8% of reported influenza B cases (range: 8.3–13.7%), using case-based laboratory data from 2001–2012 (excluding 2009). With respect to severe outcomes (e.g., hospitalization, intensive care unit admission, and death), influenza B was confirmed in 15.5–58.3% (median: 38.4%) of pediatric influenza-associated hospitalizations (children 16 years of age and younger) reported by the Canadian Immunization Monitoring Program Active (IMPACT) surveillance network between 2004–2005 and 2012–2013 (excluding the 2009–2010 pandemic season)Footnote 209. The IMPACT study also found that the proportion of deaths attributable to influenza (any strain) was significantly greater for children admitted to hospital with influenza B (1.1%) than for those admitted with influenza A (0.4%). The proportion of hospitalizations due to influenza B relative to all influenza hospitalizations has been generally similar to the proportion of influenza B detections relative to all influenza infections in the general population during the same time period. Additional information can be found in the Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2014–2015. In the NACI Literature Review on Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccines, a review of B lineage antigens included in the Canadian influenza vaccines and the circulating strains each season indicates a match in five of the 12 seasons from 2001–2002 through to 2012–2013, a moderate match (about 50% from each lineage) in 1 season, and a mismatch in remaining 6 influenza seasons (i.e., 70% or more of the characterized B strains were of the opposite lineage to the antigen in that season’s vaccine). Children 6–23 months of age Three types of influenza vaccine are authorized for use in children 6–23 months of age: IIV3-SD, IIV3-Adj, and IIV4-SD. Given the burden of influenza B disease in children and the potential for lineage mismatch between the predominant circulating strain of influenza B and the strain in a trivalent vaccine, NACI recommends that a quadrivalent influenza vaccine should be used. If a quadrivalent vaccine is not available, any of the available age-appropriate trivalent vaccines should be used. There is insufficient evidence to make comparative recommendations on the use of IIV3-Adj over IIV3-SD. Children 2–17 years of age Four types of influenza vaccine have been authorized for use in children 2–17 years of age (IIV3-SD, IIV4-SD, IIV4-cc, and LAIV4. Given the burden of influenza B disease in children and the potential for lineage mismatch between the predominant circulating strain of influenza B and the strain in a trivalent vaccine, NACI recommends that an age appropriate quadrivalent vaccine should be used. If a quadrivalent vaccine is not available, an age-appropriate trivalent vaccine should be used. The current evidence does not support a recommendation for the preferential use of LAIV in children and adolescents 2–17 years of age. Refer to the NACI Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2018–2019 for information supporting this recommendation. Children 2–17 years of age with chronic health conditions NACI recommends that any age-appropriate influenza vaccine (IIV or LAIV) may be considered for children 2–17 years of age with chronic health conditions; however, LAIV should not be used for children with severe asthma (as defined as currently on oral or high-dose inhaled glucocorticosteroids or with active wheezing), those with medically attended wheezing in the 7 days prior to vaccination, those currently receiving aspirin or aspirin-containing therapy, and those with immune compromising conditions, excluding those with stable HIV infection on HAART and with adequate immune function. LAIV is also contraindicated in pregnant adolescents. Children and adolescents for whom LAIV is contraindicated should receive IIV. If IIV is used, NACI recommends that a quadrivalent vaccine should be used. If a quadrivalent vaccine is not available, an age-appropriate trivalent vaccine should be used. NACI recommends that LAIV may be given to children with stable, non-severe asthma, children with cystic fibrosis who are not treated with immunosuppressive drugs, such as prolonged systemic corticosteroids, and children with stable HIV infection on HAART and with adequate immune function. Refer to the NACI Recommendations on the Use of Live, Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (FluMistⓇ): Supplemental Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine for 2011–2012 for additional information supporting these recommendations. Summary of vaccine characteristics for decision making IIV3-SD, IIV4-SD, IIV4-cc, and LAIV4 are authorized for use in Canada for children 2–17 years of age. The comparison of the vaccine characteristics of IIV and LAIV, in Table 4 below, may be considered in making a decision on the preferred vaccine option(s) for use by an individual or a public health program. Note that although data comparing LAIV to IIV4-cc are not available, IIV-cc is comparable to egg-based IIV. Table 4: Vaccine characteristics of live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) compared with inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) in children 2–17 years of age ConsiderationsTable 4 Footnote a LAIVTable 4 Footnote b compared with IIVTable 4 Footnote c Efficacy and effectiveness There was early evidence of superior efficacy of LAIV3 compared with IIV3-SD in children less than 6 years of age from randomized controlled trials, with weaker evidence of superior efficacy in older children. However, later post-marketing and surveillance studies across multiple influenza seasons found comparable protection against influenza for LAIV and IIV, with findings of reduced effectiveness for LAIV against A(H1N1) in some studies. Like IIV4-SD, LAIV4 is expected to provide additional protection against the influenza B strain not contained in IIV3-SD. Immunogenicity LAIV3 has been shown to be as immunogenic as IIV3-SD, depending on age, with LAIV4 being non-inferior to LAIV3. Safety Rhinitis (runny nose) and nasal congestion are more common with LAIV. Clinical studies and post-marketing studies showed a similar safety profile to IIV. Contraindications There are vaccine contraindications specific to LAIV. LAIV is contraindicated for children with severe asthma, medically attended wheezing in the 7 days prior to vaccination, and immune compromising conditions (with the exception of children with stable HIV infection on HAART and with adequate immune function), as well as those currently receiving aspirin or aspirin-containing therapy. LAIV is also contraindicated for pregnant adolescents. Acceptability Delivery of LAIV as a nasal spray may be preferable for children who are averse to receiving the vaccine by needle injection. Abbreviations: HAART: highly active antiretroviral therapy; IIV: inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV3-SD: standard-dose trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-SD: standard-dose quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; LAIV: live attenuated influenza vaccine; LAIV3: trivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine; LAIV4: quadrivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine. Table 4 Footnote a NACI has not assessed the comparative cost-effectiveness of authorized influenza vaccine types for children 2–17 years of age. Table 4 Return to footnote a referrer Table 4 Footnote b The trivalent formulation of LAIV (LAIV3) received a Notice of Compliance from Health Canada in June 2010 and was first used in publicly funded immunization programs in Canada for the 2012–2013 influenza season. The quadrivalent formulation (LAIV4) was approved for use in Canada for the 2014–2015 season and has been in use since that time. LAIV3 is no longer available in Canada. Table 4 Return to footnote b referrer Table 4 Footnote c Both trivalent and quadrivalent IIV-SD (IIV3-SD and IIV4-SD) are authorized for use in Canada for the 2021–2022 influenza season. Data comparing LAIV to IIV4-cc are not available, however IIV-cc is comparable to egg-based IIV. Table 4 Return to footnote c referrer V.2 Adults Burden of disease in adults A study focusing on estimates of deaths associated with influenza in the United States has established that the average annual rate of influenza-associated deaths for adults aged 65 years of age and older was 17.0 deaths per 100,000 (range: 2.4–36.7)Footnote 210. The study also states that of deaths coded as being influenza- or pneumonia-related, persons 65 years of age and older accounted for 87.9% of the overall estimated annual average number of deaths. When influenza-related deaths among adults 65 years of age and older were estimated using codes for underlying respiratory and circulatory causes of death, these estimates increased to 66.1 deaths per 100,000 (range: 8.0–121.1) and 89.4%, respectively. This study described a wide variation in the estimated number of deaths from season to season, which was closely related to the particular influenza virus types and subtypes in circulation. Estimates presented in the study of yearly influenza-associated deaths with underlying pneumonia and influenza causes (1976–2007) reveal a large difference between influenza type A and B with a calculated median of greater than 6,000 deaths associated with influenza type A and half of that number for influenza type B (approximately 3,360) for persons 65 years of age and older. During the 22 seasons in which influenza A(H3N2) was the prominent strain, the average influenza-associated mortality rates were 2.7 times higher than for the nine seasons that it was not (all age groups combined), and on average, there were about 37% more annual influenza-associated deaths, regardless of the primary medical cause of death. A higher risk of hospitalization and death was also reported by Cromer et al. in adults 65 years of age and older, compared to younger adults in their assessment of the burden of influenza in England by age and clinical risk groupFootnote 211. Canadian surveillance data show that hospitalization rates among adults 65 years of age and older were higher during the A(H3N2)-predominant 2014–2015 season compared to the previous five influenza seasons and also compared to the 2012–2013 season when A(H3N2) also predominated; 2014–2015 was a season in which there was a vaccine mismatch with the circulating A(H3N2) strain. Similar to the hospitalization rates, death rates among older adults were highest in the 2014–2015 season compared to the previous five seasons and compared to the previous A(H3N2) season in 2012–2013. Mortality rates among other age groups were similar to or lower than the previous five influenza seasons. Laboratory detections over this same time period showed that influenza seasons in which influenza subtype A(H3N2) predominated, disproportionally affected adults 65 years of age and older, while seasons with greater A(H1N1) detections resulted in a higher proportion of positive cases in younger age groups. Adults 18–59 years of age Five types of influenza vaccine are authorized for use in adults 18–59 years of age: IIV3-SD, IIV4-SD, IIV4-cc, RIV4, and LAIV4. NACI recommends that any of the available influenza vaccines should be used in adults without contraindications. IIV or RIV should be used for adults with chronic health conditions identified in List 1, HCWs or pregnant persons (noting that no published clinical data pertaining to safety of vaccination with RIV4 during pregnancy is currently available to inform vaccine-associated risks for this population). Adults 60–64 years of age Four types of influenza vaccine are authorized for use in adults 60–64 years of age: IIV3-SD, IIV4-SD, IIV4-cc, and RIV4. NACI recommends that any of the available age-appropriate influenza vaccines should be used. Adults 65 years of age and older Six types of influenza vaccine are authorized for use in adults 65 years of age and older: IIV3-SD, IIV3-Adj, IIV4-SD, IIV4-cc, IIV4-HD, and RIV4. Recommendation for individual-level decision making When available, IIV-HD should be used over IIV-SD, given the burden of influenza A(H3N2) disease and the good evidence of better protection of IIV3-HD compared to IIV3-SD in adults 65 years of age and older. Based on a review of pre-authorization trials, IIV4-HD is non-inferior to IIV3-HD and is therefore expected to provide the same enhanced protection against A(H3N2) compared to standard dose IIV, including IIV4-SD. Although IIV-HD is expected to provide better protection against influenza A(H3N2) for adults 65 years of age or older, the benefit of providing this vaccine to all adults 65+ as opposed to any other influenza vaccine is not clear (refer to the next section). NACI is currently conducting an updated review of influenza vaccines in this population. Any of the available influenza vaccines would be preferable to remaining unvaccinated or requesting individuals to return for vaccine. Therefore, in the absence of a specific product, NACI recommends that any of the available influenza vaccines authorized for this age group should be used. Recommendation for public health program-level decision making IIV3-HD is expected to provide better protection compared to IIV3-SD. Similarly, IIV4-HD is expected to provide better protection compared to IIV4-SD. The previous assessment completed by NACI demonstrated insufficient evidence to make a comparative recommendation on the use of IIV3-HD over IIV3-SD at the programmatic level and a complete assessment that includes economic considerations has not yet been conducted for IIV4-HD. Therefore, NACI currently recommends that any of the available influenza vaccines should be used for public health programs. NACI is in the process of completing an updated assessment on influenza vaccines for adults 65 years of age and older. Refer to the NACI Literature Review Update on the Efficacy and Effectiveness of High-Dose (FluzoneⓇ High-Dose) and MF59-Adjuvanted (FluadⓇ) Trivalent Inactivated Influenza Vaccines in Adults 65 Years of Age and Older for additional information supporting these recommendations. Summary of vaccine characteristics for decision making There are six types of inactivated influenza vaccines (IIV3-SD, IIV3-Adj, IIV4-SD, IIV4-cc, and IIV4-HD) and one type of recombinant influenza vaccine (RIV4) authorized for use in Canada for adults 65 years of age and older. The comparison of vaccine characteristics across vaccine types, in Table 5 below, may be considered in making a decision on the preferred vaccine option(s) for use by an individual or a public health program. Due to the limited available data directly comparing the performance of IIV3-Adj, IIV-HD, IIV4-SD, IIV4-cc, or RIV4, considerations for these vaccines in Table 5 are compared to IIV3-SD for which comparative data on efficacy, effectiveness, and/or immunogenicity with each of IIV3-Adj and IIV4-SD are available. Data directly comparing IIV4-cc and IIV4-HD to IIV3-SD are not available. Comparative data on efficacy, effectiveness, and/or immunogenicity of IIV3-cc and IIV3-SD are available. Table 5: Comparison of the vaccine characteristics of influenza vaccine types available for use in adults 65 years of age and older ConsiderationsTable 5 Footnote a Influenza vaccine type IIV3-Adj IIV4-HDTable 5 Footnote b IIV4-SD IIV4-ccTable 5 Footnote c RIV4 Burden of disease Although influenza-associated morbidity and mortality varies each season, in general there is an increased burden of severe disease in adults 65 years of age and older during influenza seasons when influenza A(H3N2) predominatesFootnote 210 Efficacy and effectiveness Overall, insufficient comparative evidence with IIV3-SD to draw conclusion. ExpectedTable 5 Footnote b better protection compared with IIV3-SD, particularly against influenza A(H3N2). Better protection against the influenza B strain not contained in IIV3-HD. Better protection against the influenza B strain not contained in IIV3-SD. ExpectedTable 5 Footnote c better protection against the influenza B strain not contained in IIV3-SD. ExpectedTable 5 Footnote c better protection against the influenza B strain not contained in IIV3-SD.PotentiallyTable 5 Footnote d better protection compared with IIV4 SD. Immunogenicity Non-inferior immune response compared to IIV3-SD. Superiority to IIV3-SD has not been consistently demonstrated. ExpectedTable 5 Footnote b superior immune response to influenza A strains compared to IIV3-SD. Superior immune response to the additional B strain compared to IIV3-HD. Non-inferior immune response to the strains contained in IIV3-SD with superior immune response to the additional B strain. Non-inferior immune response to the strains contained in IIV3-cc. Superior immune response against the influenza B strain not contained in IIV3-SD. Non-inferior response expectedTable 5 Footnote c compared to IIV3-SD. ExpectedTable 5 Footnote e non-inferior immune response compared to IIV4-HD, IIV4-cc, IIV3-HD, IIV3-Adj. Contraindications Same contraindications as IIV3-SD. Safety Higher rate of injection site reactions than IIV3-SD. Higher or comparable systemic reactions compared to IIV3-SD; systemic reactions were mild to moderate and transient. SAEs were comparable to IIV3-SD and were uncommon. Higher rate of some systemic reactions than IIV4-SD and the same is expectedTable 5 Footnote b compared to IIV3-SD; most systemic reactions were mild and transient. SAEs were rare and similar in frequency to IIV4-SD and the same is expected compared to IIV3-SDTable 5 Footnote b. Pre-licensure clinical trials and post-marketing surveillance showed a similar safety profile to IIV3-SD. Pre-licensure clinical trials showed a similar safety profile to IIV3-cc. Similar safety profile to IIV3-SD is expectedTable 5 Footnote c. Pre-licensure clinical trials showed a similar safety profile to IIV4-SD, IIV3-HD and IIV-Adj. Similar safety profile to IIV3-SD is expected. Abbreviations: IIV3-Adj: adjuvanted egg-based trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV3-SD: standard-dose trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-cc: standard-dose cell culture-based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-HD: high-dose quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-SD: standard-dose quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; RIV4: quadrivalent recombinant influenza vaccine; SAE: serious adverse event. Table 5 Footnote a NACI has not assessed the comparative cost-effectiveness of available influenza vaccine types for adults 65 years of age and older. Table 5 Return to footnote a referrer Table 5 Footnote b Data directly comparing IIV4-HD to IIV3-SD are not available; however, IIV4-HD has been shown to be non-inferior to IIV3-HD and has a comparable rate of systemic and local reactions. Therefore, information presented here is expected to apply to IIV4-HD as well. Table 5 Return to footnote b referrer Table 5 Footnote c Data directly comparing IIV4-cc to IIV3-SD are not available; however, IIV3-cc (licensure never sought in Canada) has been shown to be non-inferior to IIV3-SD. Therefore, information presented here is expected to apply to IIV4-cc as well. Table 5 Return to footnote c referrer Table 5 Footnote d Data directly comparing RIV4 to IIV3-SD are not available; however, RIV4 has been shown to provide better protection than IIV4-SD based on one study conducted during a single influenza season (2014-2015). Table 5 Return to footnote d referrer Table 5 Footnote e Data directly comparing RIV4 to IIV3-SD are not available; however, RIV4 has been shown to be non-inferior to IIV4-SD, IIV4-cc, IIV3-HD and IIV3-Adj against all tested influenza strains (A/H1N1, A/H3N2, B/Yamagata lineage, and B/Victoria lineage) and has a comparable rate of adverse events based on 3 influenza seasons (2014-2015, 2017-2018, 2018-2019). Therefore, information presented here is expected to apply to IIV3-SD as well. Table 5 Return to footnote e referrer Adults with chronic health conditions NACI recommends that any age-appropriate IIV or RIV, but not LAIV, should be offered to adults with chronic health conditions identified in List 1, including those with immune compromising conditions. Pregnant individuals NACI recommends that any age-appropriate IIV or RIV, but not LAIV, should be offered to pregnant individuals (noting that no published clinical data pertaining to safety of vaccination with RIV4 during pregnancy is currently available to inform vaccine-associated risks). Due to a lack of safety data at this time, LAIV should not be administered to pregnant individuals due to the theoretical risk to the fetus from administering a live virus vaccine. LAIV can be administered to breastfeeding individuals. Health care workers NACI recommends that any age-appropriate IIV or RIV, but not LAIV, should be offered to HCWs. Comparative studies in healthy adults have found IIV to be similarly or more efficacious or effective compared with LAIVFootnote 187. In addition, as a precautionary measure, LAIV recipients should avoid close association with people with severe immune compromising conditions (e.g., bone marrow transplant recipients requiring isolation) for at least 2 weeks following vaccination, because of the theoretical risk for transmitting a vaccine virus and causing infection. VI. List of Abbreviations AE Adverse event AEFI Adverse event following immunization ART Antiretroviral therapy CAEFISS Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System CI Confidence interval CIG Canadian Immunization Guide DIN Drug Identification Number FFU Fluorescent focus units GBS Guillain-Barré syndrome GMT Geometric mean titre GMTR Geometric mean titre ratio HA Hemagglutinin HAART Highly active antiretroviral therapy HCW Health care worker HIV Human immunodeficiency virus Ig Immunoglobulin IIV Inactivated influenza vaccine IIV3 Trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine IIV3-Adj Adjuvanted trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (egg-based) IIV3-HD High-dose trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (egg-based) IIV3-SD Standard-dose trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (egg-based) IIV4 Quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine IIV4-cc Mammalian cell culture-based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine IIV4-HD High-dose quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (egg-based) IIV4-SD Standard-dose quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (egg-based) ILI Influenza-like illness IM Intramuscular IMPACT Immunization Monitoring Program Active LAIV Live attenuated influenza vaccine (egg based) LAIV3 Trivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine (egg based) LAIV4 Quadrivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine (egg based) MDCK Madin-Darby Canine Kidney MMR Measles, mumps and rubella NA Neuraminidase NACI National Advisory Committee on Immunization ORS Oculorespiratory syndrome PHAC Public Health Agency of Canada RCT Randomized controlled trial RIV Recombinant influenza vaccine RIV4 Recombinant quadrivalent influenza vaccine RNA Ribonucleic acid rVE Relative vaccine efficacy RZV Recombinant zoster vaccine SAE Serious adverse event VE Vaccine effectiveness WHO World Health Organization VII. Acknowledgments This statement was prepared by: A Sinilaite, R Stirling, and R Harrison, on behalf of the NACI Influenza Working Group and was approved by NACI. NACI gratefully acknowledges the contribution of: A Gil, C Tremblay, M Tunis, M Xi, and K Young NACI Influenza Working Group Members: J Papenburg (Chair), P De Wals, D Fell, I Gemmill, R Harrison, D Kumar, J Langley, A McGeer, and D Moore Former members: N Dayneka, K Klein, J McElhaney, and S Smith Liaison representatives: L Grohskopf (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], United States) Ex-officio representatives: C Bancej (Centre for Immunization and Respiratory Infectious Diseases [CIRID], PHAC), J Reiter (First Nations and Inuit Health Branch [FNIHB], Indigenous Services Canada [ISC]), B Warshawsky (Vice President’s Office, Infectious Disease Prevention and Control Branch [IDPCB]), and J Xiong (Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate [BGTD], Health Canada [HC]). NACI Members: S Deeks (Chair), R Harrison (Vice-Chair), J Bettinger, N Brousseau, P De Wals, E Dubé, V Dubey, K Hildebrand, K Klein, J Papenburg, A Pham-Huy, C Rotstein, B Sander, S Smith, and S Wilson. Former member: C Quach (Chair) Liaison representatives: L Bill (Canadian Indigenous Nurses Association), LM Bucci (Canadian Public Health Association), E Castillo (Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada), A Cohn (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United States), L Dupuis (Canadian Nurses Association), P Emberley (Canadian Pharmacists Association), J Emili (College of Family Physicians of Canada), D Fell (Canadian Association for Immunization Research and Evaluation), S Funnel (Indigenous Physicians Association of Canada), J Hu (College of Family Physicians of Canada), Noah Ivers (College of Family Physicians of Canada), M Lavoie (Council of Chief Medical Officers of Health), D Moore (Canadian Paediatric Society), M Naus (Canadian Immunization Committee), A Pham-Huy (Association of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Disease Canada), and A Ung (Canadian Pharmacists Association). Ex-officio representatives: V Beswick-Escanlar (National Defence and the Canadian Armed Forces), E Henry (Centre for Immunization and Respiratory Infectious Diseases [CIRID], PHAC), M Lacroix (Public Health Ethics Consultative Group, PHAC), C Lourenco (Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs Directorate, Health Canada),D MacDonald (CIRID, PHAC), S Ogunnaike-Cooke (CIRID, PHAC), G Poliquin (National Microbiology Laboratory, PHAC), K Robinson (Marketed Health Products Directorate, HC) and T Wong (First Nations and Inuit Health Branch, Indigenous Services Canada). VIII. Appendix A: Characteristics of Influenza Vaccines Available for Use in Canada, 2022–2023Appendix A Footnote a Product name (manufacturer) Vaccine Characteristic Vaccine type Route of administration Authorized ages for use Antigen content for each vaccine strain Adjuvant Formats available Post-puncture shelf life for multi-dose vials Thimerosal Antibiotics (traces) Production medium Quadrivalent FlulavalⓇ Tetra (GSK) IIV4-SD (split virus) IM 6 months and older 15 µg HA /0.5 mL dose None 5 mL multi-dose vial 28 days Yes (multi-dose vial only) None Egg (Avian) FluzoneⓇ Quadrivalent (Sanofi Pasteur) IIV4-SD (split virus) IM 6 months and older 15 µg HA /0.5 mL dose None 5 mL multi-dose vial Single-dose pre-filled syringe without attached needle Up to expiry date indicated on vial label Yes (multi-dose vial only) None Egg (Avian) AfluriaⓇ Tetra (Seqirus) IIV4-SD (split virus) IM 5 years and older 15 µg HA /0.5 mL dose None 5 mL multi-dose vial Single dose pre-filled syringe without attached needle Up to expiry date indicated on vial label Yes (multi-dose vial only) Neomycin and polymyxin B Egg (Avian) InfluvacⓇ Tetra (BGP Pharma ULC, operating as Mylan, d.b.a. Viatris Canada) IIV4-SD (subunit) IM or deep subcutaneous injection 6 months and older 15 µg HA /0.5 mL dose None Single dose pre-filled syringe with or without attached needle Not applicable No Gentamicin or neomycin and polymyxin BAppendix A Footnote b Egg (Avian) FlucelvaxⓇ Quad (Seqirus) IIV4-cc (subunit) IM 6 months and older 15 µg HA /0.5 mL dose None 5 mL multi-dose vial Single dose pre-filled syringe without attached needle 28 days Yes (multi-dose vial only) None Cell culture (Mammalian) FluzoneⓇ High-Dose Quadrivalent (Sanofi Pasteur) IIV4-HD (split virus) IM 65 years and older 60 µg HA /0.7 mL dose None Single dose pre-filled syringe without attached needle Not applicable No None Egg (Avian) Supemtek™(Sanofi Pasteur) RIV4(recombinant protein) IM 18 years and older 45 µg HA/0.5 mL dose None Single dose pre-filled syringe without attached needle Not applicable No None Recombinant (Insect vector-expressed) FluMistⓇ Quadrivalent (AstraZeneca) LAIV4 (live attenuated) Intranasal 2–59 years 106.5-7.5 FFU of live attenuated reassortants /0.2 mL dose (given as 0.1 mL in each nostril) None Single use pre-filled glass sprayer Not applicable No Gentamicin Egg (Avian) Trivalent Fluad PediatricⓇ and FluadⓇ (Seqirus) IIV3-Adj (subunit) IM Pediatric: 6–23 monthsAdult: 65 years and older Pediatric: 7.5 µg HA /0.25 mL doseAdult:15 µg HA /0.5 mL dose MF59 Single dose pre-filled syringe without a needle Not applicable No Kanamycin and neomycin Egg (Avian) Abbreviations: FFU: fluorescent focus units; HA: hemagglutinin; IIV3-Adj: adjuvanted egg-based trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-cc: standard-dose cell culture-based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IIV4-SD: standard-dose egg-based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine; IM: intramuscular; LAIV4: quadrivalent live attenuated influenza vaccine; NA: neuraminidase. Appendix A Footnote a Full details of the composition of each vaccine authorized for use in Canada, including other non-medicinal ingredients, and a brief description of its manufacturing process can be found in the product monograph. Appendix A Return to footnote a referrer Appendix A Footnote b Neomycin and polymyxin B are only used if gentamicin cannot be used. No trace amounts of neomycin or polymyxin B are present if gentamicin was used. Appendix A Return to footnote b referrer IX. References Footnote 1 World Health Organization. Influenza (Seasonal): Fact Sheet N°211. 2014. Accessed: 9 October 2018. Available from: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs211/en/ Return to footnote 1 Footnote 2 Mamas MA, Fraser D, Neyses L. Cardiovascular Manifestations Associated with Influenza Virus Infection. Int J Cardiol. 2008 Nov ;130(3):304-9. Return to footnote 2 Footnote 3 Moriarty LF, Omer SB. Infants and the seasonal influenza vaccine. A global perspective on safety, effectiveness, and alternate forms of protection. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2014;10(9):2721-8. Return to footnote 3 Footnote 4 Schwarz TF, Aggarwal N, Moeckesch B, Et Al. Immunogenicity and Safety of an Adjuvanted Herpes Zoster Subunit Vaccine Coadministered With Seasonal Influenza Vaccine in Adults Aged 50 Years or Older. J Infect Dis. 2017;216(11):1352-61. Return to footnote 4 Footnote 5 Koutsakos M, Wheatley AK, Laurie K, Et Al. Influenza Lineage Extinction during the COVID-19 Pandemic? Nature Reviews Microbiology. 2021 Return to footnote 5 Footnote 6 Spencer JA, Shutt DP, Moser SK, Et Al. Epidemiological Parameter Review and Comparative Dynamics of Influenza, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Rhinovirus, Human Coronavirus, and Adenovirus. Medrxiv. 2020:2020.02.04.20020404. Return to footnote 6 Footnote 7 Statistics Canada. the 10 Leading Causes of Death, 2011. 2014. Accessed: 9 October 2018. Available from: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-625-x/2014001/article/11896-eng.htm Return to footnote 7 Footnote 8 Schanzer DL, Mcgeer A, Morris K. Statistical Estimates of Respiratory Admissions Attributable to Seasonal and Pandemic Influenza for Canada. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2013;7(5):799-808. Return to footnote 8 Footnote 9 Schanzer DL, Sevenhuysen C, Winchester B, Et Al. Estimating Influenza Deaths in Canada, 1992-2009. Plos One. 2013;8(11):E80481. Return to footnote 9 Footnote 10 Langley JM, Vanderkooi OG, Garfield HA, Et Al. Immunogenicity and Safety of 2 Dose Levels of a Thimersol-Free Trivalent Seasonal Influenza Vaccine in Children Aged 6-35 Months. J Ped Infect Dis. 2012;1(1):55-8. Return to footnote 10 Footnote 11 Skowronski DM, Hottes TS, Chong M, Et Al. Randomized Controlled Trial of Dose Response to Influenza Vaccine in Children Aged 6 to 23 Months. Pediatrics. 2011;128(2):E276-89. Return to footnote 11 Footnote 12 Mcelhaney JE, Hooton JW, Hooton N, Et Al. Comparison of Single versus Booster Dose of Influenza Vaccination on Humoral and Cellular Immune Responses in Older Adults. Vaccine. 2005;23(25):3294-300. Return to footnote 12 Footnote 13 Breiman RF, Brooks WA, Goswami D, Et Al. A Multinational, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial to Assess the Immunogenicity, Safety, and Tolerability of Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine Coadministered with Oral Poliovirus Vaccine in Healthy Young Children. Vaccine. 2009;27(40):5472-9. Return to footnote 13 Footnote 14 Lum LC, Borja-Tabora C, Breiman RF, Et Al. Influenza Vaccine Concurrently Administered with a Combination Measles, Mumps, and Rubella Vaccine to Young Children. Vaccine. 2010;28(6):1566-74. Return to footnote 14 Footnote 15 Nolan T, Bernstein DI, Block SL, Et Al. Safety and Immunogenicity of Concurrent Administration of Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine with Measles-Mumps-Rubella and Varicella Vaccines to Infants 12 to 15 Months of Age. Pediatrics. 2008;121(3):508-16. Return to footnote 15 Footnote 16 National Advisory Committee on Immunization. Updated Recommendations on the Use of Herpes Zoster Vaccines. Ottawa: Public Health Agency of Canada. 2018; Available At: Https://Www.Canada.Ca/En/Services/Health/Publications/Healthy-Living/Updated-Recommendations-Use-Herpes-Zoster-Vaccines.html. Return to footnote 16 Footnote 17 National Advisory Committee Oi. Statement on Thimerosal. Can Commun Dis Rep. 2003;29(-1):1-12. Return to footnote 17 Footnote 18 National Advisory Committee on Immunization. Thimerosal: Updated Statement. an Advisory Committee Statement (ACS). Can Commun Dis Rep. 2007;33(ACS-6):1-13. Return to footnote 18 Footnote 19 Gerber JS, Offit PA. Vaccines and Autism: A Tale of Shifting Hypotheses. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;48(4):456-61. Return to footnote 19 Footnote 20 Centers for Disease Control, and Prevention. Preliminary Results: Surveillance for Guillain-Barré Syndrome after Receipt of Influenza A (H1N1) 2009 Monovalent Vaccine - United States, 2009-2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010;59(21):657-61. Return to footnote 20 Footnote 21 Kwong JC, Vasa PP, Campitelli MA, Et Al. Risk of Guillain-Barré Syndrome after Seasonal Influenza Vaccination and Influenza Health-Care Encounters: A Self-Controlled Study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2013;13(9):769-76. Return to footnote 21 Footnote 22 National Advisory Committee on Immunization. Supplementary Statement on Influenza Vaccination: Continued Use of Fluviral® Influenza Vaccine in the 2000-2001 Season. Can Commun Dis Rep. 2001;27(ACS-1):1-3. Return to footnote 22 Footnote 23 Ahmadipour N, Watkins K, Fréchette M, Coulby C, Anyoti H, Johnson K. Vaccine Safety Surveillance in Canada: Reports to CAEFISS, 2013–2016. Can Commun Dis Rep. 2018;44((9)):206-14. https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v44i09a04 Return to footnote 23 Footnote 24 Black S, Nicolay U, Del Giudice G, Et Al. Influence of Statins on Influenza Vaccine Response in Elderly Individuals. J Infect Dis. 2016;213(8):1224-8. Return to footnote 24 Footnote 25 Omer SB, Phadke VK, Bednarczyk RA, Et Al. Impact of Statins on Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness against Medically Attended Acute Respiratory Illness. J Infect Dis. 2016;213(8):1216-23. Return to footnote 25 Footnote 26 Public Health Agency of Canada. Reporting Adverse Events Following Immunization (AEFI) in Canada: User Guide to Completion and Submission of the AEFI Reports. Ottawa, PHAC. 2004; Available at: Https://Www.Canada.Ca/En/Public-Health/Services/Immunization/Reporting-Adverse-Events-Following-Immunization/User-Guide-Completion-Submission-Aefi-Reports.Html. Accessed 05/23, 2019. Return to footnote 26 Footnote 27 Louie JK, Acosta M, Jamieson DJ, Et Al. Severe 2009 H1N1 Influenza in Pregnant and Postpartum Women in California. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(1):27-35. Return to footnote 27 Footnote 28 Siston AM, Rasmussen SA, Honein MA, Et Al. Pandemic 2009 Influenza A(H1N1) Virus Illness among Pregnant Women in the United States. JAMA. 2010;303(15):1517-25. Return to footnote 28 Footnote 29 Mak TK, Mangtani P, Leese J, Et Al. Influenza Vaccination in Pregnancy: Current Evidence and Selected National Policies. Lancet Infect Dis. 2008;8(1):44-52. Return to footnote 29 Footnote 30 Mcneil S, Halperin B, Macdonald N. Influenza in Pregnancy: the Case for Prevention. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;634:161-83. Return to footnote 30 Footnote 31 Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Bresee JS. Pandemic Influenza and Pregnant Women. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008;14(1):95-100. Return to footnote 31 Footnote 32 Centers for Disease Control, and Prevention. Maternal and Infant Outcomes among Severely Ill Pregnant and Postpartum Women with 2009 Pandemic Influenza A (H1N1)--United States, April 2009-August 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60(35):1193-6. Return to footnote 32 Footnote 33 Pierce M, Kurinczuk J, Spark P, Et Al. Perinatal Outcomes After Maternal 2009/H1N1 Infection: National Cohort Study. BMJ. 2011;342:D3214-. Return to footnote 33 Footnote 34 Goldenberg R, Culhane J, Iams J, Et Al. Epidemiology and Causes of Preterm Birth. Lancet. 2008;371(9606):75-84. Return to footnote 34 Footnote 35 Mcneil SA, Dodds LA, Fell DB, Et Al. Effect of Respiratory Hospitalization during Pregnancy on Infant Outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2011;204(6):S54-7. Return to footnote 35 Footnote 36 Zaman K, Roy E, Arifeen SE, Et Al. Effectiveness of Maternal Influenza Immunization in Mothers and Infants. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(15):1555-64. Return to footnote 36 Footnote 37 Poehling K, Szilagyi P, Staat M, Et Al. Impact of Maternal Immunization on Influenza Hospitalizations in Infants. Obstet Gynecol. 2011;204(6):S141-8. Return to footnote 37 Footnote 38 Eick AA, Uyeki TM, Klimov A, Et Al. Maternal Influenza Vaccination and Effect on Influenza Virus Infection in Young Infants. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2011;165(2):104-11. Return to footnote 38 Footnote 39 France EK, Mcclure D, Hambidge S, Et Al. Impact of Maternal Influenza Vaccination During Pregnancy on the Incidence of Acute Respiratory Illness Visits Among Infants. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160(12):1277-83. Return to footnote 39 Footnote 40 Steinhoff M, Omer S, Roy E, Et Al. Neonatal Outcomes after Influenza Immunization during Pregnancy: A Randomized Controlled Trial. CMAJ. 2012;184(6):645-53. Return to footnote 40 Footnote 41 Fell DB, Sprague AE, Liu N, Et Al. H1N1 Influenza Vaccination During Pregnancy and Fetal and Neonatal Outcomes. Am J Public Health. 2012;102(6):E33-40. Return to footnote 41 Footnote 42 Omer S, Goodman D, Steinhoff M, Et Al. Maternal Influenza Immunization and Reduced Likelihood of Prematurity and Small For Gestational Age Births: A Retrospective Cohort Study. Plos Med. 2011;8(5):E1000441. Return to footnote 42 Footnote 43 Dodds L, Macdonald N, Scott J, Et Al. the Association between Influenza Vaccine in Pregnancy and Adverse Neonatal Outcomes. J Obstetr Gynecol Can. 2012;34(8):714-20. Return to footnote 43 Footnote 44 Macdonald NE, Riley LE, Steinhoff MC. Influenza Immunization in Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2009;114(2):365-8. Return to footnote 44 Footnote 45 Tamma PD, Ault KA, Del Rio C, Et Al. Safety of Influenza Vaccination during Pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2009;201(6):547-52. Return to footnote 45 Footnote 46 Moro PL, Broder K, Zheteyeva Y, Et Al. Adverse Events in Pregnant Women Following Administration of Trivalent Inactivated Influenza Vaccine and Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine in the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System, 1990-2009. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2011;204(2):146e1-7. Return to footnote 46 Footnote 47 European MA. Fifteenth Pandemic Pharmacovigilance Update. Http://Www.Ema.Europa.Eu/Pdfs/Influenza/21323810en.Pdf Ed. London: European Medicines Agency; 2010. Accessed: 9 October 2018. Available from: https://www.ema.europa.eu/documentseport/fifteenth-pandemic-pharmacovigilance-update_en.pdf Return to footnote 47 Footnote 48 Simonsen L, Fukuda K, Schonberger LB, Et Al. the Impact of Influenza Epidemics on Hospitalizations. J Infect Dis. 2000;181(3):831-7. Return to footnote 48 Footnote 49 Schanzer DL, Tam TW, Langley JM, Et Al. Influenza-Attributable Deaths, Canada 1990-1999. Epidemiol Infect. 2007;135(7):1109-16. Return to footnote 49 Footnote 50 Centers for Disease Control, and Prevention. Deaths Related to 2009 Pandemic Influenza A (H1N1) Among American Indian/Alaska Natives - 12 States, 2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2009;58(48):1341-4. Return to footnote 50 Footnote 51 National Center for ES. Individuals, Families and Children in Poverty. Status and Trends in the Education of American Indians and Alaska Natives. Http://Nces.Ed.Gov/Pubs2008/Nativetrends/Ind_1_6.Asp Ed. Washington, DC: US Department of Education; 2008. Accessed: 9 October 2018. Available from: http:/ces.ed.gov/pubs2008ativetrends/ind_1_6.asp Return to footnote 51 Footnote 52 Indigenous and Northern AC. Highlights from the Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples - People to People, Nation to Nation. 2010; 2016. Return to footnote 52 Footnote 53 Clark M, Riben P, Nowgesic E. the Association of Housing Density, Isolation and Tuberculosis in Canadian First Nations Communities. Int J Epidemiol. 2002;31(5):940-5. Return to footnote 53 Footnote 54 Saxen H, Virtanen M. Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Double Blind Study on the Efficacy of Influenza Immunization on Absenteeism of Health Care Workers. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1999;18(9):779-83. Return to footnote 54 Footnote 55 Wilde JA, Mcmillan JA, Serwint J, Et Al. Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccine in Health Care Professionals: A Randomized Trial. JAMA. 1999;281(10):908-13. Return to footnote 55 Footnote 56 Carman WF, Elder AG, Wallace LA, Et Al. Effects of Influenza Vaccination of Health-Care Workers on Mortality of Elderly People in Long-Term Care: A Randomised Controlled Trial. Lancet. 2000;355(9198):93-7. Return to footnote 56 Footnote 57 Hayward AC, Harling R, Wetten S, Et Al. Effectiveness of an Influenza Vaccine Programme For Care Home Staff to Prevent Death, Morbidity, and Health Service Use Among Residents: Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial. BMJ. 2006;333(7581):1241. Return to footnote 57 Footnote 58 Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, Et Al. Influenza Vaccination of Health Care Workers in Long-Term-Care Hospitals Reduces the Mortality of Elderly Patients. J Infect Dis. 1997;175(1):1-6. Return to footnote 58 Footnote 59 Lemaitre M, Meret T, Rothan-Tondeur M, Et Al. Effect of Influenza Vaccination of Nursing Home Staff on Mortality of Residents: A Cluster-Randomized Trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009;57(9):1580-6. Return to footnote 59 Footnote 60 Shugarman LR, Hales C, Setodji CM, Et Al. the Influence of Staff and Resident Immunization Rates on Influenza-Like Illness Outbreaks in Nursing Homes. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2006;7(9):562-7. Return to footnote 60 Footnote 61 Kuster SP, Shah PS, Coleman BL, Et Al. Incidence of Influenza in Healthy Adults and Healthcare Workers: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Plos One. 2011;6(10):E26239. Return to footnote 61 Footnote 62 Buchan SA, Kwong JC. Influenza Immunization among Canadian Health Care Personnel: A Cross-Sectional Study. CMAJ Open. 2016;4(3):E479-88. Return to footnote 62 Footnote 63 Hussain H, Mcgeer A, Mcneil S, Et Al. Factors Associated with Influenza Vaccination Among Healthcare Workers in Acute Care Hospitals in Canada. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2018;12(3):319-25. Return to footnote 63 Footnote 64 Public Health Agency of Canada. Vaccination Coverage Goals and Vaccine Preventable Disease Reduction Targets by 2025. 2019; Available At: Https://Www.Canada.Ca/En/Public-Health/Services/Immunization-Vaccine-Priorities/National-Immunization-Strategy/Vaccination-Coverage-Goals-Vaccine-Preventable-Diseases-Reduction-Targets-2025.Html#Det22. Accessed 05/13, 2019. Return to footnote 64 Footnote 65 Bish A, Yardley L, Nicoll A, Et Al. Factors Associated with Uptake of Vaccination against Pandemic Influenza: A Systematic Review. Vaccine. 2011;29(38):6472-84. Return to footnote 65 Footnote 66 Dini G, Toletone A, Sticchi L, Et Al. Influenza Vaccination in Healthcare Workers: A Comprehensive Critical Appraisal of the Literature. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2018;14(3):772-89. Return to footnote 66 Footnote 67 Hakim H, Gaur AH, Mccullers JA. Motivating Factors for High Rates of Influenza Vaccination among Healthcare Workers. Vaccine. 2011;29(35):5963-9. Return to footnote 67 Footnote 68 68. Lytras T, Kopsachilis F, Mouratidou E, Et Al. Interventions to Increase Seasonal Influenza Vaccine Coverage in Healthcare Workers: A Systematic Review and Meta-Regression Analysis. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016;12(3):671-81. Return to footnote 68 Footnote 69 69. Schmid P, Rauber D, Betsch C, Et Al. Barriers of Influenza Vaccination Intention and Behavior - A Systematic Review of Influenza Vaccine Hesitancy, 2005 - 2016. Plos One. 2017;12(1):E0170550. Return to footnote 69 Footnote 70 70. Vasilevska M, Ku J, Fisman DN. Factors Associated with Healthcare Worker Acceptance of Vaccination: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2014;35(6):699-708. Return to footnote 70 Footnote 71 71. Accreditation Canada. Infection Prevention and Control Standards. 9th Ed. Ottawa: Accreditation Canada; 2013. Return to footnote 71 Footnote 72 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Green MS, Et Al. Influenza Vaccine Efficacy in Young, Healthy Adults. Clin Infect Dis. 1998;26(4):913-7. Return to footnote 72 Footnote 73 Leighton L, Williams M, Aubery D, Et Al. Sickness Absence Following a Campaign of Vaccination against Influenza in the Workplace. Occup Med (Lond). 1996;46(2):146-50. Return to footnote 73 Footnote 74 Nichol KL, Lind A, Margolis KL, Et Al. the Effectiveness of Vaccination against Influenza in Healthy, Working Adults. N Engl J Med. 1995;333(14):889-93. Return to footnote 74 Footnote 75 Department of Health (UK). Flu Vaccination for Poultry Workers. London: Department of Health; 2007. Return to footnote 75 Footnote 76 Gray GC, Trampel DW, Roth JA. Pandemic Influenza Planning: Shouldn't Swine and Poultry Workers Be Included? Vaccine. 2007;25(22):4376-81. Return to footnote 76 Footnote 77 Bridges CB, Lim W, Hu-Primmer J, Et Al. Risk of Influenza A (H5N1) Infection among Poultry Workers, Hong Kong, 1997-1998. J Infect Dis. 2002;185(8):1005-10. Return to footnote 77 Footnote 78 Puzelli S, Di Trani L, Fabiani C, Et Al. Serological Analysis of Serum Samples from Humans Exposed to Avian H7 Influenza Viruses in Italy between 1999 and 2003. J Infect Dis. 2005;192(8):1318-22. Return to footnote 78 Footnote 79 Tweed SA, Skowronski DM, David ST, Et Al. Human Illness from Avian Influenza H7N3, British Columbia. Emerg Infect Dis. 2004;10(12):2196-9. Return to footnote 79 Footnote 80 Skowronski DM, Li Y, Tweed SA, Et Al. Protective Measures and Human Antibody Response during an Avian Influenza H7N3 Outbreak in Poultry in British Columbia, Canada. CMAJ. 2007;176(1):47-53. Return to footnote 80 Footnote 81 Heckler R, Baillot A, Engelmann H, Et Al. Cross-Protection against Homologous Drift Variants of Influenza A and B after Vaccination with Split Vaccine. Intervirology. 2007;50(1):58-62. Return to footnote 81 Footnote 82 Walter EB, Neuzil KM, Zhu Y, Et Al. Influenza Vaccine Immunogenicity in 6- to 23-Month-Old Children: Are Identical Antigens Necessary for Priming? Pediatrics. 2006;118(3):E570-8. Return to footnote 82 Footnote 83 Englund JA, Walter EB, Fairchok MP, Et Al. A Comparison of 2 Influenza Vaccine Schedules in 6- to 23-Month-Old Children. Pediatrics. 2005;115(4):1039-47. Return to footnote 83 Footnote 84 Englund JA, Walter EB, Gbadebo A, Et Al. Immunization with Trivalent Inactivated Influenza Vaccine in Partially Immunized Toddlers. Pediatrics. 2006;118(3):E579-85. Return to footnote 84 Footnote 85 Levandowski RA, Gross PA, Weksler M, Et Al. Cross-Reactive Antibodies Induced by a Monovalent Influenza B Virus Vaccine. J Clin Microbiol. 1991;29(7):1530-2. Return to footnote 85 Footnote 86 Levandowski RA, Regnery HL, Staton E, Et Al. Antibody Responses to Influenza B Viruses in Immunologically Unprimed Children. Pediatrics. 1991;88(5):1031-6. Return to footnote 86 Footnote 87 Mclean HQ, Thompson MG, Sundaram ME, and Et Al. Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness in the United States during 2012-2013: Variable Protection by Age and Virus Type. J Infect Dis. 2015;211(10):1529-40. Return to footnote 87 Footnote 88 88. Mclean HQ, Thompson MG, Sundaram ME, Et Al. Impact of Repeated Vaccination on Vaccine Effectiveness against Influenza A(H3N2) and B During 8 Seasons. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59(10):1375-85. Return to footnote 88 Footnote 89 Pavia-Ruz N, Angel Rodriguez Weber M, Lau YL, Et Al. A Randomized Controlled Study to Evaluate the Immunogenicity of a Trivalent Inactivated Seasonal Influenza Vaccine at Two Dosages in Children 6 to 35 Months of Age. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2013;9(9):1978-88. Return to footnote 89 Footnote 90 Skowronski DM, Tweed SA, De Serres G. Rapid Decline of Influenza Vaccine-Induced Antibody in the Elderly: Is it Real, or is it Relevant? J Infect Dis. 2008;197(4):490-502. Return to footnote 90 Footnote 91 Anema A, Mills E, Montaner J, Et Al. Efficacy of Influenza Vaccination in HIV-Positive Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. HIV Med. 2008;9(1):57-61. Return to footnote 91 Footnote 92 Cooper C, Hutton B, Fergusson D, Et Al. A Review of Influenza Vaccine Immunogenicity and Efficacy in HIV-Infected Adults. Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol. 2008;19(6):419-23. Return to footnote 92 Footnote 93 Scharpe J, Evenepoel P, Maes B, Et Al. Influenza Vaccination is Efficacious and Safe in Renal Transplant Recipients. Am J Transplant. 2008;8(2):332-7. Return to footnote 93 Footnote 94 Manuel O, Humar A, Chen MH, Et Al. Immunogenicity and Safety of an Intradermal Boosting Strategy for Vaccination against Influenza in Lung Transplant Recipients. Am J Transplant. 2007;7(11):2567-72. Return to footnote 94 Footnote 95 Buxton JA, Skowronski DM, Ng H, Et Al. Influenza Revaccination of Elderly Travelers: Antibody Response to Single Influenza Vaccination and Revaccination at 12 Weeks. J Infect Dis. 2001;184(2):188-91. Return to footnote 95 Footnote 96 Ljungman P, Nahi H, Linde A. Vaccination of Patients with Haematological Malignancies with One or Two Doses of Influenza Vaccine: A Randomised Study. Br J Haematol. 2005;130(1):96-8. Return to footnote 96 Footnote 97 Gross PA, Weksler ME, Quinnan GVJ, Et Al. Immunization of Elderly People with Two Doses of Influenza Vaccine. J Clin Microbiol. 1987;25(9):1763-5. Return to footnote 97 Footnote 98 Cowling BJ, Fang VJ, Nishiura H, Et Al. Increased Risk of Noninfluenza Respiratory Virus Infections Associated with Receipt of Inactivated Influenza Vaccine. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;54(12):1778-83. Return to footnote 98 Footnote 99 Cowling BJ, Ng S, Ma ES, Et Al. Protective Efficacy against Pandemic Influenza of Seasonal Influenza Vaccination in Children in Hong Kong: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55(5):695-702. Return to footnote 99 Footnote 100 100. Fujieda M, Maeda A, Kondo K, Et Al. Inactivated Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness in Children Under 6 Years of Age during the 2002-2003 Season. Vaccine. 2006;24(7):957-63. Return to footnote 100 Footnote 101 Katayose M, Hosoya M, Haneda T, Et Al. the Effectiveness of Trivalent Inactivated Influenza Vaccine in Children over Six Consecutive Influenza Seasons. Vaccine. 2011;29(9):1844-9. Return to footnote 101 Footnote 102 Kawai N, Ikematsu H, Iwaki N, Et Al. A Prospective, Internet-Based Study of the Effectiveness and Safety of Influenza Vaccination in the 2001-2002 Influenza Season. Vaccine. 2003;21(31):4507-13. Return to footnote 102 Footnote 103 Kawai S, Nanri S, Ban E, Et Al. Influenza Vaccination of Schoolchildren and Influenza Outbreaks in a School. Clin Infect Dis. 2011;53(2):130-6. Return to footnote 103 Footnote 104 Kwong JC, Ge H, Rosella LC, Et Al. School-Based Influenza Vaccine Delivery, Vaccination Rates, and Healthcare Use in the Context of a Universal Influenza Immunization Program: an Ecological Study. Vaccine. 2010;28(15):2722-9. Return to footnote 104 Footnote 105 Kwong JC, Maaten S, Upshur RE, Et Al. the Effect of Universal Influenza Immunization on Antibiotic Prescriptions: an Ecological Study. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49(5):750-6. Return to footnote 105 Footnote 106 Loeb M, Russell ML, Moss L, Et Al. Effect of Influenza Vaccination of Children on Infection Rates in Hutterite Communities: A Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2010;303(10):943-50. Return to footnote 106 Footnote 107 Maeda T, Shintani Y, Miyamoto H, Et Al. Prophylactic Effect of Inactivated Influenza Vaccine on Young Children. Pediatr Int. 2002;44(1):43-6. Return to footnote 107 Footnote 108 Neuzil KM, Dupont WD, Wright PF, Et Al. Efficacy of Inactivated and Cold-Adapted Vaccines against Influenza an Infection, 1985 to 1990: the Pediatric Experience. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2001;20(8):733-40. Return to footnote 108 Footnote 109 Nicholls S, Carroll K, Crofts J, Et Al. Outbreak of Influenza A (H3N2) in a Highly-Vaccinated Religious Community: A Retrospective Cohort Study. Commun Dis Public Health. 2004;7(4):272-7. Return to footnote 109 Footnote 110 Ochiai H, Fujieda M, Ohfuji S, Et Al. Inactivated Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness Against Influenza-Like Illness Among Young Children in Japan--with Special Reference to Minimizing Outcome Misclassification. Vaccine. 2009;27(50):7031-5. Return to footnote 110 Footnote 111 Pebody RG, Andrews N, Fleming DM, Et Al. Age-Specific Vaccine Effectiveness of Seasonal 2010/2011 and Pandemic Influenza A(H1N1) 2009 Vaccines in Preventing Influenza in the United Kingdom. Epidemiol Infect. 2012:1-11. Return to footnote 111 Footnote 112 Reichert TA, Sugaya N, Fedson DS, Et Al. the Japanese Experience with Vaccinating Schoolchildren against Influenza. N Engl J Med. 2001;344(12):889-96. Return to footnote 112 Footnote 113 Treanor JJ, Talbot HK, Ohmit SE, Et Al. Effectiveness of Seasonal Influenza Vaccines in the United States during a Season with Circulation of all Three Vaccine Strains. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55(7):951-9. Return to footnote 113 Footnote 114 Yamaguchi S, Ohfuji S, Hirota Y. Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness in Primary School Children in Japan: A Prospective Cohort Study Using Rapid Diagnostic Test Results. J Infect Chemother. 2010;16(6):407-13. Return to footnote 114 Footnote 115 Belongia EA, Kieke BA, Donahue JG, Et Al. Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness in Wisconsin during the 2007-08 Season: Comparison of Interim and Final Results. Vaccine. 2011;29(38):6558-63. Return to footnote 115 Footnote 116 Charu V, Viboud C, Simonsen L, Et Al. Influenza-Related Mortality Trends in Japanese and American Seniors: Evidence for the Indirect Mortality Benefits of Vaccinating Schoolchildren. Plos One. 2011;6(11):E26282-. Return to footnote 116 Footnote 117 Jefferson T, Di Pietrantonj C, Al-Ansary L, Et Al. Vaccines for Preventing Influenza in the Elderly. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010(2):CD004876. Return to footnote 117 Footnote 118 Govaert TM, Thijs CT, Masurel N, Et Al. the Efficacy of Influenza Vaccination in Elderly Individuals. A Randomized Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial. JAMA. 1994;272(21):1661-5. Return to footnote 118 Footnote 119 Poole PJ, Chacko E, Wood-Baker R, Et Al. Influenza Vaccine for Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006(1):CD002733. Return to footnote 119 Footnote 120 Hak E, Buskens E, Van Essen GA, Et Al. Clinical Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccination in Persons Younger Than 65 Years with High-Risk Medical Conditions: the PRISMA Study. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165(3):274-80. Return to footnote 120 Footnote 121 Nichol KL, Nordin J, Mullooly J, Et Al. Influenza Vaccination and Reduction in Hospitalizations for Cardiac Disease and Stroke among the Elderly. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(14):1322-32. Return to footnote 121 Footnote 122 Looijmans-Van Den Akker I, Verheij TJ, Buskens E, Et Al. Clinical Effectiveness of First and Repeat Influenza Vaccination in Adult and Elderly Diabetic Patients. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(8):1771-6. Return to footnote 122 Footnote 123 Jackson LA, Jackson ML, Nelson JC, Et Al. Evidence of Bias in Estimates of Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness in Seniors. Int J Epidemiol. 2006;35(2):337-44. Return to footnote 123 Footnote 124 Jackson LA, Nelson JC, Benson P, Et Al. Functional Status is a Confounder of the Association of Influenza Vaccine and Risk of All Cause Mortality in Seniors. Int J Epidemiol. 2006;35(2):345-52. Return to footnote 124 Footnote 125 Simonsen L. Commentary: Observational Studies and the Art of Accurately Measuring Influenza Vaccine Benefits. Int J Epidemiol. 2007;36(3):631-2. Return to footnote 125 Footnote 126 Simonsen L, Viboud C, Taylor RJ. Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccination. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(26):2729-30. Return to footnote 126 Footnote 127 Orenstein EW, De Serres G, Haber MJ, Et Al. Methodologic Issues Regarding the Use of Three Observational Study Designs to Assess Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness. Int J Epidemiol. 2007;36(3):623-31. Return to footnote 127 Footnote 128 Thomas PG, Keating R, Hulse-Post D, Et Al. Cell-Mediated Protection in Influenza Infection. Emerg Infect Dis. 2006;12(1):48-54. Return to footnote 128 Footnote 129 Trombetta CM, Gianchecchi E, Montomoli E. Influenza Vaccines: Evaluation of the Safety Profile. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2018;14((3)):657-70. Return to footnote 129 Footnote 130 Edwards KM, Dupont WD, Westrich MK, Et Al. A Randomized Controlled Trial of Cold-Adapted and Inactivated Vaccines for the Prevention of Influenza a Disease. J Infect Dis. 1994;169(1):68-76. Return to footnote 130 Footnote 131 Gonzalez M, Pirez MC, Ward E, Et Al. Safety and Immunogenicity of a Paediatric Presentation of an Influenza Vaccine. Arch Dis Child. 2000;83(6):488-91. Return to footnote 131 Footnote 132 Piedra PA, Glezen WP, Mbawuike I, Et Al. Studies on Reactogenicity and Immunogenicity of Attenuated Bivalent Cold Recombinant Influenza Type A (CRA) and Inactivated Trivalent Influenza Virus (TI) Vaccines in Infants and Young Children. Vaccine. 1993;11(7):718-24. Return to footnote 132 Footnote 133 Jain VK, Rivera L, Zaman K, Et Al. Vaccine for Prevention of Mild and Moderate-to-Severe Influenza in Children. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(26):2481-91. Return to footnote 133 Footnote 134 Belshe RB. the Need for Quadrivalent Vaccine against Seasonal Influenza. Vaccine. 2010;28:D45-53. Return to footnote 134 Footnote 135 Haber P, Moro PL, Lewis P, Et Al. Post-Licensure Surveillance of Quadrivalent Inactivated Influenza (IIV4) Vaccine in the United States, Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), July 1, 2013− May 31, 2015. Vaccine. 2016;34(22):2507-12. Return to footnote 135 Footnote 136 Izurieta HS, Chillarige Y, Kelman J, Et Al. Relative Effectiveness of Cell-Cultured and Egg-Based Influenza Vaccines among Elderly Persons in the United States, 2017-18. J Infect Dis. 2019;220((8)):1255-1264. Return to footnote 136 Footnote 137 Klein NP, Fireman B, Goddard K, Et Al. LB15. Vaccine Effectiveness of Flucelvax Relative to Inactivated Influenza Vaccine during the 2017–18 Influenza Season in Northern California. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2018;5((Suppl 1)):S764.T. Return to footnote 137 Footnote 138 US Armed Forces, Armed Forces Health Surveillance Center. Influenza-Like Illness (ILI). 2015; Available At: Https://Www.Health.Mil/Reference-Center/Publications/2015/10/01/Influenza-Like-Illness. Accessed 07/15, 2019. Return to footnote 138 Footnote 139 US Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Clinical Data Needed to Support the Licensure of Seasonal Inactivated Influenza Vaccines. 2007; Available At: Https://Www.Fda.Gov/Downloads/Biologicsbloodvaccines/Guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/Guidances/Vaccines/Ucm091990.Pdf. Accessed 06/05, 2021. Return to footnote 139 Footnote 140 Skowronski DM, Janjua NZ, De Serres G, Et Al. Low 2012-13 Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness Associated with Mutation in the Egg-Adapted H3N2 Vaccine Strain Not Antigenic Drift in Circulating Viruses. Plos ONE. 2014;9(3):E92153. Return to footnote 140 Footnote 141 Zost SJ, Parkhouse K, Gumina ME, Et Al. Contemporary H3N2 Influenza Viruses Have a Glycosylation Site That Alters Binding of Antibodies Elicited By Egg-Adapted Vaccine Strains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2017;114((47)):12578-83. Return to footnote 141 Footnote 142 Wu NC, Zost SJ, Thompson AJ, Et Al. A Structural Explanation for the Low Effectiveness of the Seasonal Influenza H3N2 Vaccine. Plos Pathogens. 2017;13((10)):E1006682. Return to footnote 142 Footnote 143 the Francis Crick Institute. Worldwide Influenza Centre: Annual and Interim Reports – February 2018 Interim Report. 2018; Available At: Https://Www.Crick.Ac.Uk/Research/Worldwide-Influenza-Centre/Annual-and-Interim-Reports/. Accessed 07/15, 2019. Return to footnote 143 Footnote 144 European Union European Medicines Agency. Assessment Report for Paediatric Studies Submitted According to Article 46 of the Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006. 2015; Available At: Https://Www.Ema.Europa.Eu/En/Documents/Variation-Report/Optaflu-H-C-758-P46-0052-Epar-Assessment-Report_En.Pdf. Accessed 07/15, 2019. Return to footnote 144 Footnote 145 European Union European Medicines Agency. Optaflu European Public Assessment Report: Scientific Discussion. 2007; Available At: Https://Www.Ema.Europa.Eu/En/Documents/Scientific-Discussion/Optaflu-Epar-Scientific-Discussion_En.Pdf. Accessed 07/15, 2019. Return to footnote 145 Footnote 146 US Food and Drug Administration. Flucelvax Quadrivalent. 2019; Available At: Https://Www.Fda.Gov/Vaccines-Blood-Biologics/Vaccines/Flucelvax-Quadrivalent. Accessed 07/15, 2019. Return to footnote 146 Footnote 147 US Food and Drug Administration. FLUCELVAX - Seqirus, Inc. 1.14.1.3 US Package Insert. 2019; Available At: Https://Www.Fda.Gov/Media/85322/Download. Accessed 07/15, 2019. Return to footnote 147 Footnote 148 Bart S, Cannon K, Herrington D, Et Al. Immunogenicity and Safety of a Cell Culture-Based Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccine in Adults: A Phase III, Double-Blind, Multicenter, Randomized, Non-Inferiority Study. . Hum Vaccines Immunother. 2016;12((9)):2278-88. Return to footnote 148 Footnote 149 Hartvickson R, Cruz M, Ervin J, Et Al. Non-Inferiority of Mammalian Cell-Derived Quadrivalent Subunit Influenza Virus Vaccines Compared to Trivalent Subunit Influenza Virus Vaccines in Healthy Children: A Phase III Randomized, Multicenter, Double-Blind Clinical Trial. Int J Infect Dis. 2015;41:65-72. Return to footnote 149 Footnote 150 Moro PL, Winiecki S, Lewis P, Et Al. Surveillance of Adverse Events After the First Trivalent Inactivated Influenza Vaccine Produced in Mammalian Cell Culture (Flucelvax) Reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), United States, 2013-2015. Vaccine. 2015;33((45)):6684-6688. Return to footnote 150 Footnote 151 Bencharitiwong R, Leonard S, Tsai T, Et Al. in Vitro Assessment of the Allergenicity of Novel MF59-Adjuvanted Pandemic H1N1 Influenza Vaccine Produced in Dog Kidney Cells. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2012;8((7)):863-865. Return to footnote 151 Footnote 152 Wanich N, Bencharitiwong R, Tsai T, Et Al. in Vitro Assessment of the Allergenicity of a Novel Influenza Vaccine Produced in Dog Kidney Cells in Individuals with Dog Allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2010;104(5):426-33. Return to footnote 152 Footnote 153 Mosca F, Tritto E, Muzzi A, Et Al. Molecular and Cellular Signatures of Human Vaccine Adjuvants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105(30):10501-6. Return to footnote 153 Footnote 154 Calabro S, Tortoli M, Baudner B, Et Al. Vaccine Adjuvants Alum and MF59 Induce Rapid Recruitment of Neutrophils and Monocytes that Participate in Antigen Transport to Draining Lymph Nodes. Vaccine. 2011;29(9):1812-23. Return to footnote 154 Footnote 155 Seubert A, Monaci E, Pizza M, Et Al. the Adjuvants Aluminum Hydroxide and MF59 Induce Monocyte and Granulocyte Chemoattractants and Enhance Monocyte Differentiation toward Dendritic Cells. J Immunol. 2008;180(8):5402-12. Return to footnote 155 Footnote 156 O'Hagan DT, Rappuoli R, De Gregorio E, Et Al. MF59 Adjuvant: the Best Insurance against Influenza Strain Diversity. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2011;10(4):447-62. Return to footnote 156 Footnote 157 Vesikari T, Knuf M, Wutzler P, Et Al. Oil-in-Water Emulsion Adjuvant with Influenza Vaccine in Young Children. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1406-16. Return to footnote 157 Footnote 158 Vesikari T, Groth N, Karvonen A, Et Al. MF59 (R)-Adjuvanted Influenza Vaccine (FLUAD (R)) in Children: Safety and Immunogenicity Following a Second Year Seasonal Vaccination. Vaccine. 2009;27:6291-5. Return to footnote 158 Footnote 159 Vesikari T, Pellegrini M, Karvonen A, Et Al. Enhanced Immunogenicity of Seasonal Influenza Vaccines in Young Children using MF59 Adjuvant. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2009;28:563-71. Return to footnote 159 Footnote 160 Della Cioppa G, Vesikari T, Sokal E, Lindert K, Nicolay U. Trivalent and Quadrivalent MF59 (R)-Adjuvanted Influenza Vaccine in Young Children: A Dose- and Schedule-Finding Study. Vaccine. 2011;29:8696-704. Return to footnote 160 Footnote 161 Zedda L, Forleo-Neto E, Vertruyen A, Et Al. Dissecting the Immune Response to MF59-Adjuvanted and Nonadjuvanted Seasonal Influenza Vaccines in Children Less than Three Years of Age. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2015;34(1):73-8. Return to footnote 161 Footnote 162 Nolan T, Bravo L, Ceballos A, Et Al. Enhanced and Persistent Antibody Response against Homologous and Heterologous Strains Elicited By a MF59-Adjuvanted Influenza Vaccine in Infants and Young Children. Vaccine. 2014;32(46):6146-56. Return to footnote 162 Footnote 163 Vaarala O, Vuorela A, Partinen M, Et Al. Antigenic Differences between AS03 Adjuvanted Influenza A (H1N1) Pandemic Vaccines: Implications for Pandemrix-Associated Narcolepsy Risk. Plos One. 2014;9(12):E114361. Return to footnote 163 Footnote 164 Diaz Granados CA, Dunning AJ, Robertson CA, Et Al. Efficacy and Immunogenicity of High-Dose Influenza Vaccine in Older Adults by Age, Comorbidities, and Frailty. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62:S37-8. Return to footnote 164 Footnote 165 Izurieta HS, Thadani N, Shay DK, Et Al. Comparative Effectiveness of High-Dose Versus Standard-Dose Influenza Vaccines in US Residents Aged 65 Years and Older from 2012 to 2013 Using Medicare Data: A Retrospective Cohort Analysis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015;15(3):293-300. Return to footnote 165 Footnote 166 Falsey AR, Treanor JJ, Tornieporth N, Et Al. Randomized, Double-Blind Controlled Phase 3 Trial Comparing the Immunogenicity of High-Dose and Standard-Dose Influenza Vaccine in Adults 65 Years of Age and Older. J Infect Dis. 2009;200(2):172-80. Return to footnote 166 Footnote 167 Couch RB, Winokur P, Brady R, Et Al. Safety and Immunogenicity of a High Dosage Trivalent Influenza Vaccine among Elderly Subjects. Vaccine. 2007;25(44):7656-63. Return to footnote 167 Footnote 168 Keitel WA, Atmar RL, Cate TR, Et Al. Safety of High Doses of Influenza Vaccine and Effect on Antibody Responses in Elderly Persons. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(10):1121-7. Return to footnote 168 Footnote 169 Pasteur S. Study of Fluzone® Influenza Virus Vaccine 2011-2012 Formulation (Intramuscular Route) Among Adults. 2013; 2014. Return to footnote 169 Footnote 170 Tsang P, Gorse GJ, Strout CB, Et Al. Immunogenicity and Safety of Fluzone Intradermal and High-Dose Influenza Vaccines in Older Adults >65 Years of Age: A Randomized, Controlled, Phase II Trial. Vaccine. 2014;32(21):2507-17. Return to footnote 170 Footnote 171 Nace DA, Lin CJ, Ross TM, Et Al. Randomized, Controlled Trial of High-Dose Influenza Vaccine among Frail Residents of Long-Term Care Facilities. J Infect Dis. 2015;211(12):1915-24. Return to footnote 171 Footnote 172 Diazgranados CA, Dunning AJ, Jordanov E, Et Al. High-Dose Trivalent Influenza Vaccine Compared to Standard Dose Vaccine in Elderly Adults: Safety, Immunogenicity and Relative Efficacy during the 2009-2010 Season. Vaccine. 2013;31(6):861-6. Return to footnote 172 Footnote 173 Diazgranados CA, Dunning AJ, Kimmel M, Et Al. Efficacy of High-Dose versus Standard-Dose Influenza Vaccine in Older Adults. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(7):635-45. Return to footnote 173 Footnote 174 Sanofi Pasteur. Product Monograph: FLUZONE® High-Dose Quadrivalent. 2019; Available At: Https://Health-Products.Canada.Ca/Dpd-Bdpp/Info.Do?Lang=En&Code=99020. Accessed 09/15, 2020. Return to footnote 174 Footnote 175 Chang LJ, Meng Y, Janosczyk H, Et Al. Safety and Immunogenicity of High-Dose Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccine in Adults ≥65 Years of Age: A Phase 3 Randomized Clinical Trial. Vaccine. 2019;37(39):5825-34. Return to footnote 175 Footnote 176 Dunkle LM, Izikson R, Patriarca P, Et Al. Efficacy of Recombinant Influenza Vaccine in Adults 50 Years of Age or Older. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(25):2427-36. Return to footnote 176 Footnote 177 Belongia EA, Levine MZ, Olaiya O, Et Al. Clinical Trial to Assess Immunogenicity of High-Dose, Adjuvanted, and Recombinant Influenza Vaccines against Cell-Grown A(H3N2) Viruses in Adults 65 to 74 Years, 2017–2018. Vaccine. 2020;38(15):3121-8. Return to footnote 177 Footnote 178 Shinde V, Cai R, Plested J, Et Al. Induction of Cross-Reactive Hemagglutination Inhibiting Antibody and Polyfunctional CD4+ T-Cell Responses by a Recombinant Matrix-M–Adjuvanted Hemagglutinin Nanoparticle Influenza Vaccine. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2020:Ciaa1673. Return to footnote 178 Footnote 179 Dunkle LM, Izikson R, Patriarca PA, Et Al. Randomized Comparison of Immunogenicity and Safety of Quadrivalent Recombinant Versus Inactivated Influenza Vaccine in Healthy Adults 18–49 Years of Age. J Infect Dis. 2017;216(10):1219-26. Return to footnote 179 Footnote 180 Wang W, Alvarado-Facundo E, Vassell R, Et Al. Comparison of A(H3N2) Neutralizing Antibody Responses Elicited by 2018–2019 Season Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccines Derived from Eggs, Cells, and Recombinant Hemagglutinin. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2020:Ciaa1352. Return to footnote 180 Footnote 181 Cowling BJ, Perera RAPM, Valkenburg SA, Et Al. Comparative Immunogenicity of Several Enhanced Influenza Vaccine Options for Older Adults: A Randomized, Controlled Trial. Clin Infect Dis. 2020;71(7):1704-14. Return to footnote 181 Footnote 182 Gouma S, Zost SJ, Parkhouse K, Et Al. Comparison of Human H3N2 Antibody Responses Elicited by Egg-Based, Cell-Based, and Recombinant Protein-Based Influenza Vaccines during the 2017-2018 Season. Clin Infect Dis. 2020;71(6):1447-53. Return to footnote 182 Footnote 183 Dawood FS, Naleway AL, Flannery B, Levine MZ, Murthy K, Sambhara S, Gangappa S, Edwards L, Ball S, Grant L, Belongia E, Et Al. Comparison of the Immunogenicity of Cell Culture-Based and Recombinant Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccines to Conventional Egg-Based Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccines Amongamong Healthcare Personnel Aged 18–64 Years: A Randomized Open-Label Trial. Clinical Infectious Diseases.Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Jul 10. Return to footnote 183 Footnote 184 European Medicines Agency (EMA). Assessment Report: Supemtek. 2020; Available at: Https://Www.Ema.Europa.Eu/En/Documents/Assessment-Report/Supemtek-Epar-Public-Assessment-Report_En.Pdf. Accessed September 28, 2021. Return to footnote 184 Footnote 185 Woo EJ, Moro PL. Postmarketing Safety Surveillance of Quadrivalent Recombinant Influenza Vaccine: Reports to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System. Vaccine. 2021;39(13):1812-7. Return to footnote 185 Footnote 186 Cowling BJ, Thompson MG, Ng TWY, Et Al. Comparative Reactogenicity of Enhanced Influenza Vaccines in Older Adults. J Infect Dis. 2020;222(8):1383-91. Return to footnote 186 Footnote 187 Grohskopf LA, Sokolow LZ, Fry AM, Et Al. Update: ACIP Recommendations for the Use of Quadrivalent Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (LAIV4) - United States, 2018-19 Influenza Season. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018;67(22):643-5. Return to footnote 187 Footnote 188 National Advisory Committee Oi. Recommendations on the Use of Live, Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (Flumist®): Supplemental Statement on Seasonal Influenza Vaccine 2011-2012. Can Commun Dis Rep. 2011;37(-7):1-77. Return to footnote 188 Footnote 189 Block SL, Falloon J, Hirschfield JA, Et Al. Immunogenicity and Safety of a Quadrivalent Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine in Children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2012;31(7):745-51. Return to footnote 189 Footnote 190 Block SL, Yi T, Sheldon E, Et Al. A Randomized, Double-Blind Noninferiority Study of Quadrivalent Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine in Adults. Vaccine. 2011;29(50):9391-7. Return to footnote 190 Footnote 191 Medimmune. A Randomized, Partially Blind Active Controlled Study to Evaluate the Immunogenicity of MEDI8662 in Adults 18-49 Years of Age. 2011; 2015. Return to footnote 191 Footnote 192 Public Health Agency of Canada. NACI Recommendation on the Use of Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (LAIV) in HIV-Infected Individuals. 2020; Available At: Https://Www.Canada.Ca/En/Public-Health/Services/Immunization/National-Advisory-Committee-on-Immunization-Naci/Live-Attenuated-Influenza-Vaccine-Hiv-Infected-Individuals.html. Return to footnote 192 Footnote 193 Ritzwoller DP, Bridges CB, Shetterly S, Et Al. Effectiveness of the 2003-2004 Influenza Vaccine Among Children 6 Months to 8 Years of Age, with 1 Vs 2 Doses. Pediatrics. 2005;116(1):153-9. Return to footnote 193 Footnote 194 Neuzil KM, Jackson LA, Nelson J, Et Al. Immunogenicity and Reactogenicity of 1 versus 2 Doses of Trivalent Inactivated Influenza Vaccine in Vaccine-Naive 5-8-Year-Old Children. J Infect Dis. 2006;194(8):1032-9. Return to footnote 194 Footnote 195 Shuler CM, Iwamoto M, Bridges CB, Et Al. Vaccine Effectiveness against Medically Attended, Laboratory-Confirmed Influenza among Children Aged 6 to 59 Months, 2003-2004. Pediatrics. 2007;119(3):E587-95. Return to footnote 195 Footnote 196 Allison MA, Daley MF, Crane LA, Et Al. Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness in Healthy 6- o 21-Month-Old Children during the 2003-2004 Season. J Pediatr. 2006;149(6):755-62. Return to footnote 196 Footnote 197 Skowronski DM, Hottes TS, De Serres G, Et Al. Influenza B/Victoria Antigen Induces Strong Recall of B/Yamagata but Lower B/Victoria Response in Children Primed with Two Doses of B/Yamagata. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011;30(10):833-9. Return to footnote 197 Footnote 198 Public Health Agency of Canada. Canadian Immunization Guide: Part 1 - Key Immunization Information: Timing of Vaccine Administration. 2017; Available At: Https://Www.Canada.Ca/En/Public-Health/Services/Publications/Healthy-Living/Canadian-Immunization-Guide-Part-1-Key-Immunization-Information/Page-10-Timing-Vaccine-Administration.Html. Accessed 10/09, 2018. Return to footnote 198 Footnote 199 Nascimento Silva JR, Camacho LA, Siqueira MM, Et Al. Mutual Interference on the Immune Response to Yellow Fever Vaccine and a Combined Vaccine against Measles, Mumps and Rubella. Vaccine. 2011;29(37):6327-34. Return to footnote 199 Footnote 200 200. Stefano I, Sato HK, Pannuti CS, Et Al. Recent Immunization against Measles does not Interfere with the Sero-Response to Yellow Fever Vaccine. Vaccine. 1999;17(9-10):1042-6. Return to footnote 200 Footnote 201 Tauraso NM, Myers MG, Nau EV, Et Al. Effect of Interval between Inoculation of Live Smallpox and Yellow-Fever Vaccines on Antigenicity in Man. J Infect Dis. 1972;126(4):362-71. Return to footnote 201 Footnote 202 Verstraeten T, Jumaan AO, Mullooly JP, Et Al. A Retrospective Cohort Study of the Association of Varicella Vaccine Failure with Asthma, Steroid Use, Age at Vaccination, and Measles-Mumps-Rubella Vaccination. Pediatrics. 2003;112(2):E98-103. Return to footnote 202 Footnote 203 Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Immunization Safety Review: Influenza Vaccines and Neurological Complications. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences; 2008. Return to footnote 203 Footnote 204 Sivadon-Tardy V, Orlikowski D, Porcher R, Et Al. Guillain-Barre Syndrome and Influenza Virus Infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;48(1):48-56. Return to footnote 204 Footnote 205 Stowe J, Andrews N, Wise L, Et Al. Investigation of the Temporal Association of Guillain-Barre Syndrome with Influenza Vaccine and Influenza Like Illness using the United Kingdom General Practice Research Database. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;169(3):382-8. Return to footnote 205 Footnote 206 Tam CC, O'Brien SJ, Petersen I, Et Al. Guillain-Barre Syndrome and Preceding Infection with Campylobacter, Influenza and Epstein-Barr Virus in the General Practice Research Database. Plos One. 2007;2(4):E344. Return to footnote 206 Footnote 207 Andrews N, Stowe J, Al-Shahi Salman R, Et Al. Guillain-Barre Syndrome and H1N1 (2009) Pandemic Influenza Vaccination Using an AS03 Adjuvanted Vaccine in the United Kingdom: Self-Controlled Case Series. Vaccine. 2011;29(45):7878-82. Return to footnote 207 Footnote 208 Statistics Canada. Table 051-0001 - Estimates of Population, by Age Group and Sex for July 1, Canada, Provinces and Territories, Annual (Persons Unless Otherwise Noted), CANSIM (Database). 2014; 2015. Return to footnote 208 Footnote 209 Tran D, Vaudry W, Moore D, Et Al. Hospitalization for Influenza A versus B. Pediatrics. 2016;138(3):10.1542/Peds.2015,4643. Epub 2016 Aug 17. Return to footnote 209 Footnote 210 Centers for Disease Control, and Prevention. Estimates of Deaths Associated with Seasonal Influenza --- United States, 1976-2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010;59(33):1057-62. https://www.fda.gov/files/vaccines%2C%20blood%20%26%20biologics/published/Guidance-for-Industry--Clinical-Data-Needed-to-Support-the-Licensure-of-Seasonal-Inactivated-Influenza-Vaccines.pdf Return to footnote 210 Footnote 211 Assessment report: Supemtek [Internet]. Cromer D, Van Hoek AJ, Jit M, Et Al. the Burden of Influenza in England by Age and Clinical Risk Group: A Statistical Analysis to Inform Vaccine Policy. J Infect. 2014;68(4):363-712021. Available from: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/assessment-report/supemtek-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf Return to footnote 211 Page details Date modified: 2023-02-16 About this site Public Health Agency of Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finance Science and innovation Indigenous peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions PrivacyCore body temperature increases host resistance to influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Core body temperature increases host resistance to influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection Download PDF Copy By Shanet Susan AlexReviewed by Aimee MolineuxJun 10 2022 A recent article posted to the Research Square* preprint server demonstrated that high body temperature elevates gut microbiota-reliant host resistance against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and influenza A viral infection. Study: High body temperature increases gut microbiota-dependent host resistance to influenza A virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Image Credit: iunewind / Shutterstock*Important notice: Research Square publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information. Background Respiratory illnesses, like influenza and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), cause significant mortality and morbidity, primarily affecting the elderly. Fever is a common characteristic of COVID-19 and influenza, although its physiological significance in viral infection resistance among hosts is unclear. The relevance of additional age-linked alterations in host variables other than impaired type I interferons (IFNs) signaling in influenza virus infection susceptibility is unknown. Multiple studies showed that the gut microbiota makeup in both animals and humans varies with age. In addition, as people get older, their average body temperature drops. Although it is becoming increasingly clear that gut microbiota plus their metabolites are critical for influenza infection protection, the impacts of core body temperature upon host defense against influenza virus infection are mainly uncertain. The current study's authors previously established that after intranasal treatment with a sublethal 30 pfu dosage of influenza virus, mice exposed to a high ambient 36 °C temperature exhibit impaired virus-selective CD8+ T cell reactions and antibody generation. The outside temperature's impact on host resistance to challenge with a deadly influenza virus, on the other hand, remains unknown. About the study In the present study, the scientists investigated the impact of core and outside body temperature on host resistance against influenza infections. They tested host resistance to SARS-CoV-2 or influenza virus infection by exposing mice to a high ambient temperature of 36°C. The mice were housed at 36, 22, or 4°C for a week preceding infection with influenza virus. High heat-, cold-, and room temperature (RT)-exposed mice were intranasally infected with a mouse-adapted influenza A virus strain A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (PR8) and maintained at 36, 22, or 4°C for the whole duration of the assessments to explore the effect of core body temperature in influenza virus infection protection. The authors confined mice at 36, 34, 28, or 22 °C before infecting them with the influenza virus to establish the minimum core body temperature needed for protection from infection. They infected antibiotics (Abx)-treated or low fiber (LF)-fed mice exposed to high heat to see if gut microbial metabolites or microbiota were required to improve host resistance to influenza virus infection. The investigators conducted gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), capillary electrophoresis time-of-flight mass spectrometry (CE-TOFMS), and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-centered metabolome assessment of serum, cecal contents, and livers of naive mice kept at 36, 22, or 4°C for a week to evaluate the mechanisms underpinning gut microbiota-stemmed metabolite triggered host resistance in high heat-exposed mice to influenza infection. Moreover, the team examined the inhibitory impact of bile acids on SARS-CoV-2 infection. In the absence or presence of bile acids, they infected VeroE6/TMPRSS2 cells with SARS-CoV-2. Further, the scientists examined the link between bile acid titers in COVID-19 patients' plasma and illness severity. Results The study results show that exposing mice to high ambient 36 °C temperature enhances host resistance against viral pathogens such as influenza and SARS-CoV-2. High-heat-exposed mice raise their basal body temperature above 38°C, allowing the production of more bile acid in a gut microbiota-reliant way in the intestine and serum. High body temperature increases gut microbiota-dependent host resistance to influenza virus infection. Mice were kept at 22, 28, 34, or 36 °C for 7 d before influenza virus infection and throughout infection. a, Body temperature of naïve mice kept at 22, 28, 34, or 36 °C were measured. b-d, Mice kept at 22, 28, 34, or 36 °C were infected intranasally with 1,000 pfu of influenza virus. Mortality (b), core body temperatures (c), and virus titer in the lung wash (d) were measured on indicated days after challenge. e, f, LF-fed, Abx-treated, and control mice kept at 36 °C were infected intranasally with 1,000 pfu of influenza virus. Mortality (e) and core body temperatures (f) were measured on indicated days after challenge. Related StoriesOne in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19Could vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionSeasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicBy restricting viral replication and neutrophil-based tissue damage, the gut microbiota-stemmed deoxycholic acid (DCA) plus its plasma membrane-attached receptor Takeda G-protein-coupled receptor 5 (TGR5) expression increases host resistance to infection with influenza virus. Furthermore, the Syrian hamster was protected from severe SARS-CoV-2 infection by the DCA plus its nuclear farnesoid X receptor (FXR) agonist. Additionally, compared to the minor sickness group, the plasma of SARS-CoV-2-infected individuals with moderate 1 or 2 diseases had lower levels of specific bile acids. Overall, the current findings reveal an unanticipated pathway by which SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus resistance was increased among hosts in a gut microbiota-reliant way via a high fever induced by the virus. Conclusions The study findings depicted a previously unknown relationship between host viral infection resistance, gut microbial action, and core body temperature. The researchers discovered that exposing mice to a high ambient 36 °C temperature raises body temperature and enhances host resistance to SARS-CoV-2 or influenza virus infection. Moreover, the study found that activation of gut microbiota based on high body temperature elevates bile acid concentrations in the intestine and serum, which reduces virus replication and harmful inflammatory responses after SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus infection. The current article notably adds to the comprehension of how host resistance to SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection was heightened by core body temperature. The present inference that specific bile acids were diminished in the plasma of individuals with moderate 1/2 COVID-19 might elucidate the diversity in clinical illness manifestation among humans and assist COVID-19 outcome mitigation strategies. *Important notice: Research Square publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information. Journal reference: Preliminary scientific report. Takeshi Ichinohe, Minami Nagai, Miyu Moriyama et al. High body temperature increases gut microbiota-dependent host resistance to influenza A virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection, 08 June 2022, PREPRINT (Version 1) available at Research Square https://doi.org/10.21203s.3.rs-1737468/v1, https://www.researchsquare.com/articles-1737468/v1 Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Agonist, Antibody, B Cell, Bile, Cell, Chromatography, Cold, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Electrophoresis, Fever, Gas Chromatography, G-Protein, heat, Influenza, Interferons, Liquid Chromatography, Mass Spectrometry, Membrane, Metabolite, Metabolites, Metabolome, Mortality, Protein, Receptor, Research, Respiratory, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Spectrometry, Syndrome, Virus Comments (0) Written byShanet Susan AlexShanet Susan Alex, a medical writer, based in Kerala, India, is a Doctor of Pharmacy graduate from Kerala University of Health Sciences. Her academic background is in clinical pharmacy and research, and she is passionate about medical writing. Shanet has published papers in the International Journal of Medical Science and Current Research (IJMSCR), the International Journal of Pharmacy (IJP), and the International Journal of Medical Science and Applied Research (IJMSAR). Apart from work, she enjoys listening to music and watching movies. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APASusan Alex, Shanet. (2022, June 10). Core body temperature increases host resistance to influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220610/Core-body-temperature-increases-host-resistance-to-influenza-virus-and-SARS-CoV-2-infection.aspx.MLASusan Alex, Shanet. "Core body temperature increases host resistance to influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220610/Core-body-temperature-increases-host-resistance-to-influenza-virus-and-SARS-CoV-2-infection.aspx>.ChicagoSusan Alex, Shanet. "Core body temperature increases host resistance to influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220610/Core-body-temperature-increases-host-resistance-to-influenza-virus-and-SARS-CoV-2-infection.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardSusan Alex, Shanet. 2022. Core body temperature increases host resistance to influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 infection. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220610/Core-body-temperature-increases-host-resistance-to-influenza-virus-and-SARS-CoV-2-infection.aspx. Suggested Reading Leritrelvir shows high efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 protease mutationsUnraveling the mechanism of Shufeng Jiedu Capsules in influenza treatmentCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Study finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsResearch identifies respiratory transmission potential of H5N1 virusCurcumin compound reactivates Epstein–Barr virus, offering safer cancer therapySARS-CoV-2 hijacks host proteins to escape immune clearancePublic trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the US Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Parkinson's Disease (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Elevated antibody responses to Epstein-Barr virus linked to increased risk of multiple sclerosisAvoid contact with sick or dead wild birds; Report to WDFW | Spokane Regional Health District Avoid contact with sick or dead… | Spokane Regional Health District Contact/Directory | About SRHD | For Health Care Providers | Complaints | Careers/Volunteers Health Topics Birth & Death Certificates Data & Reports Cards, Permits & Inspections Programs & Services How Do I... Diseases & Conditions Environmental Health Healthy Living Injury, Violence, & Safety Workplace All Health Topics Health Topics Topics associated with the health district's mission Birth Certificates Death Certificates All Certificates Frequently Asked Questions Birth & Death Certificate FAQs Demographics Environment Healthy Behaviors Health Care Health Status Infectious Diseases Injury & Violence Local Community Issues Program Reports & Evaluations Reproductive Health Specific Populations View All Data & Reports Reports and fact sheets about community health issues Drinking Water (Private Wells) Food Establishment Permits Food Worker Cards On-Site Sewage (Septic Systems) Pool Operators School Health & Safety View All Cards, Permits & Inspections Helping to ensure health and safety standards are met Administration/Operations Animals & Insects Community & Family Health Disease Prevention Drowning Prevention Emergency Preparedness Environmental Hazards & Resources Food Safety Healthy Behaviors Opioid Treatment Services Pools, Water Recreation Facilities School Health & Safety On-Site Sewage All Programs Apply for Employment or volunteer Food worker card Attend Board of Health meetings SRHD events Do business with SRHD Bid and contract opportunities Work with SRHD Get a vaccination COVID-19 vaccines SRHD vaccination events Find out what you need Get a permit Food establishments On-site sewage/septic systems Pools Private wells Find support Child abuse and neglect New parents Nutrition for women, infants, and children (WIC) Opioid treatment services Learn about Diseases and conditions Environmental health Healthy living Injury, violence, and safety School health and safety What to do in an emergency Order birth and death certificates Birth certificates Death certificates Report Complaint or concern Food safety concern Illegal dumping/solid waste handling concern Request Public records Medical records View Clinical information for healthcare professionals Programs and services overview Program directory Regional health data ... More SRHD News News Blogs Events Avoid contact with sick or dead wild birds; Report to WDFW Jun 07, 2022 avian influenza, bird flu, washington state department of fish and wildlife, washington state department of health June 8, 2022 Update Due to Avian Flu in Wild Birds, Avoid Sick or Dead Wild Birds The Washington State Department of Health (DOH) and the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) are asking the public to avoid contact with wild birds, especially sick or dead wild birds or their young. An outbreak of avian influenza, also known as bird flu, is impacting wild birds including Canada geese, snow geese, bald eagles, and other raptors. If you encounter sick or dead wild birds, alert WDFW using the agency’s reporting tool. Here is how to report both wild and domestic sick and dead birds: Use an online form to report sick/dead wild birds suspected of avian influenza to the Washington Department of Fish & Wildlife. Report sick/dead domestic birds to Washington State Department of Agriculture's Avian Health Program: 1-800-606-3056 or visit Avian Influenza | Washington State Department of Agriculture for more information about how to protect backyard flocks. The full DOH/WDFW press release can be found here. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Reported Human Infections with Avian Influenza A Viruses | Avian Influenza (Flu) (cdc.gov) Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife: Avian influenza (bird flu) | Washington Department of Fish & Wildlife You might be interested in... Backyard Flock Tests Positive for Bird Flu in Spokane County Read More Spokane Regional Health District 1101 W. College Ave. Spokane, WA 99201Phone: 509.324.1500 Web Archive | Notice of Privacy Practices Contact | News | Blogs | Events | Services and Building Hours | Media Hub Copyright Spokane Regional Health District 2024Summer is near but winter respiratory viruses are still here search Search All UC Davis Health Main Menuadd menuMain Menu closeMain Menu Main Menuremove UC Davis Health Home Patients & Visitors Services & Specialties Health Care Professionals Schools & Programs Research News About UC Davis Health Giving Careers search Search ×Search All UC Davis Health Search enhanced by Google close Search All UC Davis Health Search enhanced by Google News how_to_regMyUCDavisHealth Login person_searchFind a Provider content_paste_goRefer a Patient location_onMaps and Locations video_camera_frontTelehealth Services biotechSearch Clinical Trials workCareers volunteer_activismMake a Gift callContact Us ShowmenumenuMenu Patients & Visitorschevron_right chevron_leftBackPatients & Visitorsarrow_forwardPersonalized, compassionate care and the expertise of the region's only academic health center. Conditions and Treatments Maps, Locations and Parking Appointments and Referrals About Patient Care Services & Specialtieschevron_right chevron_leftBackServices & Specialtiesarrow_forwardWorld-class care and doctors for both routine and complex health care challenges. Primary Care Specialty Care A-Z Care Centers Telehealth Services Find a Provider Health Care Professionalschevron_right chevron_leftBackHealth Care Professionalsarrow_forwardWe train the health care providers of tomorrow, today, offering professionals the knowledge, skills and abilities to deliver exemplary care. Refer a Patient Featured Specialties Find a Provider or Faculty Residency Programs and Fellowships Clinical Studies Career Opportunities Professional Development Clinical News Schools & Programschevron_right chevron_leftBackSchools & Programsarrow_forwardUC Davis schools and education programs offer the highest quality training, skills and values to lead change and improve health for all. UC Davis School of Medicinearrow_forward Betty Irene Moore School of Nursing at UC Davisarrow_forward Additional Education Programs and Trainingarrow_forward Researchchevron_right chevron_leftBackResearcharrow_forwardWe believe improving health for all is possible. So, our collaborative research includes clinical, translational and basic science studies. Research Programs Search Clinical Trials Clinical Research News Participate in Clinical Trialsarrow_forward Newschevron_right chevron_leftBackNewsarrow_forwardNews, blogs and publications from UC Davis Health with the latest health care, patient, faculty, leadership, medical, science and research news and innovations. UC Davis Health Responds Noticias en Español Feature Stories Blogs and Podcasts Publications Health Highlights Newsletter Videos Social Media For Journalists Public Reporting About Uschevron_right chevron_leftBack About UC Davis Healthchevron_right chevron_leftBackAbout UC Davis Healtharrow_forward Office of the Vice Chancellor Executive Leadership Awards and Honors Health Ventures Office Clinical Strategic Plan Upcoming Events Points of Distinction Facts and Figures 150th Anniversary Giving to UC Davis Health Community Engagementchevron_right chevron_leftBackCommunity Engagement Highlightsarrow_forward Our Commitment to the Underserved Community Health Needs Assessment (CHNA) CHNA Implementation Strategy Government and Community Relations Principles of Community Health Sciences Development Public Affairs and Marketing Community Advisory Board Careerschevron_right chevron_leftBackAll UC Davis Health Staff Job Opportunitiesarrow_forward Primary Care Physicians Recruitment Nurse Recruitment at UC Davis Health Betty Irene Moore School of Nursing Nursing Volunteer Clinical Faculty School of Medicine Faculty Recruitment School of Medicine Residency and Fellowship Programs Careers at UC Davis Campus Careers at the University of California Exceptional Employment Quick Links how_to_regMyUCDavisHealth Login person_searchFind a Provider content_paste_goRefer a Patient location_onMaps and Locations video_camera_frontTelehealth Services biotechSearch Clinical Trials workCareers volunteer_activismMake a Gift callContact Us UC Davis Health News Headlines Summer is near but winter respiratory viruses are ... Children's HealthJune 10, 2022 Summer is near but winter respiratory viruses are still here (SACRAMENTO) Winter may have come and gone, but some of its respiratory viruses are still here and circulating in our communities. UC Davis Health experts are seeing cases of influenza (flu), RSV and other respiratory viruses – even though summer is around the corner. “Influenza cases are still rising and many community-associated respiratory viruses are increasing,” said Dean Blumberg, chief of pediatric infectious diseases at UC Davis Children’s Hospital. “These viruses are all typically associated with the colder months. They don’t usually hang around this long.” The California Department of Public Health has reported that influenza activity is elevated and continues to circulate in California. The majority of detected influenza viruses are the strain known as A (H3N2). “We don’t know why this might be happening, but it could be due to a very bad match between the flu vaccine and the circulating H3N2 strain. Plus, there have been increased opportunities for transmission after the past two winters of lockdowns,” Blumberg said. Influenza cases are still rising and many community-associated respiratory viruses are increasing, These viruses are all typically associated with the colder months. They don’t usually hang around this long.” —Dean BlumbergPediatrician Tammy Woo said she and her colleagues were diagnosing cases of flu A up until about two weeks ago at the UC Davis Health Midtown Clinic. “We are still seeing a lot of stomach bugs, and I did have a patient with RSV last week,” Woo said. “Hand, foot and mouth disease is also going around now, but that isn’t completely out of the ordinary I think.” The winter illnesses are happening as the specter of the COVID-19 variants Omicron BA.4 and BA.5 continue to take hold. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has determined that Sacramento County has a high level of COVID-19, with the rate of spread eight times greater than it was in April. So how should people protect themselves from these viruses? UC Davis Health experts recommend taking the usual precautions: If you are feeling sick, stay home. Do not go to school or work and don’t run errands. Avoid close contact with people who are sick. Cover your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing. Throw away the tissue and wash your hands when you are done. Clean your hands often. Sing the birthday song twice while washing your hands with soap and water. When soap and water are not available, use alcohol-based gel hand sanitizers and rub your hands until the gel is dry. Wear a well-fitted mask or face covering to protect yourself in spaces when you can’t maintain a safe distance from others. Explore related topics Children's HealthGeneral Health NewsCoronavirusInfectious Diseases Media ContactSee our media contacts page Related Articles UC Davis Children’s Hospital fall newsletter now available 3 faculty honored for excellence in pediatric care Does fidgeting help people with ADHD focus? Connect with us Public Affairs & Marketing Make a Gift Monday - Friday, 8 a.m. - 5 p.m.:hs-publicaffairs@ucdavis.edu916-734-9040 After business hours, holidays or weekends:hs-publicaffairs@ucdavis.edu916-734-2011 (ask for public information officer) RESOURCES FOR JOURNALISTS Contact media relations Media guidelines Using our name Parking for media OTHER RESOURCES Upcoming events Public reporting Facts and figures Medical Center Children’s Hospital Rehabilitation Hospital Neighborhood clinics School of Medicine Betty Irene Moore School of Nursing Medical Group ABOUT UC DAVIS HEALTH About Us Contact Us Social Media Maps and Directions FOR PATIENTS MyUCDavisHealth Find a Provider or Faculty Clinic Locations Clinical Trials Referring Physicians Help Paying Your Bill Price Transparency COVID-19 Resources WE ARE PART OF UC Davis University of California Health University of California © 2024 UC Regents. All Rights Reserved | Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy 4301 X St., Sacramento, CA 95817Cascades Raptor Center responds to spread of avian influenza in OregonSkip to main content HomeElection 2024 Important, but heartbreaking: Cascades Raptor Center reacts to bird flu spreading in OregonLouis Krauss Register-GuardShow Caption Hide Caption Bird flu is taking a toll on eagles, wild birdsThe avian flu is more widespread this year and affecting more wild bird species compared to the last outbreak in 2015, officials say. Many raptors that contract it die. (May 5)APAs avian flu cases continue to spread among birds in the WIllamette Valley, it has been a trying time for veterinarian Ulrike Streicher and other staff members at the Cascades Raptor Center in Eugene.In the last two weeks roughly a quarter of the 40 red tail hawks brought in have shown symptoms of the disease and had to be euthanized, since there is no way to treat it, Streicher said. It has been hard for Streicher personally, she said, having to put down more birds who show symptoms of the disease, in order to prevent any spread."I know it's important for containing the disease and particularly also protecting other birds in our care, but at the same time it's totally heartbreaking," she said.The area's first reported cases of avian influenza were found in several geese in Alton Baker Park last month, according to the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. This is the first time the disease has been reported in Oregon, ODFW said.First reports in area:Highly contagious avian flu detected in Alton Baker Park geese, other birdsThe highly contagious disease has been spreading from the eastern U.S. for months. The raptor center stopped accepting rescued waterfowl in March, since they are the most common carriers of the disease.A south Eugene nonprofit animal wildlife hospital and nature center, the Cascades Raptor Center is home to 36 resident birds of prey and a varying number of animals there for treatment. The center has ramped up its biosecurity protocols to protect the birds from the disease, and all newly rescued birds are required to go through a five-day quarantine period in an isolated space, before they enter the normal treatment area. Staff have been taking steps to ensure they don't accidentally spread the contamination, including putting on protective clothing in the quarantine space.With the increased precautions and threat of disease spread, Streicher said it has been mentally exhausting on the center's workers."You go into full battle gear when you work in the quarantine area with the new arrivals," Streicher said. "It's very time-consuming, but it's also very stressful because you have to really keep control of what comes into the quarantine area so that nothing that leaves is infected or just gets disposed of in there."The common symptoms of avian flu in hawks include respiratory issues, pneumonia and encephalitis, which leads to convulsions and more."They start vocalizing, they go in circles, it's a very horrid scenario," she said.Some owls brought in have also shown these symptoms, Streicher said. Anyone who sees an injured or sick bird should still report it to the raptor center's hotline for rescue, although there may be a few more questions due to the disease, Streicher said.The disease has already made an impact on local bird populations, Streicher said, especially this year's number of baby ducks and geese. At Alton Baker Park, for example, Streicher said you are not likely to see any hatchlings because they were killed by the disease."We got it at a very unlucky time because it basically came to Lane County at the time young goslings hatched, so it literally wiped out a whole generation," she said.The cold and wet weather this spring has also contributed to the impacts of avian flu, since the virus survives better in those conditions, Streicher said.There have been no cases of avian flu that have infected any resident birds at the raptor center so far, Streicher said. The disease is often transmitted to hawks when they eat a goose or duck.Pandemic impact:COVID pandemic, record heat lead to busiest year ever for Eugene's Cascades Raptor CenterTo protect from disease spread, those hiking and especially those near waterfowl habitat should make sure to wash their hands and shoes, Streicher said. Residents should be careful to not bring any dirt into their homes from waterfowl habitats and should avoid contact with goose and duck feces, she added. Chicken owners should also be careful about cleaning their hands and shoes.While it usually is not transmitted to humans, it can infect people and can range from no symptoms to more severe ones, according to the CDC.Portland Audubon has a similar policy to Cascades Raptor Center and is not accepting any rescued ducks or geese at this time, but will admit most other native wildlife species, according to a Q&A page on the disease.Anyone who sees a sick or injured bird can report it to the raptor center's call line at 541-485-1320, and also should report avian flu symptoms to ODFW at 866-968-2600.Louis Krauss covers breaking news for The Register-Guard. Contact him at lkrauss@registerguard.com, and follow him on Twitter @LouisKraussNews. Facebook Twitter EmailHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices© Copyright Gannett 2024Moderna takes mRNA influenza candidate into Phase 3 trial CONTINUE TO SITE Or wait... News and analysis on the clinical development and manufacture of large molecule drugs Sign in Register Sign out My account Search Send Home News Bio developments Biopharma culture Contract manufacturing & logistics Markets & regulation Mergers & deals Promotional features Site Archive November 2024 October 2024 All News Multimedia Videos Podcasts Photo Galleries Trends Antibody-drug conjugates Biosimilars Cell & gene therapies Clinical development Emerging markets Pipelines Weight loss drugs Site Archive November 2024 October 2024 All News Multimedia Videos Podcasts Photo Galleries Resources Analytical (technologies & services) Bio-outsourcing Bioreactors Cell lines Disposable manufacturing tech Facilities Fill-finish & packaging Separation & purification Type of resources Library Technical papers Product brochures Videos Supplier webinars Suppliers Events Shows & conferences All events Editorial webinars Online events Events All Events Related Site Outsourcing-Pharma.com Menu close Register Send Home News Back to News Bio developments Biopharma culture Contract manufacturing & logistics Markets & regulation Mergers & deals Promotional features Trends Back to Trends Antibody-drug conjugates Biosimilars Cell & gene therapies Clinical development Emerging markets Pipelines Weight loss drugs Resources Back to Resources Analytical (technologies & services) Bio-outsourcing Bioreactors Cell lines Disposable manufacturing tech Facilities Fill-finish & packaging Separation & purification Events Back to Events All Events Shows & conferences All events Editorial webinars Online events Resources Back to Resources Library Technical papers Product brochures Videos Supplier webinars Suppliers Related Site Back to Related Site Outsourcing-Pharma.com Sign out My account User close Register Account & Access Sign in Register Sign out My account Moderna takes mRNA influenza candidate into Phase 3 trials By Rachel Arthur 07-Jun-2022 - Last updated on 07-Jun-2022 at 13:28 GMT Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email to a friend Pic:getty/violetastoimenova Moderna has dosed the first participants in a Phase 3 study of the company’s seasonal influenza vaccine candidate, mRNA-1010. The vaccine represents one of Moderna’s most advanced candidates outside of COVID-19 vaccines, and is one of several influenza vaccine vaccines being developed by the company.The company believes the mRNA platform – with flexibility and speed in the manufacturing process and improved efficacy over traditional vaccines – is ‘well-positioned to address the significant unmet need in seasonal flu’.mRNA-1010 leads portfolio of five influenza vaccinesThe Phase 3 trial is expected to enroll around 6,000 adults in the southern hemisphere (A confirmatory efficacy study for the candidates may follow during the northern hemisphere influenza season if required).The randomized, observer-blind study is designed to evaluate the safety and immunological non-inferiority of mRNA-1010 to a licensed seasonal influenza vaccine in adults 18 years and older. Participants will be randomly assigned on a 1:1 ratio to receive either a single dose of mRNA-1010 or a single dose of a licensed seasonal influenza vaccine as a comparator.mRNA-1010 is a vaccine candidate that encodes for hemagglutinin (HA) glycoproteins of the four influenza strains recommended by the WHO for the prevention of influenza, including influenza A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and influenza B/Yamagata- and B/Victoria-lineages (HA is a major influenza surface glycoprotein that is considered an important target to generate broad protection against influenza and is the primary target of currently available influenza vaccines).The company, however, also has four other mRNA influenza vaccine candidates. mRNA-1011 and mRNA-1012 include additional HA antigens for broader coverage of circulating influenza A strains, and are in pre-clinical studies.mRNA-1020 and mRNA-1030 include both HA and neuraminidase (NA) antigens (thus targeting multiple proteins in the influenza virus lifecycle and reducing the potential of viral antigenic escape), and entered Phase 1/2 trials earlier this year.Meanwhile, Moderna is also developing combination vaccines for COVID-19 and influenza (mRNA-1073) and another that targets COVID-19, influenza and RSV (mRNA-1230).Moderna set for 3 commercial launches in next 3 yearsmRNA-1010 represents the fourth mRNA vaccine candidate for Moderna to begin Phase 3 trials, alongside a COVID-19 booster, RSV and CMV vaccines. The pipeline of advanced candidates could lead to three respiratory commercial launches over the next two to three years, according to Moderna CEO Stéphane Bancel.“mRNA-1010 is the first of several influenza vaccine candidates we are developing with the aim of iteratively improving traditional vaccines by inducing broad and robust immune responses. We believe our mRNA platform, with the flexibility and speed of our manufacturing process, is well-positioned to address the significant unmet need in seasonal flu,”​ said Bancel. "Influenza vaccines are a key pillar in our respiratory vaccine strategy that includes the development of combination candidates targeting multiple viruses in a single vaccine, including influenza with SARS-CoV-2 and respiratory syncytial virus.​ Copyright - Unless otherwise stated all contents of this web site are © 2024 - William Reed Ltd - All Rights Reserved - Full details for the use of materials on this site can be found in the Terms & Conditions Related topics Bio developments Related news Show more Moderna’s next-gen COVID-19 booster becomes first authorized Omicron-specific bivalent vaccine Sanofi predicts pivot to high-value flu vaccines will drive another year of record sales Vaxess starts Phase 1 trial for H1 influenza vaccine patch Emergex starts up production for universal influenza vaccine Show more Follow us Facebook Twitter Linkedin Webinars On-demand webinars Manufacturing Friendly Aggregate Clearance in Downstream Processing of Bispecific and Traditional Antibodies Using a Novel POROS Mixed-Mode Chromatography Media Thermo Fisher Scientific - Biosciences Headlines Aditum Bio and Leads Biolabs join forces in new company to fight autoimmune diseases Sarepta discontinues development of Duchenne ASO treatment vesleteplirsen Synaffix and BigHat Biosciences collaborate to develop AI-designed ADC EMA accepts Alvotech and Advanz Pharma’s Marketing Authorization Application for biosimilar of J&J’s Simponi AbbVie acquires Aliada Therapeutics in $1.4 billion deal Abzena announces major expansion of its biologics manufacturing facility Aldevron’s Anu Codaty on passion, leadership, and innovation AstraZeneca’s rare disease therapy Fasenra receives EU approval Follow us Facebook Twitter Linkedin BioPharma-Reporter Advertise with us Why Register? Apply to reuse our content Press Releases – Guidelines About us Contact the Editor Report a technical problem Resources Whitelist our newsletters Editorial Calendar RSS Feed Podcast Help CentreImpact of video-led educational intervention on uptake of influenza vaccine among the elderly in western China: a community-based randomized controlled trial | BMC Public Health | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search BMC Public Health Home About Articles Submission Guidelines Collections Join the Editorial Board Submit manuscript Impact of video-led educational intervention on uptake of influenza vaccine among the elderly in western China: a community-based randomized controlled trial Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 06 June 2022 Impact of video-led educational intervention on uptake of influenza vaccine among the elderly in western China: a community-based randomized controlled trial Minghuan Jiang1,2,3,4, Xuelin Yao1,2,3,4, Pengchao Li1,2,3,4, Yu Fang1,2,3,4, Liuxin Feng5, Khezar Hayat1,2,3,4, Xinke Shi6, Yilin Gong1,2,3,4, Jin Peng1,2,3,4 & …Naveel Atif1,2,3,4 Show authors BMC Public Health volume 22, Article number: 1128 (2022) Cite this article 2383 Accesses 5 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundInfluenza vaccination coverage rate among the elderly is low in China. We aimed to evaluate the impact of video-led educational intervention on influenza vaccine uptake among the Chinese elderly.MethodsA randomized controlled trial was conducted in 8 communities of Xi’an, a representative city in western China. Elderly aged over 60 years were randomized to the control group and intervention group (12-minute video education on influenza and its vaccination). Participants’ knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAP) of influenza was assessed by using a questionnaire survey before and after the intervention. The primary outcomes were participants’ willingness to get influenza vaccinated and their actual uptake rates in the 2020-21 flu season. Secondary outcomes were the variations of pre- and post-intervention KAP scores. Intention-to-treat analysis was performed to analyze the data, and sensitivity analyses were conducted to examine the robustness of the results.ResultsA total of 350 people were enrolled, with 175 individuals for each group. Participants in the intervention group were more willing to receive influenza vaccination than those in the control group (64.6% vs. 51.4%, p<0.05). The influenza vaccination uptake rate occurred in 10.3% of participants in the intervention group and 3.4% in the control group (odds ratio, 3.23; 95% CI 1.25-8.32, p<0.001). The post-intervention KAP scores in the intervention group were significantly higher compared to those in the control group (p<0.001).ConclusionVideo-led education was an effective and feasible approach to improve old people’s willingness and uptake of influenza vaccination in western China. Peer Review reports BackgroundInfluenza tends to cause an epidemic among individuals globally, and the influenza pandemic was proposed as one of the ten threats to human health by the World Health Organization (WHO) [1]. Influenza leads to 290,000-640,000 deaths around the world annually, with 84%-95% of deaths occurring in old people [2,3,4]. With the rapidly aging population in China [5], influenza-related cases and complications could be a substantial disease burden for the old people. The influenza vaccine is regarded as the most effective approach to prevent influenza infection. The Technical Guidelines for Seasonal Influenza Vaccination in China (2020-2021) [6] and Health China Campaign 2019-2030 [7] both recommended that the elderly aged over 60 years were one of the priority groups to get influenza vaccination.Influenza vaccine is not included in the National Immunization Program in China, while some developed regions provided fully or partial reimbursement for high-risk population receiving vaccination. Influenza vaccines are widely available in community or township health centers, however, the coverage of influenza vaccination among Chinese old people was extremely low (4%) [8] compared to the 75% vaccination target recommended by WHO [9]. Lack of vaccine-related knowledge, suspicion of vaccine safety, and low vigilance of influenza-related risks were the main barriers of influenza vaccination in the elderly [10, 11]. A recent meta-analysis with studies in Asian populations such as Hong Kong reported that interventions by physicians’ reminders, home visits, face-to-face conversation, clinic posters, and free influenza vaccine could result in a 1.11 to 152.95-fold increase in influenza vaccine uptake among old people over 60 years [12].Previous studies reported that knowledge and understanding were the main barriers of expanding influenza vaccination in Chinese old people [13,14,15]. Educational interventions were found to be one of the most effective approaches to improve vaccine coverage via oral communication, posters, brochures, videos, or surface mails [16,17,18,19]. Compared to brochures, emails, or text messages, videos have proved more acceptable and intuitive due to its compound elements with images, words, and sounds making it easier to understand, especially for the elderly [20]. To our knowledge, there have been no prior studies on video-led educational interventions in elderly Chinese to explore its usefulness in influenza vaccination. Since the influenza vaccination rate was lowest in western regions of China [21], the present study aimed to assess the impact of video-led educational intervention on influenza vaccine uptake among old people in western China.MethodsParticipants and randomizationWe designed a community-based randomized controlled trial (RCT) to perform the present study, which was prospectively registered at the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR2000034330) on 02/07/2020. A detailed research protocol was reported elsewhere previously [22]. In short, we selected Xi’an, the capital city of Shaanxi province, as the representative region of western China. Based on the average gross domestic product per capita in all Xi’an districts, we randomly selected Yan Ta and Xin Cheng as developed districts and Chang An and Ba Qiao as underdeveloped districts [23]. Two community healthcare centers in each district were selected by using computer-generated random numbers. Participants were therefore randomly recruited from old adults with regular medical check-ups based on health records in 8 community healthcare centers. Participants were informed about the significance of the study, and those who agreed to participate in were randomized to the intervention and control groups, respectively, in a 1:1 ratio. The inclusion criteria of eligible participants were: 1) elderly aged 60 years or above; 2) living in the community for at least one year; 3) willing to participate in this study with an informed consent form. Individuals with hearing or eye-sight problems, cognitive disorders, or serious psychological illnesses were excluded from the study.The uptake rate of influenza vaccine among old people in western China was estimated to be 2% [21]. We assumed that the post-intervention uptake rate would have a 5-fold increase to 10% in our study. With the power of 0.9 and significance level of 0.05, it required 80 participants in each group according to a Chi-square test in the G-power statistical analysis program [24]. If the lost follow-up rate of participants was 20%, the sample size in each group was calculated to be a minimum of 96 in the present study.Video-led educational interventionTwo post-graduate medical students designed the content of the education video; thereafter we invited experts from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention and Public Hospitals in Xi’an to provide recommendations to upgrade the video. A pilot test was conducted on ten old people to improve the acceptability and visualization of the video. The final 12-minute video was composed of 1) knowledge of influenza, including its epidemic risks, influenza-related complications, transmission, and prevention of influenza infection; 2) information on the influenza vaccine, including its safety and effectiveness, time for vaccination, and vaccination recommendations; 3) several cases of influenza pandemic globally to illustrate the severity of influenza diseases.Data collectionTo assess the effect of the intervention, a questionnaire survey on participants’ knowledge, attitudes, and practice (KAP) about influenza and the vaccine was performed before and after the intervention. The questionnaire (Additional file 1) consisted of four sections: 1) socio-demographic characteristics of the participants, including gender, age, monthly income, occupation, education, condition of chronic diseases, and history of influenza vaccination in the previous season; 2) knowledge of influenza and influenza vaccine; 3) attitudes toward influenza vaccination; 4) practices to receive influenza vaccination. We conducted a pilot survey with 30 old people to evaluate the questionnaire validity, and the Cronbach alpha coefficient of the questionnaire was 0.844. The primary outcomes assessed in the present study were participants’ willingness to get vaccinated and the uptake rate of influenza vaccine. Secondary outcomes were the variations of participants’ KAP scores.We recruited 10 medical students from Xi’an Jiaotong University to conduct the present study. They were well-trained on the objectives of our study, the process of intervention, and communication skills with old people. The study was performed from September to November 2020 before the influenza outbreak in the 2020-21 season. From the beginning of September to the end of October, participants in the intervention group received a basic medical examination and a 12-minute video education on influenza and influenza vaccines at the healthcare centers. Subsequently, participants had a 15-minute group discussion on the content of the video, and medical students were responsible for answering their questions raised from the video. Participants in the control group only received a basic medical examination. At the end of November, the medical students called all participants to ask and record their vaccination status and test their KAP scores using the same questionnaire.Statistical analysisIntention-to-treat analysis was performed to analyze data using Microsoft Excel 2010 and IBM SPSS 21.0 [25]. Participants who were lost follow-up were considered unvaccinated and reluctant to be vaccinated. The post-intervention data on them were consistent with their data in baseline before intervention. To examine the robustness of our results, we also conducted sensitivity analysis by excluding data from participants who were lost follow-up. Findings on participants’ socio-demographic characteristics, uptake of influenza vaccine, and their willingness to get vaccinated were presented by descriptive statistics by proportion. Their KAP scores were shown using a mean with a standard deviation. Chi-square test and Wilcoxon rank-sum test were used to evaluate the difference of participants’ characteristics and KAP scores in baseline, respectively. A Chi-square test was performed to compare the difference in post-intervention willingness to get vaccination and vaccine uptake in two groups. T-test was used to compare the variation of pre-and post-intervention KAP scores. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to determine the association between educational intervention and uptake of influenza vaccine. Participants’ socio-demographic characteristics including gender, age, occupation, educational level, monthly income, status of chronic diseases, and vaccination in the previous season were adjusted. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.ResultsIn total, 400 people were recruited from 8 communities. 24 (6%) individuals refused to participant in the study, 15 (3.75%) individuals did not meet the inclusion criteria, and 11 (2.75%) did not complete the pre-intervention questionnaire survey. Therefore, 350 participants with 175 old people were enrolled in the RCT for each group. Participants’ baseline socio-demographic characteristics in the two groups showed no significant difference (Table 1). The mean vaccination rates in the previous flu season were 3.4% in the intervention group and 2.9% in the control group (p=0.759). The proportion of participants who were willing to get vaccinated in the future was 44.6% and 46.9% in the intervention and control groups, respectively (p=0.912). The pre-intervention KAP scores also showed no significant difference in the two groups.Table 1 Participants’ socio-demographic characteristics in baselineFull size tableThe results of intention-to-treat analysis for the present study were shown in Fig. 1. Participants in the intervention group were more willing to receive influenza vaccination than those in the control group (64.6% vs. 51.4%, p<0.05). The influenza vaccination uptake rate occurred in 10.3% of participants in the intervention group and 3.4% in the control group (unadjusted odds ratio, 3.23; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.25-8.32, p<0.001). Although the uptake rate in the intervention group was numerically higher (not statistical difference) than that in the control group before intervention, the variation of vaccination rates between two groups was found to be statistically different. The variations of participants’ pre-and post-intervention KAP scores in both groups were shown in Table 2. All KAP scores in the intervention group increased significantly compared to those in the control group post-intervention (p<0.001). The logistic regression analysis found that monthly income, educational intervention, and knowledge and practice scores were significant predictors of vaccine uptake (Table 3). The vaccine uptake rate of participants receiving the educational intervention was 3.63-fold higher compared to those who were in the control group (adjusted odds ratio, 3.63; 95%CI: 1.31-10.06; p=0.013).Fig. 1Pre- and post-intervention (a) willingness to get vaccinated, and (b) uptake of influenza vaccine.Full size imageTable 2 Variation of participants’ pre- and post-intervention KAP scoresFull size tableTable 3 Significant predictors of vaccine uptake in logistic regression analysisFull size tableIn our study, 32 and 31 participants were lost to follow-up in the intervention and control groups, respectively. To examine the robustness of above findings, sensitivity analysis was performed by excluding data from these participants. The findings for primary and secondary outcomes were consistent with results as shown in the intention-to-treat analysis (Table 4). In summary, participants’ willingness to get vaccinated, the uptake of influenza vaccine, and the post-intervention KAP scores in the intervention group were significantly higher than those in the control group.Table 4 Results of sensitivity analysis after interventionFull size tableDiscussionWe performed a RCT study and found that video-led educational intervention had a positive effect on the uptake of influenza vaccine among old people in China. The impact included participants’ willingness to get vaccinated and the actual uptake of the influenza vaccine significantly increased by 20.0 and 6.9 percentage points by the intervention, respectively. There were no statistically significant changes in the control group. The uptake rate was significantly associated with the improved knowledge and practice scores of old people.The significant increase in influenza vaccination after intervention in our study was consistent with the impact of previous educational approaches [16, 26]. A study in eastern China examined the effectiveness of implementing the recommendation for influenza vaccination from community healthcare workers to elderly people with chronic diseases [27]. The results showed that the vaccination coverage increased from 0.3% to 19% after the intervention. Another study from Hong Kong reported that the influenza vaccination rate among the elderly increased 34% by using 3-min face-to-face verbal health education and a pamphlet regarding influenza [26]. However, the absolute post-intervention uptake rate (10.3%) in our study was still far below the target of 60-80% to achieve herd immunity [28]. Therefore, multiple interventions could be combined to increase further the uptake of influenza vaccine in China, such as expanding vaccine access, financial incentives for vaccination, national or regional immunization programs, or personal advocacy of vaccination by community-based home visits [12].In the present study, although nearly half of the participants (45.7%) were willing to get the influenza vaccination, the pre-intervention uptake (3.14%) was far below expected. A study in Shanghai showed similar findings that the willingness to self-pay for influenza vaccine was 70.5% among Chinese aged 50 to 59 years, while the actual uptake was 10.8% [29]. The great gap between willingness and vaccination behavior was possibly associated with vaccine hesitancy [11]. Factors of cost, convenience or access to vaccines were possible barriers of vaccine hesitancy that prevent those who willing to be vaccinated from actual vaccination. A meta-analysis of intention-behavior tests showed that median-to-big change of intention yielded a small-to-median change of behavior [30]. Therefore, the increase of post-intervention vaccination uptake in our study could be partly explained by participants’ vaccination willingness increasing from 44.6% to 64.6%.The KAP scores improved significantly among old people who received video-led educational intervention in our study. The information delivered by the video served as an impetus for more positive beliefs towards influenza vaccine for the elderly. Individuals’ awareness towards influenza vaccination were facilitators of vaccine uptake [10, 11]. Unvaccinated people had low knowledge score on the severity of influenza and the effectiveness and safety of the vaccine [10]. A similar study from Singapore reported that old peoples’ knowledge gaps on influenza would affect their attitudes towards vaccination uptake [31]. A community-based educational intervention could improve knowledge scores across genders, ages, and educational levels. Previous studies on the evaluation of adult KAP related to influenza and vaccine in China reported that most people viewed influenza as a common disease, and its threat to society was low [32, 33]. They agreed influenza could not lead to severe health and economic burden; therefore, they did not get vaccinated in practice.Besides personal beliefs towards getting a vaccination, social factors also influenced the regional or national vaccine uptake rate, including recommendations from healthcare professionals or immunization programs for vaccination [31]. Introducing a vaccination program from a healthcare system or societal perspective may greatly influence old people’s behavior on vaccination uptake. To date, the influenza vaccine has not been included in the national immunization program in China. Around 61 regions in China provided fully or partial reimbursement for high-risk populations (old people, children, healthcare workers) receiving influenza vaccination [34]. The reimbursement of influenza vaccination was a motivator for uptake of influenza vaccination. For instance, the vaccination rate increased from 1.7% to 38.7% among old people after implementing a free vaccination program in Beijing [13]. However, the increased vaccination rate was still lower than in some developed countries with similar vaccination policies [35].There were several limitations in the present study. Firstly, we selected Xi’an as the representative city in western China and samples may be biased towards those who were willing to participate and get immunized in our study, which might also limit the generalization of our findings to the whole nation. In future, the interventional strategies recommended by the WHO Europe office Tailoring Immunization Programs could be adopted to examine their effects on vaccine uptake from a country perspective [36], which have proved great success after implementation in some developed countries [37]. Secondly, we performed the intervention before the 2020-21 flu season and assessed its outcome at the end of the following month, which might underestimate the long-term impact of the video-led educational intervention. The post-intervention uptake of the influenza vaccine in this season among the elderly could be possibly higher than the data reported in our study. Thirdly, the end outcomes of vaccination uptake and willingness were reported by the participants. Their actual vaccination were not available since we were not able to access to their medical records. Social desirability bias might exist in both groups after intervention, especially in the intervention group. Lastly, the actual vaccination rates in both groups might be influenced by the unexpected shortage of influenza vaccines in the 2020-21 flu season because the coronavirus disease epidemic of 2019 (COVID-19) increased the demand for influenza vaccines in China [38]. The COVID-19 might also influence participants’ perceptions of knowledge and attitude towards influenza in both groups [33]. Although we were not able to assess its exact impact on our findings, we conducted rigorous sensitivity analysis to examine the robustness of our results and the effect of our intervention.ConclusionDespite a short-term duration of intervention in our study, video-led education achieved a positive impact and proved to be an effective approach to increase old people’s willingness and uptake of influenza vaccination in western China. We recommended that policymakers further justify the cost-effectiveness of generalized application to broader populations and regions in China. Availability of data and materials The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author, subject to approval from the ethics committee that approved the original study. AbbreviationsWHO: World Health Organization RCT: Randomized controlled trial KAP: Knowledge, attitudes, and practice ReferencesWorld Health Organization. Ten threats to global health. 2019. https://www.who.int/emergenciesen-threats-to-global-health-in-2019. Accessed 27 Aug 2021.Iuliano AD, Roguski KM, Chang HH, Muscatello DJ, Palekar R, Tempia S, et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet. 2018;391(10127):1285–300.Article PubMed Google Scholar Feng LZ, Shay DK, Jiang Y, Zhou H, Chen X, Zheng YD, et al. Influenza-associated mortality in temperate and subtropical Chinese cities, 2003–2008. Bull World Health Organ. 2012;90(4):279–88.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wang H, Fu CX, Li KB, Lu JY, Chen YY, Lu EJ, et al. Influenza associated mortality in Southern China, 2010–2012. Vaccine. 2014;32(8):973–8.Article PubMed Google Scholar National Bureau of Statistics. Main data of the seventh national population census. 2021. http://www.stats.gov.cn/ztjc/zdtjgz/zgrkpc/dqcrkpc/ggl/20210520210519_1817693.html. Accessed 27 Aug 2021.China Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Technical guidelines for seasonal influenza vaccination in China (2020-2021). 2020. http://www.chinacdc.cn/jkzt/crb/bl/lxxgm/jszl_2251/202009/W020200911453959167308.pdf. Accessed 27 Aug 2021.Healthy China Action Promotion Committee. Health china campaign 2019-2030. 2019. http://www.nhc.gov.cn/guihuaxxs/s3585u/201907/e9275fb95d5b4295be8308415d4cd1b2/files/470339610aea4a7887d0810b4c00c9bd.pdf. Accessed 27 Aug 2021.Fan J, Cong S, Wang N, Bao HL, Wang BH, Feng YJ, et al. Influenza vaccination rate and its association with chronic diseases in China: results of a national cross-sectional study. Vaccine. 2020;38(11):2503–11.Article PubMed Google Scholar World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe. Evaluation of seasonal influenza vaccination policies and coverage in the WHO European Region. 2014. http://www.euro.who.Int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/241644/Evaluation-of-seasonal-influenza-vaccination-policies-and-coverage-in-the-WHO-European-Region.pdf?ua=1. Accessed 27 Aug 2021.Kan T, Zhang J. Factors influencing seasonal influenza vaccination behaviour among elderly people: a systematic review. Public Health. 2018;156:67–78.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schmid P, Rauber D, Betsch C, Lidolt G, Denker ML. Barriers of influenza vaccination intention and behavior - a systematic review of influenza vaccine hesitancy, 2005–2016. PLoS ONE. 2017;12(1): e0170550.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thomas RE, Lorenzetti DL. Interventions to increase influenza vaccination rates of those 60 years and older in the community (Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;5:e005188. Google Scholar Lv M, Fang R, Wu J, Pang X, Deng Y, Lei T, et al. The free vaccination policy of influenza in Beijing, China: The vaccine coverage and its associated factors. Vaccine. 2016;34(18):2135–40.Article PubMed Google Scholar Jiang X, Shang X, Lin J, Zhao Y, Wang W, Qiu Y. Impacts of free vaccination policy and associated factors on influenza vaccination behavior of the elderly in China: a quasi-experimental study. Vaccine. 2021;39(5):846–52.Article PubMed Google Scholar Yan S, Wang Y, Zhu W, Zhang L, Gu H, Liu D, et al. Barriers to influenza vaccination among different populations in Shanghai. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2021;17(5):1403–11.Article PubMed Google Scholar Ho HJ, Tan YR, Cook AR, Koh G, Tham TY, Anwar E, et al. increasing influenza and pneumococcal vaccination uptake in seniors using point-of-care informational interventions in primary care in Singapore: a pragmatic, cluster-randomized crossover trial. Am J Public Health. 2019;109(12):1776–83.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kriss JL, Frew PM, Cortes M, Malik FA, Chamberlain AT, Seib K, et al. Evaluation of two vaccine education interventions to improve pertussis vaccination among pregnant African American women: a randomized controlled trial. Vaccine. 2017;35(11):1551–8.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chan SSC, Leung DYP, Leung AYM, Lam C, Hung I, Chu D, et al. A nurse-delivered brief health education intervention to improve pneumococcal vaccination rate among older patients with chronic diseases: a cluster randomized controlled trial. Int J Nurs Stud. 2015;52(1):317–24.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang X, Chen H, Zhou J, Huang Q, Feng XY, Li J. Impact of web-based health education on HPV vaccination uptake among college girl students in Western and Northern China: a follow-up study. BMC Womens Health. 2022;22(1):46.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kececi A, Bulduk S. Health Education for the Elderly. 2012. http://cdn.intechopen.com/pdfs-wm/29304.pdf. Accessed 27 Aug 2021.Wang Q, Yue N, Zheng MY, Wang DL, Duan CX, Yu XG, et al. Influenza vaccination coverage of population and the factors influencing influenza vaccination in mainland China: A meta-analysis. Vaccine. 2018;36(48):7262–9.Article PubMed Google Scholar Li PC, Hayat K, Jiang MH, Pu ZJ, Yao XL, Zou YM, et al. Impact of video-led educational intervention on the uptake of influenza vaccine among adults aged 60years and above in China: a study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. BMC Public Health. 2021;21(1):222.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shaanxi Provincial Bureau of Statistics. Statistic Yearbook Of Shaanxi. 2020. http:/jj.shaanxi.gov.cn/upload2020/indexch.htm. Accessed 27 Aug 2021.Faul F, Erdfelder E, Buchner A, Lang AG. Statistical power analyses using G*Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression analyses. Behav Res Methods. 2009;41(4):1149–60.Article PubMed Google Scholar White IR, Horton NJ, Carpenter J, Pocock SJ. Strategy for intention to treat analysis in randomised trials with missing outcome data. BMJ. 2011;342: d40.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Leung KC, Mui C, Chiu WY, Ng YY, Chen MHY, Ho PH, et al. Impact of patient education on influenza vaccine uptake among community-dwelling elderly: a randomized controlled trial. Health Educ Res. 2017;32(5):455–64.Article PubMed Google Scholar Yi B, Zhou SZ, Song Y, Chen EF, Lao XY, Cai J, et al. Innovations in adult influenza vaccination in China, 2014–2015: Leveraging a chronic disease management system in a community-based intervention. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2018;14(4):947–51.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Plans-Rubio P. The vaccination coverage required to establish herd immunity against influenza viruses. Prev Med. 2012;55(1):72–7.Article PubMed Google Scholar Lu XY, Lu J, Zhang LP, Mei KW, Guan BC, Lu YH. Gap between willingness and behavior in the vaccination against influenza, pneumonia, and herpes zoster among Chinese aged 50–69 years. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2021;20:1147–52.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Webb TL, Sheeran P. Does changing behavioral intentions engender bahaviour change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychol Bull. 2006;132(2):249–68.Article PubMed Google Scholar Ho HJ, Chan YY, Bin Ibrahim MA, Wagle AA, Wong CM, Chow A. A formative research-guided educational intervention to improve the knowledge and attitudes of seniors towards influenza and pneumococcal vaccinations. Vaccine. 2017;35(47):6367–74.Article PubMed Google Scholar Wendlandt R, Cowling BJ, Chen YY, Havers F, Shifflett P, Song Y, et al. Knowledge, attitudes and practices related to the influenza virus and vaccine among older adults in Eastern China. Vaccine. 2018;36(19):2673–82.Article PubMed Google Scholar Jiang M, Feng L, Wang W, Gong Y, Ming WK, Hayat K, et al. Knowledge, attitudes, and practices towards influenza among Chinese adults during the epidemic of COVID-19: a cross-sectional online survey. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2021;17(5):1412–9.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yang J, Atkins KE, Feng LZ, Pang MF, Zheng YM, Liu XX, et al. Seasonal influenza vaccination in China: Landscape of diverse regional reimbursement policy, and budget impact analysis. Vaccine. 2016;34(47):5724–35.Article PubMed Google Scholar Rizzo C, Rezza G, Ricciardi W. Strategies in recommending influenza vaccination in Europe and US. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2018;14(3):693–8.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Butler R, MacDonald NE, Hesitancy SWGoV. Diagnosing the determinants of vaccine hesitancy in specific subgroups: the guide to Tailoring Immunization Programmes (TIP). Vaccine. 2015;33(34):4176–9.Article PubMed Google Scholar Dube E, Leask J, Wolff B, Hickler B, Balaban V, Hosein E, et al. The WHO Tailoring Immunization Programmes (TIP) approach: Review of implementation to date. Vaccine. 2018;36(11):1509–15.Article PubMed Google Scholar Gong L, Zhang X, Qu Z, Francis MR, Han K, Xu C, et al. Public interest in distribution and determinants of influenza and pneumonia vaccination during the COVID-19 pandemic: an Infodemiology and cross-sectional study from China. Vaccines (Basel). 2021;9(11):1329.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank all the participants and healthcare workers, for their support and help during data collection.FundingThis work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Shaanxi Province [2020JQ-079]. The funding had no role in the study design, collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data, writing the manuscript, and decision to submit the manuscript for publication.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Pharmacy Administration and Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710061, ChinaMinghuan Jiang, Xuelin Yao, Pengchao Li, Yu Fang, Khezar Hayat, Yilin Gong, Jin Peng & Naveel AtifCenter for Drug Safety and Policy Research, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710061, ChinaMinghuan Jiang, Xuelin Yao, Pengchao Li, Yu Fang, Khezar Hayat, Yilin Gong, Jin Peng & Naveel AtifShaanxi Center for Health Reform and Development Research, Xi’an, 710061, ChinaMinghuan Jiang, Xuelin Yao, Pengchao Li, Yu Fang, Khezar Hayat, Yilin Gong, Jin Peng & Naveel AtifResearch Institute for Drug Safety and Monitoring, Institute of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Western China Science & Technology Innovation Harbor, Xi’an, 712000, ChinaMinghuan Jiang, Xuelin Yao, Pengchao Li, Yu Fang, Khezar Hayat, Yilin Gong, Jin Peng & Naveel AtifDepartment of Pharmacy, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710004, ChinaLiuxin FengHealth Science Center, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710061, ChinaXinke ShiAuthorsMinghuan JiangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXuelin YaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPengchao LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYu FangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLiuxin FengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKhezar HayatView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXinke ShiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYilin GongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJin PengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNaveel AtifView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsJiang M, Yao X, Hayat K, and Atif N drafted the manuscript. Jiang M, Li P, Fang Y, and Hayat K designed the study. Yao X, Li P, Feng L, Shi X, Gong Y, and Peng J performed the study and collected the data. Yao X and Li P analyzed the data. All authors had approved the final version of the manuscript for submission.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Minghuan Jiang.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate The study conformed to the Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki) and was approved by the Ethical Committee of Health Science Center of Xi’an Jiaotong University (approval number: No.2020-1183). Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests All authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationAdditional file 1. Questionnaire for survey.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleJiang, M., Yao, X., Li, P. et al. Impact of video-led educational intervention on uptake of influenza vaccine among the elderly in western China: a community-based randomized controlled trial. BMC Public Health 22, 1128 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-13536-8Download citationReceived: 03 November 2021Accepted: 26 May 2022Published: 06 June 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-13536-8Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsInfluenza vaccineVaccination coverageRandomized controlled trialAwarenessElderly Download PDF Advertisement BMC Public Health ISSN: 1471-2458 Contact us General enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.A comparison of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza cytokine storms Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member A comparison of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza cytokine storms Download PDF Copy By Shanet Susan AlexReviewed by Danielle Ellis, B.Sc.Jun 9 2022 In a recent study published in the Journal of Interferon & Cytokine Research, researchers compared the cytokine storms of pandemic influenza and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infections. Study: Comparing the Cytokine Storms of COVID-19 and Pandemic Influenza. Image Credit: NIAID Background Emerging respiratory viruses pose a serious health risk because they have the potential to create large-scale outbreaks. The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has resulted in millions of severe infection cases and fatalities globally in the last two years. Vaccination against Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and natural infection have both been shown to provide protective immune responses against SARS-CoV-2, but the parameters affecting morbidity are not well understood. Matching the immune fingerprints of SARS-CoV-2 infections with those of other severe respiratory infections, like pandemic influenza, could help settle current debates over the reasons behind their severe manifestations. As a result, finding similarities in the immunopathology of two illnesses could lead to immunotherapy targets that address shared pathogenic processes. Meanwhile, identifying distinct traits that distinguish each infection might lead to the discovery of specific immune modifications aiding the development of diagnostic and personalized therapies for each instance. About the study In the current study, the researchers summarize immunopathological elements of pandemic influenza and COVID-19, considering cytokine storms as the underlying cause of morbidity. The team analyzed differences and similarities in the cytokine signatures of both infections to identify compounds more appealing for translational drug and medication development. This review examines cytokine storm syndromes (CSS) seen during influenza and COVID-19 to identify conserved immunopathogenic processes underpinning severe illness. Furthermore, the investigators give the theoretical foundations for future study on particular cytokine systems involved in COVID-19 pathogenesis by emphasizing distinct immune characteristics in severe SARS-CoV-2 infection, presenting potential immunotherapy targets. Mechanisms behind the cytokine storm of sepsis. Sepsis is an exaggerated immune reaction elicited by local or systemic infection. Individuals with this condition display elevated levels of cytokines in the circulation (hypercytokinemia), a phenomenon named “cytokine storm.” The mechanisms driving the progression from a normal immune response against a pathogen to sepsis are under investigation. Clinical and demographic features of affected persons, together with genetic factors promoting an excessive immune activation or affecting the regulatory mechanisms of the immune system, might contribute to the pathobiology of sepsis. The exuberant production of cytokines leads to harmful effects on local cells, activation, and increased permeability of the endothelium, and microthrombosis. Hypercytokinemia is also accompanied by many anti-inflammatory mechanisms that arrest immune cell functions (immunoparalysis). Together, these alterations (cytokine storm + immunoparalysis) result in the development of organ failure without clearing the infection. Understanding the pathogenesis of sepsis is crucial to approaching other severe infections such as COVID-19 and pandemic influenza. The art pieces used in this figure were modified from Biorender (https://biorender.com/), licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License. COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019. Results and conclusions Overall, the data reported in the present article illustrate significant differences and similarities in the immune signature of severe COVID-19 and influenza. In addition, both illnesses increase levels of cytokines with varying roles. The elevated cytokines such as interferon β (IFN-β) and IFN-α has anti-viral traits, and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), interleukin 22 (IL-22), and IL-12) have inflammatory characteristics in severe SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections. Further, IL-10 has regulatory functions, and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) have angiogenic properties. In addition, cytokines, such as chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 8 (CXCL8), CXCL10, CXCL9, chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2), CCL5, and CCL4 harbor chemoattractant traits. Furthermore, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), PDGF, and FGF exhibit growth factor characteristics. Related StoriesSARS-CoV-2 hijacks host proteins to escape immune clearanceResearch identifies respiratory transmission potential of H5N1 virusPublic trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USHence, the authors noted that pathogenic processes such as increased innate immune stimulation, microvascular dysfunction, and monocyte or neutrophil chemotaxis could be relevant during the COVID-19 and influenza diseases. Using the information presented in this review, it is possible to conclude that the CSS of severe COVID-19 and influenza was similar, implying comparable pathogenic routes that could be leveraged for therapeutic applications. Certainly, both viruses were recognized by identical pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), activate similar signaling pathways, and need comparable adaptive and innate immune elements for protection. Elevated inflammasome- and PRR-induced cytokines, including IL-1, TNF, and IL-6, were seen in the CS of severe COVID-19 and influenza, suggesting a chronic innate inflammatory cascade that was harmful to the host. Hypothetically, addressing these compounds might lower their immunological and vascular impacts, important in the pathophysiology of sepsis, relaxing inflammation and enabling the extrapulmonary organs and lungs to re-establish equilibrium. The cytokine storm profiles of pandemic influenza and COVID-19. (A) Cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors commonly or differentially elevated during severe influenza and COVID-19 were identified by retrospective analysis of independent studies. (B) Immune profiles distinguishing influenza from COVID-19 identified by parallel comparisons. The art pieces used in this figure were modified from Biorender (https://biorender.com/), licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License. Conversely, there was a disparity in the immune fingerprint of COVID-19 and influenza. Heightened levels of type 1 T helper (Th1) cytokines plus IL-2, a proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL), soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (sTNF-R2), sTNF-R1, CXCL17, and surfactant protein D (SP-D) in severe influenza patients. Besides, severe SARS-CoV-2 patients showcase a polyfunctional Th2/Th1/Th17 immune activation pattern. According to the findings, SARS-CoV-2, not the influenza virus, elicited a polyfunctional and abundant CS profile. As a result, restoring a balanced immune response could be a viable goal for host-directed therapy targeted at some subsets of SARS-CoV-2 patients. The team proposes that the optimal COVID-19 immune therapeutics should inhibit particular immune signaling routes linked to hyperinflammation and restore useful immune homeostasis that boosts protective immunity in the subset of patients who produce polyfunctional cytokines. The authors stated that more study was needed to confirm these immune characteristics and determine the ideal time to provide specific immunotherapies based on the cytokine dynamics of these illnesses (SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections). They mentioned that future research should evaluate whether tezepelumab, which improves lung function and lowers exacerbations and eosinophilia in people with uncontrolled asthma, could improve COVID-19 outcomes. Journal reference: Lynette Miroslava Pacheco-Hernández, Jazmín Ariadna Ramírez-Noyola, Itzel Alejandra Gómez-García, Sergio Ignacio-Cortés, Joaquín Zúñiga, and José Alberto Choreño-Parra. Comparing the cytokine storms of COVID-19 and pandemic influenza. Journal of Interferon & Cytokine Research. ahead of print, DOI: http://doi.org/10.1089/jir.2022.0029, https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/jir.2022.0029 Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Anti-Inflammatory, Asthma, B Cell, CCL2, CCL4, CCL5, Cell, Chemokine, Chemokines, Chronic, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, CXCL10, Cytokine, Cytokines, Diagnostic, Eosinophilia, Fibroblast, Genetic, Growth Factor, Immune Response, Immune System, immunity, Immunotherapy, Inflammasome, Inflammation, Influenza, Interferon, Interleukin, Ligand, Lungs, Monocyte, Necrosis, Pandemic, Pathogen, Pathophysiology, Platelet, Proliferation, Protein, Receptor, Research, Respiratory, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Sepsis, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Therapeutics, TNFα, Tumor, Tumor Necrosis Factor, Vascular, Virus Comments (0) Written byShanet Susan AlexShanet Susan Alex, a medical writer, based in Kerala, India, is a Doctor of Pharmacy graduate from Kerala University of Health Sciences. Her academic background is in clinical pharmacy and research, and she is passionate about medical writing. Shanet has published papers in the International Journal of Medical Science and Current Research (IJMSCR), the International Journal of Pharmacy (IJP), and the International Journal of Medical Science and Applied Research (IJMSAR). Apart from work, she enjoys listening to music and watching movies. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APASusan Alex, Shanet. (2022, June 09). A comparison of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza cytokine storms. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220609/A-comparison-of-SARS-CoV-2-and-influenza-cytokine-storms.aspx.MLASusan Alex, Shanet. "A comparison of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza cytokine storms". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220609/A-comparison-of-SARS-CoV-2-and-influenza-cytokine-storms.aspx>.ChicagoSusan Alex, Shanet. "A comparison of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza cytokine storms". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220609/A-comparison-of-SARS-CoV-2-and-influenza-cytokine-storms.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardSusan Alex, Shanet. 2022. A comparison of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza cytokine storms. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220609/A-comparison-of-SARS-CoV-2-and-influenza-cytokine-storms.aspx. Suggested Reading Anti-inflammatory cytokine linked to capillary obstruction and cognitive decline in diabetesCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionGenetic risk factors for long-COVID uncovered in a large multi-ethnic studyUnraveling the mechanism of Shufeng Jiedu Capsules in influenza treatmentLeritrelvir shows high efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 protease mutationsStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsOne in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19Canada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S. Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Genetics (Subscribe or Preview) Asthma (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Seasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicTwo Red Foxes in Utah Test Positive for Avian Influenza | Outdoor Life Search for: Hunting Big Game Hunting Deer Hunting Bow Hunting Hunting Dogs Predator Hunting Small Game Hunting Turkey Hunting Upland Bird Hunting Waterfowl Hunting Wild Game Recipes Fishing Fly Fishing Freshwater Bass Fishing Panfish Fishing Saltwater Fishing Ice Fishing Record Fish Saltwater Fishing Wild Caught Fish Recipes Conservation Climate & Environment Hunter Recruitment Policy & Legislation Public Lands & Waters Wildlife Management Guns Ammo Competitive Shooting Concealed Carry Handguns Rifles Shot Show Shotguns Gear ATVs Camping Gear Fishing Gear Hunting Gear Knives Optics Shooting Gear Survival Gear Trucks Survival Animal Attacks Fitness Foraging & Gardening Natural Disaster Survival Survival Skills Wilderness Survival FOLLOW US Newsletter Sign-Up Facebook Instagram Youtube RSS Merch Cover Art Knives 747K 181K 57.8K Search for: Hunting Big Game Hunting Deer Hunting Bow Hunting Hunting Dogs Predator Hunting Small Game Hunting Turkey Hunting Upland Bird Hunting Waterfowl Hunting Wild Game Recipes Fishing Fly Fishing Freshwater Bass Fishing Panfish Fishing Ice Fishing Record Fish Saltwater Fishing Wild Caught Fish Recipes Conservation Climate & Environment Hunter Recruitment Policy & Legislation Public Lands & Waters Wildlife Management Guns Ammo Competitive Shooting Concealed Carry Handguns Rifles Shot Show Shotguns Gear ATVs Camping Gear Fishing Gear Hunting Gear Knives Optics Shooting Gear Survival Gear Trucks Survival Animal Attacks Fitness Foraging & Gardening Natural Disaster Survival Survival Skills Wilderness Survival Merch Cover Art Knives Newsletter Sign-up Conservation Wildlife Management Two Red Foxes in Utah Test Positive for Avian Influenza These are the first known cases of mammals in the state contracting bird flu By Keegan Sentner Posted on Jun 10, 2022 3:28 PM EDT It's the first documented case of mammals contracting the avian flu in the state during this outbreak. Pedro 'Pete' Ramirez, Jr. / USFWS Share Two red foxes that were found dead in two different Utah cities have tested positive for the highly contagious avian flu, according to the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. The deadly virus was first detected in Utah in April and has since spread to wild and domestic bird populations across the state. The first red fox was found dead on a homeowner’s lawn in Murray on May 24. Two days later, an individual reported a second dead red fox roughly 5 miles away in Taylorsville. Both occurred in the Salt Lake Valley. “While it does happen, it’s not very common for wildlife species other than birds to get highly pathogenic avian influenza,” said veterinarian Ginger Stout in a DWR press release. The two foxes were the first confirmed mammals to test positive for the avian flu in the state. “Some states have had one or two cases in wild mammals, but it’s pretty infrequent, and it seems to affect younger animals more often when it does occur,” said Stout. UWR wildlife officials sent the bodies to the Utah Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory in Logan, Utah for testing. Officials then sent samples to the National Veterinary Services Laboratory in Iowa to confirm the presence of the virus in the two mammals. Both foxes tested negative for rabies. The first official case of avian influenza in Utah occurred in April when chickens in a non-commercial flock reported positive for the virus. Last month, Utah confirmed its first official case in wild birds when a great horned owl in Cache County tested positive. Since then, the state has confirmed the virus in 25 wild birds across eight counties. Since January, the highly contagious bird flu has been wreaking havoc on wild and domestic bird populations across the country. As of this week, 1,422 wild birds across 41 states have tested positive for avian influenza. In addition, officials have reported outbreaks in 36 states, affecting 39,874,604 domestic poultry from 396 outbreaks. Over the past few months, Outdoor Life has reported on several outbreaks in the Pacific Northwest, Texas, and Wyoming. This week, Arizona reported its first cases, and ducks in the National Mall tested positive for the virus. In addition, the virus is significantly affecting the poultry industry and causing price spikes for many commercial products, including eggs, whose prices have risen 45 percent since February. In April, the United States Department of Agriculture allocated $263 million to the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service to help combat the virus and protect the industry. “Highly pathogenic avian influenza is a serious concern for our nation’s poultry industry,” said USDA undersecretary for marketing and regulatory programs Jenny Lester Moffitt. “We need to continue our nationwide response to minimize the impact.” Although there has been a confirmed case of the virus infecting a human, which occurred in Colorado in May, the Center for Disease Control considers avian influenza to be of low risk to humans. Summary Two red foxes were found dead outside homes roughly five miles from each other. It's the first case of bird flu in Utah mammals. Latest Hunting My First Buck Was the Biggest Typical Mule Deer Ever Taken with a Bow. I Almost Discarded the Antlers My First Buck Was the Biggest Typical Mule Deer Ever Taken with a Bow. I Almost Discarded the Antlers By Bill Barcus as told to Lee Kline Hunting ‘I Thought I’d Fall Out of the Tree.’ Missouri Hunter Tags Her Biggest Buck Yet ‘I Thought I’d Fall Out of the Tree.’ Missouri Hunter Tags Her Biggest Buck Yet By Bob McNally More in Wildlife Management Bird Flu Has Reached Oregon and Washington Bird Flu Has Reached Oregon and Washington By Keegan Sentner The U.K. Releases 55 Million Game Birds Every Year. This Group Says Not to Release Any Amid Avian Flu Fears The U.K. Releases 55 Million Game Birds Every Year. This Group Says Not to Release Any Amid Avian Flu Fears By Dac Collins More Than 1,500 Pheasants, Quail, and Ducks Euthanized as Texas Confirms Bird Flu Outbreak at a Commercial Game Bird Operation More Than 1,500 Pheasants, Quail, and Ducks Euthanized as Texas Confirms Bird Flu Outbreak at a Commercial Game Bird Operation By Dac Collins Avian Flu a Growing Concern in North Carolina as Officials Confirm More Cases in Wild Ducks Avian Flu a Growing Concern in North Carolina as Officials Confirm More Cases in Wild Ducks By Dac Collins Avian Flu Spreads Across Southeastern U.S. and Beyond, Killing Hundreds of Wild Birds Along the Atlantic Flyway Avian Flu Spreads Across Southeastern U.S. and Beyond, Killing Hundreds of Wild Birds Along the Atlantic Flyway By Kristen A. Schmitt Brown Bear Cub Becomes the Second Bruin in Alaska to Die from Bird Flu Brown Bear Cub Becomes the Second Bruin in Alaska to Die from Bird Flu By Dac Collins Deadliest Bird Flu Outbreak in U.S. History Is Killing Bears, Mountain Lions, and Marine Mammals Deadliest Bird Flu Outbreak in U.S. History Is Killing Bears, Mountain Lions, and Marine Mammals By Katie Hill USDA Bans Importation of All Hunter-Harvested Waterfowl from Canada the Day After Hunting Season Opens USDA Bans Importation of All Hunter-Harvested Waterfowl from Canada the Day After Hunting Season Opens By Dac Collins SEE MORE More in Conservation Smoke a Goose with the Wing Still On? Waterfowl Importation Ban Could Cause Confusion for Hunters at Canadian Border Smoke a Goose with the Wing Still On? Waterfowl Importation Ban Could Cause Confusion for Hunters at Canadian Border By Joe Genzel USDA Walks Back Canada Waterfowl Ban, Will Allow Hunters to Bring Meat Across the Border USDA Walks Back Canada Waterfowl Ban, Will Allow Hunters to Bring Meat Across the Border By Dac Collins Waterfowl Fall from the Sky by the Hundreds as Lunar Eclipse Coincides with Snowstorm in Central Oregon Waterfowl Fall from the Sky by the Hundreds as Lunar Eclipse Coincides with Snowstorm in Central Oregon By Keegan Sentner A Polar Bear Died from Bird Flu in Alaska A Polar Bear Died from Bird Flu in Alaska By Katie Hill Public Land: House Committee Passes First Land-Transfer Legislation Public Land: House Committee Passes First Land-Transfer Legislation By Tony Hansen The Story Behind the Snow Goose Mass Die-Off Video The Story Behind the Snow Goose Mass Die-Off Video By Katie Hill Why Some Hunters Disparage Other Hunters—and Why It’s Dangerous for All of Us Why Some Hunters Disparage Other Hunters—and Why It’s Dangerous for All of Us By Tyler Freel From the Archives: The History of the Outdoor Life Conservation Pledge From the Archives: The History of the Outdoor Life Conservation Pledge By Natalie Krebs SEE MORE NEWSLETTER SIGNUP Get the hottest outdoor news and cutting-edge gear reviews. Sign Up By signing up you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. Hunting Big Game Hunting Deer Hunting Bow Hunting Hunting Dogs Predator Hunting Small Game Hunting Turkey Hunting Upland Bird Hunting Waterfowl Hunting Wild Game Recipes Fishing Fly Fishing Freshwater Bass Fishing Panfish Fishing Ice Fishing Record Fish Saltwater Fishing Wild Caught Fish Recipes Conservation Climate & Environment Hunter Recruitment Policy & Legislation Public Lands & Waters Wildlife Management Guns Ammo Competitive Shooting Concealed Carry Handguns Rifles Shot Show Shotguns Gear ATVs Camping Gear Fishing Gear Hunting Gear Knives Optics Shooting Gear Survival Gear Trucks More About Us Outdoor Life+ FAQ Outdoor Life Editorial Standards How We Test and Review Products Contact Us Affiliate Disclosure Privacy Policy Sitemap FOLLOW US DISCLAIMER(S) Articles may contain affiliate links which enable us to share in the revenue of any purchases made. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Service. © 2024 Recurrent. All rights reserved.Avian influenza suspected as hundreds of dead birds found on N.B. shores | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Avian influenza suspected as hundreds of dead birds found on N.B. shores | CBC News LoadedNew BrunswickAvian influenza suspected as hundreds of dead birds found on N.B. shoresAn estimated 1,000 dead birds have been found along the New Brunswick shoreline in recent weeks, with avian flu the suspected culprit.People warned not to handle dead birds, but to report them to the provinceShane Magee · CBC News · Posted: Jun 10, 2022 3:25 PM EDT | Last Updated: June 10, 2022Lewnanny Richardson, a biologist and the species-at-risk program director with Nature NB, says he has counted around 350 dead birds in recent days. (Shane Magee/CBC)Social SharingThrough his binoculars, Lewnanny Richardson scans the Factorie à Bastien beach on New Brunswick's Acadian Peninsula.The biologist with Nature NB spots what he's looking for a few hundred metres down the shore and adds one more to his total: 350 dead birds since May 25."I've been with Nature NB for the last 22 years," Richardson said. "I've never seen that."It's part of a series of discoveries of dead birds along the shore, from the northeastern city of Bathurst, south to Port Elgin, near Nova Scotia. No hard numbers are available, though an estimated 1,000 of one species have been found in recent weeks.WATCH | Biologist concerned as hundreds of dead birds wash ashore:Dead birds are washing up on New Brunswick's northern and eastern coasts2 years agoDuration 4:04A biologist is finding more and more dead birds washing up along New Brunswick shorelines, and avian influenza is the suspected causeSimilar discoveries were made around the Gulf of St. Lawrence on the shores of Quebec, Prince Edward Island, Cape Breton and western Newfoundland. Avian influenza, or H5N1, is the suspected culprit in New Brunswick. The viral infection also known as bird flu spreads easily among birds and affects wild and domesticated species. The virus spreads by bird secretions and droppings.Richardson walks the Acadian Peninsula shore as part of a piping plover survey and normally counts 20 dead birds per summer.A dead northern gannet washed up on a beach on the Acadian Peninsula. Richardson suspected the bird had died shortly before. (Shane Magee/CBC)On May 25, Richardson and his summer students counted three. Then more. Early on, he logged things like GPS co-ordinates for each one. Now he takes a photo, some basic notes, and keeps counting.Most of the birds are northern gannets, which aren't normally found in New Brunswick. That's the species Richardson spotted washed up on the beach in the minutes since his colleagues walked the same shoreline."That northern gannet just died a couple of minutes ago," Richardson said after getting closer. "It's been washed [up] by the sea, so you can see it's super fresh.""We're seeing a large-scale mortality event for northern gannets in the Gulf of St. Lawrence," Becky Whittam, manager of the wildlife and habitat section at Environment and Climate Change Canada, said in an interview. Whittam said an estimated 1,000 gannets have been found dead on New Brunswick's east coast. There have been "thousands" reported around the gulf region."Everybody is completely overwhelmed right now with just keeping up with these large scale mortalities," said Megan Jones.Northern gannets found dead near Tracadie undergoing tests for avian fluStrain of highly pathogenic avian influenza kills thousands of birds in QuebecJones is the Atlantic regional director for Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative and an assistant professor at the Atlantic Veterinary College in Prince Edward Island. Jones has been involved in necropsies, or examinations, and testing a small number of the birds from New Brunswick.Jones said changes in the northern gannets' brains, livers, lungs and other organs are consistent with avian influenza. Almost all are preliminary positive results through PCR testing, the same type of testing used for COVID-19. Samples are sent to a lab in Winnipeg for confirmation. Kaitlyn Lemay walks along the beach in Saint-Édouard-de-Kent where on Tuesday, she said, provincial wildlife officials told her they had collected about 200 dead birds. (Shane Magee/CBC)Gannets found dead in Quebec and Prince Edward Island have been confirmed to have highly pathogenic avian influenza, Whittam said.Kaitlyn Lemay was on her lunch break Tuesday at the wharf in Saint-Édouard-de-Kent when she spotted Department of Natural Resources staff using all-terrain vehicles on the beach.Curious, she approached and asked what happened. Lemay says she was told they had collected about 200 dead birds from the area around 100 kilometres south of where Richardson has been counting dead birds. Lemay said she was told the birds were northern gannets, cormorants and other sea birds.She saw a trailer loaded with black garbage bags she said were full of dead birds."I have never seen this many dead birds on the beach," Lemay said in an interview.The provincial Department of Natural Resources deferred an interview request to the federal government.A Department of Natural Resources employee shows one of the dead northern gannets collected from a beach on the Acadian Peninsula in northeastern Brunswick. (Shane Magee/CBC)A few kilometres down the coast from the wharf is the picturesque Bouctouche Dunes and boardwalk. Joanne Jaillet works at the Irving Eco-Centre where 50 to 60 dead birds, mainly northern gannets, have been found over about a week on the beach where they do guided tours with school children."I've been working here for 24 years now, and this is the first for us that so many birds are being picked up on the beach," Jaillet said.Possible avian flu cases in P.E.I. foxes shows need to 'remain vigilant'Hundreds of birds dead or dying of avian flu land on Cape Breton shoresBack on the Acadian Peninsula, a Department of Natural Resources staff member was using an all-terrain vehicle to drive down the beach and collect the dead birds Thursday, placing them in black garbage bags.The bags were piled into the back of a pickup truck. Bags filled with dead birds were starting to fill a dumpster outside the DNR office in nearby Tracadie.Richardson said the birds will be buried at a landfill to reduce the chance of infecting other animals.Richardson said seeing species he's worked with for two decades dying in front of him is disturbing. "I was saying to one of my staff yesterday, I would love to hug them and say, 'It's OK, you can die. Don't be afraid.'"Dead birds in garbage bags are being collected from beaches and stored in a dumpster beside the Department of Natural Resources office in Tracadie before being buried. (Shane Magee/CBC)Jones said the number of deaths is extremely unusual for the region. "We have never had an outbreak like this. We've never had an outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza in Atlantic Canada, anyway. But certainly, we've never seen one at this scale."The dead gannets are believed to be from a nesting colony on Bonaventure Island off Quebec's Gaspé Peninsula.It's one of six gannet colonies in Atlantic Canada and Quebec. There are no colonies in New Brunswick. The birds, which are not considered endangered, fly from the island and feed at sea before returning to feed their young.Whittam said there are an estimated 200,000 breeding gannets in Canada. "They can withstand some of that mortality and bounce back in future years," Whittam said. "But we are keeping a close eye on the situation."Two dead northern gannets on a beach near Tracadie. (Shane Magee/CBC)Another large colony is just off the Magdalen Islands, which Jones said is the suspected source of gannets coming ashore on Prince Edward Island and Cape Breton.Jones said the virus, or one similar to it, has circulated in Europe for a few years and showed up in Newfoundland before Christmas. Since then, it has spread across the Maritimes, Canada and most of the United States.Jones and Whittam said a large number of scientists and officials in Canada are involved in tracking and trying to understand the bird deaths. "We're looking at just characterizing exactly what the virus is doing to all of these animals," Jones said. "There are also people looking at what's happening on the bird colonies going out on the ground to actually try to quantify this thing."Megan Jones, an assistant professor at the Atlantic Veterinary College, says the number of bird deaths is extremely unusual for the region. (University of Prince Edward Island/Submitted)Avian influenza has prompted alarm about potential harm to poultry production. The highly pathogenic avian influenza was found in a small flock of chickens about 20 kilometres south of Moncton this spring. A control zone that restricted live birds, bird products or byproducts from being moved into or out of the area was lifted this week.Jones said they've started seeing foxes test positive on Prince Edward Island, believed to be the result of eating sick birds. The risk to humans is considered low.Those interviewed all warned anyone who finds a sick or dead wild bird to not touch them.Nick Brown, a spokesperson for the New Brunswick government, said in an email the province would respond to calls about dead birds on a case-by-case basis.Jones said anyone walking dogs should be careful to keep them away from sick or dead birds.The province said the birds should be reported to the Department of Natural Resources at 1-833-301-0334.ABOUT THE AUTHORShane MageeReporterShane Magee is a Moncton-based reporter for CBC.CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories Northern gannets found dead near Tracadie undergoing tests for avian flu Strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza kills thousands of birds in Quebec Possible avian flu cases in P.E.I. foxes shows need to 'remain vigilant' Hundreds of birds dead or dying of avian flu land on Cape Breton shoresFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowHundreds of birds dead or dying of avian flu land on Cape Breton shores | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Hundreds of birds dead or dying of avian flu land on Cape Breton shores | CBC News LoadedNova ScotiaHundreds of birds dead or dying of avian flu land on Cape Breton shoresNova Scotia's Department of Natural Resources says more than 300 northern gannets from the Magdalen Islands have landed on Cape Breton's shoreline, potentially infecting local bird populations.The birds, mostly northern gannets, come from a Magdalen Islands colony that is widely infected with H5N1CBC News · Posted: Jun 06, 2022 4:21 PM EDT | Last Updated: June 7, 2022More than 300 northern gannets infected with H5N1 — known as avian influenza or bird flu — have been found dead or dying along Nova Scotia's Cape Breton shoreline. (Jacques Boissinot/The Canadian Press)Social SharingOcean-going birds infected with avian influenza are washing up dead on Nova Scotia shores and provincial officials are worried the highly contagious disease will now spread among local bird populations.Thousands of northern gannets from a colony in the Magdalen Islands have died of the flu over the last couple of weeks and Quebec's Wildlife Ministry says hundreds of them are confirmed cases of H5N1 — known as avian flu.Elizabeth Walsh, a biologist with Nova Scotia's Department of Natural Resources and Renewables, said more than 300 dead or dying gannets have been found along the province's shoreline and there is concern the disease will spread locally."We have more probability of avian influenza in our water birds such as waterfowl and gulls ... than when we do have birds like the gannets, when they die on shore, scavengers such as bald eagles [and] our other birds of prey can also succumb to avian influenza," she said.Strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza kills thousands of birds in QuebecSome infected gannets have been found in Pictou and Antigonish counties along the Northumberland Strait, said Walsh, but they mostly fly to parts of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Cape Breton looking for food."We've seen a large number of gannets washing up on our shores and I am concerned about what repercussions this could have on their population," she said.There are no confirmed cases in local shorebird populations, but officials are concerned about the potential for spread among nesting species such as endangered piping plovers.Elizabeth Walsh, a regional biologist with the Department of Natural Resources, says anyone who finds a dead or dying bird should not touch it, but should call 1-800-565-2224 to report it to the province. (Submitted by Elizabeth Walsh)The department is planning to conduct a count on Tuesday of nesting colonies on the Bird Islands just off Cape Breton, where puffins, razorbills and guillemots can be found.Anyone who finds a dead or dying bird should not touch it and should keep pets away from them, said Walsh.She recommended calling the department's toll-free line at 1-800-565-2224 to report the location where birds are found and DNR officials will clean them up.Signs of disease in animalsAccording to Quebec's Department of Agriculture, Environment and Natural Resources website, the disease causes few signs in birds. However, the ministry says infected birds may have a lack of energy or appetite, decreased egg production, coughing, sneezing, diarrhea or a lack of co-ordination. The virus spreads by bird secretions and droppings, says the ministry. The ministry says there is a low chance of humans becoming infected after having contact with the birds but people who do come in contact with any bird should wash their hands with soap and hot water or an alcohol solution.MORE TOP STORIES'It's going to be wild': N.S. tourism businesses expecting big yearEskasoni Community BureauEskasoni café aims to serve community by dishing up healthier optionsTruro police chief calls RCMP lockdown request 'a last-minute Hail Mary'N.S. judge rules path to Silver Sands Beach near Halifax must reopenN.S. researchers receive nearly $1.5M to study impacts of COVID-19CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canow2 Salt Lake County foxes found dead with bird flu in uncommon cross-species infection, officials say 2 Salt Lake County foxes found dead with bird flu in uncommon cross-species infection, officials sayTwenty-five wild birds across 6 Utah counties have been infected during this latest outbreak. By Daedan Olander | June 9, 2022, 7:02 p.m.The Utah Division of Wildlife Resources confirmed Thursday that avian flu had infected two red foxes that were found dead in Salt Lake County late last month.The first animal was discovered in a homeowner’s yard in Murray on May 24, and the second was found two days later in Taylorsville, a news release stated. Both were dead at the time of discovery. The carcasses were transported to the Utah Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory in Logan, and testing at the National Veterinary Services Laboratory in Ames, Iowa, confirmed the disease.According to officials, this type of cross-species infection is uncommon.“While it does happen, it’s not very common for wildlife species other than birds to get highly pathogenic avian influenza,” Ginger Stout, a wildlife division veterinarian, said in the news release. “Some states have had one or two cases in wild mammals, but it’s pretty infrequent, and it seems to affect younger animals more often when it does occur.”The division currently believes the foxes either ate or had some other contact with birds carrying the disease.The state’s first bird flu case during this outbreak was confirmed last month in Cache County. The virus has since infected 25 wild birds across Cache and five additional Utah counties: Weber, Salt Lake, Utah, Tooele and Carbon. The birds included Canada geese, great horned owls, hawks, pelicans, turkey vultures and ducks.In rare instances, avian influenza can spread to humans, and symptoms include fever, cough, headache and shortness of breath, according to the Mayo Clinic’s website. While this strain is considered a low risk to people, one human case has been confirmed in Colorado.For safety, the wildlife division suggests that residents regularly clean their bird feeders and baths and avoid physical contact with wild birds.“If anyone finds a group of five or more dead waterfowl or shorebirds — or any individual dead scavengers or raptors — they should report it to the nearest DWR office and absolutely make sure not to touch the birds or pick them up,” Stout said. To report such findings, call 801-538-4700, and the wildlife division will dispatch and collect them for testing.In case you missed itRepublican Utah state school board members form caucus, will meet in closed meetingsI-15 widening: A jaw-dropping new price tag and everything else we learned from the final environmental report‘The prank was not appropriate’: Former Utah Tech University president apologizes for phallic gag giftTHE LATEST194-year-old LDS Church and 100-year-old Russell Nelson reach a milestone — in TooeleLook Ahead: Local events and things to do this week, November 10-16Big 12 Conference fines Ute AD Mark Harlan for disparaging refs after Utah-BYU gameGordon Monson: Shame on Utah AD Mark Harlan for complaining about a game that was absolutely not ‘stolen’ from his UtesPerson in hospital after being shot by police in West JordanFeatured Local SavingsCONNECT Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube RSS SUBSCRIPTIONSSubscribe to print + digitalSubscribe to digital onlyDigital access for print subscribersEmail newslettersLogin to your print accountLogin to your digital accountSubscription FAQsHelp and contact infoGift SubscriptionsABOUT USHistory and missionOur nonprofit modelBoard and advisersOfficers and staffSupportersDonors and tax filingPrivacy policyCalifornia privacyEditorial policies and ethicsMOREAdvertise with usLegal noticesStorePodcastsArchivesStory TipsSupport The TribuneDonateCookie PreferencesCommenting PolicyABOUT USTERMS OF SERVICEPRIVACY POLICYEDITORIAL POLICYADVERTISECONTACT USHELPSUPPORTWEEKLY PRINT EDITIONEMAIL NEWSLETTERSPODCASTSNEWS TIPSDONATECOOKIE PREFERENCESReport a missed paper by emailing subscribe@sltrib.com or calling 801-237-2900For e-edition questions or comments, contact customer support 801-237-2900 or email subscribe@sltrib.comsltrib.com © 1996-2024 The Salt Lake Tribune. All rights reserved.New vaccine posters available | AHA News Skip to main content Secondary Menu AHA Member Center About Press Center AHA Help Center Search Advocacy Quick Links Action Center We Care, We Vote Advocacy Agenda Advocacy Issues Action Alerts Special Bulletins Advisories Letters Testimony Press Releases Topics Access & Health Coverage Affordability Behavioral Health Compliance Current & Emerging Payment Models Health Equity Technology and Cybersecurity Quality and Patient Safety Regulatory Relief Workforce Issues for You The Value of Health Systems Surprise Billing Institute for Diversity and Health Equity The 340B Drug Pricing Program Rural Health and Critical Access Hospitals Hospitals Against Violence | #HAVhope Post-acute Care Maternal and Child Health Cybersecurity & Risk Advisory Physician Leaders Nurse Leadership Trustees Health Systems Teaching Hospitals Providers with Health Plans Career Resources Current AHA Openings Certification Center American Organization for Nursing Leadership Professional Membership Groups AHA Trustee Services Data & Insights Fast Facts on U.S. Hospitals Health Care: The Big Picture Environmental Scan Sustainability Roadmap AHA Health Care Workforce Scan Market Scan Health Equity Action Library (HEAL) AHA Center for Health Innovation AHA Data Products AHA Coding Clinic National Uniform Billing Committee (NUBC) Hospitals and Systems Presentation Center Community Health Data AHA Funded Partnerships Resource Center AHA Online Store Education & Events Events & Webinars Calendar AHA Leadership Summit AHA Rural Health Care Leadership Conference AHA Annual Membership Meeting Accelerating Health Equity Conference Webinar Recordings AHA Team Training Individual Membership Organization Events AHA Knowledge Exchange Innovation Resources Sponsorship Information News News Articles COVID-19 Updates Advancing Health Podcast My AHA Connect app AHA Stat Blog AHA News RSS Feed Subscribe to AHA Today Perspective Chair File Individuals & Communities Telling the Hospital Story COVID-19 Vaccines COVID-19 Resources Promoting Healthy Communities AHA Community Health Improvement Breadcrumb Home News Headline New vaccine posters available Jun 09, 2022 - 03:14 PM The AHA today published two new posters highlighting the long history of vaccines. From the first vaccine developed in 1796 against smallpox to the latest COVID-19 vaccine, vaccines have reduced the burden of disease as well as the associated mortality and morbidity. Hospitals are encouraged to display the posters in patient waiting areas and exam rooms and use them in digital communications. These new infographics, now available in English and soon to be in Spanish, are part of AHA’s continuing effort to encourage vaccine confidence; see all education resources and get answers to your vaccine questions here. COVID-19: Vaccines and Therapeutics Related News Articles Headline View the AHA's latest United Against the Flu toolkit celebrating fall AHA's latest social media toolkit for encouraging vaccination against the flu and COVID-19 provides fall-themed social media posts and graphics. Download the… Headline CDC recommends two doses of COVID-19 vaccine for older individuals, lowers pneumococcal vaccine age The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention last week endorsed a recommendation for people aged 65 and older and for immunocompromised individuals to… Headline CDC reminds hospital and health system workers to protect themselves, patients during respiratory virus season The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is reminding clinicians and other health care workers to take necessary steps to keep themselves and their… Chairperson's File Chair File: The Best Defense Against Flu and COVID-19 Autumn is here, and that means cooler weather and also the start of flu season.We know the best way to prevent influenza is to get a flu vaccine. The Centers… Headline Survey: Less than 20% of U.S. adults concerned for themselves or family receiving infection ahead of respiratory virus season The National Foundation for Infectious Diseases Sept. 25 released a survey showing that less than one in five U.S. adults are concerned about themselves or a… Headline FDA authorizes combination tests for flu, COVID-19 The Food and Drug Administration Aug. 22 granted emergency use authorization for two new combined COVID-19 and influenza tests. The Nano-Check Influenza-COVID-… AHA Footer About AHA Careers at AHA Membership AHA Online Store Chicago Office: 312.422.3000 D.C. Office: 202.638.1100 AHA Support: 1.800.424.4301 AHA Help Center: Contact Us and FAQs Advocacy Access & Health Coverage Action Center Affordability Behavioral Health Compliance Current & Emerging Payment Models Health Equity Hospitals Against Violence (HAV) Leveraging Technology Quality and Patient Safety Regulatory Relief Surprise Billing Workforce Career Resources Current AHA Openings Certification Center Data & Insights Fast Facts on U.S. Hospitals Health Care: The Big Picture Environmental Scan Community Health Data AHA Data Products Presentation Center Education and Events Events and Webinars Calendar AHA Leadership Summit AHA Rural Health Care Leadership Conference AHA Team Training AHA Knowledge Exchange Sponsorship Information News Subscribe to AHA Today Advancing Health Podcast Download My AHA Connect App AHA Stat Blog AHA News RSS Feed Advancing Health in America Telling the Hospital Story COVID-19 Vaccines Promoting Healthy Communities AHA Community Health Improvement Press Center Press Releases Press Kit Affiliated Organizations Health Research & Educational Trust Institute for Diversity and Health Equity AHA Physician Alliance AHA Trustee Services American Organization for Nursing Leadership Professional Membership Groups © 2024 by the American Hospital Association. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Terms of Use Facebook Twitter Youtube Instagram Noncommercial use of original content on www.aha.org is granted to AHA Institutional Members, their employees and State, Regional and Metro Hospital Associations unless otherwise indicated. AHA does not claim ownership of any content, including content incorporated by permission into AHA produced materials, created by any third party and cannot grant permission to use, distribute or otherwise reproduce such third party content. Request permission to reproduce AHA content.Bird flu quarantine lifted in Lane CountyPlease ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of website accessibilityMon, 11 Nov 2024 08:14:01 GMT (1731312841915)Story Infinite Scroll - News3 v1.0.0 (common)c176e2edee36242d1f910bbcf0b370e84d231d3fNewsWeatherRadarMapsCamerasClosingsODOT CamerasUmpqua River Info7-Day ForecastSportsOutdoorsGame CenterWatch Now 52 Sun 60 Mon 54Bird flu quarantine lifted in Lane Countyby KVALWed, June 8th 2022 at 2:43 AM(SBG)TOPICS:environmentsocial issuesAgricultural Health And SafetyAvian InfluenzaCentral Luzon H5N6 OutbreakHealthInfectious DiseasesInfluenzaEUGENE, Ore. — The Oregon Department of Agriculture has lifted a quarantine in Lane Country that limited the movement of poultry within a region where the highly pathogenic avian influenza was found.ODA observed the area twice since the quarantine was implemented May 17 and determined the area is now secure following euthanasia and disposal of the infected birds.ODA is still encouraging people in the area to keep domesticated birds separated from wild species.Stay ConnectedLike UsFollow Us© 2024 Sinclair, Inc.TermsEEOFCCFCCPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyCookie PreferencesLoading ...US declares Seqirus Holly Springs ‘pandemic ready’ to produce 150 million doses of flu vaccine in NC | WRAL TechWire WRAL.com TechWire Partners TechWire Insiders TechWire 20 Jobs Jobs Home Bio Jobs Hub Local Business Virtual Conference Series Workforce Development Economic Development LimeLight Calendar Startups Startups Home Startup Guide Funding 101 News News Home Analysis Biotech Internet Energy Venture & Innovation Partner Content TechWire Insiders Real Estate News News Home Analysis Biotech Internet Energy Venture & Innovation Partner Content TechWire Insiders Real Estate Startups Startups Home Startup Guide Funding 101 Calendar LimeLight Jobs Jobs Home Bio Jobs Hub Local Business Virtual Conference Series Workforce Development Economic Development Select Page News US declares Seqirus Holly Springs ‘pandemic ready’ to produce 150 million doses of flu vaccine in NC flu vaccineSeqirus Seqirus flu vaccine plant in Holly Springs by WRAL News — June 6, 2022 Seqirus Holly Springs held a ribbon cutting Monday morning to celebrate its expansion and new recognition for pandemic vaccine production and distribution. Last week, the U.S. government declared Seqirus, one of the largest influenza vaccine manufacturers in the world, “pandemic ready” to produce and distribute 150 million doses of its cell-based pandemic influenza vaccines, which would be needed in the event of an influenza pandemic. “We have to keep moving. We have to keep changing. We need to meet the evolving needs of the patient and the times we have,” said Paul Perrault, CSL CEO and managing director. The Seqirus facility, located at 475 Green Oaks Parkway in Holly Springs, is the first and only company in the U.S. to receive the designation for domestic production. “The impact of this expansion both locally and around the globe is significant,” said Dave Sehgal, the vice president of manufacturing and Holly springs site head for Sequirus. The facility is also the first of its kind built in partnership with the federal government’s Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA). “When [pandemic influenza] does hit, we will be ready to go, and we have complete confidence we can hit those milestones and those goals,” said Robert Johnson, BARDA director. Sen. Richard Burr helped establish the authority to strengthen the country’s readiness to respond to the next flu pandemic. “I really am concerned with a year from now and the severity that flu might represent,” said Burr. “It’s really important for us, and for the world, to have access to vaccines and for flu vaccination to be a normal process for our annual medical prevention.” Pandemic influenza differs from seasonal influenza, although both can cause severe illness and live-threatening complications in some patients. Pandemic influenza, like coronavirus, is dangerous because there is “likely to be little or no pre-existing immunity to the virus in the human population,” according to a statement from Seqirus. According to Seqirus, four influenza pandemics have occurred in the last century, including the 1918 pandemic. It really is about protecting public health and making sure that we are pandemic ready,” said Perrault. “Pandemic influenza is still one of the most urgent and predictable public health threats we face as a nation,” he said. In the event of a pandemic influenza, Seqirus will be able to manufacture 150 million doses of specialized vaccines in Holly Springs. “As we have learned throughout COVID-19, preparing for naturally occurring pandemics is critical to America’s national and economic security,” said Perrault. flu vaccineSeqirus PreviousGSK’s measles vaccine now approved for use in U.S. NextMusk threatens to walk away from Twitter deal over spam, fake account info Back to WRAL.com Quick LinksAbout Us Contact Us Contribute TechWire Partners Advertise With Us Privacy Policy Newsletter SignupLatest headlines delivered to you twice daily © 2024 WRAL TechWire. | Site designed and managed by WRAL Digital Solutions. | Privacy Policy. | Advertising Terms and Conditions. | Terms and Conditions Bloc[83]VISIT SITE × Raleigh Iron WorksVISIT SITE × × Glen LennoxVISIT SITE × North HillsVISIT SITE × Boxyard RTPVISIT SITE × FentonVISIT SITE × × × × × × × × × × × × × × × × × × × × ×First Cases Of H5N1 Bird Flu Strain Discovered In Arizona | Scottsdale, AZ PatchSkip to main contentScottsdale, AZSubscribeNews FeedEventsLocal BusinessesClassifiedsPostAdvertiseNearbyTempe NewsPhoenix NewsAZ NewsTucson NewsYuma NewsPalm Desert NewsLas Vegas NewsNV NewsPalm Springs NewsRamona NewsLocal NewsCommunity CornerCrime & SafetyPolitics & GovernmentSchoolsTraffic & TransitObituariesPersonal FinanceNeighbor NewsBest OfSeasonal & HolidaysWeatherArts & EntertainmentBusiness & TechHealth & WellnessHome & GardenSportsTravelKids & FamilyPetsRestaurants & BarsEventsLocal BusinessesClassifiedsReal EstateSee all communitiesAdvertiseNearby CommunitiesTempe, AZPhoenix, AZAcross ArizonaTucson, AZYuma, AZPalm Desert, CALas Vegas, NVAcross NevadaPalm Springs, CARamona, CAState EditionArizonaNational EditionTop National NewsSee All CommunitiesHealth & FitnessFirst Cases Of H5N1 Bird Flu Strain Discovered In Arizona The strain has been spreading across the U.S. But the first cases in the state were discovered in three cormorants in a Scottsdale Park. Dan Shalin, Patch StaffPosted Fri, Jun 10, 2022 at 1:04 pm MTThe first cases of the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 have been discovered in Arizona in three nestling neotropical cormorants found dead in a Scottsdale park. (Shutterstock )SCOTTSDALE, AZ —The bird flu strain that has been discovered throughout the U.S. this spring has been found for the first time in Arizona, the Arizona Game and Fish Department (AZGFD) confirmed on Wednesday.The AZGFD said the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 has been discovered in three nestling neotropical cormorants that were found dead in Scottsdale's El Dorado Park. The Huffington Post reported that the birds were found when morning walkers alerted wildlife officials about the discovery of the dead birds at the park.Find out what's happening in Scottsdalewith free, real-time updates from Patch.SubscribeSurveillance, sampling and testing initially were conducted by the AZGDF and U.S. Geographical Survey National Wildlife Center (NWHC) before the presence of H5N1 was confirmed this week by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's National Veterinary Services Laboratory (NVSL) in Ames, Iowa.The AZGFD said that Arizona has not had any confirmed cases of H5N1 in domestic poultry.Find out what's happening in Scottsdalewith free, real-time updates from Patch.SubscribeAnne Justice-Allen, the AZGFD's wildlife veterinarian, told the Huffington Post that it was a good thing the walkers in Scottsdale had alerted officials about the birds before they had been removed from the area. This allowed the cormorants to be collected and tested. "We had a high suspicion that it was something that we do not normally see," Justice-Allen said. "We have resident cormorants in the area, and we do not normally see mortality events in them."Since the H5N1 was first discovered in Indiana in February, more than 37 million birds have been depopulated due to the disease, according to the AZGFD.Though wild birds often are resident to avian flu, authorities said the Eurasian H5N1 strain currently circulating in North America has caused the death of large numbers of wild birds, including: bald eagles, great horned owls, Canada geese, black vultures, waterfowl, and raptorsThe AZGFD said the transmission risk of avian influenza from infected birds to people remains low. However, there are protective measures people should take if their jobs include contact with wild birds or domestic poultry, like workers at wildlife rehabilitation facilities and falconers. The AZGFD has advised the use of protective gloves, face masks and handwashing, and said it is reaching out to people in various professions to warn about the potential risks and necessary precautions. The agency also has said that people who own chickens or other domestic birds, should avoid feeding wild birds or put out feed for their own flock if it might attract wild birds. Attracting these wild birds can increase the risk of spreading the avian flu to other wild birds and domestic poultry. For people who have bird feeders in their yard, the AZGFD said good hygiene at the feeder always is important, though there is little evidence that songbirds and other backyard birds are carrying the avian flu. People who discover dead birds or birds that appear to be sick are asked to report them to the AZGFD. According to the agency, concerning symptoms in birds include: sneezing, coughing, eyeose discharges, lethargy or rapid decline and sudden death.To report the discovery of birds suspected of carrying disease to the AZGFD , call 602-942-3000 OPTION 5.As for people who raise and keep poultry: if a significant number of the domestic flock or feral poultry in the area show symptoms of illness, contact the State Veterinary Office at 602-542-4293 or reach out via email to diseasereporting@azda.gov and npip@azda.gov.Get more local news delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up for free Patch newsletters and alerts.ThankShareMore from ScottsdaleSeasonal & Holidays|Oct 25Giving Back In Scottsdale: Local Causes To Support This SeasonSeasonal & Holidays|Oct 12024 Pumpkin Patches In The Scottsdale AreaFeatured EventsNov 12, 2024 T-Mobile Tuesdays: Get Fresh Perks Every WeekNov 12, 2024 Taxes in Retirement Webinar+ Add your eventFeatured Classifieds+ Add your classifiedLatest News NearbyScottsdale, AZ News🌱 Scottsdale schools shine in state report cardsScottsdale, AZ News🌱 Dog sitter drama in Scottsdale unfoldsScottsdale, AZ News🌱 Explore Canal Convergence's interactive art in ScottsdaleScottsdale, AZ News🌱 Scottsdale's My Home Group joins Fathom's realty networkScottsdale, AZ News🌱 Axon's bold Scottsdale plan faces local hurdlesBest of ScottsdaleScottsdale | Community CornerShop The Scottsdale Farmers Market Like A Pro, Info Here Find out what’s happening in yourcommunity on the Patch appCorporate InfoAbout PatchCareersPartnershipsAdvertise on PatchSupportFAQsContact PatchCommunity GuidelinesPosting InstructionsTerms of UsePrivacy Policy© 2024 Patch Media. All Rights Reserved.ERs in 'unknown territory' with unseasonal spike in respiratory illnesses | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore ERs in 'unknown territory' with unseasonal spike in respiratory illnesses | CBC News LoadedNova ScotiaERs in 'unknown territory' with unseasonal spike in respiratory illnessesEmergency rooms in Nova Scotia are seeing unusually high levels of non-COVID respiratory illnesses, and some doctors say the removal of masking requirements is likely a factor.Some doctors say lifting masking requirements has contributed to spreadFrances Willick · CBC News · Posted: Jun 10, 2022 8:59 AM EDT | Last Updated: June 10, 2022About 10 per cent of patients visiting the IWK emergency room recently have screened positive for influenza-like illnesses, much higher than the normal levels of one to two per cent. (George Rudy/Shutterstock)Social SharingA recent unseasonal uptick in influenza A and other respiratory viruses in Nova Scotia is likely related to the lifting of COVID-19 measures such as masking, doctors say.There were 36 cases of influenza A identified during the first week of June — the most in any week so far this year. Another spike of 32 cases was reached in early May.Both peaks fall outside the normal flu season in the province, which is most intense from about December to April. There are typically fewer than five cases of influenza A or B identified each year in early June, and often there are none.Reports released by the province also show a steady increase in emergency department visits due to influenza-like illnesses since mid-May, a trend which is continuing into June.Dr. Katrina Hurley, a physician and the chief of the emergency department at the IWK Health Centre, says about 10 per cent of kids coming to emergency are screening positive for influenza-like illnesses that are not COVID-19 — much higher than the usual figures of one to two per cent for this time of year. "June is usually the time when things are turning around — we're seeing, you know, kids fall off their bikes, but not having trouble breathing usually," she said. "We're hustling like it's peak flu season right now and this is not normal."Nova Scotia has seen unseasonal spikes in cases of influenza A in recent weeks. (Nova Scotia Department of Health and Wellness)Hurley said a variety of non-COVID-19 viruses are being identified, including influenza A, rhinovirus, human metapneumovirus, enterovirus and parainfluenza.The removal of mandatory masking is likely contributing to the surge, Hurley said."Masking protected us not only from COVID, it protected children from essentially everything. And so now that the masks are off and things are circulating, you have this whole cohort of children under the age of two, two and a half, who have not been exposed to any of these illnesses before," she said."The number of children I'm seeing right now who attend daycare and saying that they're just getting illness after illness after illness is the story that I'm hearing. I went two years without diagnosing an ear infection and now I'm seeing them almost every shift. So it's all the things that used to plague children and used to be a normal part of childhood disappeared, and now they're back."The masking requirement in Nova Scotia schools was lifted on May 24. (Jon Cherry/Getty Images)Dr. Tanya Munroe, an emergency department doctor at Colchester East Hants Health Centre, also believes the move to optional masking, particularly in schools, is a likely culprit for the increase in respiratory virus circulation."When you look at the schools, where they hung on to the mask mandate longer than the general public, which was a good idea, now that it's off among that population, that's a pretty good petri dish for a lot of viruses to spread."Munroe said it's possible that the apparent increase in confirmed non-COVID-19 respiratory virus cases is due to increased testing for them.She said, prior to COVID, if a patient went to an emergency department with a cough, cold, runny nose, fever or muscle aches and pains, they'd likely only get swabbed if they were in a high-risk population such as a long-term care resident, or if they required hospital admission.Now, as patients in emergency departments are swabbed to rule out COVID-19, those swabs are also processed for influenza A, B and respiratory syncytial virus."So we are case-finding because we're looking in a way we wouldn't historically have done," Munroe said.Waning flu shot effectiveness could be partially to blame for the late-season spike in influenza A, says Dr. Shelley Deeks, the deputy chief medical officer of health for Nova Scotia. (David Greedy/Getty Images)Munroe also wondered whether uptake of the flu shot had faltered this season, leading to greater spread of influenza. The Department of Health and Wellness was not able to provide statistics on how many Nova Scotians received their flu shots this year.Dr. Shelley Deeks, Nova Scotia's deputy chief medical officer of health, agreed the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions could be driving the transmission of other viruses.She said the late-season spike in influenza A could also be caused by the waning effectiveness of flu shots, many of which were delivered last fall, as well as the limited efficacy of the vaccine against what turned out to be the dominant strain of the virus.Nova Scotia is far from alone in experiencing a surge in flu cases outside of the normal season. Deeks said that trend has been identified across the country, but national numbers appear to have peaked a few weeks ago.'We're in unknown territory'Munroe has some optimism that the circulation of respiratory viruses will decrease with the onset of summer as people spend more time outdoors.Hurley is a bit more hesitant."I wouldn't use the word that I'm optimistic," she said. "I'm hopeful that this is going to shift and we're going to have a bit of a spell where we get a break over the summer before it ramps back up when kids return to school. "But I feel like what the graphs and the data show me is that we can't predict what's going to happen. I think we're in unknown territory."The IWK emergency department currently has about 40 per cent more patients than usual this time of year, so Hurley urged people to be understanding if they face longer waits than normal."We want to provide them good care and we're doing the best we can with the resources we have."MORE TOP STORIESDartmouth community fridge project reports huge demand since May launchSmall claims court rules in favour of 'renovicted' Lunenburg tenantRate of growth in Atlantic Canada's grey seal population is slowing, says DFO reportWhat's causing a stink in Sydney harbour? The answer is unclearN.S. reports 21 new deaths, 49 hospitalizations from COVID-19 in weekly updateABOUT THE AUTHORFrances WillickReporterFrances Willick is a journalist with CBC Nova Scotia. Please contact her with feedback, story ideas or tips at frances.willick@cbc.caCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowThe Kid LAROI reschedules shows cancelled due to influenza - triple jSkip to main contentABCSearchLoadingMore from ABCMore from ABCClose menuABCiviewListenABC HomeNewsLocallisteniviewMoreEditorial PoliciesRead our editorial guiding principlesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCtriple jHomeMusicThe LatestNewsLive MusicProgramsVideosTouringMerchHottest 100The Kid LAROI reschedules shows cancelled due to influenzaBy Al NewsteadPosted 6 Jun 20226 Jun 2022Mon 6 Jun 2022 at 1:33amShareFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Currently on a huge homecoming tour, The Kid LAROI cancelled his Melbourne shows and postponed a Brisbane performance after being struck down with illness.The 18-year-old Kamilaroi artist attempted to take to the stage at Rod Laver Arena on Friday night but was unable to perform due to what has since been diagnosed as influenza. The virus has also affected several members of his touring team. Fans were left waiting around 40 minutes at the arena before an announcement over loudspeakers informed the sold out crowd of the cancellation. LAROI apologised in an Instagram story hours later."I wanted to perform very badly, so we called the doctors and had them bring an IV drip and some extra stuff to try and help,” he wrote."As the night went on, it got worse, to the point where it was hard for me to stand up and go to the bathroom... I promise you with all my heart that I gave everything in me to try and get up on that stage tonight." “This is my first ever tour and I absolutely hate that I’ve had to do this, especially so last minute as it’s not fair on you guys, but at the end of the day I have to put my health first and I would be lying to you if I told you I was okay to come up and perform for you. I love you all more than anything in the entire world and again, I am so so unbelievably fuckin sorry.”LAROI has now announced new Melbourne dates, and rescheduled tonight's Brisbane performance to Wednesday. View the new tour dates below. Tickets purchased for the original dates remain valid for the new dates. Fans unable to attend the new shows can request refunds. The Kid LAROI End Of The World Australian Tour 2022Tuesday 7 June – Riverstage: Jagera Turrbal, BrisbaneWednesday 8 June – Riverstage: Jagera Turrbal, Brisbane - rescheduled from Mon 6 JuneFriday 10 June – Rod Laver Arena: Wurundjeri Land, Melbourne - rescheduled from Fri 3 JuneSaturday 11 June - MyState Bank Arena: muwinina, Hobart TASSunday 12 June – Rod Laver Arena: Wurundjeri Land, Melbourne - rescheduled from Sat 4 June"This is my first time touring and I’m discovering lots of new things about my body that I didn’t know before," LAROI wrote to fans on social media. "I’m doing everything I can now to take care of myself and make sure I’m good to come back and give you all the show that you deserve.”He also noted how the rescheduled Brisbane performance now clashes with the opening NRL State of Origin match, but offered a solution...As well as performing back-to-back shows in his hometown of Sydney, The Kid LAROI has been busy offstage while in the country. He made a surprise appearance at a McDonald's, hit the casino tables in Adelaide, and dropped into his old neighbourhood in Waterloo to donate $100,000 to the Fact Tree Youth Service centre.He also checked in with triple j Breakfast, reflecting on his wild rise to success since 2018 - from an Unearthed High finalist to an ARIA, NIMAs, and APRA decorated artist and the highest charting Indigenous artist in Hottest 100 history. Watch below.LoadingPosted 6 Jun 20226 Jun 2022Mon 6 Jun 2022 at 1:33amShareFacebookX (formerly Twitter)RelatedThe Kid LAROI: the story so farFirst Play: The Kid LAROI previews debut album with 'Thousand Miles'Dadhood, alien ghosts, tattoos with The Kid LAROI: stuff we learned from Post MaloneThe Kid LAROI, Genesis Owusu, The Wiggles win big at the APRA AwardsARIA Awards 2021 winners: Genesis Owusu, The Kid LAROI dominateThe Kid LAROI, JK-47 lead National Indigenous Music Award winnersMusic (Arts and Entertainment)Back to topFootertriple jMore from ABCWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.SectionsHomeMusicThe LatestNewsLive MusicProgramsVideosTouringMerchScheduleRecently PlayedAbout triple jTime Delayed StreamsFrequency Findertriple j appConnect with triple jInstagramYouTubeX (formerly Twitter)FacebookContact usSMS: 0439 757 555 (rates apply)Contact FormGet the Jmail newsletterYour information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement.Email addressSubscribeEditorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCRACGP - Free flu vaccinations: Everything GPs need to know Home About Clinical Authors Most read this year GP Opinion Videos & Podcasts Professional Comments policy RACGP poll Menu Search for: Advertising newsGP > Professional Jolyon Attwooll 06 Jun 2022 News Free flu vaccinations: Everything GPs need to know Jolyon Attwooll 6/06/2022 4:20:50 PM Universally free flu vaccines are now available – in theory at least – across all Australian states. Here, newsGP sums up the latest details. State governments hope the initiative will encourage much wider take-up of flu vaccinations this season. With the return of influenza to Australia – and case numbers and hospitalisations rising rapidly – every state government has now announced that flu vaccinations will be free for everyone over the age of six months for at least the rest of June. It is a huge expansion of eligibility for free vaccines beyond those who qualify under the National Immunisation Program (NIP), and has required some very rapid administrative work to clarify how it will work in general practices around the country. Here, newsGP looks at what is happening across all the states and territories, and what general practices involved will need to do to claim the cost for state-government-supported vaccines. Note that this is the best available information currently available. With many practices reporting supply as a significant issue, combined with the extremely swift changes in a major vaccination program, these details may be subject to further updates and clarifications. NSW Free vaccine program dates: 1–30 June. Vaccination rebate: The reimbursement in NSW is for the purchase cost of the vaccine. Note that this is different to most states, which have instead said that vaccines will be reimbursed at a fixed cost per dose. How to claim: According to NSW Health, GPs need to submit a declaration form once the program has ended for reimbursement. Details of the form have not been shared yet. Any further information: As well as reimbursing GPs for privately sourced vaccine stocks, NSW Health has stated that GPs will be also able to obtain state purchased FluQuadri vaccine from the State Vaccine Centre. NSW Health has stated that ‘GPs should continue to prioritise NIP supplies for eligible patients’. Queensland Free vaccine program dates: 24 May – 30 June. Vaccination rebate: $21.95, not including GST, for privately purchased vaccines only. How to claim: Proof of purchase and an invoice with quantity and type of vaccine ordered should be submitted to Queensland Health for privately purchased vaccine stocks only. See the Queensland Health document outlining how to invoice. Any further information: Full details including instructions for general practices applying for reimbursement, are available on the Queensland Health website. South Australia Free vaccine program dates: 29 May – 30 June. Vaccination rebate: $21.95 (not including GST), for privately purchased vaccines only. How to claim: General practices that are new suppliers to SA Health need to register on the state government payment system as soon as possible. Invoices for flu vaccinations given from consolidated invoice with applicable costs to be submitted no later than close of business on Thursday 7 July 2022 for influenza vaccinations administered between 29 May and 30 June 2022 only. Further information: SA Health has said it will not be able to supply general practices any further vaccines stocks, and states that GPs should source supplies ‘via usual channels and submit applications for reimbursement for those administered’. It also states that only individual vaccinations will be reimbursed, rather than entire shipments of privately sourced vaccines. See full details on the SA Health website. Tasmania Free vaccine program dates: 6 June – 6 July. Vaccination rebate: $21.50 (not including GST), which the state’s health department says will cover the cost of both the vaccine and administration. The Tasmanian Department of Health has stated that claims for payment can only be made for vaccines delivered during this period, and that the fee will be paid regardless of source (ie both National Immunisation Program and privately sourced). How to claim: Reimbursement claims should be invoiced to the Tasmanian Department of Health in Hobart. Invoices should be sent to the Tasmanian Department of Health (TasVaxAdmin@health.tas.gov.au), with terms stated as ‘for immediate payment on receipt of invoice’. Further information: The department has said they would prefer invoices before 23 June and that final invoices should be received no later than 20 July. Victoria Free vaccine program dates: 1–30 June. Vaccination rebate: $25, not including GST, for privately purchased vaccines only. The department has stated this reimbursement ‘is separate to Medicare Benefit Scheme (MBS) billing requirements or other billing processes, which can continue as per usual practice’. How to claim: General practices have until 13 June to register with the Department of Health to be eligible for payments. For reimbursement, general practices will need to send invoices providing details of the number of doses administered in June. Further information: A $2000 grant is also available to cover further administration costs. To be eligible practices must administer at least 50 flu vaccinations this month, with an additional eight hours of vaccination appointments. Keep track of further updates on the Victorian Department of Health website. A webinar was also held with input from the RACGP and the Victorian Department of Health last week, with a recording available on the RACGP website. Western Australia Free vaccine program dates: 1–30 June. Vaccination rebate: $22, for privately purchased vaccines only. How to claim: Registrations will be required after 7 June for general practices to access the state government’s ordering system. Further details: Similar to Victoria, there will be a one-off grant of $2000 available to general practices if they administer a minimum of 50 flu vaccinations in June. They will also need to ‘provide information on additional activities undertaken to promote uptake of the influenza vaccine’. RACGP WA states that GPs do not need to change the way they normally bill for consultations as part of the initiative and that ‘billing structures remain at the discretion of individual practices’. Further details on the program are available on the WA Department of Health website. What about the territories? ACT The ACT has not joined the states in expanding free vaccination to everyone, although this weekend it did say it will provide free vaccines to concession card holders through territory run clinics only, and not general practices. Northern Territory Authorities in the territory have not announced any plans to expand eligibility for free vaccines. The RACGP has promotional material, including posters, for GPs to let patients know they are providing the flu vaccine, available on the RACGP website. Log in below to join the conversation flu flu vaccinations free flu vaccinations general practice influenza newsGP weekly poll Which of the RACGP GP24 conference’s key themes are you most interested in? Technology and AI 60%Environmental health 0%GP wellbeing 20%Future of the GP workforce 20% Related Free flu vaccination campaigns expand across the country Influenza ‘resurgence’ expected in coming months Less than 10% of under-fives vaccinated against flu GPs ‘essential’ to tackling complacency over influenza newsGP weekly poll Which of the RACGP GP24 conference’s key themes are you most interested in? Technology and AIEnvironmental healthGP wellbeingFuture of the GP workforce Advertising Advertising Login to comment newsGP Terms and conditions | Privacy statement | RACGP | recruitGP | AJGP © 2018 The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) ABN 34 000 223 807Flu Resurgence: What does this mean for our sector? | BioMelbourne Network Search About About Us Contact Our Board Life Members Our Team History Membership Member Directory Network Engagement Benefits Become a Member Wilam Events Upcoming Events Previous Events Sector Events Initiatives Women in Leadership Awards 2025 Nominations page Eligibility Honour roll FAQs Global Victoria – Healthtech Talks Podcasts BioMelbourne Network Podcast Three-Year Strategy 2023 Insider Report 2023 Data and Insights, Identifying Opportunities and Advocacy 2023 Healthtech Industry Development 2023 Sector Promotion Industry Insights News Grants & Funding Jobs Advocacy and Policy Australian Medtech Manufacturing Alliance « All Events This event has passed. Flu Resurgence: What does this mean for our sector? June 10, 2022 @ 11:00 am - 12:30 pm AEST Event Navigation « BioPharma Masterclass 2: The Art of Capital Raising – Negotiating the Investment Landscape MedTechVic futuremap® workshop – Bosch Australia Manufacturing Solutions, Clayton » As Australia opened up to the world, the question arose as to what kind of influenza season we will have in 2022. Flu prevalence in Australia has been at “historically low levels” since April 2020. However, this could change dramatically and we are seeing that 2022 will be a flu season like no other. Not only are the circumstances unique but we will be forced to deal with the potential of ‘flurona,’ where the concurrent existence of COVID-19 and influenza in our community presents new public health challenges. You can join our speakers who will discuss key drivers for the 2022 flu season, potential economic impacts of the resurgence, and what it means for the sector and Australian biosecurity. The discussion will also examine key learnings from COVID-19 that can help with flu preparedness, and technologies that are available to help combat flu more effectively. This BioForum, sponsored by the State Government of Victoria, is taking place on Friday 10 June online via Zoom webinar. We will be joined by the following speakers: • Professor Ian Barr, Deputy Director of the WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza • Dr Jonathan Anderson, Executive Medical Director, International Regions, Seqirus • Dr Felicia Pradera, General Manager, Health Security Systems Australia, Medical Countermeasures Program Leader See speaker bios below: Event details Date: Friday 10 June 2022 Time (AEST): 11:00am – 12:30pm Presentations (online) Live stream: A link to join the event will be shared 24 – 48 hours prior to the event Online registration: This is a free event for BioMelbourne Network Members & Non Members Unsure if your organisation is a member? Check our Member Directory Sponsored by the State Government of Victoria Dr Jonathan Anderson, Executive Medical Director, International Regions, Seqirus Jonathan Anderson is currently the Executive Medical Director for Seqirus, part of CSL, covering Asia-Pacific and Europe. Seqirus are one of the leading global biotechnology companies for both seasonal and pandemic influenza prevention. Before joining industry in 2010, he was a GP with a special interest in Infectious Diseases in Melbourne. Academic interests included HIV treatment & prevention, Human Papilloma Virus, and the role of health economics in decision-making for population health. In 2006 he worked within the Victoria Department of Health and Human Services to help implement a workbook for pandemic preparedness for GPs that he designed. During the recent pandemic he volunteered as a GP in the COVID mass vaccination clinics at the Royal Exhibition Building and in Ballarat. He has co-authored 38 peer-reviewed and other publications and has a PhD in Medicine from UNSW and Masters of Public Health from Melbourne. Professor Ian Barr, Deputy Director of the WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza Professor Ian Barr is currently the Deputy Director of the WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza (one of 5 globally) based at the Doherty Institute in Melbourne, Australia which has operated since 1992. The Centre plays an active role in the regional surveillance of human influenza. Ian has over 35 years’ experience in Research and Development both with academic and commercial groups including over 21 years at the Centre and has authored or co-authored nearly 300 publications including over 250 peer reviewed journal articles, reviews and editorials on various aspects of influenza. He holds an Honorary Professorial position in the Department of Microbiology and Immunology at the University of Melbourne. Dr Felicia Pradera, General Manager, Health Security Systems Australia, Medical Countermeasures Program Leader Felicia Pradera is the General Manager for Health Security Systems Australia, as division of DMTC Ltd and is currently on secondment from the Defence Science and Technology Group (DSTG). At DSTG she leads the National Medical Countermeasures Initiative and is Australia’s Science and Technology lead to the international Medical Countermeasures Consortium. Dr Pradera is responsible for the collaborative development of new platform technology and sovereign industrial capability to support Defence and National Security requirements against chemical, biological and radiological threats, emerging infectious disease and pandemics. Felicia has expertise in academic research (immunology), preclinical & clinical trials, intellectual property and complex program management. She specializes in medical countermeasures and health security on behalf of the Government in addition to providing strategic advice and guidance. Felicia has BSc from Murdoch University, BSc (Hons) from Melbourne University, Dr.rer.naturwissenschaftern from the Technical University of Berlin, and a Masters of Intellectual Property Law from Monash University. + Google Calendar+ iCal Export Details Date: June 10, 2022 Time: 11:00 am - 12:30 pm Cost: Free Event Category: BioForum Contact BioMelbourne Network Phone: +61 3 9667 8181 Email: info@biomelbourne.org + Google Calendar+ iCal Export Related Events BioForum – BioNTech: From concept to clinical trials November 28 @ 3:45 pm - 6:00 pm AEDT BioForum – Biotech scandal to SaaS Success: Fireside chat with Theranos ’survivor’ Marissa Senzaki November 26 @ 4:00 pm - 6:30 pm AEDT 2025 Women in Leadership Awards celebration: Breaking down barriers across all leadership positions – SOLD OUT November 12 @ 3:30 pm - 5:45 pm AEDT Event Navigation « BioPharma Masterclass 2: The Art of Capital Raising – Negotiating the Investment Landscape MedTechVic futuremap® workshop – Bosch Australia Manufacturing Solutions, Clayton » Home News & opinion Member Directory Events CLICK HERE TO SUBSCRIBE TO OUR NEWSLETTER BioMelbourne Network respectfully acknowledges the Traditional Custodians of the unceded lands and waters of Victoria: the Bunurong, Gunaikurnai and Wurundjeri peoples, on which the BioMelbourne Network and our Victorian members work, and as well as the lands and waters of our members further afield. We pay respect to their Elders past and present. As Australia’s first scientists, we acknowledge the significant contribution that they and other Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have made and continue to make to the research and knowledge systems that inform our community and our sector. We acknowledge that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people continue to live in a spiritual and sacred relationship with this country and recognise our responsibility to continue to work towards reconciliation. Copyright © BioMelbourne Network Network Privacy Policy FAQ Website by Silver Lane Studio About About Us Contact Our Board Life Members Our Team History Membership Member Directory Network Engagement Benefits Become a Member Wilam Events Upcoming Events Previous Events Sector Events Initiatives Women in Leadership Awards 2025 Nominations page Eligibility Honour roll FAQs Global Victoria – Healthtech Talks Podcasts BioMelbourne Network Podcast Three-Year Strategy 2023 Insider Report 2023 Data and Insights, Identifying Opportunities and Advocacy 2023 Healthtech Industry Development 2023 Sector Promotion Industry Insights News Grants & Funding Jobs Advocacy and Policy Australian Medtech Manufacturing AlliancePublic advice after reports of dead seabirds | Fife Council Skip to navigation Skip to search Skip to content Skip to footer Toggle Search Toggle Menu All Services Facilities News Centre Search Search Clear X Cookie Settings Our use of cookies Some cookies used are essential to providing a service, while others help us improve your experience and provide us with insights into how the site is being used. Analytics cookies - Are anonymous and help us understand how visitors use the site. Social Media cookies - Offer an enhanced cross-platform experience. Advertising cookies - Provide meaningful, targeted content when using this website and other platforms. For more detailed information about the cookies we use, see our Cookies page. I accept cookies I do not accept cookies Cookie preferences Necessary cookies Necessary cookies enable core functionality such as security, network management, and accessibility. You may disable these by changing your browser settings, but this may affect how the website functions. Analytics cookies We'd like to set Google Analytics cookies to help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on how you use it. The cookies collect information in a way that does not directly identify anyone. For more information on how these cookies work, please see our 'Cookies page'. Social Media / Embedded Media cookies We'd like to allow Social Media cookies to provide a richer experience. These cookies will allow us the ability to list Fife Council tweets and Facebook posts, Google maps, audio clips & Videos on some of our pages. Our videos use Youtube's privacy-enhanced mode. Advertising cookies These cookies allow us to show relevant adverts to the content you are viewing. They also provide the ability to deliver targeted online advertising across other platforms like Facebook, Google, Instagram and the Quantcast network. Save and Close Home News Centre 2022 News Centre Fife Council planning are first to win gold for carbon literacy Open Show Categories Hide Categories Public advice after reports of dead seabirds Published Date: Jun 9th, 2022 This article is more than 2 years old Fife Council is working with partner agencies following reports of dead seabirds off the Fife coast and elsewhere in Scotland.There is a risk that dead or ill sea birds may appear on Fife's shores. At this time Avian Influenza has not been ruled out so it's important that the following guidance is followed:Don't pick up or touch dead or sick wild birdsKeep pets/dogs away from any dead or sick birdsDon't feed wild waterfowlDon't touch wild bird feathers or surfaces contaminated with wild bird droppingsIf you keep poultry or other birds, wash your hands and clean and disinfect your footwear before tending to your birdsPlease report any dead wild waterfowl to DEFRA's hotline: 03459 335577 (Monday to Friday). If the DEFRA hotline is unavailable then please telephone 03451 550099 so we can still record your incident.If you find a live but ailing bird call SSPCA 03000 999 999Find out more at www.gov.uk/guidance/avian-influenza-bird-flu Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Footer Navigation Contact usMake a complaintSite map Social MediaAccessibilityCookies Policy Follow Us Facebook X Instagram WhatsApp Copyright © Fife Council 2024 All Rights Reserved Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Website by Squiz & Verint Chat with FIONA Close Chat windowInfluenza cases on the rise in South Africa Healthcare Public Health All contentAllArticlesCompaniesEventsGalleriesJobsPeople Submit newsAdvertiseSubscribeMy AccountAll contentAllArticlesCompaniesEventsGalleriesJobsPeople HomeHealthcareMarketing & MediaAgricultureAutomotiveConstruction & EngineeringEducationEnergy & MiningEntrepreneurshipESG & SustainabilityFinanceHR & ManagementICTLegalLifestyleLogistics & TransportManufacturingPropertyRetailTourism & TravelInternationalSubmit news IndustriesAll industriesAgricultureAutomotiveConstruction & EngineeringEducationEnergy & MiningEntrepreneurshipESG & SustainabilityFinanceHealthcareHR & ManagementICTLegalLifestyleLogistics & TransportManufacturingMarketing & MediaPropertyRetailTourism & Travel FeaturesLoeries Creative WeekBizTrendsIAB Bookmarks AwardsIMC ConferenceOrchids and OnionsPrism AwardsMore Sections.. In the newsEnquire about a company Biz Press OfficeAgricultureAutomotiveConstruction & EngineeringEducationEnergy & MiningEntrepreneurshipESG & SustainabilityFinanceHealthcareHR & ManagementICTLegalLifestyleLogistics & TransportManufacturingMarketing & MediaPropertyRetailTourism & TravelNewsIndustriesCompaniesJobsEventsPeopleVideoAudioGalleriesMy BizSubmit contentMy AccountAdvertise with us Public Health News South Africa NewsPress OfficesCompaniesJobsEventsOpinionPeopleMultimediaMy BizNewsCompany newsIn briefsNew appointmentsNew businessNewsletter archiveMost read articlesSubmit newsPress Office newsPress OfficesPress Office infoMy Press OfficeOpen a Biz Press OfficeCompany listingsPress Office companiesMy companyMy saved companiesGet a Biz listingJobs offeredJobs wantedMy saved jobsMy CVRecruitersCompanies recruitingPost your job adRecruitment loginSubmit a jobIndustry eventsWorkshopsOtherCalendarSubmit eventArticlesContributors A-ZContributeFind peoplePeople you may knowInvite peopleEdit my profileVideosAudiosGalleriesSubmit your mediaMy newsfeedMy profileEdit my profileMy CVMy favouritesMy followersFollowing people Subscribe & Follow Subscribe Advertise your job vacanciesPost your Job Ad here >>Trending 2 days 7 days 30 days By Industry South Africa to welcome new private university by 2026Why South African advertising needs to rediscover its storytelling rootsStefanie DavisFree WhatsApp Business incoming service conversationsBlue Label Media partners with African Bank to roll out new corporate identity across 155 busesNews24 journalists take top honours in 2024 Vodacom Journalist of the Year AwardsCopper could cure Murray & Roberts cold after De Beers diamond coughLindsey SchuttersShow more Search jobsAll ProvincesGautengWestern CapeKwazulu-NatalMpumalangaEastern CapeLimpopoNorth WestFree StateSearch Jobs now >> Subscribe to daily business and company news across 19 industries SUBSCRIBE× Influenza cases on the rise in South Africa 9 Jun 20229 Jun 2022 PrintPDFSend to a friendMore sharing options More sharing options The influenza (flu) season is upon us in the Southern Hemisphere. According to the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD), in South Africa the 2022 flu season started in the week commencing 25 April - and numbers appear to have been increasing over the past few weeks.Source: Supplied.A similar trend has been evident with data from Australia, where cases tripled from 25 April compared to the previous two weeks, and the numbers of cases and hospitalisations may continue to climb. It is reported in both Australia and SA that the 2022 flu season may be longer and more severe.Flu is a respiratory tract infection caused by an influenza virus infection that can spread quickly, causing seasonal epidemics that may result in people becoming severely ill or even dying. Each year, flu causes up to 650,000 deaths worldwide, with the highest numbers in sub-Saharan Africa.Annually, there are over 11,000 flu-related deaths in SA, and almost half of the close to 50,000 people experiencing severe flu may need to be hospitalised.SA's flu seasonFlu viruses circulate at different times of the year, but in SA our seasonal flu usually has the most impact between May and September.Dr Lourens Terblanche, medical head of Sanofi South Africa, says: “Right now, there appears to be a general increase in cases of flu both locally and abroad. While non-pharmaceutical interventions like lockdowns, social distancing and mask wearing related to the Covid-19 pandemic afforded less opportunity for the influenza virus to circulate, the easing of these mandatory restrictions may facilitate a surge in flu cases.”The World Health Organization and the NICD state that flu vaccination is the most effective way to prevent disease and reduce the risk of getting severely ill.Says Dr Terblanche: “In SA, annual flu vaccination is recommended for individuals at high risk of complications or severe outcomes of influenza. The vaccine is however available for any individual from the age of six months to help prevent influenza infection.”Those at high riskGroups targeted as high risk in the Department of Health’s 2022 flu vaccination campaign are healthcare workers, persons aged 65 or older, those with cardiovascular disease (including chronic heart disease, hypertension, stroke, and diabetes), chronic lung disease (including asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) and people living with HIV, as well as pregnant women.“Even in the absence of specific comorbidities, it is important to recognise persons aged over 65 years - or younger than two years - as being at risk, as well as pregnant women too,” says Terblanche.The Director General of Health has indicated that the flu vaccine may now be given at the same time as a Covid-19 vaccine, with each being given in a different arm.It’s not too late to protect against flu through vaccinations. Ask your doctor, pharmacist, or healthcare provider for more information about getting vaccinated against the flu this season.Read more: influenza, NICDShare this articleNextOptionsChoose a topic below and thereafter view all articles on the topic using the "Next >" button or swiping left.Choose a topic below and thereafter view all articles on the topic using the "Next >" button or the keyboard right arrow key.Top storiesTrending 3 daysTrending 7 daysMarketing and media Public Health Influenza NICDChoose industryAgricultureAutomotiveConstruction & EngineeringEducationEnergy & MiningEntrepreneurshipESG & SustainabilityFinanceHealthcareHR & ManagementICTLegalLifestyleLogistics & TransportManufacturingMarketing & MediaPropertyRetailTourism & Travel PrintPDFSend to a friendMore sharing optionsMore sharing options RelatedNo new Covid-19 variant, claims Health13 May 2024Health Department applauds recall of contaminated health product21 Dec 2023Latest stats spark urgent $45m long Covid response27 Sep 2023RSV on the rise, hospitals urged to prepare for paediatric admissions23 Mar 2023SA measles outbreak of concern, NICD warns as case surge hits 80% worldwideKatja Hamilton 13 Jan 2023Roche Pharma South Africa announces new partnership11 Jul 2022South Africa confirms its first case of monkeypox23 Jun 2022Covid-19 update: Outbreak of worrying new IHU variant7 Jan 2022More industry news News NewsCompany newsIn briefsNew appointmentsNew businessLatest newsletterMost read MyBiz My newsfeedMy profileEdit my profileMy favouritesMy connectionsMy groupsMy followersFollowing people Press offices Press office newsPress officesPress office listingsPress office info Jobs Jobs offeredJobs wantedMy saved jobsMy CVRecruitersCompanies recruitingSubmit a jobRecruitment login Events All eventsIndustry eventsWorkshopsOtherCalendarSubmit event Contributors ArticlesContributors A-Z People Find peoplePeople you may knowInvite peopleEdit my profile Companies Company listingsAssociationsMy companyPress offices Lifestyle Multimedia ImageSubmit gallery Biztakeouts Radio Advertising rates My Account Contact us NextOptionsLet's do BizWhat to eat when you have the flu | SBS FoodSBSSBSNewsAudioLanguagesWhat's OnGuideFoodIndigenousSportMoreLogin/Sign upHelp CentreSearchNavigate to SBS on demandSBS FoodWhat to eat when you have the fluFluids and food are very important when your body is battling influenza. Here's what you should eat when you have the flu to boost your immunity.A high protein yoghurt is easy to eat when you've got a sore throat. It's also filling, a probiotic and good for your gut (and therefore your immunity). Source: Getty ImagesEver heard of the old adage, ‘feed a cold and starve a fever’?Although no one recommends starving to recover from illness, there is some truth to the ancient saying that you can benefit from this flu season. It lies in the ‘feed’ section of the phrase, which is great because that involves eating (remember – we definitely don’t want you to starve).Accredited Practising Dietitian, Anthea Talliopoulos, believes that maintaining a balanced diet that’s rich in healthy sources of energy – like protein – and other nutrients like vitamin C and zinc – is essential when battling the flu.That’s because your body requires more energy to assemble the large number of immune cells needed to battle the illness.Getting enough fluids will have a positive impact on our health and ensure that we will not become dehydrated. But we still need to make sure we are getting enough energy.“When you have the flu, your body is running a marathon, trying to fight illness,” Talliopoulos tells SBS. “If you were preparing for a marathon, you would make sure you got enough energy. Well, it's the same when you’re sick. You really need to prioritise looking after yourself and get enough energy into your diet to help fuel your body as it runs the marathon of recovery.The dietitian pitches a scenario: “let’s say you get the flu quite badly. The severity will affect how much energy you need to take in and the amount of protein you should consume. Being sick with the flu, all other things remaining equal, will bump these amounts up. You have to make sure you consume enough energy and protein.”This advice may sound like it’s forgetting the common flu recommendation –don’t worry about eating and just focus on fluids. After all, fluids (not alcohol or coffee) help you to rehydrate if you have a fever. Water and juice can also help to expel dried up mucus and germs from your body.READ MORE15 meals to boost your immunityTalliopoulos agrees in the power of fluids. However, she encourages people who feel up to eating to go ahead and consume as much nutrient-dense food as they can in addition to increasing their fluid intake.“Getting enough fluids will have a positive impact on our health and ensure that we will not become dehydrated. But we still need to make sure we are getting enough energy.”Foods to fight the fluTalliopoulos advises that if you can stomach food, focus on eating healthy, high energy, high protein foods.Avoid sugary foods like cakes and chocolate, and ultra-processed foods that require a lot of energy to digest.“Try to have chicken broth with pieces of chicken in it,” she says, recalling her Greek heritage and the many bowls of chicken soup she’s consumed in the past featuring chicken meat, noodles or rice. “Chicken soup is a popular dish across many cultures that people have traditionally eaten to fight the flu. There’s a reason for that – when you have chicken soup, you’re drinking plenty of fluids and consuming a protein that also contains zinc.”A 2019 study published in Advances in Nutrition suggests that zinc is an essential micronutrient that is required to mount an effective antiviral response.“You can also eat eggs – another protein source that contains a moderate amount of zinc. Opt for poached eggs, which are easy to swallow. That will be beneficial if you are coughing a lot and your throat is irritated.”Research has found that up to 70 per cent of our immune health is in our gut.Eat for your gutTalliopoulos also recommends eating high protein yoghurt when you have the flu for another reason – it’s a probiotic that's good for your gut and immunity. “Research has found that up to 70 percent of our immune health is in our gut,” she says. “When we have the flu, it's really important that we focus on eating good quality foods that are going to enhance our gut health because that's actually going to assist with our recovery as well.”Other probiotics include fermented drinks, miso soup, sauerkraut and kimchi. “These are all the sort of foods that we see occurring in many traditional diets from across the world.”READ MORETarhanaTalliopoulos mentions another dish that’s beneficial for gut health. It’s trahana (also known as tarhana): a Cypriot dish her grandmother used to make when anyone in the family had the flu.READ MORETarhanaTraditionally, it is made of fermented ewes or goat milk and cracked wheat flour although Talliopoulos' grandmother made it with cow's milk. The soup features probiotics and prebiotics – a double bonus for your gut. “Looking back, I can see how the dish was beneficial in supporting our gut health and how it fought the flu. You can even add meat to it for added protein."Back then, it made sense why we ate it when we had the flu. It just made us feel better. But now we actually have the research to back up the fact that it was good for us.”READ MOREEasy chicken soup with matzo ballsYearning for this Taiwanese drunken ginger and sesame chicken soupMy family's Croatian chicken soup is good for any soulChicken soup and the lockdown chat that recalled my culinary inheritanceHanan’s mum’s Palestinian chicken soupKorean chicken soupHow a hearty bowl of chicken soup can boost your health this winterShareFollow SBS FoodfacebooktwitterinstagramtiktokSBS Food is a 24/7 foodie channel for all Australians, with a focus on simple, authentic and everyday food inspiration from cultures everywhere. NSW stream only. Read more about SBS FoodWatch nowHave a story or comment? Contact UsSBS Food is a 24/7 foodie channel for all Australians, with a focus on simple, authentic and everyday food inspiration from cultures everywhere. NSW stream only.Watch nowFollow SBS Foodfacebooktwitterinstagramtiktok5 min readPublished 6 June 2022 6:12pmUpdated 6 June 2022 6:21pmBy Yasmin NooneTagsFood and drinkNutritionShare this with family and friendsCopy linkShareArticles from The Cook Up with Adam LiawElly-May Barnes has two love languages: music and foodthe cook up12 easy chicken wing recipes that are perfect for the weekendrecipesMeet the Chilean baker whose cakes Taylor Swift lovesthe cook upPlanning to grow Indigenous herbs and spices? Read this first.the cook up12 skewer recipes and tips to fire up your next BBQethnic food10 speedy stir-fries that make midweek dinners a breezerecipesHow to convert any baked or fried recipe to an airfryer cook timefried foodA cupcake for every reason - and season!recipesSBS Food NewsletterGet your weekly serving. What to cook, the latest food news, exclusive giveaways - straight to your inbox.Your email address *SubscribeBy subscribing, you agree to SBS’s terms of service and privacy policy including receiving email updates from SBS.Follow SBS FoodfacebookX (Twitter)instagramyoutubetiktokDownload our appsSBS On DemandiOSAndroidSBS NewsiOSAndroidSBS AudioiOSAndroidListen to our podcastsThe Ugly Ducklings of Italian CuisineYou know pizza, pasta and tiramisu, but have you tried the Ugly Ducklings of Italian Cuisine?Bad TasteEverybody eats, but who gets to define what good food is?Get the latest with our SBS podcasts on your favourite podcast apps.Watch SBS On DemandBring the world to your kitchenEat with your eyes: binge on our daily menus on channel 33.Watch nowExplore SBSSBS HomeSBS On DemandNewsAudioLanguagesWhat's OnTV & Radio GuideFoodIndigenousSportVoicesTeaching ResourcesLanguagesالعربية/Arabic普通话/Mandarin廣東話/CantoneseTiếng Việt/Vietnamese한국어/KoreanSee all languagesContact SBS1800 500 727 (toll free)Help CentreLocked Bag 028, Crows Nest NSW 1585Follow SBSCopyrightTerms & ConditionsPrivacyYour online preferencesSales & AdvertisingComplaintsSBS Code of PracticeCareersAbout usSBS acknowledges the Traditional Custodians of Country and their connections and continuous care for the skies, lands and waterways throughout Australia.Why are more children coming down with serious flu symptoms?Watch TVNewsSportLifestyleTravelEntertainmentProduct ReviewsCouponsStanDomainDriveConnect with us Weekdays from 5.30amCombined ShapeCreated with Sketch.HomeLatestCompetitionsMeet the TeamTell Your StorySponsorsGot a story to tell us? We'd love to hear from you. Tell us all about it HERE.Why are more children coming down with serious flu symptoms?By Tom Livingstone |2 years ago Parents are being warned to look for the warning signs of influenza early on, as more children and teenagers are presenting at GPs and hospitals with serious symptoms.After two years of lockdowns during the coronavirus pandemic, people's immune systems, especially those of younger Australians, aren't prepared for the strains of influenza currently circulating.Paediatrician and infectious disease specialist, Professor Kristine Macartney told Today "prevention is key" but there are things parents can do to make sure their child doesn't end up in the emergency ward.You can sign up for the Today newsletter here. (Today)Paediatrician, Professor Kristine Macartney said more children were sick with flu this season due to immune systems being lowered over the COVID-19 pandemic. (Today)READ MORE: Cold and flu remedy myths busted"It's a rough time - we are having this winter that we knew we were going to have," Professor Macartney told Today.Macartney said while young children always get respiratory viruses, right now Australia has been hit by flu, RSV (respiratory syncytial virus), as well as COVID-19 still in the community."I think it's a shock for parents because many children will have a mild form of these viruses, sometimes including the flu - but perfectly healthy children sadly will pass away," she warned."We haven't had that boost to immunity, particularly in younger children in the past two years because we didn't have those viruses around."Macartney said with all the viruses going around, it is hard to tell which one your child has without a certain test, but if they have the tell tale signs like a runny nose, cough or fever, there are things you can do to help.Parents are being warned to look for the warning signs of influenza early on, as more children and teenagers are presenting at GPs and hospitals with serious symptoms. (iStock/Getty)READ MORE: How to get a free flu shot in your state or territory"If they're having a temperature but they're still having plenty of fluid, that's all good," she said."But if they're starting to get more tired, not responding to you in the way they normally would and not having those fluids, that's the time to call for help."With much of Australia's hospitals and emergency departments overrun at the moment, Macartney reminded parents to try other options first if their children's symptoms aren't severe."Try Health Direct first. We don't want our emergency rooms full unnecessarily," she said."Pick up the phone, I think there's a lot of really valuable information online for parents and Health Direct is a great place to check in and with your GP as well."Professor Macartney said there are signs to watch for to determine if parents need to call for help. (Getty Images/iStockphoto)READ MORE: Flu strain circulating now may have very sinister origins, study suggestsMacartney said part of the solution was also about prevention and reminded parents that children as young as six months can now get the flu vaccine for free as well."We really want families to hear the message of being up-to-date with vaccines for them and their children," she said.Join the Today show family and give yourself the chance to win great prizes by signing up to our weekly newsletter, delivered straight to your inbox every Wednesday with a special message from Karl and Ally. You can sign up for free here.KidsHealthVaccine Share Mail Tweet Pinterest Property News: World's biggest building kicks off $75 billion construction.AboutContactWatch TVLive TVTV ShowsCategoriesConnect your TVHow to watchTV GuideNewsLatestNationalWorldPoliticsTechWeatherFinanceToday ShowA Current Affair60 MinutesSportLive ScoresOlympicsNRLCricketTennisAFLRugbyFootballAthleticsGolfCombatLifestyleLatestRoyalsStyleCelebrityKitchenTravelCoachYouParentingMoneyHoroscopesEntertainmentLatestTV ShowsMAFSThe BlockLove IslandLego MastersTipping PointThe SummitGetawayTravel GuidesProduct ReviewsTechnologyBeautyStyle + FashionLivingKitchenHealth + FitnessParentingGift IdeasRadio2GB3AW4BC6PRStanTV ShowsMoviesSportStan OriginalsDomainAdvice & GuidesProperty SearchHome LoansHome Price GuideDriveCar ReviewsCar NewsNew Car ShowroomCars for SalePedestrian TVEntertainmentNewsOnlineTelevisionCouponsUber EatseBayAmazonNikeHomeNewslettersWork with usAdvertise with usSupportTerms of usePrivacy© 2024 Nine Entertainment Co.