Spatial, temporal and molecular dynamics of swine influenza virus-specific CD8 tissue resident memory T cells | Mucosal Immunology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature mucosal immunology articles article NB: AS OF JANUARY 1, 2023 THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED WITH ELSEVIER: https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/mucosal-immunology Spatial, temporal and molecular dynamics of swine influenza virus-specific CD8 tissue resident memory T cells Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 10 February 2022 Spatial, temporal and molecular dynamics of swine influenza virus-specific CD8 tissue resident memory T cells Veronica Martini ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6086-03581,2 nAff8, Matthew Edmans1, Simon Gubbins1, Siddharth Jayaraman3, Basudev Paudyal1, Sophie Morgan1, Adam McNee1, Théo Morin4, Pramila Rijal2, Wilhelm Gerner1, Andrew K. Sewell4, Ryo Inoue5, Mick Bailey6, Timothy Connelley3, Bryan Charleston1, Alain Townsend2, Peter Beverley7 & …Elma Tchilian1 Show authors Mucosal Immunology volume 15, pages 428–442 (2022)Cite this article 3304 Accesses 10 Citations 14 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractFor the first time we have defined naïve, central memory, effector memory and differentiated effector porcine CD8 T cells and analyzed their distribution in lymphoid and respiratory tissues after influenza infection or immunization, using peptide-MHC tetramers of three influenza nucleoprotein (NP) epitopes. The hierarchy of response to the three epitopes changes during the response in different tissues. Most NP-specific CD8 T cells in broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) and lung are tissue resident memory cells (TRM) that express CD69 and downregulate CD45RA and CCR7. NP-specific cells isolated from BAL express genes characteristic of TRM, but gene expression differs at 7, 21 and 63 days post infection. In all tissues the frequency of NP-specific CD8 cells declines over 63 days almost to background levels but is best maintained in BAL. The kinetic of influenza specific memory CD8 T cell in this natural host species differs from that in small animal models. Similar content being viewed by others Long-term maintenance of lung resident memory T cells is mediated by persistent antigen Article 09 June 2020 Prevention of respiratory virus transmission by resident memory CD8+ T cells Article 12 December 2023 CD8+ tissue-resident memory T-cell development depends on infection-matching regulatory T-cell types Article Open access 11 September 2023 IntroductionImmunity to influenza A viruses (IAV) has been intensively studied over many years and the role of neutralizing antibody in protection against homologous virus is well established (reviewed1). Moreover experimental studies in mice and humans have revealed the importance of pre-existing cellular immunity in heterosubtypic protection (reviewed2). The development of live attenuated influenza virus vaccines administered by nasal spray, now commercially available for humans and pigs, followed from the discovery that many lymphocytes reside in non-lymphoid tissues and that local immune responses are important in protective immunity3,4.Intravenous infusion of anti-lymphocyte antibodies prior to isolation of lymphocytes from tissues has led to the definition of populations of lymphocytes that are considered to be tissue resident because they do not enter the bloodstream and therefore are not stained by the infused antibody. The majority of these cells have a memory phenotype and are therefore termed tissue resident memory cells (TRM)5,6,7,8,9,10. In mice TRM have been shown to exceed the number of T cells in the lymphoid system and to play important roles in maintaining local immune memory11. Adoptively transferred lung TRM cells from mice that were previously infected with Sendai virus conferred protection to naïve animals, demonstrating the essential contribution of this population to immunity12. TRM are the predominant population in the adult human lung and antigen-specific cells were found at stable frequencies years after pathogen encounter, indicating their key role in respiratory infections13. Mouse and human TRM express CD69 and more variably CD103, both facilitate tissue retention6,14,15,16,17. CD103 expression on lung TRM is dependent on TGFβ signalling18.Porcine physiology closely resembles that of humans, pigs have a similar distribution of sialic acid in their respiratory tract and are infected with similar influenza viruses, making them a powerful large animal natural host model to study immunity to influenza19,20,21. Reassortment of influenza gene segments in pigs is well established, making pigs an animal reservoir of influenza viruses that pose a threat of zoonotic infections in humans22. Influenza is also a significant economic burden to farmers22. We have shown that pigs and humans make very similar antibody responses to influenza viruses and that local respiratory tract immune responses play an important role in protective immunity. Following immunization with influenza vaccines or influenza infection, there are high frequencies of influenza-specific T cells in broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL), lung tissue and tracheo-bronchial lymph nodes (TBLN)23,24,25,26. However, the lack of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to porcine CD69 and CD103 has made studies of porcine TRM challenging, although we have previously identified porcine TRM, following infusion of anti-CD3 antibody25,27. Nevertheless, their phenotype and function during influenza infection remain poorly defined and there have been few ex vivo studies of antigen-specific T cells. In addition, while the phenotype of porcine helper T cells has been thoroughly analyzed28,29,30,31, CD8 T cells are less well characterized and CCR7, essential for migration to lymphoid organs and CD45RA, a known differentiation marker, both widely used in human immunology, have never been studied in combination to define subsets of porcine T cells.Here we examined IAV-specific CD8 TRM throughout the respiratory tract. We focussed on CD8 TRM in BAL as this population of airway cells is relatively accessible in many species including humans, contains almost exclusively TRM apart from alveolar macrophages, and does not require extraction procedures that might alter the cellular composition and phenotype. Here, for the first time we showed that CD45RA and CCR7 together identify porcine CD8 T cell subsets similar to those in humans and we described the expression of CD69 in CD8 T cells in several tissues, using a newly generated antibody32. We examined antigen-specific CD8 TRM in the context of influenza infection and immunization in inbred Babraham pigs33, using peptide-SLA tetramers carrying a previously identified34 and two novel influenza nucleoprotein (NP) epitopes. This enabled us to define the phenotype of influenza-specific CD8 T cells, analyze their distribution in different tissues, define their transcriptional profile at different times after infection and model the dynamics of the response.ResultsSubsets of porcine T cells and identification of CD8 TRMAntibodies to CD45 isoforms and CCR7, which distinguish T cell subsets in several species, were used for initial characterization of CD8 T cells from different tissues of Babraham pigs. BAL, which contains ~80% macrophages as in other species, is of particular interest as it contains airway T cells that are at the frontline of protection against respiratory pathogens35. Among the lymphocytes in BAL ~20% were CD4 T cells, ~20% CD8 and a slightly higher proportion γδ T cells24.Because porcine T helper cells express CD8α when activated30,36, we used an antibody to CD8β combined with CD45RA and CCR7 antibodies to identify and characterize CD8 T cells. Four populations were apparent (Fig. 1a) in blood, spleen and TBLN, which appear to correspond to those defined in humans as naïve (CD45RA+CCR7+), central memory T cells (TCM) (CD45RA-CCR7+), effector memory T cells (TEM) (CD45RA-CCR7-) and differentiated effector T cells (TDE) (CD45RA+CCR7)37. The mucosal tissues (lung and BAL) contained higher proportions of cells with TEM and TDE phenotypes. To confirm this differentiation scheme for CD8 T cells, we examined expression of CD27, a marker of less differentiated cells and perforin, expressed by effector CD8 T cells. These experiments indicated that the proposed naïve and TCM cells in all tissues expressed CD27 but little or no perforin, while TEM and TDE cells were heterogeneous, expressing one or the other marker or neither, as in humans (Supplementary Fig. 1)37,38,39. These data support the identification of naïve and TCM cells and indicated that TEM and TDE are more differentiated cells with effector function. To confirm this, we examined PMA/ionomycin induced cytokine production of the four subsets of CD8 T cells, sorted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). A high proportion of TEM produced IFNγ and TNF while lower proportions of TDE and TCM and few naïve cells did so (Fig. 1b, c, d). Naïve and TCM cells secreted mainly TNF (4.4% and 8.7% respectively) while many TEM were double producers (IFNγ+TNF+ 18.9%). TDE produced predominantly IFNγ (8%) with a smaller proportion secreting both IFNγ and TNF (4.9%).Fig. 1: Phenotype of porcine CD8 T cells in tissues and cytokine secretion after stimulation.a Expression of CD45RA and CCR7 by CD8 T cells isolated from the indicated tissues of naïve Babraham pigs (n = 3). Quadrants show the proportion of each population. b Mean frequency (± SD) of TDE (CD45RA+, CCR7–), naïve (CD45RA + , CCR7 + ), TCM (CD45RA-, CCR7 + ) and TEM (CD45RA-, CCR7-) in CD8 T cells. c CD8 + T cells from PBMC of naïve Babraham pigs (n = 3) were sorted according to their expression of CD45RA and CCR7. The sorted cells were stimulated with PMA and Ionomycin for 0, 2, 4 and 6 h and TNF and IFNγ secretion measured by intracellular cytokine staining. Each symbol represents one animal, this experiment was repeated twice. d Representative FACS plot showing the secretion of IFNγ and TNF after 6 h stimulation in TDE (white panel), naïve (blue panel), TCM (grey panel) and TEM (red). Mean proportion of IFNγ single (top left), double producer (top right) and single TNF + (bottom right) T cells are reported. e CD69 expression in differentiated effector (TDE, white), naïve (blue), central memory (TCM, grey) and effector memory (TEM, red) in CD8 T cells in the tissues analyzed.Full size imageWe have previously shown that BAL and a large proportion of lung T cells are not stained by intravenous anti-CD3 antibody25,27, indicating that these populations are TRM. BAL T cells are almost exclusively highly differentiated. Staining with CD69, a marker of activation and tissue residency40,41 showed that, as in humans, CD69 was absent or minimally expressed on blood CD8 T cells, while the highest expression was found in BAL and TBLN. In TBLN CD69 expression may indicate either recirculation of TRM10 or recent activation of T cells. CD8 TDE in the lungs expressed lower levels of CD69 (Fig. 1e).These data demonstrated that in pigs, CD69 expression is tissue dependent on activated/memory CD8 T cells. BAL CD8 T cells are predominantly TEM phenotype with high expression of CD69 and lack of staining by intravenous CD3 antibody, indicating that they are TRM. TEM are heterogenous in expression of CD27 and perforin and produce high levels of cytokines on stimulation.Kinetics and phenotype of influenza-specific CD8 T cellsHaving established the phenotype of CD8 T cells from unimmunized pigs, we wished to define the temporal dynamics of the immune response to IAV. Inbred Babraham pigs were infected with H1N1pdm09 in four experiments and pigs culled from 1 to 63 days later24 (Fig. 2a). We determined the proportions of influenza NP-specific CD8 T cells binding to tetramers carrying the previously defined DFE epitope and tetramers of the newly identified AAV and VAY epitopes (Supplementary Fig. 2) in various tissues over time (Supplementary Table 1), starting at 6 DPI when a cellular response is first detectable24. The results and curves fitted to the data are shown in Fig. 2b and indicated that the peak proportion of CD8+ T cells specific for each tetramer and the timing of the peak differed amongst tissues and between tetramers. The highest response for all tetramers, expressed as a percentage or absolute count, was found in the BAL, followed by lung and local lymph nodes, (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Fig. 3). Interestingly, the modelled response in PBMC peaked earlier compared to BAL, lung or nasal turbinates (NT) (Table 1), in accordance with the idea that cells generated in lymph nodes traffic to local tissues via the blood. AAV responses peaked 3 to 17 days later than the peak of DFE or VAY responses in different tissues, while DFE and VAY shared similar kinetics in most tissues except PBMC, where DFE peaked earlier (Table 1 and Fig. 2b). The magnitude of AAV responses was greater than those to VAY and DFE in all tissues, while DFE was higher than VAY in all tissues except for TBLN (Table 1 and Fig. 2b). At the later time points of 21, 42 and 63 DPI we also examined tracheal CD8 T cells and here too the AAV response was higher than that to DFE and VAY (p = 0.03 at 42 DPI), with DFE being significantly higher than VAY (p = 0.03) (Supplementary Fig. 4A, B).Fig. 2: Experimental design and tetramer distribution in tissues.a Babraham pigs were infected with H1N1pdm09 intranasally. One pig was culled on each day post infection in experiments T1 and T2, three on each day in T3 and four on each day in T4. Broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL), lung, tracheo-bronchial lymph nodes (TBLN), peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and spleen were collected at all time points (n = 3 at 0, 14, 20 DPI; n = 5 at 6, 7, 13 DPI; n = 2 at 9, 11 DPI; n = 7 at 21 DPI; n = 4 at 42, 63 DPI) while nasal turbinates (NT) were isolated only in experiments T3 and T4 (n = 2 at 0, 7, 13 DPI; n = 3 at 14, 20, 21 DPI; n = 4 at 42, 63 DPI) b Proportion (%) of CD8+ T cells specific for AAV (left), DFE (middle) or VAY (right) in different tissues. In each plot the solid line is the fitted curve describing the dynamics, the large open circles are the mean % at each time point and the small filled circles are the observed % for individual pigs at each time point.Full size imageTable 1 Estimated parameters describing the changes over time in the proportion of CD8+ T cells specific for each tetramer in different tissues.Full size tableWe next analyzed changes in the proportions of the different tetramer+ cells in each tissue by fitting curves to the data (Supplementary Table 2). BAL, lung and spleen showed similar changes in proportions of the different tetramer+ populations. Initially AAV was lower than VAY and DFE in all tissues but by 30 DPI AAV was dominant (60%), while in most tissues DFE and VAY declined (~20%) (Fig. 3a). However, in NT the frequency of cells specific for DFE remained constant (25%), while that for VAY decreased and that for AAV increased. In PBMC the proportions changed only gradually (Fig. 3a), though the small number of PBMC data points indicate that this observation should be interpreted with caution.Fig. 3: Proportions and decay of tetramer-specific cells in different tissues.Changes in the proportion of tetramer+ CD8 T cells in different tissues and estimated decay (% reduction from peak) over time (a) Relative proportion (%) of CD8 + T cells specific for each tetramer (AAV—blue; DFE—black; VAY—red) in the indicated tissues. In each plot the solid line is the fitted curve describing the dynamics and the points are the observed proportions for individual pigs at each time point (for n see legend to Fig. 2). b Decay from the peak of response within the indicated tissue. c Decay of tetramer+ CD8 T cells in different tissues (as indicated). Note: DFE and VAY have the same dynamics in BAL, VAY has the same dynamics in NT and PBMC and AAV has the same dynamics in NT and spleen so these decay curves overlap.Full size imageInfluenza specific T cells in the nasal mucosa of mice have been shown to be longer lived and decline less rapidly than those present in the harsh environment of the lung42. Using the curves fitted to the proportion of different tetramer+ cells in each tissue (Fig. 2b), we investigated the decline of tetramer+ T cells in all tissues after the peak response in more detail (Fig. 3b, c). The decay in the proportion of cells specific for AAV was slower than that for cells specific for either DFE or VAY in all tissues. Furthermore, the proportion of cells specific for AAV decayed most slowly in BAL.Collectively, our results shows that the frequency of different tetramer+ T cells varies between tissues, with the highest frequency in BAL. AAV tetramer+ cells are dominant at later time points. In general, responses in PBMC peaked earlier compared to local tissues but waned more rapidly and did not reflect events in mucosal tissues. We did not observe a more rapid decay in lung and BAL compared to NT, as previously reported in mice42.BAL T cells maintain a stable surface phenotype but transcription alters over timeWe next analyzed the phenotype of the NP-specific T cells present locally (in BAL and TBLN) and systemically (PBMC) (Fig. 4a). The majority of tetramer+ cells were TCM or TEM throughout the time course in all tissues analyzed. There was a slow but steady increase in the proportion of TCM with time in PBMC (Fig. 4b). Most influenza-specific T cells in local lymph nodes were TCM (80%) (Fig. 4a, b). In contrast, in BAL the majority of cells are TEM (78.5%), with only a small number of TCM (20.3% at 21 DPI) (Fig. 4a, b). Changes in TDE and naïve cells are not shown as the numbers of these cells were too small for reliable analysis.Fig. 4: Phenotype of influenza-specific CD8 T cells in tissues over time.(a) Expression of CD45RA and CCR7 by AAV (left, blue), DFE (centre, black) and VAY (right, red) tetramer + (coloured dots) and total CD8 T cells (in grey) isolated at 21 DPI from PBMC (top), TBLN (middle) BAL (bottom), representative plots for one individual. b Proportion (%) of CD8 + T cells staining with AAV (blue), DFE (black) and VAY (red) tetramer in different tissues. T cell populations are TCM (CD45RA-/CCR7 + ; top row) and TEM (CD45RA-/CCR7 + ; bottom row) in PBMC (left), TBLN (centre) and BAL (right). In each plot the solid line is the fitted trend and the points are the observed proportions for individual pigs at each time point (for n see legend to Fig. 2).Full size imageWe used RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to compare the transcriptome of CD8 T cells specific for the previously defined DFE NP epitope34. DFE+ T cells were isolated from BAL by cell sorting at different time points (7, 21 and 63 DPI) (Fig. 5a). Differential gene expression analysis was applied to compare these three groups. 4,666 genes were expressed at significantly different levels (padj value ≤ 0.05 and |log2 fold change | > 1) at 7 DPI versus (vs) 21 DPI while 1,198 were differentially expressed in 7 DPI vs 63 DPI and only 560 in 21 DPI vs 63 DPI (Fig. 5b). At 7 DPI several upregulated genes were involved in cell growth, movement (Igfbp2) and proliferation (Ctla4,Kif11, Kif18a, Shmt1) while at 21 DPI genes linked with T cell activation (Tagap, IL2ra, Csf2, Dgkg) and adhesion (L1cam, Cass4) were highly expressed (Fig. 5c). Interestingly, comparison of 7 DPI and 63 DPI revealed differential expression of genes involved in metabolism (Jazf1, Atp8b4, Igf2bp3,), transcription factors (Litaf), T cell development and proliferation (Ccnd3, Shcbp1). Upregulated pathways at 21 DPI, compared to 7 DPI, were linked to the control of Th1/Th2 differentiation in CD4 T cells, cytokine secretion, antigen processing and presentation (Fig. 5d, Supplementary Table 3). The TGFβ signalling pathway, known to be involved in mucosal residency, was also upregulated at 21 DPI.Fig. 5: Transcriptional profile of DFE-specific T cells in BAL at 7, 21 and 63 DPI.a Sorting strategy for the isolation of DFE + T cells for RNA-seq. b Venn diagram shows the number of significant differentially expressed genes (padj value<0.05, and |log2 fold change | > 1) between 7DPI versus (vs) 21 DPI, 21DPI vs 63DPI and 63DPI vs 7DPI samples (n = 3). c Volcano plot showing upregulated genes in 21DPI vs 7DPI and 63DPI vs 21DPI comparison. d Heatmap of selected genes from KEGG Pathway analysis related to cytokine production, T cell differentiation and TGFβ pathway (enrichment score of 0.76, 0.88 and 0.83 respectively).Full size imageWe examined key gene expression features of TRM, previously identified in the human lung13,43,44 (Supplementary Fig. 5). BAL cells from 63 DPI upregulated a gene related to integrins (Itga1), the TRM transcription regulator gene Znf683 and downregulated genes involved in migration (Sell, S1pr1) as in humans. In addition, at the earlier timepoint of 7 DPI DFE+ T cells expressed more cytotoxicity related genes (GzmA, GzmH, Prf1 and Ccl5) while starting from 21 DPI genes involved in cytokine signalling and secretion were upregulated (Ifng, Tnf, Il13, Tgfb1 and Tnfsf13b) (Supplementary Fig. 5). Interestingly, CD69 gene expression changed with time, peaking at 21 DPI, as did CD103 gene expression (Itgae) with a peak at 7 DPI.Despite the similar phenotype, these data suggests that gene expression in CD8 T cells at the site of infection changes over time, with genes involved in proliferation and migration upregulated at 7 DPI while cytokine related pathways are upregulated at 21 DPI.BAL tetramer+ cells are a highly differentiated populationAs RNA-seq analysis revealed changes in CD69 gene expression with time, we analyzed CD69 protein expression in BAL, TBLN and PBMC by fitting curves to the data (Supplementary Table 4 and Fig. 6a). CD69 expression decayed only slightly with time in BAL for all tetramers and also for AAV and VAY labelled T cells in TBLN, while it decayed faster in TBLN DFE+ T cells (0.022/day for DFE, 0.003/day VAY and 0.001/day AAV) (Table 2 and Fig. 6a).Fig. 6: Activation state and transcription factors expression in tetramer+ CD8 T cells.(a) Top: Histograms show the expression of CD69 by DFE (black), VAY (red) and AAV (blue) tetramer+ T cells in PBMC (left), TBLN (centre) and BAL (left) at 21 DPI. Bottom: Frequencies of tetramer+ cells expressing CD69 in PBMC, TBLN and BAL. b Top: Expression of T-Bet and Eomes by AAV (left, blue), DFE (centre, black) and VAY (right, red) tetramer + (coloured dots) and total CD8 T cells (in grey) isolated at 21 DPI from TBLN, representative plots for one individual. Bottom: Frequencies of tetramer+ cells expressing T-bet and Eomes in PBMC, TBLN and BAL. C Proportion of AAV, DFE and VAY tetramer+ expressing Ki67 in PBMC, TBLN and BAL. In each plot the solid line is the fitted curve describing the dynamics and the points are the observed proportions for individual pigs at each time point (for n see legend to Fig. 2).Full size imageTable 2 Estimated decay rates (d; /day) in the proportion of tetramer specific T cells expressing different markers across tissues.Full size tablePathway analyses revealed upregulation of genes related to Th1/Th2 differentiation of CD4 T cells in BAL CD8 T cells at 21 DPI compared to 7 DPI. We validated these findings by analyzing and modelling the expression of the transcription factor T-bet, involved in Th1 differentiation and homing to inflammatory sites, and Eomesodermin (Eomes), involved in induction of memory and effector T-cell differentiation45 (Fig. 6b). The highest expression of this transcription factor was found in AAV+ T cells in TBLN followed by VAY and DFE with little change over time, while similar expression was present in PBMC for all tetramers, with no decay (Fig. 6b and Table 2). Eomes was poorly expressed in BAL, only detectable at early time points and decayed rapidly in all tetramer+ cells (Table 2). In contrast, T-bet expression differed greatly among tissues and tetramers. T-bet was highly expressed in TBLN and PBMC, and decayed more slowly in TBLN for all tetramers. In TBLN, T-bet decreased more gradually in AAV than DFE or VAY responding T cells (Fig. 6b and Table 2). There was low expression of T-bet at early times in BAL, which declined rapidly and was undetectable at later time points in all tetramers (Table 2).These data suggested that BAL TRM may have already switched off Eomes and T-bet protein expression and are no longer undergoing active Th1/Th2 differentiation. We therefore analysed Ki67 expression as a proxy for cell proliferation which is normally linked to differentiation. Whereas high frequencies of Ki67+ tetramer binding cells were found in PBMC and TBLN at early time points, only 14% of BAL cells were Ki67+ at 6 DPI and Ki67 expression was barely detectable at 63 DPI (1.8%) (Fig. 6c).The RNA-seq data indicates changes in expression of many genes related to cytokine production over time. Lymphocytes isolated from PBMC, TBLN and BAL were therefore stimulated with H1N1pdm09 and the production of IFNγ, TNF and IL-2 by tetramer binding cells was assayed by intracellular cytokine staining. We compared the responses of the dominant responding AAV population with DFE cells which decline more rapidly. Despite high expression of T-bet, PBMC tetramer+ cells produced a limited amount of IFNγ (5.9% in DFE+, 4,3% AAV+ at 7 DPI) which was almost undetectable after 21 DPI (Fig. 7a, b). Similar kinetics were found in TBLN, with IFNγ and IFNγ/TNF co-producing cells being the most abundant. The highest responses were in BAL, with consistent production of cytokines (predominately IFNγ and TNF) even at 63 DPI. No significant difference was observed between DFE+ and AAV+ populations, but there was a trend toward a higher proportion of triple producers (INFγ+TNF+IL-2+) at later time points in AAV+ cells compared to DFE+ (Fig. 7b).Fig. 7: Cytokine secretion after ex vivo virus stimulation of AAV and DFE tetramer+ cells.(a) Lymphocytes isolated at different time points from blood, TBLN and BAL were stimulated with H1N1pdm09 MOI = 1. Following 18 h of stimulation, cells were labelled using tetramers and cytokines quantified using intracellular cytokine staining. Representative plots of AAV + (on left) and DFE + (right) T cells secreting IFNγ, TNF and IL-2 cytokines, from lymphocytes isolated 14 DPI. b Mean frequency (±SEM) of tetramer+ cells secreting IFNγ, TNF and IL-2 from PBMC (top panels), TBLN (in the middle) and BAL (bottom). The right Y axes shows the mean frequency of AAV + (in blue, left panels) and DFE + (in black, right panels) within CD8 T cells. Data shown are mean of 3/4 individuals per timepoint. Two-way ANOVA was used for comparison of each cytokine population between DFE+ and AAV+ cells.Full size imageIn conclusion, despite changes over time in transcription of CD69 and T cell differentiation genes, we did not find corresponding differences in the level of protein expression of CD69, T-bet and Eomes in BAL. In contrast TBLN and PBMC expressed T-bet and Ki67 at early time points and Eomes up to 63 DPI. Ex vivo stimulation with H1N1pdm09 resulted in IFNγ and TNF cytokine secretion at 7 DPI, while upregulation of related genes was highest at 21 DPI. Irrespective of changes in gene expression, BAL TRM maintained a stable surface phenotype and produced abundant cytokines for at least 63 DPI.Aerosol immunization generates a powerful CD8 response with a similar phenotype to influenza infectionTo investigate whether immunization elicits similar responses to natural infection we administered S-FLU, a single cycle influenza vaccine, by aerosol to Babraham pigs and boosted them 3 weeks later. In a first experiment three pigs were culled 3 weeks post boost (WPB) while in a second, S-FLU immunized pigs (n = 6) were challenged with H1N1pdm09 and culled four days later (Fig. 8a). Control pigs were left untreated in the first or were challenged without prior immunization in the second experiment. Anti-porcine CD3 mAb was administered intravenously (i.v.) 10 min prior to sacrifice to distinguish between tissue resident (CD3 i.v.-) and circulating T cells (CD3 i.v.+) (Fig. 8a and Supplementary Fig. 6). We enumerated S-FLU specific cells using the DFE tetramer, as this epitope is conserved in the vaccine and challenge viruses. In BAL, 22.6% of CD8 T cells were DFE+ at 3 WPB but only 5% 4 days post challenge (DPC) (Fig. 8b). Conversely, there were higher numbers of TBLN and PBMC DFE+ cells 4 DPC compared to 3 WPB (0.8% vs 0.3% in TBLN and 0.2% vs 0.1% in PBMC) (Fig. 8b). As we have shown before, BAL and TBLN cells were completely inaccessible to blood (CD3 i.v.-) while most spleen cells were labelled with the infused antibody (Supplementary Fig. 6), confirming that BAL cells are truly tissue resident and that lymph node cells are also outside the blood stream25,27.Fig. 8: DFE+ T cell distribution and phenotype after S-FLU immunisation.(a) In a first experiment Babraham pigs (n = 3) were immunized with S-FLU by aerosol (aer), boosted 3 weeks later and after 3 weeks, infused with anti-porcine CD3 mAb intra-venously (i.v.) 10 min prior to sacrifice. Control animal were left untreated (n = 2). In a second experiment, Babraham pigs (n = 6) received S-FLU aer and control animals (n = 5) remained untreated. Three weeks post boost all animals were challenged with H1N1pdm09 intranasally. After 4 days, half of the pigs were infused i.v. with anti CD3 mAb and then all culled. b Percentages of CD8 T cells staining with DFE tetramer in S-FLU immunized (black dots) and S-FLU immunized and challenged animals (grey dots). Respective controls are shown as squares. Each symbol represents an individual animal and the mean is indicated by a bar. c Mean frequency (± SEM) of naïve (CD45RA + , CCR7 + ), TCM (CD45RA-, CCR7 + ) and TEM (CD45RA–, CCR7–) and TDE (CD45RA + , CCR7–) of DFE + T cells in BAL, TBLN and PBMC of S-FLU vaccinated (n = 3) and challenged animals (n = 6). d Representative histograms of intracellular staining for Ki67 (left) T-bet (centre) and Eomes (right) in DFE + CD8 T cells in BAL, TBLN and PBMC of S-FLU vaccinated animals 3 weeks post boost (black) and 4 days post challenge (grey). Dotted histograms indicate controls and numbers show mean fluorescent intensity (MFI).Full size imageWe then used CD45RA and CCR7 to study differences in phenotype. Three weeks after S-FLU immunization, BAL cells were almost exclusively TEM as after natural infection and this did not change after challenge (Fig. 8c). Following challenge however, there was a rapid increase in the proportion of TCM in TBLN and PBMC (from 33% at 3 WPB to 77% at 4 DPC in TBLN and 0% to 46% in PBMC).In the earlier H1N1pdm09 infection experiment, relatively few BAL CD8 cells expressed Ki67. We therefore examined whether DFE+ T cells expressed Ki67 early after immunization and challenge with live virus. Ki67 was minimally expressed at 3 WPB in all tissues, and at 4 DPC in BAL. In contrast a high proportion of DFE+ TBLN cells and DFE+ PBMC expressed Ki67 after challenge (Fig. 8d). As during influenza infection, 3 weeks after the S-FLU boost, DFE+ BAL cells lacked T-bet and Eomes but Eomes was expressed at a low level in PBMC, and T-bet minimally in TBLN and in a low proportion of PBMC. At 4 DPC, the distribution of Eomes was unchanged but T-bet expression increased in all tissues including BAL (Fig. 8d).Taken together these results suggest that S-FLU immunization by aerosol elicited a stronger T cell response in BAL compared to influenza infection but the responding T cells had a similar differentiated, largely non-proliferating phenotype. The proportion of DFE tetramer+ cells in BAL decreased four days after challenge with infectious virus perhaps due to activation induced cell death following encounter with antigen in the epithelium.DiscussionIn this study, we have described in detail for the first time porcine influenza-specific CD8 T cells in lymphoid and non-lymphoid tissues and shown that antibodies to CD45RA and CCR7 identify four subsets: naïve, TCM, TEM and TDE. The phenotype of these subsets was substantiated by additional staining for CD27 and perforin, and by assessing their ability to secrete effector cytokines. We have also shown that while all four CD8 T cell subsets are well represented in PBMC, spleen and TBLN, there is a very different distribution at mucosal sites. In lung tissue the majority of CD8 cells are TDE and TEM as has been previously reported in humans43, while in BAL TEMs predominate (~80%). Whether these subsets correspond exactly to subsets define in other species will require investigation of their proliferative potential, telomer length and expression of survival and senescence related genes (reviewed in46).We have already shown that the majority of TBLN, BAL and, to a lesser extent, lung T cells are inaccessible to intravenous anti-CD3 antibody, it was therefore of interest to examine the expression of CD69, a marker of activation and tissue residence, on these cells. CD69 is a lectin that binds the sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor-1 (S1PR-1). S1PR-1 binding limits responsiveness to sphingosine 1-phosphate, a mediator of egress to the bloodstream, and therefore promotes tissue retention. As in other species, we found that CD69 is minimally expressed on blood T cells although upregulated if PBMC are activated with a mitogen (data not shown), but in BAL, CD69 is expressed on a high proportion of CD8 T cells. In TBLN and spleen CD69+ T cells were also present, perhaps indicating that a proportion of cells in these organs may have been recently activated. A high proportion of NP specific T cells in TBLN expresses CD69 from 6 days after influenza challenge until 63 DPI (Fig. 6a) perhaps representing either continuing antigenic stimulation or recirculation of TRM10. Murine studies identified a population of CD4 and CD8 TRM, inaccessible to the bloodstream, lacking CD69 and CD103 expression, highlighting the heterogeneity of this population17. Other markers such as CD49a and the chemokine receptor CXCR6, which promote tissue retention of TRM, should therefore be studied in the future to further characterise porcine TRM47,48.Most studies on T cells responses to IAV in pigs have relied on ex vivo restimulation with live virus, with consequent changes in phenotype30,49,50. Here, we reported the the identification of two new CD8 epitopes in influenza NP, which allowed us to compare changes in the distribution, phenotype and gene expression of different antigen specific cells from 6 to 63 days post influenza infection34. Intriguingly, the modelled kinetics of the responses to the three epitopes are very different, with DFE tetramer numbers showing a very early peak in PBMC and spleen but peaking in all other tissues at similar times to VAY. The response to the third epitope AAV appears later, but by 20–30 DPI it is dominant in all tissues and persists for longer than the response to the other two epitopes. Others have reported marked differences in the hierarchy of the responses to immunodominant epitopes of influenza in mice51,52. Pizzolla and colleagues have shown that T cells specific for immunodominant epitopes in NP, PA and PB proteins of influenza in the nasal mucosa shared a similar hierarchy with systemic responses while in the lung all immunodominant epitopes were equally represented42. In our model, despite an initial peak of DFE+ CD8 T cells, at the memory stage, the AAV epitope dominates in all tissues, with no marked difference between the organs. Furthermore, the response of tetramer positive cells does not decline more rapidly in the lung or BAL than blood or spleen, although in mice both of these have been postulated to be hostile environments inducing transcriptional and epigenetic changes that promote apoptosis53. Further studies are required to understand why AAV responses are immunodominant compared to DFE and VAY. Immunodominance may be linked to peptide-MHC affinity and it has also been reported that early IFNγ production can provide an advantage to a given antigen specific population54,55. However, we did not observe significant differences in cytokine production of AAV+ and DFE+ CD8 T cells (Fig. 7). Differences in antigen presentation kinetics of peptides from the same viral protein have been shown to account for the magnitude of expansion of antigen-specific CD8 T cells56, while epitope abundance has not57. Further studies are required to investigate these mechanisms in the pig IAV infection model, and the importance of the different epitopes for protective immunity.Mechanisms by which TRM populations persist have been investigated by several authors in mice with sometimes contradictory results, so that it remains unclear whether some or all respiratory tract TRM populations are maintained by recruitment of circulating cells. While some experiments suggest that antigen encounter in the lung environment is important for TRM establishment and maintenance42,53,58,59, it has been reported that lung TRM may develop independently of pulmonary antigen encounter under specific inflammatory conditions60. Our results indicate that TEM but not TCM can be recruited to the lungs and since relative numbers of TEM in the circulation decrease with time after antigen exposure while TCM increase, (Fig. 4b) this may explain why recruitment of TRM declines with time60. These data are in accord with parabiosis experiments in mice since if the parabiosis is carried out early after immunization, (activated) antigen-specific cells from the immunized animal enter the lungs of the parabiotic partner but not if the parabiosis is performed later59.Our data indicates that following influenza infections an airway population of TRM, recoverable by BAL, is established with a peak at 20–30 DPI of predominantly AAV-specific cells. We hypothesize that the late dominance of AAV may be because cells with this specificity continue to divide for longer than those specific for DFE or VAY, with continuing generation of cells with a TEM phenotype that can enter the lungs. Early on, BAL TRM cells express genes characteristic of T cell activation and 5–22% express Ki67, though Ki67 expression is much more prominent in tetramer binding cells in TBLN and PBMC, suggesting that the bulk of the BAL population arises by cell division prior to entry into the airways. BAL Ki67 expression declines over time and, since the tetramer binding population also declines, cell division clearly does not maintain the population, nor can it be replenished from the blood since the frequency of tetramer binding cells in blood declines similarly. The low level of Ki67 expression is in line with recent studies showing lower frequencies of Ki67+ TRM in the lung of healthy human donors and in SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to circulating T cells16,61,62.Interestingly, expression of the transcription factors T-bet and Eomes has similar kinetics to Ki67 in BAL. In mice, T-box transcription factor downregulation and the consequent expression of CD103 on CD8 T cells are essential for TRM formation63. Although the lack of phenotypic changes over time may suggest that airway TRM are a stable effector population, this is not the case since there are major change in gene expression, with genes involved in cytokine production, differentiation and the TGFβ pathway highly upregulated at 21 compared to 7 DPI and expression declining at 63 DPI. TGFβ plays a critical role in tissue retention and differentiation into TRM64,65,66 suggesting that tetramer binding cells at 21 DPI already present TRM features. In addition, we identified different sets of genes characteristic of TRM in humans, which are also upregulated at each of these time points. Viral antigen has been shown to persist in local lymph nodes for more than 2 months after IAV infection and in the lung for 110 days after Adenovirus vectored immunization in mice, influencing the recruitment of circulating antigen specific T cells to the lung and TRM gene expression67,68. In addition, others have reported marked differences in gene expression between CD8 T cells specific for different epitopes69, which should be investigated in the future to understand the prevalence of AAV+ CD8 T cells.These data provide a detailed analysis of the phenotype and distribution of tetramer binding CD8 T cells following IAV infection but not the protective efficacy of these cells in the pig model. However, when S-FLU immunized pigs are challenged with a heterosubtypic IAV strain, in the absence of cross-neutralizing antibodies, lung pathology is reduced but the viral load and viral shedding are not, in contrast to results in ferrets27 and mice70,71. Surprisingly, after influenza infection the frequency of CD8 tetramer binding cells declines rapidly so that by day 63 there are very low frequencies in all tissues we have examined, except BAL. Our study was limited to CD8 T cells but future work will need to establish if other memory populations decline with similar kinetics and whether this decline correlates with loss of protection against lung pathology following heterosubtypic challenge. Nevertheless, it appears that T cell memory to IAV may decline rapidly in this natural host species not maintained under specific pathogen free conditions, contrasting with results in transgenic mouse models10. Whether the pig or small animals better represent the way in which humans respond to influenza viruses remains to be determined. The fact that humans are susceptible to new influenza strains does suggest that heterosubtypic immunity declines with time and is not effective in preventing infection or transmission, although perhaps providing some degree of protection against severe disease72.The similarities in phenotype and transcriptional profile of porcine and human TRM highlight the value of this large animal model for understanding the importance of specificity of response in establishing protection against respiratory infections and for the development of next generation vaccines.Materials and methodsAnimals and influenza challenge experimentAnimal experiments were conducted according to the UK Government Animal (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 at the University of Bristol, the Pirbright Institute (TPI) and the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) under project license P47CE0FF2, with approval from ethics committees at each institute. All institutions conform to the ARRIVE guidelines. The inbred Babraham pigs33,73 were bred at APHA in line with the principles outlined in the FELASA recommendations74. Animals were pre-screened to ensure absence of exposure to influenza viruses by hemagglutination inhibition test. The pigs (female and male) were randomized and acclimatized for at least 7 days before any procedures were carried out.Three influenza challenge experiments were performed at the University of Bristol (T1, T2 and T3), as previously reported24 while a longer time course study (T4) took place at APHA (Fig. 2a). For T1, T2 and T3 thirty-eight Babraham inbred pigs (9.3 weeks old on average) were experimentally infected intranasally, using a mucosal atomisation device (MAD) (MAD300, Wolfe-Tory Medical), with 1 × 107 PFU of MDCK grown H1N1 A/swine/England/1353/2009 (H1N1pdm09), 2 ml per nostril. In T1 and T2 one infected pig was culled each day on days 1 to 7, 9, 11 and 13 post challenge while two control uninfected pigs were sampled prior to infection and two more at day 8. During T3 three challenged animals were culled at days 6, 7, 13, 14, 20 and 21 post infection. Six control uninfected animals were included in T3: three culled at day −1 and the other three on the day of challenge. During T4 twelve pigs (10.2 weeks old on average) were challenged as described above and four pigs were randomly culled at each of day 21, 42 and 63 post infection. All animals were included in the analysis and no criteria for exclusion were established a priori.A first immunization experiment was performed at TPI where three Babraham pigs of 5.5 weeks of age were sedated and immunized with H7N1 S-FLU [eGFP/N1(PR8)] H7t(Netherlands/219/2003) (2.4. x 108 50% tissue culture infective dose (TCID50)) administered by aerosol using a SOLO vibrating mesh nebuliser (Aerogen ltd.) as previously described25. A group of two control pigs was left untreated. Vaccinated pigs were boosted after 3 weeks as described above and culled 3 weeks post boost (WPB). In total, 10 min prior to sacrifice animals were infused intravenously (i.v.) with anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody (mAb) (clone PPT3), produced in house, at a concentration of 1 mg/kg to label circulating T cells. A second immunization experiment was performed at APHA. Six Babraham pigs received H1N1 S-FLU [eGFP*/N1(A/Eng/195/2009)] H1(A/Eng/195/2009) (7.3 × 107 TCID50) by aerosol twice, three weeks apart, as described before25. Five unimmunized pigs were used as controls. One pig in the control group reached its humane end point because of a pre-existing heart condition, limiting the number of pigs in the control to five animals. At 3WPB, all animals were challenged intranasally with 2.8 × 106 PFU of H1N1pdm09 delivered by MAD and culled four days later. To minimise potential confounders pigs were challenged with H1N1pdm09 at the same time, in random order not based on prior treatment.Half of the pigs in each group received anti-CD3 mAb i.v. 10 min prior to culling.The time point selected (4 days post challenge) is based on our extensive experience and published work with other swine/zoonotic influenza viruses to provide the best snap shot of disease development.As each group was culled at different time or immunized or not, it was not possible to run completely blinded experiments.Tissue sampling and processingPeripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), tracheo-bronchial lymph nodes (TBLN), lung, broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) and spleen were processed as previously described27,75. In addition, nasal turbinate (NT) and trachea were isolated in studies T3 and T4 as described before25,76. Cells were cryopreserved in 10% DMSO (Thermo Fischer) in fetal bovine serum (FBS).IFNγ ELISpot assay and identification of influenza nucleoprotein epitopesCryopreserved lymphocytes were stimulated using H1N1pmd09 (MOI = 1), medium and H1N1pmd09 nucleoprotein derived peptides (GL Biochem Ltd.) and frequencies of IFNγ spot forming cells were determined as described before75. To identify CD8 T cell epitopes in H1N1pdm09 nucleoprotein pools of ten 18 amino acid (aa) peptides overlapping by 12 aa, were used for initial ELISpot screening. Individual peptides from responding pool were then used to identify the highest responding peptides within each pool. Minimal epitopes were then defined using a second screen with 9 aa peptides derived from the 18 aa peptides giving the highest responses (Supplementary Fig. 2). Pool 3 and 4 consistently showed the highest responses across tissues and therefore were broken down to identify minimal epitopes of 9 aa length: NP181-189 AAVKGVGTI (AAV) and NP217-225 VAYERMCNI (VAY), which were confirmed to be CD8 epitopes (data not shown) and loaded into porcine SLA-2 molecules to generate tetramers. Responses to pool 5 were attributed to the previously defined DFE epitope and this pool was therefore not further deconvoluted34.Flow cytometric analysis and cell sortingCryopreserved single cell suspensions from PBMC, TBLN, lung, BAL, NT and trachea were thawed and rested for 2 hours in RPMI supplemented with Glutamax, 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin, 5% HEPES and 10% FBS (all from Thermo Fisher) at room temperature before staining. Two million cells per well were stained in 96 well plates with each NP tetramer (AAV, DFE (NP290–298 DFEREGYSL) and VAY) separately (as previously described25,34). Following tetramer staining, fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies (see Supplementary Table 5 for all antibodies used) were added in staining buffer (PBS + 0.1% FBS), for 15 mins at 4 °C and then washed twice with PBS before fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde solution in PBS (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Intracellular staining for the detection of Eomesodermin, T-bet and Ki67 was performed using True-Nuclear™ Transcription Factor Buffer Set (BioLegend), according to the manufacturer instructions. Perforin and cytokine staining was achieved using Fixation/Permeabilization Solution Kit (BD Biosciences). Gating strategies for the different panels and control used are illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 7A, B. Stained cells were analyzed using a BD LSRFortessa.To analyze the time course of activation of different CD8 subpopulations, cryopreserved PBMC from naïve animals were first stained for CD8β, CD45RA and CCR7 expression and sorted into 4 subpopulations (CD45RA+CCR7+, CD45RA+CCR7-, CD45RA-CCR7+, CD45RA-CCR7-) using a BD FACSAria cell sorter. Cells were then centrifuged at 1000 × g for 5 min and re-suspended in cell culture medium (RPMI, 10% FBS, HEPES, Sodium pyruvate, Glutamax and Penicillin/Streptomycin) overnight at 37 °C. On the following day, cells were stimulated using PMA Ionomycin (BioLegend) for 2, 4 and 6 hours and cytokines detected by intracellular cytokine staining (see Supplementary Table 5 for antibodies list) using Fixation/Permeabilization Solution Kit (BD Biosciences), unstimulated cells were used as a control.Cells isolated from BAL, TBLN and PBMC were stimulated with H1N1pdm09 (MOI = 1) overnight and cytokine production quantified by intracellular cytokine staining as previously described24. Data were analyzed by Boolean gating. Media only controls for each sample were used as baseline and subtracted from the results.For preparation of RNA, BAL cells isolated from 7, 21 and 63 DPI samples (n = 3) were depleted of alveolar macrophages using a MACS cell separation LS column (Miltenyi Biotec) after staining for CD14 and CD172a (see Supplementary Table 5). Lymphocytes were then stained for DFE tetramer, CD8 and live/dead marker using a BD FACSAria (BD Bioscience).Data were analyzed using FlowJo software v10.7 (Tree Star).RNA-seqRNA-sequencing was performed on DFE+ T cells from BAL because the tissue samples were sorted before the AAV tetramer was produced. BAL DFE+ T cells were sorted (average of 4480 cells/sample) in PBS, samples were then centrifuged at 3000 g for 5 min. RNA was extracted using PicoPure RNA Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer instructions followed by DNase treatment (TURBO DNA-free™ Kit, Thermo Fisher). Isolated RNA was used as input for SMARTer Stranded Total RNA-Seq Kit v3 - Pico Input Mammalian (Takara Bio) and PCR amplification performed. cDNA was pooled and sequenced on NovaSeq using an S1 100 PE flow cell. Raw fastq files were used for an initial quality control using FastQC (https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/). Next, CogentAP (Cogent NGS Analysis Pipeline v1.0, Takara Bio) was used to trim and add the sample barcodes to the fastq header for each sample. The reads were then trimmed of Illumina and library prep adapters using cutadapt77, and subsequentially aligned to Sus scrofa Sscrofa11.1 assembly (GCA_000003025.6) using STAR78 with default parameters. UMI-tools was used to discard duplicated reads79 and featureCounts extracted the number of reads aligned to each gene feature80. Differential gene expression (DGE) analysis was carried out using TCC-GUI, which iterates DESeq2 for data normalisation, using the featureCounts output for pairwise comparisons81,82. Pathway analysis was performed using Webgestalt online tool83, selecting GSEA as comparison method and sscrofa as reference genome. KEGG pathway database was used as reference and ensemble ID were uploaded together with ranked score (-log10(p value)*log2(fold change difference)) based on the results of DGE comparison. Other settings include: minimum number of IDs in the category (5), maximum number of IDs in the category (2000), significance level (FDR < 0.05) and number of permutation (1000).Statistical analysisTo compare the changes over time in the proportion of CD8+ T cells specific for each tetramer in a tissue, the following curve was fitted to the data, namely,$$y(t) = y_0 + (y_{\max } - y_0)\left( {\frac{t}{{t_{\max }}}} \right)^6\exp \left( { - \frac{{6(t - t_{\max })}}{{t_{\max }}}} \right),$$where y is the proportion at t days post infection, y0 is the baseline proportion, ymax is the peak proportion and tmax is the time of peak proportion. This curve was chosen as it gives an appropriate shape for the data without including a large number of parameters. Note that the decay rate from peak titre is given by 6max.Similarly, changes over time in the proportion of tetramer-specific T cells expressing different cell surface markers in each tissue were compared by fitting exponential curves to the data,$$y(t) = y_0\exp ( - dt),$$where y is the proportion at t days post infection, y0 is the initial proportion and d is the decay rate (/day). Each marker was analyzed independently.In both analysis, variation in parameters (i.e. y0, ymax and tmax or y0 and d) amongst tissues and tetramers was assessed by fitting different models to the data by nonlinear least squares and comparing the residual deviance for the models using F-tests84 (Supplementary Tables 1 and 4). These analyses were implemented in Matlab (version R2020b; The Mathworks, Inc.).Because data on CD8+ T cells in the trachea were only available for a reduced number of time points, the proportion of cells specific for each tetramer in this tissue were compared at each time point using a Kruskal-Wallis test followed by pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum tests. This analysis was implemented in R (version 4.0.5)85.To assess changes over time in the relative proportion of CD8+ T cells specific for each tetramer, the following model was used:$$\begin{array}{l}y_{DFE}(t) = K_1^{(DFE)} + \frac{{K_2^{(DFE)} - K_1^{(DFE)}}}{{1 + \exp ( - b_{DFE}(t - d_{DFE}))}},\hfill\\ y_{VAY}(t) = 1 - y_{DFE}(t) - y_{AAV}(t),\hfill\\ y_{AAV}(t) = K_1^{(AAV)} + \frac{{K_2^{(AAV)} - K_1^{(AAV)}}}{{1 + \exp ( - b_{AAV}(t - d_{AAV}))}},\end{array}$$where y(t) is the proportion specific for the tetramer t days post infection, K1 and K2 are the minimum and maximum frequencies, b the rate of change in frequency and d is the time of the maximum rate of change. This formulation ensures the total proportion of cells is 100%. Variation in parameters (i.e. K1, K2, b and d) amongst tissues was assessed by fitting different models to the data by nonlinear least squares and comparing the residual deviance for the models using F-tests84 (Supplementary Tables 2). This analysis was implemented in Matlab (version R2020b; The Mathworks, Inc.). Only samples for which the frequency of all three tetramers was available were included in this analysis.Trends in the phenotype of tetramer specific CD8+ T cells in each tissue were assessed using linear models. Each model included the proportion of cells in the population (CD45RA+/− and CCR7+/−) specific for a tetramer as the response variable and tissue, tetramer and days post infection as explanatory variables, together with two- and three-way interactions between the explanatory variables. Model simplification proceeded by stepwise deletion of non-significant (P > 0.05) terms (as judged by F-tests). This analysis was implemented in R (version 4.0.5) (R Core Team 2021).Frequencies of cytokine secreting cells in DFE+ and AAV+ cells over time were compared using two-way ANOVA in GraphPad Prism version 9.1.0.The number of pigs in each experiment are indicated in the figure legends. Sample size for the immunization experiment was calculated based on previous experiments, with a SD of approximately 0.5 and 80% power and 95% confidence27,75. Data availability RNA-seq data is deposited and available under GEO website database number GSE182645. ReferencesKrammer, F. The human antibody response to influenza A virus infection and vaccination. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 19, 383–397 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Thomas, P. G., Keating, R., Hulse-Post, D. J. & Doherty, P. C. Cell-mediated protection in influenza infection. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 12, 48–54 (2006).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Harper, S. A., Fukuda, K., Cox, N. J. & Bridges, C. B. Advisory Committee on Immunization P. Using live, attenuated influenza vaccine for prevention and control of influenza: supplemental recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm. Rep. 52(RR-13), 1–8 (2003).PubMed Google Scholar Genzow, M., Goodell, C., Kaiser, T. J., Johnson, W. & Eichmeyer, M. Live attenuated influenza virus vaccine reduces virus shedding of newborn piglets in the presence of maternal antibody. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 12, 353–359 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sathaliyawala, T. et al. Distribution and compartmentalization of human circulating and tissue-resident memory T cell subsets. Immunity 38, 187–197 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Teijaro, J. R. et al. Cutting edge: Tissue-retentive lung memory CD4 T cells mediate optimal protection to respiratory virus infection. J. Immunol. 187, 5510–5514 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gebhardt, T. et al. Memory T cells in nonlymphoid tissue that provide enhanced local immunity during infection with herpes simplex virus. Nat. Immunol. 10, 524–530 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wakim, L. M., Woodward-Davis, A. & Bevan, M. J. Memory T cells persisting within the brain after local infection show functional adaptations to their tissue of residence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 17872–17879 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Masopust, D. et al. Dynamic T cell migration program provides resident memory within intestinal epithelium. J. Exp. Med. 207, 553–564 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fonseca, R. et al. Developmental plasticity allows outside-in immune responses by resident memory T cells. Nat. Immunol. 21, 412–421 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Steinert, E. M. et al. Quantifying memory CD8 T cells reveals regionalization of immunosurveillance. Cell 161, 737–749 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McMaster, S. R., Wilson, J. J., Wang, H. & Kohlmeier, J. E. Airway-resident memory CD8 T cells provide antigen-specific protection against respiratory virus challenge through rapid IFN-gamma production. J. Immunol. 195, 203–209 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kumar, B. V. et al. Human tissue-resident memory T cells are defined by core transcriptional and functional signatures in lymphoid and mucosal sites. Cell Rep. 20, 2921–2934 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Masopust, D., Vezys, V., Wherry, E. J., Barber, D. L. & Ahmed, R. Cutting edge: gut microenvironment promotes differentiation of a unique memory CD8 T cell population. J. Immunol. 176, 2079–2083 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schenkel, J. M., Fraser, K. A., Vezys, V. & Masopust, D. Sensing and alarm function of resident memory CD8(+) T cells. Nat. Immunol. 14, 509–513 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thome, J. J. et al. Spatial map of human T cell compartmentalization and maintenance over decades of life. Cell 159, 814–828 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Turner, D. L. et al. Lung niches for the generation and maintenance of tissue-resident memory T cells. Mucosal Immunol. 7, 501–510 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wakim, L. M., Smith, J., Caminschi, I., Lahoud, M. H. & Villadangos, J. A. Antibody-targeted vaccination to lung dendritic cells generates tissue-resident memory CD8 T cells that are highly protective against influenza virus infection. Mucosal Immunol. 8, 1060–1071 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Trebbien, R., Larsen, L. E. & Viuff, B. M. Distribution of sialic acid receptors and influenza A virus of avian and swine origin in experimentally infected pigs. Virol. J. 8, 434 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rajao, D. S. & Vincent, A. L. Swine as a model for influenza A virus infection and immunity. ILAR J. 56, 44–52 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Judge, E. P. et al. Anatomy and bronchoscopy of the porcine lung. A model for translational respiratory medicine. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 51, 334–343 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Henritzi, D. et al. Surveillance of European Domestic Pig Populations Identifies an Emerging Reservoir of Potentially Zoonotic Swine Influenza A Viruses. Cell Host Microbe 28, 614–627 e616 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar McNee A, et al. Establishment of a pig influenza challenge model for evaluation of monoclonal antibody delivery platforms. J. Immunol. 205, 648–660 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Edmans, M. et al. Magnitude and kinetics of T cell and antibody responses during H1N1pdm09 infection in inbred babraham pigs and outbred pigs. Front Immunol. 11, 604913 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Martini, V. et al. Simultaneous aerosol and intramuscular immunization with influenza vaccine induces powerful protective local T cell and systemic antibody immune responses in pigs. J. Immunol. 206, 652–663 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Holzer, B. et al. Protective porcine influenza virus-specific monoclonal antibodies recognize similar haemagglutinin epitopes as humans. PLoS Pathog. 17, e1009330 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Holzer, B. et al. Comparison of heterosubtypic protection in ferrets and pigs induced by a single-cycle influenza vaccine. J. Immunol. 200, 4068–4077 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Moreno, S. et al. Analysis of chemokine receptor CCR7 expression on porcine blood T lymphocytes using a CCL19-Fc fusion protein. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 39, 207–213 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Talker, S. C. et al. Phenotypic maturation of porcine NK- and T-cell subsets. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 40, 51–68 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Reutner, K. et al. CD27 expression discriminates porcine T helper cells with functionally distinct properties. Vet. Res 44, 18 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Franzoni, G. et al. Assessment of the phenotype and functionality of porcine CD8 T cell responses following vaccination with live attenuated classical swine fever virus (CSFV) and virulent CSFV challenge. Clin. Vaccin. Immunol. 20, 1604–1616 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Hayashi, Y., Okutani, M., Ogawa, S., Tsukahara, T. & Inoue, R. Generation of anti-porcine CD69 monoclonal antibodies and their usefulness to evaluate early activation of cellular immunity by flow cytometric analysis. Anim. Sci. J. 89, 825–832 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schwartz JC, et al. The major histocompatibility complex homozygous inbred Babraham pig as a resource for veterinary and translational medicine. HLA 92, 40–43 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Central Google Scholar Tungatt, K. et al. Induction of influenza-specific local CD8 T-cells in the respiratory tract after aerosol delivery of vaccine antigen or virus in the Babraham inbred pig. PLoS Pathog. 14, e1007017 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Masopust, D. & Soerens, A. G. Tissue-resident T cells and other resident leukocytes. Annu Rev. Immunol. 37, 521–546 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Saalmuller, A., Werner, T. & Fachinger, V. T-helper cells from naive to committed. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 87, 137–145 (2002).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Romero, P. et al. Four functionally distinct populations of human effector-memory CD8+ T lymphocytes. J. Immunol. 178, 4112–4119 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vigano, S. et al. CD160-associated CD8 T-cell functional impairment is independent of PD-1 expression. PLoS Pathog. 10, e1004380 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Rufer, N. et al. Ex vivo characterization of human CD8+ T subsets with distinct replicative history and partial effector functions. Blood 102, 1779–1787 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Farber, D. L., Yudanin, N. A. & Restifo, N. P. Human memory T cells: generation, compartmentalization and homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 24–35 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Masopust, D. & Schenkel, J. M. The integration of T cell migration, differentiation and function. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 309–320 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pizzolla, A. et al. Resident memory CD8(+) T cells in the upper respiratory tract prevent pulmonary influenza virus infection. Sci. Immunol. 2, eaam6970 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Snyder, M. E. et al. Generation and persistence of human tissue-resident memory T cells in lung transplantation. Sci. Immunol. 4, eaav 5581 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Schoettler, N., Hrusch, C. L., Blaine, K. M., Sperling, A. I. & Ober, C. Transcriptional programming and T cell receptor repertoires distinguish human lung and lymph node memory T cells. Commun. Biol. 2, 411 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Banerjee, A. et al. Cutting edge: the transcription factor eomesodermin enables CD8+ T cells to compete for the memory cell niche. J. Immunol. 185, 4988–4992 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mahnke, Y. D., Brodie, T. M., Sallusto, F., Roederer, M. & Lugli, E. The who’s who of T-cell differentiation: human memory T-cell subsets. Eur. J. Immunol. 43, 2797–2809 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ray, S. J. et al. The collagen binding alpha1beta1 integrin VLA-1 regulates CD8 T cell-mediated immune protection against heterologous influenza infection. Immunity 20, 167–179 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Tse, S. W., Radtke, A. J., Espinosa, D. A., Cockburn, I. A. & Zavala, F. The chemokine receptor CXCR6 is required for the maintenance of liver memory CD8(+) T cells specific for infectious pathogens. J. Infect. Dis. 210, 1508–1516 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Khatri, M. et al. Swine influenza H1N1 virus induces acute inflammatory immune responses in pig lungs: a potential animal model for human H1N1 influenza virus. J. Virol. 84, 11210–11218 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Talker, S. C. et al. Influenza A virus infection in pigs attracts multifunctional and cross-reactive T cells to the lung. J. Virol. 90, 9364–9382 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wiley, J. A., Hogan, R. J., Woodland, D. L. & Harmsen, A. G. Antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells persist in the upper respiratory tract following influenza virus infection. J. Immunol. 167, 3293–3299 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Belz, G. T., Xie, W., Altman, J. D. & Doherty, P. C. A previously unrecognized H-2D(b)-restricted peptide prominent in the primary influenza A virus-specific CD8(+) T-cell response is much less apparent following secondary challenge. J. Virol. 74, 3486–3493 (2000).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hayward, S. L. et al. Environmental cues regulate epigenetic reprogramming of airway-resident memory CD8(+) T cells. Nat. Immunol. 21, 309–320 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jenkins, M. R., Webby, R., Doherty, P. C. & Turner, S. J. Addition of a prominent epitope affects influenza A virus-specific CD8+ T cell immunodominance hierarchies when antigen is limiting. J. Immunol. 177, 2917–2925 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Liu, F., Whitton, J. L. & Slifka, M. K. The rapidity with which virus-specific CD8+ T cells initiate IFN-gamma synthesis increases markedly over the course of infection and correlates with immunodominance. J. Immunol. 173, 456–462 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sacha, J. B. et al. Differential antigen presentation kinetics of CD8+ T-cell epitopes derived from the same viral protein. J. Virol. 82, 9293–9298 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Croft, N. P. et al. Kinetics of antigen expression and epitope presentation during virus infection. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003129 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McMaster, S. R. et al. Pulmonary antigen encounter regulates the establishment of tissue-resident CD8 memory T cells in the lung airways and parenchyma. Mucosal Immunol. 11, 1071–1078 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Takamura, S. et al. Specific niches for lung-resident memory CD8+ T cells at the site of tissue regeneration enable CD69-independent maintenance. J. Exp. Med 213, 3057–3073 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Slutter, B. et al. Dynamics of influenza-induced lung-resident memory T cells underlie waning heterosubtypic immunity. Sci. Immunol. 2, eaag2031 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Purwar, R. et al. Resident memory T cells (T(RM)) are abundant in human lung: diversity, function, and antigen specificity. PLoS One 6, e16245 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Szabo, P. A. et al. Longitudinal profiling of respiratory and systemic immune responses reveals myeloid cell-driven lung inflammation in severe COVID-19. Immunity 54, 797–814 e796 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mackay, L. K. et al. T-box transcription factors combine with the cytokines TGF-beta and IL-15 to control tissue-resident memory T cell fate. Immunity 43, 1101–1111 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhang, N. & Bevan, M. J. Transforming growth factor-beta signaling controls the formation and maintenance of gut-resident memory T cells by regulating migration and retention. Immunity 39, 687–696 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Mohammed, J. et al. Stromal cells control the epithelial residence of DCs and memory T cells by regulated activation of TGF-beta. Nat. Immunol. 17, 414–421 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ma, C. & Zhang, N. Transforming growth factor-beta signaling is constantly shaping memory T-cell population. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 11013–11017 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Uddback, I. et al. Long-term maintenance of lung resident memory T cells is mediated by persistent antigen. Mucosal. Immunol. 14, 92–99 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Zammit, D. J. & Lefrancois, L. Dendritic cell-T cell interactions in the generation and maintenance of CD8 T cell memory. Microbes Infect. 8, 1108–1115 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yoshizawa, A. et al. TCR-pMHC encounter differentially regulates transcriptomes of tissue-resident CD8 T cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 48, 128–150 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Baz, M. et al. Nonreplicating influenza A virus vaccines confer broad protection against lethal challenge. mBio 6, e01487–01415 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Powell, T. J., Silk, J. D., Sharps, J., Fodor, E. & Townsend, A. R. Pseudotyped influenza A virus as a vaccine for the induction of heterotypic immunity. J. Virol. 86, 13397–13406 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sridhar, S. et al. Cellular immune correlates of protection against symptomatic pandemic influenza. Nat. Med 19, 1305–1312 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Signer, E. N. et al. DNA profiling reveals remarkably low genetic variability in a herd of SLA homozygous pigs. Res Vet. Sci. 67, 207–211 (1999).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Berset Convenor F, Caristo, M. E., Ferrara, F., Hardy, P., Oropeza-Moe, M. & Waters, R. Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Associations recommendations of best practices for the health management of ruminants and pigs used for scientific and educational purposes. Lab Anim. 55, 117–128 (2021).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Morgan, S. B. et al. Aerosol delivery of a candidate universal influenza vaccine reduces viral load in pigs challenged with pandemic H1N1 virus. J. Immunol. 196, 5014–5023 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Martini, V. et al. Distribution of droplets and immune responses after aerosol and intra-nasal delivery of influenza virus to the respiratory tract of pigs. Front Immunol. 11, 594470 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Martin, M. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput sequencing reads. EMBnet 17, 10–12 (2011).Article Google Scholar Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Smith, T., Heger, A. & Sudbery, I. UMI-tools: modeling sequencing errors in Unique Molecular Identifiers to improve quantification accuracy. Genome Res. 27, 491–499 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K. & Shi, W. featureCounts: an efficient general purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30, 923–930 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Su, W., Sun, J., Shimizu, K. & Kadota, K. TCC-GUI: a Shiny-based application for differential expression analysis of RNA-Seq count data. BMC Res. Notes 12, 133 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Liao, Y., Wang, J., Jaehnig, E. J., Shi, Z. & Zhang, B. WebGestalt 2019: gene set analysis toolkit with revamped UIs and APIs. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, W199–W205 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ross GJS Nonlinear estimation. Springer-Verlag: New York, 1990, viii, 189 p.pp.Team RC. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. 2020.Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe are grateful to all animal staff at the University of Bristol, the Pirbright Institute and APHA. We thank Emily Porter, Ore Francis and the Mucosal Immunology group at TPI for their help in tissue collection and processing. We acknowledge the Flow Cytometry Facility at TPI for their support with cell sorting and Edinburgh Genomics for their help with RNA sequencing. This work was supported by the UKRI Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) sLoLa BB/L001330/1, BBS/E/I/0000703, BBS/E/I/00007037 and BBS/E/I/00007039. AT and PR are funded by the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Innovation Fund for Medical Sciences, China Grant 2018-I2M-2-002, the Townsend-Jeantet Prize Charitable Trust (charity 1011770), and Medical Research Council Grant MR/P021336/1. AKS is a Wellcome Investigator (220295/Z/20/Z).Author informationAuthor notesVeronica MartiniPresent address: Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Bellinzona, SwitzerlandAuthors and AffiliationsThe Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, UKVeronica Martini, Matthew Edmans, Simon Gubbins, Basudev Paudyal, Sophie Morgan, Adam McNee, Wilhelm Gerner, Bryan Charleston & Elma TchilianWeatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKVeronica Martini, Pramila Rijal & Alain TownsendThe Roslin Institute, Edinburgh, UKSiddharth Jayaraman & Timothy ConnelleyDivision of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, UKThéo Morin & Andrew K. SewellLaboratory of Animal Science, Setsunan University, Osaka, JapanRyo InoueBristol Veterinary School, University of Bristol, Langford, UKMick BaileyNational Heart and Lung Institute, St Mary’s Campus, Imperial College, London, UKPeter BeverleyAuthorsVeronica MartiniView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMatthew EdmansView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSimon GubbinsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSiddharth JayaramanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBasudev PaudyalView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSophie MorganView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdam McNeeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarThéo MorinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPramila RijalView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWilhelm GernerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrew K. SewellView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRyo InoueView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMick BaileyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTimothy ConnelleyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBryan CharlestonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlain TownsendView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPeter BeverleyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarElma TchilianView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsConceptualization: E.T., V.M., A.T., P.B. Methodology: V.M., M.E., S.G., S.J., B.P., A.M., S.M., T.M., P.R., R.I., A.K.S. Investigation: V.M., E.T., S.G., S.J., T.C. Visualization: V.M., S.G. Funding acquisition: E.T., B.C., A.T. Supervision: E.T., A.T., P.B. Writing—original draft: V.M., E.T., P.B. Writing—review & editing: V.M., E.T., P.B., S.G., M.E., R.I., T.C., A.K.S., B.C.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Veronica Martini or Elma Tchilian.Ethics declarations Competing interests A.T. is named on a patent regarding the use of S-FLU vaccine. The other authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary MaterialsRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleMartini, V., Edmans, M., Gubbins, S. et al. Spatial, temporal and molecular dynamics of swine influenza virus-specific CD8 tissue resident memory T cells. Mucosal Immunol 15, 428–442 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41385-021-00478-4Download citationReceived: 06 September 2021Revised: 23 November 2021Accepted: 08 December 2021Published: 10 February 2022Issue Date: May 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41385-021-00478-4Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by A genome assembly and transcriptome atlas of the inbred Babraham pig to illuminate porcine immunogenetic variation John C. SchwartzColin P. FarrellJohn A. Hammond Immunogenetics (2024) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Information Open access publishing About the Editors Contact Press Releases About the Partner For Advertisers Subscribe Publish with us For Authors & Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Mucosal Immunology (Mucosal Immunol) ISSN 1935-3456 (online) ISSN 1933-0219 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedADDL Conducts Testing as Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza is Confirmed by USDA in Indiana Commercial Turkey Flock | Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine Leave Your PrintDonate Today! PVM Menu Apply Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM)Veterinary Nursing Distance LearningVeterinary Nursing - On CampusFinancial AidBoiler Vet CampDiversity and Inclusion Certificate ProgramVet Up!Veterinary Research Scholars Summer ProgramJob Opportunities About About Purdue Veterinary MedicineLeadershipDiversity, Equity, & InclusionAcademic DepartmentsAdministration & Service UnitsCommunity EngagementGlobal EngagementAwards & RecognitionFaculty & Staff DirectoryContact & DirectionsCareer Resources Education Educational ProgramsDoctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM) ProgramVeterinary Nursing ProgramUndergraduate & Post-Baccalaureate ProgramsGraduate & Postgraduate ProgramsInternship & Residency ProgramsContinuing Education Students & Alumni Alumni AssociationAlumni EventsCareer ResourcesCounseling & WellnessPVM YearbookStudent OrganizationsStudent SuccessThe Vet ShoppeTranscriptsVeterinary Medical Library Hospitals & Laboratories Emergencies 24/7Animal Disease Diagnostic LaboratoryPurdue University Veterinary HospitalEquine HospitalFarm Animal HospitalSmall Animal HospitalCaesars Entertainment Equine Specialty Hospital - ShelbyvilleVeterinarians & ReferralsHospital Virtual Tours Research Office of ResearchSignature Research ProgramsResearch Centers & LabsOne HealthVeterinary Clinical TrialsGrant Proposals and Funding Giving News Purdue Veterinary Medicine NewsCommunications & Public AffairsSpeaker's Bureau News Home / Services / Diagnostic Laboratories / ADDL Conducts Testing as Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza is Confirmed by USDA in Indiana Commercial Turkey Flock ADDL Conducts Testing as Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza is Confirmed by USDA in Indiana Commercial Turkey Flock Friday, February 11, 2022 Make a Gift Support the College The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) has confirmed the presence of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in a commercial turkey flock in Dubois County, Indiana. This is the first confirmed case of HPAI in commercial poultry in the United States since 2020. Samples from the affected flock, which experienced increased mortality, were tested at the Purdue University Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory (ADDL), part of the National Animal Health Laboratory Network, and confirmed at the APHIS National Veterinary Services Laboratories in Ames, Iowa. Virus isolation is ongoing. The ADDL provides diagnostic services in support of animal health for the State of Indiana and across the United States. “When samples from the affected flock were delivered to the ADDL, the lab responded swiftly to conduct the needed tests,” said Dr. Kenitra Hendrix, ADDL director. The diagnostic laboratory is continuing to work with the Indiana Board of Animal Health (BOAH) and USDA. The farm is under quarantine, and BOAH is actively working with the industry to increase monitoring of flocks statewide. “We know that fast and accurate testing is essential in supporting the USDA and BOAH as they respond to this case,” said Dr. Hendrix. “This service is one of the ways in which we fulfill our mission of diagnostic support of animal health and the food animal industry.” Avian influenza does not present a food safety risk; poultry and eggs are safe to eat when handled and cooked properly. No human cases of avian influenza viruses have been detected in the United States. Hobby poultry owners are encouraged to practice good biosecurity and be aware of the signs of avian influenza and report illness and/or death to the USDA Healthy Birds Hotline: 866-536-7593. Callers will be routed to a state or federal veterinarian in Indiana for case assessment. Dead birds should be double-bagged and refrigerated for possible testing. Situation updates and status reports about ongoing avian influenza activities in Indiana, along with critical disease-related information, will be posted on BOAH’s website. Users may also subscribe to email and/or text message updates on a link at the top of that page. Click here to view the latest updates. Writer(s): Madeline Brod, PVM Communications Intern, and Kevin Doerr | pvmnews@purdue.edu Category: Diagnostic Laboratories, Services Latest Stories: “Paws Up” – brought to you by the PVM Wellness Committee New Dean Takes Helm of Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine PVM Bids Fond Farewell to Alumnus and Key Administrator Embarking on Exciting New Challenge PVM Admissions Office Welcomes new Admissions Process Manager Halloween PVM-Style: A Retrospective — Newsroom — — View All News — — Academics — — Our Impact — — Our People — — Research — — Services — — In the News — Communication OneCampus Portal Brightspace BoilerConnect Office 365 Outlook myPurdue Campus Faculty & Staff Human Resources Purdue Careers Colleges & Schools Purdue Directory Campus Map Education Veterinary Medicine Veterinary Nursing Graduate Programs Residency & Internships Community Engagement Continuing Education Resources Intranet PVM Careers PVM Connect PVM Directory Veterinary Medical Library Hospital & Diagnostic Services Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine, 625 Harrison Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907, 765-494-7607 © 2024 Purdue University All Rights Reserved | Educational Inclusivity Statement | Integrity Statement | EA/EO University | DOE Degree Scorecards | Copyright Complaints | Privacy Policy Maintained by Purdue Veterinary Medicine Communications. If you have trouble accessing this page because of a disability, please contact us at vetwebteam@purdue.edu.Maintaining influenza surveillance and SARS-CoV-2 monitoring Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific Countries Countries in the WHO South-East Asia Region: Bangladesh Bhutan Democratic People’s Republic of Korea India Indonesia Maldives Myanmar Nepal Sri Lanka Thailand Timor-Leste When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English Indonesia South-East Asia Indonesia Home Health topics Our work News Emergencies About us Home/ News/ Detail/ Maintaining influenza surveillance and SARS-CoV-2 monitoring Maintaining influenza surveillance and SARS-CoV-2 monitoring 6 February 2022 Highlights - Select language - Indonesia As part of the pandemic influenza preparedness framework, WHO established Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS), a global platform for monitoring influenza epidemiology and disease; and a global alert system for novel influenza viruses and other respiratory pathogens. Responding to COVID-19, WHO developed a guideline on maintaining surveillance of influenza and monitoring SARS-CoV-2. MoH adapted the guideline to monitor COVID-19.Fig. 1. COVID-19 and influenza positivity rates from ILI/SARI sentinel sites, 2021 (Credit: Endang Wulandari/WHO).Currently, there are 31 Influenza Like Illness (ILI)-based primary healthcare centers and 14 Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI)-based hospitals as sentinel surveillance sites in Indonesia that are part of the GISRS network. The sentinel sites detect cases based on case definition, collect specimen samples and ship them to designated laboratories, record cases and send weekly reports. MoH collects, verifies, monitors completeness and timeliness of reports, conducts data analysis and uploads the data to GISRS platform (Flu ID and Flu Net).To maintain ILI/SARI sentinel sites and expand their function to monitor COVID-19, besides influenza, WHO supported an orientation on the updated guideline, an online refresher training and review meetings, data collection and analysis, sample collection and shipment for ILI and SARI sentinel sites, and field monitoring and evaluation. A total of 30 participants from ILI and 52 participants from SARI sentinel sites attended the review meeting. Meanwhile, the refresher training was attended by around 100 participants. During field monitoring to 22 selected sentinel sites between March-November 2021, the MoH team delivered brief refreshment on case operational definition, sample collection and shipment and discussed gaps and challenges in implementing influenza surveillance.Fig. 2. COVID-19 positivity rate from ILI and SARI sentinel sites compared with national surveillance data (Credit: Endang Wulandari/WHO).Impacted by the pandemic, outpatient visits to ILI sentinel sites have decreased, leading to lower case detection and sample collection. Up to 19 December 2021, 647 specimens were collected and tested from ILI and SARI sentinel sites and 23 were confirmed influenza (3.6%). According to sentinel data, Influenza A(H3) was the predominant subtype between September and December 2021. Other confirmed subtypes include influenza A (H1) and influenza B Victoria lineage. Among 98% (636 out of 647) specimens tested for COVID-19, 222 were confirmed positive for COVID-19 (35%). The positivity rate of COVID-19 from sentinel sites is higher compared with COVID-19 positivity rate from the national COVID-19 surveillance data. Overall, the COVID-19 positivity trend from sentinel sites is aligned with COVID-19 national surveillance data, increasing around June with a peak in mid-July and declining since August 2021. This indicates ILI/SARI sentinel surveillance can be used to monitor COVID-19 and provide input for policy decision making with maintaining and improving data quality, completeness and timeliness of reporting and specimen collection, shipment, and testing. Responding to threat of the COVID-19 Omicron variant, WHO technical briefing for COVID-19 Omicron recommends countries to conduct sequencing of samples from ILI and SARI sentinel sites as part of genomic surveillance strategy. Fig. 3.WHO presented maintaining surveillance of influenza and monitoring SARS-CoV-2-2 during ILI/SARI review meeting (Credit: Endang Wulandari/WHO)Implementing proper health protocols to prevent COVID-19 and influenza transmission is important. These include wearing a mask, washing hands, maintaining social distance, avoiding the 3Cs (spaces that are closed, crowded or involve close contact), keeping good hygiene, improving room ventilation and getting vaccinated.Support for capacity building to improve Influenza Like Illness (ILI) and Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI) sentinel sites activity has been made possible with the generous support of Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework (PIP) fund. *** Health worker performed nasopharyngeal swab sample collection in Makassar City-Gowa Regency. (Photo Credit: Herwin Bahar/ via Getty Images) News WHO supports 1,6 million antigen-detecting rapid diagnostic tests to strengthen COVID-19 diagnostic in Indonesia 11 August 2021 Fourth Intra-Action Review (IAR) Meeting: Recommendations to strengthen the COVID-19 response 28 September 2021 Quick links Media centre Head of WHO Office Careers in WHO Indonesia Regional links Data Publications Help Contact us Integrity Hotline Privacy legal notice © 2024 WHOEurasian A5 Avian Influenza Confirmed in Wild Waterfowl in New Hampshire – NH Fish and Game Department Skip to content Annual Awards of Excellence Nomination Form Classroom Resource Request Form Curriculum Kit Request Form Fish & Wildlife Steward Request Form Privacy Policy Sign Up to Receive E-News Search Search for: Search NH Fish and Game Department Guardian of the state's fish, wildlife, and marine resources. Newsroom Home Buy A License On the Nature Trail Podcast NH Fish and Game Website all news, habitat, wildlife Eurasian A5 Avian Influenza Confirmed in Wild Waterfowl in New Hampshire Date: 02/11/2022Author: nhfishandgame CONTACT:NH Department of Agriculture, Markets, and Food: Steve Crawford 603-271-2404NH Fish and Game Department: Daniel Bergeron 603-271-3421February 11, 2022 Concord, NH –The New Hampshire Fish and Game Department and the New Hampshire Department of Agriculture, Markets and Food are announcing that Eurasian H5, a highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI), was recently detected in waterfowl in the state. Twenty (20) mallards collected through normal surveillance activities have tested positive in Rockingham County for this avian influenza. More test results are pending. The US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) considers the risk of HPAI H5 infections to the public to be low. No human infections from Eurasian H5 viruses have occurred in the United States. If you have had contact with an ill bird and become ill yourself, contact your healthcare provider to determine if influenza testing is recommended. Since January, several states have recently detected Eurasian A5. This type of HPAI is considered a low risk to humans, and sickness and mortality is typically low in wild birds, but it could be a potential danger to the poultry industry and other domestic birds. It is the first time since 2016 that the disease has been found in the United States in wild birds. Through its ongoing wild bird surveillance program, the US Department of Agriculture (USDA APHIS) collects and tests large numbers of samples from wild birds in the North American flyways. It is not uncommon to detect avian influenza in wild birds, as these viruses circulate freely in those populations without the birds appearing sick. The recent detections of this strain of Eurasian H5 avian influenza in wild birds serve as an early warning system for bird owners in the US and New Hampshire to review and stay vigilant about their biosecurity practices to protect poultry and pet birds from avian influenza. USDA APHIS Veterinary and Wildlife Services recommends that hunters and others who handle birds take precautions to protect themselves and the domestic birds they may encounter from the virus. Precautionary steps include wearing gloves while handling birds, not handling obviously sick or dead birds, washing tools and work surfaces with soap and water and then disinfecting them, and avoiding cross contamination between wild birds and domestic ones. For more information about Eurasian H5 HPAI, contact USDA APHIS at 508-363-2290 or visit https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/animalhealth/animal-disease-information/avian/avian-influenza/defend-the-flock-ai-wild-birds. For information about Eurasian H5 and its impact on wild bird species in New Hampshire, contact the NH Fish and Game Department at 603-271-3421. For information about Eurasian H5 impacting New Hampshire domestic bird species, contact the NH Department of Agriculture, Markets & Food, Division of Animal Industry, State Veterinarian, Steve Crawford, 603-271-2404 or stephen.k.crawford@agr.nh.gov. About the NH Fish and Game DepartmentAs the guardian of the state’s fish, wildlife, and marine resources, the New Hampshire Fish and Game Department works in partnership with the public: to conserve, manage and protect these resources and their habitats; inform and educate the public about these resources; and provide the public with opportunities to use and appreciate these resources. For more information visit www.wildnh.com. About the NH Department of Agriculture, Markets & FoodThe mission of the New Hampshire Department of Agriculture, Markets & Food is to support and promote agriculture and serve consumers and business for the benefit of the public health, environment and economy. For more information, visit agriculture.nh.gov. Share this:FacebookXEmailPrintLike this:Like Loading... Post navigation Previous Previous post: New Hampshire Candidates Sought for New England Fishery Management CouncilNext Next post: Single Snowmobile Crash on Lake Winnipesaukee Get News from NH Fish and Game Enter your email address to receive NHFG news by email. Email Address Subscribe News TopicsNews Topics Select Category all news becoming an outdoors woman boat access education events fisheries fishing habitat hunting jobs law enforcement legislative licensing marine NHFG Commission nongame ohrv outdoor recreation shopping volunteer opportunities wildlife Archives Archives Select Month November 2024 October 2024 September 2024 August 2024 July 2024 June 2024 May 2024 April 2024 March 2024 February 2024 January 2024 December 2023 November 2023 October 2023 September 2023 August 2023 July 2023 June 2023 May 2023 April 2023 March 2023 February 2023 January 2023 December 2022 November 2022 October 2022 September 2022 August 2022 July 2022 June 2022 May 2022 April 2022 March 2022 February 2022 January 2022 December 2021 November 2021 October 2021 September 2021 August 2021 July 2021 June 2021 May 2021 April 2021 March 2021 February 2021 January 2021 December 2020 November 2020 October 2020 September 2020 August 2020 July 2020 June 2020 May 2020 April 2020 March 2020 February 2020 January 2020 December 2019 November 2019 October 2019 September 2019 August 2019 July 2019 June 2019 May 2019 April 2019 March 2019 February 2019 January 2019 December 2018 November 2018 October 2018 September 2018 August 2018 July 2018 June 2018 May 2018 April 2018 March 2018 Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Facebook On the Nature Trail – A Podcast Black-capped Chickadee Broad-winged Hawk Eastern Coyote Big Brown Bat Green Darner Dragonfly Usage Policy Visit our website to learn more about our Usage Policy for photos and content. Get News from NH Fish & Game By signing up, you'll receive all of our news via email. Email Address Subscribe News TopicsNews Topics Select Category all news becoming an outdoors woman boat access education events fisheries fishing habitat hunting jobs law enforcement legislative licensing marine NHFG Commission nongame ohrv outdoor recreation shopping volunteer opportunities wildlife Visit Us11 Hazen Dr Concord, NH 03301603-271-3421 © 2024 NH Fish and Game Department Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email Name Website %d'Flurona' explained: What to expect from COVID-19 and flu co-infections Skip to contentNewslettersSubscribeMenuTwo people, with and without a mask, stand near a sign offering free influenza and COVID-19 vaccines.Photograph by Alexi Rosenfeld, Getty ImagesSCIENCECORONAVIRUS COVERAGE'Flurona' explained: What to expect from COVID-19 and flu co-infectionsA new study shows that such cases are still extremely rare and mostly occur in relatively young, healthy patients.BySanjay MishraFebruary 11, 2022•7 min readSince the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, public health experts have worried about people getting infected with the influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 at the same time, a disease sometimes called flurona. Now, a multi-year study of hospital patients offers some of the most comprehensive data on how frequent flurona cases are—and who seems to be getting them the most.The study, which is not yet peer reviewed, shows that flurona cases have been happening throughout the pandemic but are so far relatively rare. Out of more than 170,000 recorded cases of COVID-19 seen in hospital data from the Mayo Clinic, just 73 were co-infected with the flu. Alabama and Georgia had the highest percentage of hospitalized COVID-19 patients with influenza co-infections—0.8 percent and 0.7 percent, respectively. These flurona patients were all relatively young, and their illnesses were generally mild.However, the study reveals that hospitalizations due to co-infection were highest in January 2022 compared to all previous months of the pandemic—an increase driven in part by the highly transmissible Omicron variant.In addition to the Omicron surge, the flu has sickened a larger number of people this year than last flu season, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. This is probably because the dominant strain of influenza that's circulating—H3N2—has evolved several mutations, creating a mismatch with this year's flu vaccine that seems less protective.“The Omicron wave coincided with a very active H3N2 flu season. This has … created a scenario where there are significantly more flurona cases now than ever before in the COVID-19 pandemic,” says study co-author Venky Soundararajan, co-founder and chief scientific officer of the biomedical data firm nference, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts.However, experts stress that flurona is not at all likely to lead to genetic exchanges between viruses and cause more severe hybrid forms of either the flu or COVID-19. “While it's possible, in theory, for such gene swaps to occur, the chances of this occurring are very, very low and would almost certainly result in a non-viable virus,” says Stephen Goldstein, an evolutionary virologist at Eccles Institute of Human Genetics at the University of Utah.Study co-author Andrew Badley, an infectious disease physician-scientist at the Mayo Clinic, Minnesota, adds that “the main take-home message of [our study] is that co-infections do occur, and therefore we have to take that concept seriously.”The perfect viral storm A co-infection occurs when a patient contracts multiple pathogens—either of same type, such as two or more viruses, or different classes, such as a virus and a bacterium or fungus. This happens during many diseases; estimates suggest that 43 percent of patients hospitalized with flu-like symptoms are actually infected with multiple viruses. During Delta wave in India, many COVID-19 patients also got infected with mucor or black fungus.Knowing this possibility, scientists in China first investigated whether flu and SARS-CoV-2 co-infection could occur in January 2020, they didn’t find any cases in a study of 99 COVID-19 patients. But a follow up one month later found that about one in nine patients in a single hospital at the epicenter of the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, China, had caught both diseases.In the U.S., a study done between March 1 and April 4, 2020, in New York City showed that only one patient among 1,996 people hospitalized with COVID-19 was co-infected with influenza; 2 percent were co-infected with other respiratory viruses.The reason for these initially low co-infection rates may have been an unusually mild flu season in 2020. The CDC estimated that the U.S. saw over 35 million flu cases and 380,000 hospitalizations in the 2019-2020 flu season. By contrast, only 1,675 confirmed cases of flu were reported between September 28, 2020 and May 22, 2021, with a hospitalization rate of less than one per 100,000 people.You May Also LikeSCIENCEMultiple COVID infections can lead to chronic health issues. Here’s what to know.SCIENCECOVID-19 can ruin your sleep in many different ways—here's whySCIENCEWhy does COVID-19 cause brain fog? Scientists may finally have an answer.It’s not clear why the cases of flu dropped so precipitously, but it’s possibly due in part to preventive measures taken for COVID-19, such as social distancing, lockdowns, hand hygiene, and use of face masks. In addition, the U.S. had a record number of flu vaccine doses—193.8 million—delivered during that season.Flu season is worse this year, according to the CDC’s FluSurv-NET surveillance system. What’s more, it’s happening on top of a staggering wave of COVID-19 cases due to the Omicron variant, which has increased the odds of catching both viruses simultaneously. The upside is that flurona cases have been less severe, which may be due to the fact that most seem to be happening in people ages 14 to 41 who are generally less likely to develop severe outcomes.So why would younger populations get flurona more often? “Social distancing and masking adherence is likely less in that population,” says Badley. “It is probable, although we didn't assess that, the rate of vaccination for both COVID-19 and influenza is likely lower in the younger [population].”Still, other studies also show that co-infection has not significantly worsened the severity of disease.Does co-infection increase the risk of new hybrid viruses?As for concerns about flurona causing hybrid viruses to emerge, experts say there is no evidence of SARS-CoV-2 and flu viruses swapping genes while someone is co-infected.“In my opinion [it’s] impossible,” says Susan Weiss, a virologist at the University of Pennsylvania who has been studying coronaviruses for more than four decades.Two different strains of influenza viruses can easily exchange gene segments with each other during co-infections, but there are no examples of co-infections between influenza virus and a coronavirus leading to a more troublesome variant, Goldstein says.While SARS-CoV-2 has and continues to evolve via transmission in humans, “I don't think co-infection creates any additional risk,” he adds.Most experts also doubt that co-infections between SARS-CoV-2 and the common cold coronavirus, HCoV-229E, are a worry, despite a study, not yet peer reviewed, suggesting that such co-infections may have played a role in the evolution of Omicron.“Common cold coronavirus 229E is evolutionarily different virus from SARS-CoV-2,” says Weiss. “Such experiments are not done in laboratories, so we can’t know how close coronaviruses have to be to recombine.”It is possible to get two SARS-CoV-2 variants—like Alpha and Delta—to swap parts of their genetic codes during co-infection. Some experts even speculate that the Omicron sub-variants BA.2 and BA.3 may have arisen through such recombination events, but the evidence is elusive.In the meantime, studies have shown that the risk of developing serious COVID-19 and dying is much lower among patients who had received an influenza vaccine before they caught COVID-19.According to John O’Horo, an infectious disease physician at the Mayo Clinic, “the same things that have been able to hold this pandemic in check so far—namely, masking where appropriate, vaccination, and boosters for Omicron, and the good old-fashioned flu shot are still important.”Related TopicsCORONAVIRUSINFLUENZAPUBLIC HEALTHYou May Also LikeSCIENCEHow multiple COVID-19 infections can harm the bodySCIENCEDon't risk your holiday plans: The basics still matter for COVID and fluSCIENCECOVID-19 has tested us. Will we be ready for the next pandemic?SCIENCEIs the COVID-19 pandemic over?SCIENCECould COVID-19 trigger depression?LegalTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyYour US State Privacy RightsChildren's Online Privacy PolicyInterest-Based AdsAbout Nielsen MeasurementDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationOur SitesNat Geo HomeAttend a Live EventBook a TripBuy MapsInspire Your KidsShop Nat GeoVisit the D.C. MuseumWatch TVLearn About Our ImpactSupport Our MissionMastheadPress RoomAdvertise With UsJoin UsSubscribeCustomer ServiceRenew SubscriptionManage Your SubscriptionWork at Nat GeoSign Up for Our NewslettersContribute to Protect the PlanetFollow usNational Geographic InstagramNational Geographic FacebookNational Geographic TwitterNational Geographic YoutubeNational Geographic LinkedinNational Geographic TiktokNational Geographic RedditUnited States (Change)Copyright © 1996-2015 National Geographic SocietyCopyright © 2015-2024 National Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reservedPaper-based electrochemical immunosensor for label-free detection of multiple avian influenza virus antigens using flexible screen-printed carbon nanotube-polydimethylsiloxane electrodes | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Paper-based electrochemical immunosensor for label-free detection of multiple avian influenza virus antigens using flexible screen-printed carbon nanotube-polydimethylsiloxane electrodes Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 10 February 2022 Paper-based electrochemical immunosensor for label-free detection of multiple avian influenza virus antigens using flexible screen-printed carbon nanotube-polydimethylsiloxane electrodes Daesoon Lee1, Jyoti Bhardwaj1 & Jaesung Jang1,2,3 Scientific Reports volume 12, Article number: 2311 (2022) Cite this article 3977 Accesses 34 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects BiotechnologyHealth careTechniques and instrumentation AbstractMany studies have been conducted on measuring avian influenza viruses and their hemagglutinin (HA) antigens via electrochemical principles; most of these studies have used gold electrodes on ceramic, glass, or silicon substrates, and/or labeling for signal enhancement. Herein, we present a paper-based immunosensor for label-free measurement of multiple avian influenza virus (H5N1, H7N9, and H9N2) antigens using flexible screen-printed carbon nanotube-polydimethylsiloxane electrodes. These flexible electrodes on a paper substrate can complement the physical weakness of the paper-based sensors when wetted, without affecting flexibility. The relative standard deviation of the peak currents was 1.88% when the electrodes were repeatedly bent and unfolded twenty times with deionized water provided each cycle, showing the stability of the electrodes. For the detection of HA antigens, approximately 10-μl samples (concentration: 100 pg/ml–100 ng/ml) were needed to form the antigen–antibody complexes during 20–30 min incubation, and the immune responses were measured via differential pulse voltammetry. The limits of detections were 55.7 pg/ml (0.95 pM) for H5N1 HA, 99.6 pg/ml (1.69 pM) for H7N9 HA, and 54.0 pg/ml (0.72 pM) for H9N2 HA antigens in phosphate buffered saline, and the sensors showed good selectivity and reproducibility. Such paper-based sensors are economical, flexible, robust, and easy-to-manufacture, with the ability to detect several avian influenza viruses. Similar content being viewed by others Explore how immobilization strategies affected immunosensor performance by comparing four methods for antibody immobilization on electrode surfaces Article Open access 23 December 2022 C-MEMS-derived glassy carbon electrochemical biosensors for rapid detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein Article Open access 06 November 2023 Double-antibody-based nano-biosensing system for the onsite monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 variants Article Open access 21 August 2023 IntroductionInfluenza A viruses can cause rapid and fatal respiratory diseases in humans and some animals1, and they are subtyped in terms of their two surface proteins: hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase2. In particular, many avian influenza (AI) viruses of H5 and H7 subtypes, such as H5N1 and H7N7, may have fatality rates of 100% for poultry, and AI viruses are generally classified as highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) and low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) viruses3. These AI viruses can also cause fatal diseases in humans. Therefore, rapid measurement of several of these AI viruses is critical for preventing the spread of fatal respiratory diseases. Several methods have been developed to detect AI viruses. The most typical methods are enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)4,5, which are considered standard methods for virus detection because of their high accuracies and sensitivities despite drawbacks such as lengthy detection times and need for highly trained personnel. Recently, Raman spectroscopy6, quartz crystal microbalance7, and surface plasmon resonance8 have been used to mitigate these limitations; however, these diagnostic methods still require sophisticated equipment and appropriate training for operation9, thus requiring portable and user-friendly sensors that can detect AI viruses on-site to prevent the spread of these viruses effectively.In recent years, paper-based sensors have shown great potential for on-site diagnostic kits, such as dipstick assay, lateral flow assay, vertical flow assay, and microfluidic paper-based analytical devices (μPADs)10,11. Paper-based sensors allow flow of fluids without external forces using only the capillary action, in addition to offering good properties for biosensors, such as flexibility, lightness, hydrophilicity, fibrous and porous structure, and a high surface-to-volume ratio, thus rendering them simple to operate as well as affordable10,11. The direction of fluid flow in such sensors can be controlled by printing wax or hydrophobic patterns on the paper. These paper-based sensors involve electrical, colorimetric, or electrochemical measurements10,12,13. Among them, the electrochemical paper-based sensors are easy to miniaturize, have low limits of detection (LODs), and can quantitatively measure the amount of analytes14.To date, several studies have been presented for measuring the AI viruses or their HA antigens via electrochemical platforms (Table 1). Veerapandian et al.15 developed a label-free dual measurement sensor to detect the HA proteins of the influenza A viruses H1N1 and H5N1 using screen-printed carbon electrodes (SPCEs) on a ceramic substrate. The immunosensors had a detection range of 25 to 500 pM for H5 HA proteins, with an LOD of 9.4 pM15. A label-free sensor for detection of the HA proteins of the influenza virus H5N1 was also developed using a gold electrode on a silicon oxide wafer and a 3-way-junction DNA; it had a detection range of 1 pM to 100 nM, with an LOD of 1 pM16. As can be seen from Table 1, most of these previous studies using electrochemical platforms have incorporated gold electrodes or SPCEs on ceramic, glass, polymer, or silicon substrates but not on paper, and/or they used labeling for signal enhancement.Table 1 Electrochemical immunosensors for detection of avian influenza viruses (H5N1, H7N9, and H9N2), their hemagglutinin (HA) proteins, or peptides derived from the hemagglutinin proteins.Full size tableHerein, we present a label-free electrochemical paper-based sensor for detecting multiple AI virus antigens (Fig. 1), and this study would be the first to quantity multiple AI virus antigens using an electrochemical paper-based sensor. Generally, these AI viruses must be handled in biosafety level 3 or higher laboratories17; hence, their virus antigens are safer to use, especially in the event that aerosolization of the AI viruses may be needed18,19,20. These sensors have also shown cost-effective and simple fabrication processes, such as hydrophobic patterning using wax printing, screen-printing of the electrodes, and drop-casting of COOH-functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes (COOH-CNTs) for antibody immobilization.Figure 1Schematic of the proposed paper-based electrochemical immunosensor for detection of three different avian influenza virus antigens. Here, H5N1 HA alone is present on the sensor for the purpose of illustration. RTs stand for room temperature, ~ 25 ℃.Full size imageMoreover, continuous monitoring of airborne biological agents over time may require roll-to-roll sensors on flexible substrates such as paper21 and polymers. A paper substrate can absorb and keep analytes in sample liquids without a container. In contrast, a polymeric substrate is usually hydrophobic; hence, liquids on the substrate, when dropped, can move freely unless they are contained. In order to use the paper-based sensors for the purposes, robust and flexible electrodes are needed to obtain stable electrochemical signals since erroneous measurements can be made due to repeated bending and unfolding of paper substrate. In the present study, multi-walled (MW) CNTs and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) were mixed to produce a MWCNT-PDMS paste for screen-printing flexible electrodes on paper substrate. The CNT-PDMS composite is physically robust and flexible, with good reproducible electrical resistance22. This composite has been generally used for pressure or tactile sensors, but rarely used for electrochemical biosensors despite the advantages for the paper-based sensors. Three working electrodes were manufactured, and antibodies for three AI viruses (H5N1, H7N9, and H9N2) were immobilized on the COOH-functionalized CNTs via 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS). The bending test, sensitivity, selectivity, and reproducibility of these sensors were measured and discussed.Results and discussionCharacteristics of the MWCNT-PDMS electrodesThe peak currents were measured by differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) as a function of the weight ratio of the MWCNTs to PDMS in the MWCNT-PDMS electrodes; the peak current was observed to increase with increasing ratio of MWCNTs in the MWCNT-PDMS composite (Fig. 2A). In the case of 0.25:1, the DPV peak current was 0.8 µA at 0.72 V. When the MWCNT proportion was increased to 0.40:1, the peak current increased to 5.0 µA at 0.45 V; the main reason for this increase in peak current and decrease in peak potential with decreasing PDMS proportion can be due to the dielectric properties of PDMS37, which cause changes in the electron transfer kinetics between the electrode interface and electrolyte38,39. When the composite ratio was higher than 0.40:1, the composite was not of a paste form available for screen-printing.Figure 2(A) Differential pulse voltammograms of screen-printed MWCNT-PDMS electrodes with different mixing ratios of MWCNT and PDMS. (B) Peak currents measured for various concentrations of COOH-CNTs. The inset shows the differential pulse voltammograms for each deposition concentration of COOH-CNT on the working electrode. (C) Photograph of the working electrodes after placing 2 µl of dimethylformamide containing carboxyl-functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes (COOH-CNTs) for different concentrations ranging from 0 to 1000 µg/ml, followed by curing in an oven at 100 °C. (D) Peak currents of the COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes measured with repeating bending and unfolding for 20 cycles. The inset shows the photographs of the bending test setup. (E) Differential pulse voltammograms of the COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes at 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 bending cycles. (F) Peak currents measured for different antibody concentrations on the working electrodes (incubation time = 120 min, concentration: 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 µg/ml). (G) Peak currents measured for antibody incubation times (concentration: 10 µg/ml, t = 0, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, and 120 min, temperature = 37 °C).Full size imageWorking electrode characterization and bending testWe examined the effects of the concentration of COOH-CNTs, and the concentration and incubation time of antibodies on the COOH-CNTs modified electrodes. Figure 2B shows the peak currents measured after immobilizing 2 μl of varying concentrations (0–1000 µg/ml) of COOH-CNTs on the working electrodes and baking them in an oven at 100 ℃. Increases in peak current and shifts in peak potential (from 0.45 to 0.2 V) were observed after immobilization of COOH-CNTs on the MWCNT-PDMS electrode. The reason for this can be attributed to high conductivity of COOH-CNT that enhanced the electron transfer between the working electrodes and electrolyte38,39, also implying that the electrochemical surface characteristics of the MWCNT-PDMS electrode changed because of COOH-CNT deposition. The peak current increased with increase in the COOH-CNTs concentration, and saturated at 18.25 μA for a concentration of 500 μg/ml, where a peak potential of 0.45 V was no longer observed. This means that COOH-CNTs sufficiently covered the PDMS-MWCNT electrodes in terms of electrochemical measurement.For visual observation, images of the working electrodes were also captured with a smartphone camera after various concentrations of COOH-CNTs were immobilized on the working electrodes and dried in an oven at 100 ℃ (Fig. 2C). The bright gray color in the images indicate the deposition of COOH-CNTs on the electrode surfaces. The coffee ring effect40 was observed after deposition of COOH-CNTs in the concentration range from 50 to 200 µg/ml, where the black color showed negligible deposition of COOH-CNTs on the surface, demonstrating that these concentrations of COOH-CNTs were not enough to cover the whole electrode surfaces. However, the electrodes were fully covered (bright gray color) with COOH-CNTs after deposition of COOH-CNTs in a concentration range from 500 to 1000 µg/ml, which indicates that 500 µg/ml is the optimal concentration for complete coverage without clumps on the edges. This CNT concentration is comparable to that observed in another study, where the CNT concentration was around 200 μg/ml when using the drop-casting method41.To assure the robustness and flexibility of these paper-based sensors, the peak currents of these electrodes were measured using DPV by repeatedly bending and unfolding twenty times (Fig. 2D)42. The peak currents varied from 18.8 μA to 20.4 μA, where the relative standard deviation (RSD) was 1.88%, which was lower than that (3.09%) observed in the reproducibility tests. This shows that the COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes were minimally affected by mechanical bending, while the electrochemical sensors were continuously wetted, and the bent COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes exhibited very good stability (Fig. 2E). Although the bending test is one of the major considerations for a flexible biosensor, paper-based electrochemical biosensors showing a bending test have rarely been presented to date42,43. This may be because such sensors are usually developed as disposable devices, and continuous monitoring of airborne viruses using disposable and flexible immunosensors, which may require that the sensors should be bent and unfolded21, has rarely been reported despite its high impact44,45. Moreover, the proposed MWCNT-PDMS electrodes on a paper substrate have the potential for flexible electrochemical biosensor applications, such as polymer-based roll-to-roll printed biosensor patches46.The peak currents were also measured after immobilizing 10 μl of antibody solution on the modified MWCNT-PDMS electrodes in a concentration range from 1 to 20 μg/ml (Fig. 2F). The peak current decreased with increase in the concentration of antibodies up to 10 μg/ml, which might be due to insulating behavior of antibodies. When the antibody concentration was greater than 10 μg/ml, the peak current became saturated, which indicated that most of the free and activated carboxyl groups on the working electrodes bound with the antibodies. Optimization was also performed for incubation time of the antibodies. Ten microliters of antibodies in PBS (concentration: 10 μg/ml) was dropped on the modified MWCNT-PDMS electrodes and incubated in an oven at 37 ℃ up to 120 min to measure changes in the electrochemical properties with time (Fig. 2G). The peak current decreased with incubation time and converged at durations over 80 min.Electrochemical characterization of the functionalized working electrodesElectrochemical properties of the functionalized working electrodes with the deposition process were measured using DPV, CV, and EIS. Figure 3A shows the cyclic voltammograms for the MWCNT-PDMS (bare electrode), COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, and BSA/Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes. We observed a peak current of 38.9 μA at 0.2 V after deposition of COOH-CNTs on the bare electrodes, which had no CV peaks at 0.2 V. This was due to conductive behavior of COOH-CNTs via increasing the surface area and the electron transfer rate between the electrodes and electrolyte. The peak current decreased up to 29.9 µA after immobilizing antibodies on the modified electrode surface, which may be due to insulating behavior of antibodies. The peak current further decreased to 21.5 μA after immobilization of BSA. Large size and insulation properties of proteins such as BSA and antibodies decrease the electron transfer between electrodes and electrolyte11. DPV was also used for the same processes (Fig. 3B) and similar behaviors were observed. The peak currents were 16.9 μA after COOH-CNT deposition, 14.0 μA after antibody deposition, and 9.8 μA after BSA deposition.Figure 3(A) Cyclic voltammograms (scan rate: 50 mV/s), (B) differential pulse voltammograms, and (C) electrochemical impedance spectra of the MWCNT-PDMS, COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, H5N1-Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, and BSA/H5N1-Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes. The inset shows the equivalent circuit for EIS measurement. (D) Measured values of the solution resistance (Rs), charge transfer resistance (Rct) and double layer capacitance (Cdl) in the MWCNT-PDMS, COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, H5N1-Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, and BSA/H5N1-Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes. (E) The DPV peak currents measured for different incubation times for 10 µl of H5N1 HA detection (0, 10, 20, 30, and 40 min, concentration: 100 pg/ml, temperature = 25 °C). The error bars represent the standard deviations of three independent measurements.Full size imageThe impedance spectroscopy was performed to measure the interfacial changes after each modification of the electrode surface (Fig. 3C) at an electric potential of 0.1 V and an amplitude of 10 mV in a frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz. The inset shows the equivalent circuit, where Rct, Rs, Cdl and W represent the charge transfer resistance, solution resistance, double layer capacitance, and Warburg effect, respectively (Fig. 3D). The charge transfer resistance (Rct) of 35.5 kΩ for the bare electrodes was significantly reduced to 1.04 kΩ after COOH-CNT deposition. The Rct of the Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS increased to 4.53 kΩ due to decrease in electron transfer after antibody immobilization, which hinders electron transfer. The Rct value of the BSA/Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes were increased to 7.0 kΩ, indicating that the BSA covered nonspecific sites of the Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes and obstructed the electron transfer.The effect of incubation periods was measured to determine the optimal detection time for efficient binding of HA proteins on the antibodies-modified electrode surfaces. Figure 3E shows the peak currents after incubating H5N1 HA on the BSA/H5N1-Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes for various time periods (10–40 min). Incubation of H5N1 HA on the sensors resulted in an antigen–antibody reaction and hence a change in the DPV peak current. The peak current saturated at 20–30 min, resulting in the maximum antigen–antibody binding.Differential pulse voltammetry for hemagglutinin antigen detectionThree different HAs of the AI viruses (H5N1, H7N9, and H9N2) were detected using DPV (Fig. 4). Ten microliters of the HA solutions (in PBS) of different concentrations (10 pg/ml–100 ng/ml or 0.00017 nM–1.7 nM) were incubated on the BSA/Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes for 30 min and then washed with PBS, followed by measurements with DPV. Figure 4A–C showed decreases in peak current with increases in concentration of HA proteins of H5N1, H7N9, and H9N2, respectively, in the range of 10 pg/ml–100 ng/ml. The previous studies for HA detection using electrochemical sensors were conducted in a similar concentration range (Table 1). The injected HA bound with the antibodies immobilized on the working electrodes, and peak currents decreased with increasing HA concentrations due to the electrical insulation property of HA proteins.Figure 4Differential pulse voltammograms of different concentrations of hemagglutinin antigens of the influenza virus (A) H5N1, (B) H7N9, and (C) H9N2 subtypes. (D) Calibration graphs of hemagglutinin antigens of influenza virus H5N1, H7N9, and H9N2 for the detection range from 100 pg/ml to 100 ng/ml. The error bars represent the standard deviations of three independent measurements.Full size imageFigure 4D shows the log-linear relationships between the DPV peak currents and the three HA (H5N1, H7N9, and H9N2) concentrations. The LODs were computed as 55.7 pg/ml (0.95 pM) for H5N1 HA, 99.6 pg/ml (1.69 pM) for H7N9 HA, and 54.0 pg/ml (0.72 pM) for H9N2 HA, based on the three signal-to-noise ratios. Compared to other works on electrochemical detection of influenza HAs (Table 1), where the LODs were 9.4 pM15 and 1 pM16 for H5N1 HA proteins, present sensors showed similar or enhanced detection limits for H5N1 HA proteins. Han et al.33 reported a microfluidic immunosensor for simultaneous detection of H1N1, H5N1, and H7N9 viruses using ZnO nano-rods and HRP conjugated antibodies for signal enhancements with LOD of 1 pg/ml; however, the detection time was long (more than 2 h) because they used 1 h for incubation time of antigens and then another 1 h incubation of conjugated antibodies, followed by washing and detection33. The present sensors showed rapid (20–30 min) detection of multiple AI antigens using a simple, cost-effective and flexible paper-based electrochemical immunosensor. Moreover, there are no other studies reported on multiple detection of H5N1, H7N9, and H9N2 HA antigens in a single electrochemical paper-based device.Multiple detection testTo demonstrate the detection capabilities of the sensors for multiple targets, we tested one case in this study although there are many combinations of 3 three different HAs and several antigen concentrations. A 10-μl PBS containing H5N1 HA (10 ng/ml) and H9N2 HA (10 ng/ml), where no H7N9 HAs were included, was injected into each of the three working electrodes (BSA/H5N1-Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, BSA/H7N9-Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, and BSA/H9N2-Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature before measuring the electrochemical changes on each working electrode sequentially (Fig. 5A,B). The peak currents measured after the HA sample injection were 6.6 μA and 6.9 μA for H5N1-Ab and H9N2-Ab functionalized electrodes, respectively, whereas 11.9 μA was obtained for H7N9-Ab functionalized electrodes, similar to those of the negative controls. The peak currents of the single HA tests showed 5.8 μA (p = 0.19) at 10 ng/ml of H5N1 HA and 7.6 μA (p = 0.84) at 10 ng/ml of H9N2 HA (Fig. 4D), demonstrating that both single and multiple analyte detections were not significantly different for the 95% confidence intervals. Based on the observations, these immunosensors can quantify the concentrations of multiple HA proteins and showed negligible interference between target and non-target HAs in the samples.Figure 5(A) Differential pulse voltammograms and (B) peak currents of three BSA/Ab/COOH-CNT/CNT-PDMS electrodes of the proposed immunosensors after 10 \(\mathrm{\mu l}\) of 1 × PBS containing 10 ng/ml of H5N1 HA and 10 ng/ml of H9N2 HA was injected and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. (C) Selectivity of the immunosensors (H9N2-Ab functionalized electrodes) for influenza virus H9N2 hemagglutinin antigen detection. The test included 1 × PBS only, ten-fold diluted human serum only, non-targets (H5N1 HA, H1N1 virus, and MS2 bacteriophage) in 1 × PBS, and targets in 1 × PBS or ten-fold diluted human serum. (D) Reproducibility of the immunosensors (H5N1-Ab functionalized electrodes) using H5N1 HA antigen (concentration: 100 ng/ml). The error bars represent the standard deviations of three independent measurements.Full size imageSelectivity and reproducibility testsFor selectivity assay, different viruses (influenza A H1N1 whole viruses and MS2 bacteriophages) and HA proteins in PBS and human serum were used (Fig. 5C). The human serum was ten-fold diluted with PBS. H9N2-Ab functionalized electrodes were incubated with 10 μl of either H5N1 HA, H1N1 viruses, H9N2 HA (target), or MS2 bacteriophages for 30 min and washed with PBS before DPV measurements. The negative controls (PBS and human serum) were obtained by measuring the peak current of the H9N2-Ab functionalized electrodes after incubation of PBS and human serum alone, respectively. The concentration used in the experiments was 10 ng/ml for HA and 104 plaque forming units (pfu)/ml for viruses and bacteriophages. Only the DPV peak currents for H9N2 HA decreased, unlike those for the other non-targets and the negative controls. This implies that the immunosensor shows good selectivity.The reproducibility tests of these sensors were conducted (Fig. 5D). All H5N1-Ab functionalized electrodes were given the same concentration of H5N1 HA (100 ng/ml), incubated for 30 min, washed with PBS, and measured by DPV. The peak currents did not differ significantly, and the RSD was 3.09%, showing good reproducibility for label-free detection.ConclusionIn this study, a paper-based electrochemical immunosensor was presented for quantifying multiple AI virus antigens in a label-free manner using flexible screen-printed CNT-PDMS electrodes. Three working electrodes were constructed within a single sensor, and three different antibodies were immobilized on each working electrode; therefore, three different AI HA proteins can be measured separately. Screen-printed carbon electrodes were made by using MWCNT-PDMS paste to protect the paper substrate that might be fragile to unavoidable liquid processes as well as to provide stability and flexibility (RSD: 1.88%) under 20 cycles of bending and unfolding. COOH-CNTs were then attached to the working electrodes using drop casting. H5N1, H7N9, and H9N2 HA antigens were detected at concentrations from 100 pg/ml to 100 ng/ml, and the LODs of the sensors were 55.7 pg/ml (0.95 pM) for H5N1 HA, 99.6 pg/ml (1.69 pM) for H7N9 HA, and 54.0 pg/ml (0.72 pM) for H9N2 HA antigens, showing good selectivity and reproducibility (RSD: 3.09%) as well. Thus, this paper-based electrochemical immunosensor has high potential for field detection of AI viruses owing to its low cost, high sensitivity, simple measurement with a portable potentiostat, as well as rapid measurement time (20–30 min).Materials and methodsMaterialsWhatman filter paper (grade 4, pore size: 20–25 µm) was purchased from GE Healthcare Inc. (USA). The MWCNTs were purchased from Graphene Supermarket Inc. (USA). An adhesive polyester film (thickness: 100 μm) was obtained from Fancylobby (South Korea); PDMS was purchased from K1 Solution Co., Ltd. (South Korea). Further, Ag/AgCl ink was obtained from ALS Co., Ltd. (Japan). COOH-CNTs (> 90% carbon basis, diameter: 4–5 nm, length: 0.5–1.5 µm, 1.0–3.0 atom% carboxylic acid), EDC, NHS, human serum, and bovine serum albumin (BSA) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). One mole of 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES) buffer was obtained from Tech & Innovation (South Korea), dimethylformamide (DMF) was purchased from Daejung Chemicals & Metals Co., Ltd. (South Korea), and phosphate-buffered saline (1 × PBS, pH 7.4) was obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. (USA); influenza A H5N1 HA polyclonal antibody (pAb) (Rabbit pAb, 11048-RP02), influenza A H7N9 HA pAb (Rabbit pAb, 40103-RP01), influenza A H9N2 HA pAb (Rabbit pAb, 11229-RP02), influenza A H5N1 HA proteins (A/Anhui/1/2005, 11048-V08H4), influenza A H7N9 HA proteins (A/Shanghai/1/2013, 40104-V08H), and influenza A H9N2 HA proteins (A/Hong Kong/35820/2009, 40174-V08B) were purchased from Sino Biological Inc. (China). MS2 bacteriophages (ATCC 15597-b1) and influenza A virus H1N1 (KBPV-VR-76) were obtained from the Korean Bank for Pathogenic Viruses (South Korea).Sensor electrode fabricationThe wax pattern showing the sensing areas of the sensors was designed using Auto-CAD and printed on a Whatman filter paper (35 mm × 35 mm) using a solid wax printer (ColorQube 8570, Xerox). The paper was placed in an oven at 100 ℃ for 10 min to allow the wax to melt into the paper and then removed from the oven for hardening.The electrochemical measurement was based on the three-electrode system, and the electrodes were manufactured by screen printing. The stencil mask design consisted of three working electrodes, one counter electrode, and one reference electrode. The design was machined over a one-sided adhesive polyester film (height: 100 μm) using a laser cutter (Micro Laser Cutter C40, Coryart), and the adhesive film was attached to the waxed paper. The three working electrodes and counter electrode were fabricated from an MWCNT-PDMS paste, which was a mixture of MWCNT and PDMS to form a screen-printable dough. Because the size and surface area of the CNTs vary depending on the manufacturer, their proportion may change22. The MWCNT-PDMS dough was printed on the stencil mask and baked at 70 ℃ for 2 h, followed by cooling at room temperature (25 ℃) and removal of the stencil mask. The sensing areas of the electrodes were located within the hydrophilic non-waxed areas, and the hydrophobic areas, which were not in contact with the electrolytes, were connected to the electrochemical analyzer. For the reference electrode, the MWCNT-PDMS dough was printed only in the hydrophobic areas, and Ag/AgCl ink was printed in the hydrophilic area and baked at 70 ℃ for 30 min. The circular areas of the working electrodes and counter electrode were 12.6 mm2 (diameter: 4 mm), and the area of the reference electrode within the hydrophilic area was 3.8 mm2.Sensor electrode functionalizationCOOH-CNTs were deposited onto the three working electrodes to increase the conductivity of the electrodes47. COOH-CNTs were dissolved in DMF at a concentration of 500 μg/ml and sonicated for 2 h. The COOH-CNT supernatant was then collected by centrifuging at 4000 rpm for 1 h48. A 2 μl of the COOH-CNT solution was placed on each of the working electrodes and baked in an oven at 100 ℃ for 1 h, followed by washing with distilled water and drying with nitrogen gas.EDC/NHS was used as a crosslinker for covalent bonding of COOH-CNTs with the antibodies via amide bonds. The mixture of EDC (10 μl, 15 mM in 1 M MES buffer) and NHS (10 μl, 30 mM in 1 M MES buffer) was incubated on the working electrodes at room temperature for 30 min to activate the carboxyl groups of the COOH-CNTs. The electrodes were then washed with PBS to remove any residual EDC, NHS, and MES buffer. For each of the working electrodes, approximately 10 μl of the antibodies (concentration: 10 μg/ml) specific to the HA proteins of influenza viruses (either H5N1, H7N9, or H9N2) were injected separately, incubated at 37 ℃ for 2 h, washed with PBS, and then dried with nitrogen gas. Ten microliters of BSA solution (10 mg/ml in PBS) was then placed on each working electrode and incubated at room temperature for 30 min to prevent nonspecific binding, followed by washing with PBS (Fig. 1).Bending testWe also explored the possibility that the COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes can be used stably under circumstances in which the electrodes may be repeatedly bent for a certain period of time, which is typical for monitoring airborne biological agents continuously using roll-to-roll sensors. For this test, these electrodes were first prepared in a planar form and then bent by 90° before obtaining electrochemical measurements using DPV for each of two states, i.e., planar and bent. For each bending-and-unfolding cycle, about 5 μl of deionized (DI) water was applied to prevent dehydration of the sensing areas and to maintain the ion concentration of the electrolyte for stable electrochemical measurements; these measurement cycles were repeated twenty times.Electrochemical measurementsThe electrochemical measurements were conducted at room temperature using Autolab PGSTAT204 and NOVA 1.10 software (Metrohm, Netherlands) using a mixture of 10 mM ferri/ferrocyanide and 0.5 M KCl in 1 × PBS solution as a redox mediator. Graph analysis was conducted using Origin 2017. Changes in the electrochemical properties of the MWCNT-PDMS, COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS, and BSA/Ab/COOH-CNT/MWCNT-PDMS electrodes were measured using cyclic voltammetry (CV), DPV, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Optimization and HA protein detection experiments, and selectivity and reproducibility tests were performed using DPV. ReferencesTaubenberger, J. K. & Morens, D. M. The pathology of influenza virus infections. Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 3, 499–522 (2008).CAS Google Scholar Bouvier, N. M. & Palese, P. The biology of influenza viruses. Vaccine 26, D49–D53 (2008).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Alexander, D. J. A review of avian influenza in different bird species. Vet. Microbiol 74, 3–13 (2000).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Reen, D. J. Basic Protein and Peptide Protocols. 461–466. (Springer, 1994).Joshi, M. & Deshpande, J. Polymerase chain reaction: Methods, principles and application. IJBR 2, 81–97 (2010). Google Scholar Xiao, M. et al. Ultrasensitive detection of avian influenza A (H7N9) virus using surface-enhanced Raman scattering-based lateral flow immunoassay strips. Anal. Chim. Acta 1053, 139–147 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Li, D. et al. A nanobeads amplified QCM immunosensor for the detection of avian influenza virus H5N1. Biosens. Bioelectron. 26, 4146–4154 (2011).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Park, T. J. et al. Development of label-free optical diagnosis for sensitive detection of influenza virus with genetically engineered fusion protein. Talanta 89, 246–252 (2012).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nidzworski, D., Pranszke, P., Grudniewska, M., Król, E. & Gromadzka, B. Universal biosensor for detection of influenza virus. Biosens. Bioelectron. 59, 239–242 (2014).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hu, J. et al. Advances in paper-based point-of-care diagnostics. Biosens. Bioelectron. 54, 585–597 (2014).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bhardwaj, J., Sharma, A. & Jang, J. Vertical flow-based paper immunosensor for rapid electrochemical and colorimetric detection of influenza virus using a different pore size sample pad. Biosens. Bioelectron. 126, 36–43 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Güder, F. et al. Paper-based electrical respiration sensor. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55, 5727–5732 (2016). Google Scholar Palchetti, I. & Mascini, M. Sensors and Microsystems. 15–23. (Springer, 2010).Dungchai, W., Chailapakul, O. & Henry, C. S. Electrochemical detection for paper-based microfluidics. Anal. Chem. 81, 5821–5826 (2009).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Veerapandian, M., Hunter, R. & Neethirajan, S. Dual immunosensor based on methylene blue-electroadsorbed graphene oxide for rapid detection of the influenza A virus antigen. Talanta 155, 250–257 (2016).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lee, T. et al. Fabrication of electrochemical biosensor consisted of multi-functional DNA structure/porous au nanoparticle for avian influenza virus (H5N1) in chicken serum. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 99, 511–519 (2019).CAS Google Scholar Gangadharan, D., Smith, J. & Weyant, R. Biosafety recommendations for work with influenza viruses containing a hemagglutinin from the A/goose/Guangdong/1/96 lineage. Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 62, 1–7 (2013). Google Scholar Bhardwaj, J., Kim, M.-W. & Jang, J. Rapid airborne influenza virus quantification using an antibody-based electrochemical paper sensor and electrostatic particle concentrator. Environ. Sci. Technol. 54, 10700–10712 (2020).ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kim, H.-U. et al. Electrochemical detection of airborne influenza virus using air sampling system. AAQR 18, 2721–2727 (2018).CAS Google Scholar Hong, S., Bhardwaj, J., Han, C.-H. & Jang, J. Gentle sampling of submicrometer airborne virus particles using a personal electrostatic particle concentrator. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 12365–12372 (2016).ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Cho, Y. S. et al. Continuous surveillance of bioaerosols on-site using an automated bioaerosol-monitoring system. ACS Sens. 5, 395–403 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Du, J. et al. Optimized CNT-PDMS flexible composite for attachable health-care device. Sensors 20, 4523 (2020).ADS CAS PubMed Central Google Scholar Wang, R. et al. Interdigitated array microelectrode based impedance immunosensor for detection of avian influenza virus H5N1. Talanta 79, 159–164 (2009).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lum, J. et al. Rapid detection of avian influenza H5N1 virus using impedance measurement of immuno-reaction coupled with RBC amplification. Biosens. Bioelectron. 38, 67–73 (2012).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Jarocka, U. et al. An immunosensor based on antibody binding fragments attached to gold nanoparticles for the detection of peptides derived from avian influenza hemagglutinin H5. Sensors 14, 15714–15728 (2014).ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lin, J. et al. An impedance immunosensor based on low-cost microelectrodes and specific monoclonal antibodies for rapid detection of avian influenza virus H5N1 in chicken swabs. Biosens. Bioelectron. 67, 546–552 (2015).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Diba, F. S., Kim, S. & Lee, H. J. Amperometric bioaffinity sensing platform for avian influenza virus proteins with aptamer modified gold nanoparticles on carbon chips. Biosens. Bioelectron. 72, 355–361 (2015).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Karash, S. et al. Rapid detection of avian influenza virus H5N1 in chicken tracheal samples using an impedance aptasensor with gold nanoparticles for signal amplification. J. Virol. Methods 236, 147–156 (2016).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Jarocka, U. et al. An electrochemical immunosensor based on a 4, 4′-thiobisbenzenethiol self-assembled monolayer for the detection of hemagglutinin from avian influenza virus H5N1. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 228, 25–30 (2016).CAS Google Scholar Zhang, Q. et al. Electrochemical conversion of Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles to electroactive Prussian blue analogues for self-sacrificial label biosensing of avian influenza virus H5N1. Anal. Chem. 89, 12145–12151 (2017).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wu, Z. et al. Bifunctional magnetic nanobeads for sensitive detection of avian influenza A (H7N9) virus based on immunomagnetic separation and enzyme-induced metallization. Biosens. Bioelectron. 68, 586–592 (2015).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Huang, J. et al. Silver nanoparticles coated graphene electrochemical sensor for the ultrasensitive analysis of avian influenza virus H7. Anal. Chim. Acta 913, 121–127 (2016).ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Han, J.-H., Lee, D., Chew, C. H. C., Kim, T. & Pak, J. J. A multi-virus detectable microfluidic electrochemical immunosensor for simultaneous detection of H1N1, H5N1, and H7N9 virus using ZnO nanorods for sensitivity enhancement. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 228, 36–42 (2016).CAS Google Scholar Wu, Z. et al. Digital single virus electrochemical enzyme-linked immunoassay for ultrasensitive H7N9 avian influenza virus counting. Anal. Chem. 90, 1683–1690 (2018).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhou, C.-H., Long, Y.-M., Qi, B.-P., Pang, D.-W. & Zhang, Z.-L. A magnetic bead-based bienzymatic electrochemical immunosensor for determination of H9N2 avian influenza virus. Electrochem. Commun. 31, 129–132 (2013).ADS CAS Google Scholar Sayhi, M. et al. Electrochemical detection of influenza virus H9N2 based on both immunomagnetic extraction and gold catalysis using an immobilization-free screen printed carbon microelectrode. Biosens. Bioelectron. 107, 170–177 (2018).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Iannarelli, A., Niasar, M. G. & Ross, R. Electrode interface polarization formation in dielectric elastomer actuators. Sens. Actuators A 111992 (2020).Elgrishi, N. et al. A practical beginner’s guide to cyclic voltammetry. J. Chem. Educ. 95, 197–206 (2018).CAS Google Scholar Cao, X., Luo, L., Ding, Y., Zou, X. & Bian, R. Electrochemical methods for simultaneous determination of dopamine and ascorbic acid using cetylpyridine bromide/chitosan composite film-modified glassy carbon electrode. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 129, 941–946 (2008).CAS Google Scholar Yunker, P. J., Still, T., Lohr, M. A. & Yodh, A. Suppression of the coffee-ring effect by shape-dependent capillary interactions. Nature 476, 308–311 (2011).ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhu, J., Qin, Y. & Zhang, Y. Preparation of all solid-state potentiometric ion sensors with polymer-CNT composites. Electrochem. Commun. 11, 1684–1687 (2009).CAS Google Scholar Cinti, S. et al. Low-cost and reagent-free paper-based device to detect chloride ions in serum and sweat. Talanta 179, 186–192 (2018).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Jia, W. et al. Electrochemical tattoo biosensors for real-time noninvasive lactate monitoring in human perspiration. Anal. Chem. 85, 6553–6560 (2013).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bhardwaj, J., Devarakonda, S., Kumar, S. & Jang, J. Development of a paper-based electrochemical immunosensor using an antibody-single walled carbon nanotubes bio-conjugate modified electrode for label-free detection of foodborne pathogens. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 253, 115–123 (2017).CAS Google Scholar Bhardwaj, J. et al. Recent advancements in the measurement of pathogenic airborne viruses. J. Hazard. Mater. 420, 126574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126574 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nyein, H. Y. Y. et al. Regional and correlative sweat analysis using high-throughput microfluidic sensing patches toward decoding sweat. Sci. Adv. 5, eaaw9906 (2019).ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Valentino, O. et al. Influence of the polymer structure and nanotube concentration on the conductivity and rheological properties of polyethylene/CNT composites. Phys. E Low Dimens. Syst. Nanostruct. 40, 2440–2445 (2008).ADS CAS Google Scholar Sharma, A., Han, C.-H. & Jang, J. Rapid electrical immunoassay of the cardiac biomarker troponin I through dielectrophoretic concentration using imbedded electrodes. Biosens. Bioelectron. 82, 78–84 (2016).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant (2020R1A2C1011583), by the ITRC(Information Technology Research Center) support program (IITP-2020-2017-0-01635) supervised by the IITP (Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion), by Basic Science Research Program through the NRF funded by the Ministry of Education(2020R1A6A1A03040570), by the Institute of Civil Military Technology Cooperation funded by Defense Acquisition Program Administration and Ministry of Trade Industry and Energy of Korean government (UM19402RD4), and by Korea Environmental Industry & Technology Institute (KEITI) through Technology Development Project for Biological Hazards Management in Indoor Air Project, funded by Korea Ministry of Environment (MOE) (2021003370003).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsSensors and Aerosols Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 44919, Republic of KoreaDaesoon Lee, Jyoti Bhardwaj & Jaesung JangDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of KoreaJaesung JangDepartment of Urban and Environmental Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of KoreaJaesung JangAuthorsDaesoon LeeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJyoti BhardwajView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJaesung JangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsD.L. designed the experiments, characterized the performances, and analyzed the data. J.B. analyzed the data. J.J. supervised this study, and analyzed the data. All the authors wrote and reviewed the manuscript and discussed the results.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Jaesung Jang.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleLee, D., Bhardwaj, J. & Jang, J. Paper-based electrochemical immunosensor for label-free detection of multiple avian influenza virus antigens using flexible screen-printed carbon nanotube-polydimethylsiloxane electrodes. Sci Rep 12, 2311 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-06101-1Download citationReceived: 26 October 2021Accepted: 17 January 2022Published: 10 February 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-06101-1Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Electrical, Mechanical, and Electromechanical Properties of Screen-Printed Piezoresistive Polydimethylsiloxane with Multiwalled Carbon Nanotube Nanocomposites S. Riyaz AliA. L. G. N. AdityaE. Rufus Journal of Materials Engineering and Performance (2024) Download PDF Associated content Collection Nanomaterials for Photocatalysis Collection Editor’s choice: Biosensors Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Translational Research newsletter — top stories in biotechnology, drug discovery and pharma. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get what matters in translational research, free to your inbox weekly. Sign up for Nature Briefing: Translational ResearchBird flu continues to spread in North America, Europe - The Jerusalem Post Advertisement JP Newsletter Israel News Health & Wellness WORLD NEWS Middle East Business & Innovation Opinion JP Store Login Log Out Archaeology Israel Real Estate Judaism Kabbalah Environment Antisemitism JP Spanish Podcasts JP Shopping Aliyah Portal Premium Jerusalem Post Health & Wellness Bird flu continues to spread in North America, Europe Florida reported its first cases of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza of the season last week. By TZVI JOFFRE FEBRUARY 6, 2022 02:40 A closed road leading to a chicken farm is seen after an outbreak of bird flu in the village of Upham in southern England February 3, 2015. (photo credit: PETER NICHOLLS/REUTERS) Additional cases of avian influenza have been detected in wild and domesticated birds in Canada and the US, as a severe outbreak of the virus continues to spread in Europe.The first case of H5N1 in North America this season was detected in Newfoundland and Labrador in late December. Since then, the virus has spread to other locations in Canada and the US.Last week, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) confirmed the presence of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI), subtype H5N1, in two flocks in Nova Scotia. One outbreak was in a backyard flock, while the other outbreak was in a commercial flock. According to CBC, 12,000 turkeys were euthanized at the commercial barn during the second outbreak. Meanwhile, in the US, the first cases of the virus were detected in South Carolina in mid-January before the virus spread to North Carolina and Virginia in recent weeks, with Florida reporting its first cases last week.Two cases of Eurasian H5 avian influenza were detected in American green-winged teals in Palm Beach County, Florida, on February 1, according to the US Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS). Altogether, at least 90 cases of Eurasian H5 HPAI have been reported to the USDA since January, with nine of the cases confirmed as the H5N1 subtype. Workers in protective gear seen in Moshav Givat Yoav, in northern Israel, December 29, 2021, following an outbreak of avian influenza (credit: MICHAEL GILADI/FLASH90)The USDA has said that it expects to find further cases among wild birds and advised people to avoid coming into direct contact with wild birds. The service urged farmers and hunters to practice good biosecurity to prevent the spread of the virus.The USDA added that the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) still considers the risk to the general public from the variant to be low. No human infections from the variant have occurred in the US. A recent update by the World Health Organization stated that the overall pandemic risk associated with the H5 lineage is considered "not significantly changed" in comparison with previous years. A large number of bird flu outbreaks have been reported throughout Europe, Africa and Asia in recent weeks, mostly due to the H5N1 subtype, which comes from the H5 lineage, according to the World Organization for Animal Health. The organization warned that a further increase in outbreaks is expected in the coming months.Over a million birds were found to be infected with the variant in Israel in recent months, although Israel's Agriculture Ministry declared in recent weeks that the outbreak is now under control.The OIE has urged countries to increase surveillance for HPAI outbreaks, as the virus has been reported in over 40 countries since July. Stay updated with the latest news! Subscribe to The Jerusalem Post Newsletter Subscribe Now The H5N1, H5N3, H5N4, H5N5, H5N6 and H5N8 subtypes of HPAI are circulating in bird and poultry populations across the globe, sparking concern at OIE, which called this an “unprecedented genetic variability of subtypes ... creating an epidemiologically challenging landscape.”Last month, OIE Director General Monique Eloit told Reuters that "this time the situation is more difficult and more risky because we see more variants emerge, which make them harder to follow.""Eventually the risk is that [the virus] mutates or that it mixes with a human flu virus that can be transmitted between humans then suddenly it takes on a new dimension," she added. Germany’s Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, the Friedrich Loeffler Institute, told the German Deutsche Presse-Agentur (DPA) that Europe is experiencing its “strongest avian flu epidemic ever.”The institute added that “there is no end in sight” as the virus spreads throughout the continent and around the world, with new cases reported on a daily basis.Sign up for the Health & Wellness newsletter >> Related Tags United States health Canada Europe bird flu Hot Opinion Dear Jared Kushner, the Jewish people need you By JPOST EDITORIAL To recover, Democrats must expel anti-Zionist extremists who put off Middle America By AMOTZ ASA-EL Leaders of the Jewish enemies have always died as weak cowards By URI PILICHOWSKI How will the recent US election affect Iran, Russia, and North Korea? By LOUIS RENÉ BERES Israel cannot work with an organization that enables Hamas activities and terrorism By ZINA RAKHAMILOVA Most Read 1 Israel can't arm itself with 30,000-pound bombs in time against Iran 2 'We were ambushed': Pogrom in Amsterdam wounds several 3 102 years ago, one of the all-time greatest archaeological discoveries was made 4 Scientists unlock secrets of 3,000-year-old tablet revealing path to Noah's Ark 5 Trump’s victory throws diplomatic bombshell into Israel's multi-front war Advertisement Information About Us Contact us Feedback Terms Of Service Privacy Policy Subscriber Agreement JPost Jobs Cancel Subscription Sitemap פרסום בג'רוזלם פוסט Customer Service Advertise with Us The Jerusalem Post Group Breaking News World News Iran News MDA Heroes The Jerusalem Report Jerusalem Post Lite חדשות מעריב Real Estate Listings Hype Special Content JP Store BrandBlend Services Precious Metals Tools and services JPost Premium Ulpan Online JPost Newsletter Our Magazines Learn Hebrew RSS feed JPost.com Archive Digital Library Lists of Jewish holidays Law לוח חגים ומועדים 2024 זמני כניסת שבת Sites Of Interest Poalim Online JNF-USA The Jerusalem Post Customer Service Center can be contacted with any questions or requests: Telephone: *2421 * Extension 4 Jerusalem Post or 03-7619056 Fax: 03-5613699 E-mail: subs@jpost.com The center is staffed and provides answers on Sundays through Thursdays between 07:00 AM and 14:00 PM and Fridays only handles distribution requests between 7:00 AM and 12:30 PM For international customers: The center is staffed and provides answers on Sundays through Thursdays between 7AM and 14PM Israel time Toll Free number 1-800-448-9291 Telephone +972-3-761-9056 Fax: 972-3-561-3699 E-mail: subs@jpost.com Copyright © 2024 Jpost Inc. All rights reserved • Terms of Use • Privacy Policy Designed byAgencies: Avian flu found in birds at Indiana turkey farm Skip to content Fox 59 Indianapolis 48° WATCH NOW FOX59 News Sign Up Indianapolis 48° WATCH NOW Sponsored By Toggle Menu Open Navigation Close Navigation Search Please enter a search term. Primary Menu News Indiana News Crimetracker National and World Indy Unsolved Video on Demand FOX59 Investigates Habitat for Humanity IBJ Media/Inside INdiana Business Hispanic Heritage Month Veterans Voices Living Healthy Fentanyl Crisis NewsNation Now IN Focus Health BestReviews BestReviews Daily Deals Your Local Election Headquarters Politics from The Hill Hoosier Lottery Press Releases Automotive News Delphi Murders Trial Weather Indianapolis Forecast Indianapolis Weather Radar & Map Watches & Warnings School Closings and Delays Camera Network Submit Your Weather Closing Register Your School/Business Traffic Morning News Habitat for Humanity Wish Someone a Happy Birthday Pack the Pantries Where Is Sherman? Pay it Forward Kids First on FOX Home Zone Kylee’s Kitchen Furry Friday Angela Answers Mommy Magic Living Well Inspired Living Sports Indianapolis Colts Colts Blue Zone Podcast The Big Game High School Football Play of the Week Big Ten Sports Indiana Pacers Indy 500 Indy Now Be Our Guest Indy Monthly Marketplace Epic Discounts Find a Job Post a Job Contact Us Meet the Team Advertise with Us Hoosier Proud FOX59 Newsletter Send a News Tip Closed Captioning Work for us TV Schedule Community Calendar Regional News Partners Contests Contest Rules Search Please enter a search term. (Getty Images) Indiana News 29K turkeys killed after avian flu found on southern Indiana farm by: Associated Press Posted: Feb 9, 2022 / 01:31 PM EST Updated: Feb 9, 2022 / 03:10 PM EST (Getty Images) by: Associated Press Posted: Feb 9, 2022 / 01:31 PM EST Updated: Feb 9, 2022 / 03:10 PM EST SHARE This is an archived article and the information in the article may be outdated. Please look at the time stamp on the story to see when it was last updated. INDIANAPOLIS (AP) — A strain of avian flu that can cause high mortality rates among birds has been confirmed at a commercial turkey farm in southern Indiana, federal and state agencies said Wednesday. The United States Department of Agriculture said its Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service confirmed a strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza at the farm in Dubois County. State officials have quarantined the farm and its 29,000 turkeys are being euthanized to prevent the spread of the disease, said Denise Derrer Spears, a spokeswoman for the Indiana State Board of Animal Health. The USDA said turkeys from the affected farm will not enter the food supply and issued a reminder, the poultry and eggs should be cooked to an internal temperature of 165 degrees (73.9 Celsius) to kill bacteria and viruses. The agency said avian influenza does not present an immediate public health concern and no human cases of avian influenza viruses have been detected in the U.S. The USDA said turkey infections are the first confirmation of highly pathogenic bird flu in commercial poultry in the U.S. since 2020. The Indiana State Board of Animal Health said samples from the farm were analyzed at the Indiana Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory at Purdue University after about 100 turkeys died. The state agency said the farm is under quarantine and that state officials are working with the poultry producers statewide to increase monitoring of flocks. A January 2016 outbreak of bird flu in Dubois County affected 11 poultry farms, resulting in the loss of more than 400,000 birds, the State Board of Animal Health said. Indiana ranks third nationally in turkey production, first in duck production, second in production of table eggs and egg-laying chickens, and is a significant producer of broiler chickens, the state agency said. Indiana’s poultry industry employs more than 14,000 Hoosiers and is valued at $2.5 billion annually. Close Modal Suggest a Correction Your name(required) Your email(required) Report a typo or grammatical error(required) Submit Δ Suggest a Correction Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. Trademark and Copyright 2024 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. ✕ Read next > Read next > Next ✕ ✕ Read next > Next story in Cancel Read next > Next story in Cancel The best Black Friday deals at PetSmart Holiday / 2 days ago Black Friday is a chance to treat your pets too. You can find some incredible PetSmart Black Friday deals on products for every pet. Target’s holiday family pajama sets are 30% off right … Holiday / 2 days ago Target’s pajama offerings are incredibly cute, so you can outfit your family in the retailer’s festive duds. Walmart has holiday family pajama sets for up to … Holiday / 3 days ago Walmart is selling matching family jammies at up to 45% off. View All BestReviews Top Stories UN climate talks to focus on money to help poor nations … Round 2 in the Trump-vs-Mexico matchup looks ominous … Trump announces Tom Homan, former director of immigration … Traumatized by war, hundreds of Lebanon’s children … Will Trump’s hush money conviction stand? A judge … Top Stories More Stories Middle East latest: Israeli strike kills 3 people … UN climate talks to focus on money to help poor nations … Round 2 in the Trump-vs-Mexico matchup looks ominous … Trump announces Tom Homan, former director of immigration … Traumatized by war, hundreds of Lebanon’s children … Will Trump’s hush money conviction stand? A judge … Satellite images and documents indicate China working … Research reveals China has built prototype nuclear … More Stories Fox 59 Video Daily 3 Daily 4 Evening Drawing: November 10, 2024 3 hours ago Multiple shootings reported in Indianapolis in 2nd … 4 hours ago 1 dead after crash on Interstate 70 on west side … 4 hours ago Delphi murders trial: Jury deliberations to resume … 4 hours ago Colts get ready to face Bills at home 19 hours ago Person shot, killed at apartment complex on near … 1 day ago 2 wounded in shooting on north side of Indianapolis 1 day ago Delphi murders: Jury continues deliberation 1 day ago Football Friday Night Rewind: Sectional Finals 2 days ago Taylor’s still there 2 days ago Zach sings sometimes 2 days ago Runners head to Indianapolis for CNO Indianapolis … 2 days ago More Videos More from Fox 59 Satellite images and documents indicate China working … Research reveals China has built prototype nuclear … Trump breaks GOP losing streak in nation’s largest … Trump on Day 1: Begin deportation push, pardon Jan. … More than 1,000 mariachis belt out classics like … Biden’s White House invitation to Trump continues … Judith Jamison, a dancer both eloquent and elegant, … Israeli strikes kill dozens in Lebanon and isolated … More from Fox 59 Most Popular Boy, 13, shot in Greenwood; teenage shooter arrested Delphi murders: Jury deliberations to resume Monday Indy man: Site on ‘Wicked’ doll box links to porn IUPD: 4 pedestrians struck by driver on Saturday IMPD: Woman shot after making auto theft report 6-year-old dead after crash on SR 44 in Shelby Co. 465 SB ramp to 70 EB reopens after crash Current 48° Clear Tonight 44° Clear Precip: 0% Tomorrow 63° Mostly Sunny Precip: 0% BestReviews.com - Top picks to make everyone happy The best Black Friday deals at PetSmart Holiday / 2 days ago Target’s holiday family pajama sets are 30% off right … Holiday / 2 days ago Walmart has holiday family pajama sets for up to … Holiday / 3 days ago Target’s 3-day Early Black Friday Sale is live now Holiday / 3 days ago Netflix’s holiday movie lineup includes Lindsay Lohan … Holiday / 1 week ago Five Below wins Christmas with these ‘90s and aughts-inspired … Holiday / 2 weeks ago View All BestReviews Picks Latest News 465 SB ramp to 70 EB reopens after crash News / 5 hours ago Moore questioning Colts’ effort amid 3-game skid Indianapolis Colts / 6 hours ago Delphi murders: Jury deliberations to resume Monday Delphi Murders Trial / 4 hours ago 6-year-old dead after crash on SR 44 in Shelby Co. News / 7 hours ago Boy, 13, shot in Greenwood; teenage shooter arrested News / 9 hours ago Turnovers plague Colts in 30-20 loss to Bills Indianapolis Colts / 8 hours ago View All News Indianapolis News, Indiana Weather, Indiana News, Indiana Traffic, Indiana Local News, Indiana Sports, Community, Entertainment News Delphi Murders Trial Weather Traffic Morning News Sports Indy Now Marketplace Contact Us Contests Public File Help Online Public File EEO Report FCC Applications Get News App Get the iOS app Get the Android app from Google Play Get Weather App Get the iOS Weather app Get the Android Weather app from Google Play Stay Connected Haystack Privacy Policy 06/27/2024 Terms Of Use Public File Assistance Contact The Hill NewsNation BestReviews Content Licensing Nexstar Digital Journalistic Integrity Sitemap Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information © 1998 - 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. | All Rights Reserved. ✕New Avian Influenza Licensing Service now available - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide this message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Environment Food and farming Keeping farmed animals News story New Avian Influenza Licensing Service now available If you are in a disease control zone, you may need a licence for certain movements. From: Animal and Plant Health Agency Published 8 February 2022 Image of Chicken In Avian Influenza (AI) disease control zones, certain movements of poultry, other captive birds, eggs, poultry products, materials associated with their keeping or mammals may need a licence. You can check if you are in a disease control zone on our interactive map. If you are in a disease control zone within England, Scotland or Wales you can now apply for an AI licence using the new online Avian Influenza Licensing Service. This new service allows customers to apply online for an AI licence during the current AI outbreak. To apply online you will need to register and create sign in details. There will be two steps for verification. Once registered, applying online means you can track the status of your application and receive your licence electronically via the new system. Applications will be received via the online system and will be reviewed, and if appropriate, licences issued to allow essential farming activities to continue whilst not increasing the risk of spread of disease. Guidance on the new AI licensing service is available on GOV.UK and the licences section on the AI pages has also been updated. You can register for the new AI Licensing Service on GOV.UK. If you require further information about the new process, please contact APHA by telephoning 03000 200 301 and choosing the relevant options. Share this page The following links open in a new tab Share on Facebook (opens in new tab) Share on Twitter (opens in new tab) Updates to this page Published 8 February 2022 Related content Mitigation strategy for avian influenza in wild birds in England and Wales Bird flu: licence to move poultry meat from poultry originating in a protection zone (EXD249(HPAI)(EW)) Bird flu: licence to move table eggs into, within or out of a protection or surveillance zone in England, Scotland or Wales (EXD243(AI)(GB)) Bird flu (avian influenza): findings in non-avian wildlife Explore the topic Keeping farmed animals Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab). Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated © Crown copyrightPCR data sheds light on the dynamics of interspecies pathogen-pathogen interactions Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member PCR data sheds light on the dynamics of interspecies pathogen-pathogen interactions Download PDF Copy By Dr. Liji Thomas, MDReviewed by Danielle Ellis, B.Sc.Feb 8 2022 An interesting new study shows that several viruses, including influenza and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), significantly affect secondary infection or coinfection with other pathogens. The study reveals that multiple pathogens can be monitored simultaneously in this way, allowing cost-effective data to be collected for coinfection studies while also adding richness to the clinical and epidemiological context of the data. Study: Interactions among 17 respiratory pathogens: a cross-sectional study using clinical and community surveillance data. Image Credit: creativeneko/Shutterstock Introduction*Important notice: medRxiv publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information. Many different viruses and bacteria inhabit the human respiratory tract, many being commensal and some pathogenic. They compete to use available resources, exploit chinks in host immunity and generally adapt to their environment or make it adapt to them. In addition, they block or promote the replication of other species, which may significantly alter the host response to infection. This phenomenon, called coinfection, is thus both clinically relevant and epidemiologically important. In most cases, coinfection by a virus and a bacterium favors the proliferation of the bacterium, but when two viruses are present, they tend to inhibit each other. This explains why many patients with influenza show the presence of Streptococcus pneumonia (Pneumococcus), or higher colony counts than before, as also occurs following other respiratory virus infections. Most data on these interactions come from laboratories, animal studies, and modeling studies. The new study, available on the medRxiv* preprint server, uses polymerase chain reaction (PCR) data on 17 different pathogens, collected from clinical samples as part of the Seattle Flu Study, a community-based surveillance study of respiratory viral infections. The researchers aimed to build a database that avoided collider bias, which can occur when infection-naïve samples are not part of the study. Thus the relative risk is falsely low. What did the study show? The scientists obtained almost 21,700 positive samples from 27,400 cases of infection. Over half were from hospital residual specimens, and one in three were from community testing. One in seven came from outpatient testing. The most common pathogen was human rhinovirus, found in over a third of the samples, and pneumococcus, in about 30%. SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, was found in slightly less than one in seven cases, with influenza A H1N1 and influenza B viruses accounting for less than 10% each. In more than three-quarters of positive samples, only a single pathogen was detected. In about a fifth, there were two, while three or four co-pathogens were found in a small minority. Rhinovirus-pneumococcal coinfections were the most common in about 7% of all positive samples, while pneumococcus was detected along with adenovirus and respiratory syncytial virus A (RSV-A) in approximately 2% each. Related StoriesPublic trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USThe long-term cardiac impact of COVID-19Study reveals resistance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to common cleaning agentsIn most of these cases, pneumococcus benefited from the coinfection, as shown by the rise in bacterial load. The scientists failed to find any virus-virus interaction with facilitation of infection by one pathogen being brought about by the other – as evidenced by a higher viral load of one pathogen of the two, compared to a single infection by the same pathogen. Conversely, in many cases, interference or competition was suggested by the reduced viral load of the viruses in the coinfection pairs. These results corroborate earlier findings. However, the results show that the influenza A and B viruses are the most powerful inhibitors of coinfecting viruses, with significant effects being observed in 14 of the 21 pairs of viruses that provided adequate data. In contrast, other viruses did not appear to exert an inhibitory effect on the influenza viruses. This unidirectional suppressive effect on viral proliferation seems to be mediated by host immune responses elicited by the influenza virus, such that succeeding viruses are blocked to a large extent. Other researchers have shown that a history of coronavirus infection failed to affect the chances of getting the flu. Still, the opposite effect was observed if the flu came first, with subsequent coronavirus infection suppressed. Effective influenza vaccines could mean that other respiratory virus infections will shift away from the current trends. Pneumococcal infection can become systemic or invasive in the lower respiratory tract, causing severe or critical disease. However, its primary site of infection, in the upper respiratory mucosa, is amenable to asymptomatic carriage. With influenza A infection, the bacteria tend to adhere more tightly, colonize and invade the mucosa, causing illness and higher rates of bacterial shedding from the mucosa, which promotes the spread of the pathogen. Throughout the current pandemic, pneumococcal density was higher with viral coinfections, whether at the individual patient or population levels. However, influenza A is among the weakest facilitators of pneumococcal infection, perhaps because it suppresses other viruses since pneumococcal density is highest when more viruses are present. No virus appeared to be able to increase the degree of facilitation of pneumococcal infection by influenza A virus, a finding that goes against some recent reports. Interestingly, rhinovirus infection was suppressed by SARS-CoV-2, another finding that is in discordance with recent studies that reported rhinoviruses elicited an innate immune response that inhibited the former. On the other hand, the current study did show that human seasonal endemic coronaviruses did show inhibition with rhinovirus coinfection. This is thought to be due to pre-existing immunity to one or more of the five human seasonal coronaviruses, which is more unlikely with rhinoviruses since there are hundreds of them circulating at an endemic level. Secondly, adaptive immunity may reduce the peak viral load, reducing the chances that human seasonal coronaviruses could interfere with rhinovirus replication. If this is true, rhinovirus coinfection may mitigate SARS-CoV-2 virus in the future. Beyond the ecological interest in further studying this interaction, it may be informative about the role of population-level innate immune stimulation and/or within-host resource competition with other viruses for SARS-CoV-2 mitigation.” Conclusion The study exploited multiplexed PCR testing as a tool for examining pathogen-pathogen interactions and thus identifying high-risk combinations at the point of care. With increasing ability to understand exactly the causes of infection, future vaccine development and implementation, treatments, and public health priorities could be tailored and thus reduce the extreme burden of respiratory infections affecting billions of individuals worldwide.” *Important notice: medRxiv publishes preliminary scientific reports that are not peer-reviewed and, therefore, should not be regarded as conclusive, guide clinical practice/health-related behavior, or treated as established information. Journal reference: Preliminary scientific report. Burstein, R. et al. (2022) "Interactions among 17 respiratory pathogens: a cross-sectional study using clinical and community surveillance data". medRxiv. doi: 10.1101/2022.02.04.22270474. https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.02.04.22270474v1 Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Adenovirus, Bacteria, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Flu, H1N1, Hospital, Immune Response, immunity, Influenza, Pandemic, Pathogen, Pneumonia, Polymerase, Polymerase Chain Reaction, Proliferation, Public Health, Respiratory, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Respiratory Virus, Rhinovirus, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Vaccine, Virus Comments (0) Written byDr. Liji ThomasDr. Liji Thomas is an OB-GYN, who graduated from the Government Medical College, University of Calicut, Kerala, in 2001. Liji practiced as a full-time consultant in obstetrics/gynecology in a private hospital for a few years following her graduation. She has counseled hundreds of patients facing issues from pregnancy-related problems and infertility, and has been in charge of over 2,000 deliveries, striving always to achieve a normal delivery rather than operative. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APAThomas, Liji. (2022, February 08). PCR data sheds light on the dynamics of interspecies pathogen-pathogen interactions. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220208/PCR-data-sheds-light-on-the-dynamics-of-interspecies-pathogen-pathogen-interactions.aspx.MLAThomas, Liji. "PCR data sheds light on the dynamics of interspecies pathogen-pathogen interactions". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220208/PCR-data-sheds-light-on-the-dynamics-of-interspecies-pathogen-pathogen-interactions.aspx>.ChicagoThomas, Liji. "PCR data sheds light on the dynamics of interspecies pathogen-pathogen interactions". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220208/PCR-data-sheds-light-on-the-dynamics-of-interspecies-pathogen-pathogen-interactions.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardThomas, Liji. 2022. PCR data sheds light on the dynamics of interspecies pathogen-pathogen interactions. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220208/PCR-data-sheds-light-on-the-dynamics-of-interspecies-pathogen-pathogen-interactions.aspx. Suggested Reading One in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19Canada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Mild COVID-19 disrupts brain connectivity and reduces memory function in adolescents and young adultsNew study reveals long-term brainstem damage in COVID-19 survivors using advanced MRI scansStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionResearch links COVID-19 vaccines to temporary facial palsy in over 5,000 patientsUnraveling the survival strategies of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in lung infections Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Medical Device (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Genetic risk factors for long-COVID uncovered in a large multi-ethnic studyCharacterization of influenza A virus induced transposons reveals a subgroup of transposons likely possessing the regulatory role as eRNAs | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Characterization of influenza A virus induced transposons reveals a subgroup of transposons likely possessing the regulatory role as eRNAs Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 09 February 2022 Characterization of influenza A virus induced transposons reveals a subgroup of transposons likely possessing the regulatory role as eRNAs Steven S. Shen1,3, Hezkiel Nanda1, Constantin Aliferis1 & …Ryan A. Langlois2 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 12, Article number: 2188 (2022) Cite this article 1824 Accesses 3 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Computational biology and bioinformaticsGene regulatory networksMicrobiologyVirologyVirus–host interactions AbstractAlthough many studies have observed genome-wide host transposon expression alteration during viral infection, the mechanisms of induction and the impact on the host remain unclear. Utilizing recently published influenza A virus (IAV) time series data and ENCODE functional genomics data, we characterized virus induced host differentially expressed transposons (virus-induced-TE) by investigating genome-wide spatial and functional relevance between the virus-induced-TEs and epigenomic markers (e.g. histone modification and chromatin remodelers). We found that a significant fraction of virus-induced-TEs are derived from host enhancer regions, where CHD4 binding and/or H3K27ac occupancy is high or H3K9me3 occupancy is low. By overlapping virus-induced-TEs to human enhancer RNAs (eRNAs), we discovered that a proportion of virus-induced-TEs are either eRNAs or part of enhancer RNAs. Upon further analysis of the eRNA targeted genes, we found that the virus-induced-TE related eRNA targets are overrepresented in differentially expressed host genes of IAV infected samples. Our results suggest that changing chromatin accessibility from repressive to permissive in the transposon docked enhancer regions to regulate host downstream gene expression is potentially one of the virus and host cell interaction mechanisms, where transposons are likely important regulatory genomic elements. Our study provides a new insight into the mechanisms of virus-host interaction and may lead to novel strategies for prevention and therapeutics of IAV and other virus infectious diseases. Similar content being viewed by others The retroelement Lx9 puts a brake on the immune response to virus infection Article 10 August 2022 Landscape of evolutionary arms races between transposable elements and KRAB-ZFP family Article Open access 07 October 2024 Multi-omics analysis reveals the dynamic interplay between Vero host chromatin structure and function during vaccinia virus infection Article Open access 11 June 2024 IntroductionWe recently demonstrated that host transposon element (TE) expression is largely impacted by viral infection1. The findings have been confirmed across multiple organisms, e.g. human, mouse, and drosophila2 and numerous viral species including HIV13 and SARS-CoV-24, which indicates that the host transposon expression alteration is a fundamental phenomenon of viral infectious diseases. Although hypotheses and speculation about possible roles of virus induced differentially expressed TEs (virus-induced-TEs) are emerging, understanding the mechanism of induction and impact of transposon expression alteration on the host remains largely unclear. A recent report shows that TEs are involved in chromatin looping and CTCF bindings5. In Arabidopsis thaliana plants, the DDM1 mutation causes significant reduction of DNA methylation in the TE loci, where Snf2 family member DDM1 as a chromatin remodeler plays an important role in suppression of TE transcription6. Igolkina, et al. also reported that the connection between TEs and histone markers may impact gene expression regulation7. These interesting findings are suggestive of possible gene expression regulation roles by TE transcripts, which prompted our investigation into the genomic spatial relationship between the virus-induced-TE and permissive and/or repressive epigenomic markers, such as histone markers, chromatin remodelers, and transcription factors.Advances in genome-wide enhancer RNA studies8,9, including on histone occupancyranscription factor binding sites (ENCODE project10) and computational algorithms for functional genomic element predictions11, facilitate a deep investigation into the virus-induced-TEs and their spatial relationship to the functional genomic elements. Taking advantage of our recently published studies on influenza A virus (IAV)12, we further characterized host virus-induced-TEs by examining their spatial relationship to known functional genomic elements such as chromatin histone markers. We have found that a significant number of virus-induced-TEs (~ 9%) are derived from the chromatin histone marker H3K27ac pre-occupied regions, of which a fraction are also chromatin remodeler CHD4 binding sites. In addition to the H3K27ac occupied genome regions, the chromatin histone marker H3K9me3 regions are also found to accommodate about 2.2% of virus-induced-TEs. In a parallel analysis, by querying a computational predicted human enhancer database with virus-induced-TEs, we discovered that about 9.6% of IAV-induced TEs overlap the predicted distal enhancers. Querying the same enhancer database with other viral datasets13,14, we revealed that about 7–9% of SARS-CoV-2-induced TEs overlap the predicted enhancers, with variation in different experiments; about 7.7–7.9% of RSV and 9.8% of HPIV3 induced TEs overlap the predicted enhancers, respectively.To understand the potential functional role of virus-induced-TEs in the host, we carefully examined the genomic loci of IAV-induced-TEs to known enhancer RNAs (eRNAs). We did this due to the important regulatory roles eRNA plays in the genome for tissue specific gene expression regulation15,16,17. We found that ~ 9.2% of IAV-induced-TEs overlap eRNAs (TE eRNAs). Furthermore, we also found that about 44% of the TE eRNA targets (2144) are overrepresented in the differentially expressed gene list (4824 DE genes) of IAV infected samples, in which both upregulated and downregulated TE eRNA targets are significantly overrepresented in the upregulated DE genes (p < 0.05).Taken together, our study is the first evidence of a connection between a subgroup of IAV-induced-TEs and host enhancer RNAs. Our results indicate that the enhancers docked by this group of IAV-induced-TEs are likely less permissive and/or poised prior to virus infection. However, such enhancers become more accessible and active during virus infection, resulting in host transposon expression changes and possible downstream gene expression alteration. Based on our data, we introduce a new virus-host interaction model, showing that viruses likely influence host gene expression by activating poised enhancers and promoting eRNA transcription, where host TEs may play complex roles in the virus host interaction and gene expression regulation. This model is based on IAV but may also apply to other RNA viruses including SARS-CoV-2, RSV and HPIV3. Our discovery provides new insight into the mechanisms of virus-host interaction and may lead to novel preventive and therapeutic targets for IAV and other RAN virus infection diseases.Host transposon elements expression alteration during early stages of IAV infectionAll virus infection data used for this study was obtained from the public database (e.g. GSE147832 is an accession number of the NCBI GEO database). The data analysis scheme is highlighted in Fig. 1A. In this study, we first measured the overall transcriptome level for host transposons and genes in each virus infection time point in order to obtain a global picture of the dynamic relationship between the host transcriptome and the viral replication progression. The overall mean expression of 41,499 detectable TEs declined by ~ 38% between 3 and 6 h post-infection samples in comparison to the mock. The mean expression of overall TEs reduction is primarily reflected in the expression level changes of total differentially expressed TEs (DE TE) (FDR < 0.01) and downregulated DE TEs rather than in upregulated DE TEs and non-differentially expressed TEs (FDR > 0.01). However, the mean expression of upregulated DE TEs is about 25% higher at 3 h and 100% higher at 9 h in comparison to background at 0 h, while non-DE TEs remained steady across all measured time points (Fig. 1B). The mean expression changes of host upregulated DE TEs highly correlates to IAV replication (Fig. 1B, Suppl Fig. 1A). In contrast to transposons, the mean expression level of host genes remained relatively steady for both total genes and DE genes. Although the expression level of upregulated genes jumped to 50% and 20% at the 3 and 6 h samples respectively, the change does not temporally correlate to virus replication dynamics through all time points (Suppl. Fig. 1B). These results suggest that the host transposon expression is likely influenced by early IAV infection and reflects the dynamics of virus replication.Figure 1The temporal relationship between up regulated TEs or TE families and virus replication in the IAV early infection. (A) Outline of data sources and analysis strategy. (B) The dynamics of TE expression in the early stage of IAV infection. The upregulated DE TEs (yellow) correlates to virus replication (black) temporally, the non-DE TEs (pink) remain steady. (C) The top TE families in up (upper panel) and down (lower panel) regulated TEs. (D) The dynamics of top up regulated TE families at each time point in contrast to Non-DE TEs (pink).Full size imageWe further analyzed and plotted the top differentially expressed TE families. The same TE family or subfamily can be presented in both up and down-regulated categories due to the nature of individual TE families spreading over hundreds or thousands of different genomic locations (Fig. 1C). In general, we have observed that up-regulated TE families (e.g. Alu, SVA, ERV1, L1, etc.) are heavily influenced by IAV at different infection time points (Fig. 1D). Many down-regulated TE families are also impacted by virus at early time points, but lack a clear temporal relationship to IAV replication (Suppl Fig. 1C). These results demonstrate that although both genes and TE are subjected to IAV infection, differentially expressed TEs, in particular upregulated TEs, are likely more sensitive to IAV replication.A group of virus-induced-TEs overlap the peak regions of chromatin remodeler CHD4, histone marker H3K27ac, and H3K9me3The ENCODE database contains many high-quality datasets for us to study the spatial relationship between TE transcripts and histone markers as well as TE transcripts and chromatin remodelers10. Although the histone modification data was not available for IAV infected A549 cells at the time we conducted this study, data from non-infected A549 cells provided a good foundation to measure the genomic spatial relationship of virus-induced-TEs. After exploring the ENCODE data matrix10, we exploited 6 histone marker and 10 chromatin remodeler datasets for a genome-wide spatial relationship analysis of virus-induced-TEs. All ENCODE datasets were derived from control experiments in A549 cells without treatment, which is comparable to the mock samples of IAV time series data. The name and label of the ENCODE datasets used in this analysis are listed in Supplemental Table 1. We first plotted the genome-wide occupancy for the 10 chromatin remodelers in the virus-induced-TE regions (FDR < 0.01). 12,000 randomly selected non-DE TE (FDR > 0.01) were used as the control. Of the 10 chromatin remodelers, we found that only CHD4 has a higher binding ratio in the virus-induced-TE regions as compared to non-DE TEs (Fig. 2A,B). The CHD4 binding sites tend to be in the up-regulated DE TE regions rather than in down-regulated TE regions (Suppl. Fig. 2A,B). With the most rigorous overlapping criteria (0 bp gap allowed in between two regions), we quantitatively measured the overlap between 2825 CHD4 peaks and 21,349 DE TEs. The result demonstrated that about 0.2% (48/21,349) of virus-induced-TEs are completely overlapping CHD4 peak regions, which is significant by Chi-square test in comparison to randomly selected non-DE TE loci (13/12,000) (Fig. 2E, left panel). However, a majority of virus-induced TEs (32/48) derived from CHD4 binding regions are upregulated (Fig. 2E, left panel). CHD4 is a nucleosome remodeler in the Snf2 family and plays an important role in epigenetic transcriptional repression18. Although only a small fraction of virus-induced-TEs (mostly upregulated TEs) were derived from CHD4 binding regions, this suggests that TE transcriptional repression by CHD4 was removed from these regions, which further indicates that the chromatin status changes from repressive to permissive in these genome regions to promote the TE transcription during IAV infection.Figure 2The spatial relationship between the DE TE loci and CHD4 binding sites, H3k27ac and H3k9me3 abundant regions. (A) CHD4 binding sites are more enriched in the DE TE regions (FDR < 0.01) than other 9 remodelers; in contrast to (B) non-DE TE regions (FDR > 0.01). (C) H3k27ac is abundant in the DE TE loci. (D). H3k9me3 is abundant in the non-DE TE loci. (E). Chi-square test demonstrated that the enrichment of CHD4, H3k27ac and H3k9me3 in the DE TE regions is statistically significant, which random selected TE loci (black) is control.Full size imageOf the 6 ENCODE histone markers, we found that H3K27ac has a higher occupancy in the virus-induced-TE regions in non-infected A549 cells (Fig. 2C), while H3K9me3 is more abundant in the randomly selected non-DE TE regions (Fig. 2D) meaning chromatin configuration is more repressive and less accessible in these regions in comparison to DE TEs. The H3K27ac occupancy in the DE TE regions shows no difference between upregulated and downregulated TEs (Suppl Fig. 2C,D). Using a rigorous overlapping strategy, we were able to identify 1907 virus-induced-TEs that are derived from H3K27ac abundant regions, which is about 8.9% of overall virus-induced-TEs and significantly higher than the 6.9% (828) of non-DE TEs (Fig. 2E, middle panel). We also uncovered 515 virus-induced-TEs that are occupied by H3K9me3, which is 2.4% of overall DE TEs and significantly lower in comparison to the 4.3% (522) of non-DE TE loci (Fig. 2E, right panel). These results demonstrate that about 9% of virus-induced-TEs are derived from H3K27ac abundant regions and 2.4% from H3K9me3 peak regions. The higher percentage of non-DE TEs that overlap H3K9me3 peak regions suggests that more TEs are suppressed by H3K9me3 in the genome prior to virus infection in comparison to post-infection.H3K27ac is thought to be an epigenetic marker for enhancers in mammals, and its modification reflects cell type specific gene expression19,20. A recent study has shown that the enhancer activity cannot be determined by H3K27ac alone21. These findings suggest that H3K27ac likely works with other chromatin proteins to maintain poised chromatin status in its abundant regions. In our analysis, of the 2825 overall CHD4 binding sites, 2465 overlap with H3K27ac peaks, which indicates the majority (87%) of CHD4 binding sites are also occupied by H3K27ac (Suppl Fig. 2E). By comparing concurrency of CHD4 and H3K27ac in virus-induced-TEs to the non-DE TE control, we found that such concurrency only exists in virus-induced-TEs (Suppl Fig. 2E,F). High concurrency of CHD4 and H3K27ac in the virus-induced-TE regions may suggest functional dependency between CHD4 and H3K27ac, where CHD4 reduces chromatin accessibility and suppresses transcription events to maintain poised enhancer status prior to virus infection. Since CHD4 associated DE TEs are only a small fraction of overall virus-induced-TEs, this suggests that the rest of H3K27ac enhancers may rely on a different chromatin remodeler or mechanism to maintain poised genomic status in uninfected host cells. Of the total virus-induced-TEs, about 2.4% are derived from H3K9me3 genome regions, which is significantly lower than the 4.3% derived from randomly selected expressors. The number of virus-induced-TEs from H3K9me3 regions is quite surprising because H3K9me3 is thought to be the chromatin suppressive marker and the transcription activities in the genomic regions with abundant H3K9me3 should be very low. However, recent studies have shown that H3K9me3 is also present in poised enhancers22, which is likely related to cell type specific control23, though the mechanism is unclear. Our results support other groups’ discoveries and indicate that a small fraction of virus-induced-TEs are likely derived from poised enhancers where H3K9me3 is abundant.A proportion of virus-induced-TEs are very likely host eRNAs or part of eRNAsAnalysis of the genomic spatial relationship between virus-induced-TEs and epigenetic markers led to a discovery of a connection between DE TEs and enhancers. In addition, as a verification process, we also compared virus-induced-TEs to the computationally predicted enhancers of the human genome11. The results with predicted enhancers confirm what we observed from the spatial relationship analysis, in which about 9–10% of IAV induced DE TEs are derived from the predicted enhancer regions (Fig. 3A). Moreover, applying the same algorithm to a SARS-CoV-2 dataset13 and a dataset of multiple virus studies14 yielded very similar results (Suppl Fig. 3A). The results from different datasets and analysis methods suggest that a proportion of virus-induced-TEs are from enhancer regions of host cells. Combining both computationally predictedt results and spatial relationship analysis, we summarized that ~ 9% of virus-induced-TEs were derived from H3K27ac abundant genome regions (k27-like enhancers) and 2.4% from H3K9me3 regions (k9-like enhancers). Of the k27-like enhancers, ~ 2% of them are concurrent with CHD4. However, the spatial relationship between virus-induced-TEs and enhancers does not necessarily indicate physiological relevance to host gene expression regulation.Figure 3The spatial relationship between DE TEs and the predicted enhancers or eRNAs. (A) the DE TEs are significantly overrepresented in the predicted distal enhancer regions in contrast to random selected TEs (black), chi-square test. (B) using published eRNA dataset for verification, we found that the DE TEs are significantly overrepresented in eRNA regions, random selected TEs is the test control, chi-square test. (C) the 244 DE TEs that derived from H3K27ac occupied regions also overlap the eRNAs (p < 0.05, hyper geometric test). (D) IGV displays the expression alteration of eRNA related DE TEs in the regions of CHD4 and H3k27ac enriched (left), H3k27ac alone (middle) and H3k9me3 alone (right).Full size imageTo address this question, we designed another experiment to examine whether virus-induced-TEs overlap human eRNAs or parts of eRNAs, because eRNAs are thought to play regulatory roles in downstream gene expression regulation15,16,17,24. We adopted a recently published eRNA dataset9 for a detailed analysis of virus-induced-TEs and known eRNAs in both a spatial and orientation manner. To analyze the spatial relationship between virus-induced-TEs and eRNAs, we created three testing datasets; overall virus-induced-TEs (FDR < 0.01), upregulated DE TEs, and downregulated DE TEs (FDR < 0.01). We also generated two control datasets; a random selection of 12,000 non-DE TEs (Rand_exprs, FDR > 0.01), and a random selection of 15,000 TEs from the entire TE pool regardless of expression (TE_rand15k, more than 95% has no detectable transcripts). Each of the test and control datasets overlap the known human eRNAs during analysis, obtaining a percentage of eRNA overlapped TEs, respectively. By comparing the eRNA overlapped TEs of test datasets to controls, we may determine whether the virus-induced-TEs are prone to eRNAs (Fig. 3B, Chi-sq test). Using randomly selected non-DE TEs as a control, we found that only overall DE TEs (9.2%) and upregulated DE TEs (9.8%) are significant (Suppl. Fig. 3C). These results demonstrate that a significant amount of upregulated DE TEs (9.8%) overlap the eRNAs in comparison to both randomly selected non-DE TEs (8.1%) and randomly selected TEs (7.5%). However, downregulated DE TEs (8.4%) demonstrate no significant difference from non-DE TEs. These results indicate that a significant amount of virus-induced-TEs, particularly those that are upregulated, are derived from the same enhancer regions where the eRNA transcription may take place.Of the total 1977 eRNA overlapped DE TEs (TE-eRNAs), 244 overlapped the DE TEs that are derived from H3K27ac regions (hypergeometric test, p < 0.001) (Fig. 3C). The result shows partial but not complete overlap, which may reflect that the eRNA dataset originated from active enhancers of entire human tissues and cells, while virus-induced-TEs are likely derived from poised enhancers of A549 cells.To have a direct observation of TE-eRNAs, we loaded sequencing data of IAV infected samples together with the eRNA data and epigenetic markers CHD4, H3K27ac or H3K9me3 into the IGV genome browser. We observed TE AluSp_dup16667 expression upregulated in the 3, 6, 9, and 12 h samples (Fig. 3D, left panel, highlighted in orange), where CHD4 binding sites and H3K27ac peak are concurrent. In the middle panel (highlighted in green) of Fig. 3D, TE AluSx_dup584 is upregulated in 6, 9 and 12 h samples, where the H3K27ac peak is present. Both AluSp_dup16667 and AluSx_dup584 are autonomous TEs in the intergenic genome region. The TE L1MA6_dup9 is upregulated in 3 h samples, but downregulated in 9 and 12 h samples (Fig. 3D, right panel, highlighted in blue), whereas the intragenic region of CAMTA1 is occupied by H3K9me3. In addition to TE-eRNAs, we also observed an intergenic DE TE region where eRNA is not reported, but CHD4 and H3K27ac are concurrent (Suppl Fig. 3C). This piece of data may unveil an unknown enhancer region and potential TE-eRNAs. The full lists of DE TEs and the concurrent epigenetic markers are in Supplemental Tables 2, 3 and 4. Taken together, these results also suggest that the virus-induced-TEs may play very complex regulatory roles in host gene expression during virus infection.TE-eRNA targets are enriched in the upregulated DE genes of IAV infected samplesIf eRNA reflects enhancer transcription activity, eRNA targeted gene expression will represent functional connection between enhancer and host genes. In this sense, whether the TE-eRNA targets are differentially expressed or not in the IAV infected samples will be critical to inferring the potential regulatory role of virus-induced-TEs. The eRNA dataset containing eRNA targeted genes allows us to test this hypothesis. We first queried the eRNA targeted gene dataset with TE-eRNAs, down- and up-regulated TE-eRNAs, respectively, which resulted in 11,251, 6643 and 8640 TE-eRNA targets (named as TE-eRNA targets, down- and up-TE-eRNA targets). These TE-eRNA targets were compared with differentially expressed genes (DE genes) of IAV time series samples. The hypergeometric test was subsequently applied for the overrepresentation significance assessment. We found that both down and up-TE-eRNA targets are enriched in the upregulated DE genes (p < 0.05, Fig. 4A,B). The results suggest that either down- or up-regulated virus-induced-TEs tend to upregulate their target genes during IAV infection.Figure 4The DE TE associated eRNA targets are significantly enriched in up regulated DE genes. (A) Venn diagram shows the overlap between up or down DE genes and up or down DE TE related eRNA targets. The hypergeometric tests were performed, and the results are presented in B. (B) Hypergeometric test shows DE TE related eRNA targets are significantly enriched in the upregulated DE genes, e.g. the subset of common eRNA targets (intersection marked 3207,467,304,54) overlaps the subset of upregulated genes (intersection marked 467,54). (C) Hierarchical clustering analysis for the overlapped 2144 DE genes. (D) GO term enrichment analysis results demonstrate the IFN and virus life cycle pathways in the cluster 1.Full size imageBy overlapping TE-eRNA targets with 4824 overall DE genes, we obtained 2144 DE genes (eRNA DE genes). Applying hierarchical clustering and GO TERM analysis for eRNA DE genes, we found that the IFN pathway, virus defense and JAK-STAT pathway genes are enriched in cluster 1, where the expression level increases as virus replication progresses (Fig. 4C,D). The enrichment of the IFN pathway in the eRNA DE genes suggests that TE-eRNAs are likely an important regulatory path during IAV infection. The detailed pathway information from eRNA DE genes is available in Supplemental Table 5. The overrepresentation of TE-eRNA target genes in the DE genes suggests the potential regulatory roles of virus-induced-TEs.From the above results (Fig. 2E), we have revealed that virus-induced-TEs can be derived from either H3K27ac or H3K9me3 abundant enhancers, where a proportion of H3K27ac pre-occupied enhancers are concurrent with CHD4. Taking this into account, we categorized TE-eRNAs into three groups, H3K27ac, H3K27ac plus CHD4 and H3K9me3. We interrogated whether the three groups of TE-eRNA targets are all impacted by IAV infection. In this analysis, TE-eRNAs overlapped CHD4 binding, H3K27ac or H3K9me3 peak regions with a slightly relaxed gap size of maximum 500 bp instead of 0 bp, in which we expect to include more genes in the analysis. We found about 2477 eRNA targets also present in the 4824 DE genes (2477 is bigger than the above 2144 due to a relaxed gap size). Of 2477 eRNA targets, 210 relate to CHD4 binding region, 2250 to H3K27ac and 707 to H3K9me3 (Suppl Fig. 4A). These data suggest that IAV likely impacts all three types of enhancers.In summary, our results demonstrate the following: (1) the host upregulated TEs temporally correlate with virus replication, (2) a significant number of IAV induced DE TEs are derived from host enhancer regions; the spatial relationship between DE TEs and enhancers also exists in SARS-CoV-2, RSV and HPIV3 infected samples, suggesting such a genomic relationship between virus-induced-TEs and enhancers is likely common in RNA virus-host interaction, (3) the IAV-induced-TEs are either eRNAs or part of eRNAs, which originate from the enhancers with three different epigenetic modifications, and (4) the TE-eRNA genes are significantly overrepresented in the DE genes of IAV infection time series samples, which indicates that during IAV infection the host DE genes or a proportion of DE genes are likely influenced through TE related enhancers and eRNA pathways. Our results suggest that IAV likely interacts with host cells by changing the chromatin accessibility from repressive to permissive in the enhancer regions, regulating host downstream gene expression, where TEs are docked and likely play important regulatory roles.DiscussionFor a long period of time, transposon element expression and its potential influences on gene expression regulation have not been deeply studied. Our previous work revealed that the virus induced transposon expression in human and mouse1 and another group also found virus induced transposon expression in Drosophila somatic tissues2. These results from independent studies suggest that viral impact on host transposon expression is likely a common phenomenon across many organisms and viral species. However, many virus induced transposon transcripts are influenced by gene expression due to intron retention and gene readthrough25,26,27. In humans, only about 9–10% of transposon transcripts are from intergenic genome regions1, which makes study of this phenomenon even more challenging due to interference of gene transcripts. Even though TE transcription is real, many questions still remain, e.g. what function TE transcripts have, and what roles they might be playing besides canonical transpositions. Therefore, further characterization of virus induced transposon transcripts is necessary to fully understand their functionality.The risk of active TE transcription is TE transposition and chromosomal rearrangements, which may cause inheritable diseases in humans28,29. Therefore, TE activity, in particular canonical activity, is in general repressed in the human genome by multiple mechanisms of chromatin condensation, epigenetic transcriptional silencing, and targeting by small interfering RNAs30. Investigating the epigenetic modifications in non-infected cells for the TE regions can build a foundation for understanding virus-induced-TEs. We selected six histone markers and ten chromatin remodelers from the ENCODE data matrix, which represent permissive and repressive chromatin status in the A549 cell line that was also used for the IAV infection time series study. Surprisingly, about 4.3% of non-differentially expressed transposons are derived from H3K9me3 occupied regions; however, only about 1.9% of randomly selected transposon genomes widely overlap H3K9me3 occupied regions (Fig. 5A). Low occupancy of H3K9me3 in the randomly selected TEs is somewhat understandable as the vast majority of repetitive DNAs are part of the gene reading frame or intron regions. What’s surprising is significantly higher H3K9me3 occupancy in non-differentially expressed transposon regions (4.3%) compared to differentially expressed TE regions (2.4%) (Fig. 5A). This result suggests that H3K9me3 in these regions is likely not just a repressive marker22,23, but also a landmark of poised chromatin regions for the external signals or stimuli, which resulted in expression changes for 2.4% TEs during IAV infection.Figure 5Chromatin accessibility in transposon regions in uninfected A549 cells. (A) the number of H3k9me3 occupied non-DE TEs is about twice higher than DE TEs, which suggest IAV likely impacts on TE regions with less H3k9me3 occupancy. (B) the DE TEs tends to be derived from H3k27ac occupied TE regions in contrast to non-DE TEs and random controls. (C) majority of CHD4 binding regions are H3k27ac occupied. (D) A putative model illustrating how virus may interact with the host to change chromatin status, leading to activation of poised or silent enhancers.Full size imageH3K27ac is thought to be an epigenetic marker that distinguishes active enhancers from poised ones20. In our study, H3K27ac is found abundant in the DE TE regions of both up- and down-regulation (Fig. 2C, Suppl Fig. 2C,D), where H3K4me1 occupancy is very low, suggesting that H3K27ac occupied TE regions are poised and less accessible to transcription events in non-infected host cells. Quantitatively, the percentage of H3K27ac overlapped DE TEs over total DE TEs is about 8.9%, which is statistically significant in comparison to non-DE TEs (6.9%) and randomly selected TEs (5.7%) (Fig. 5B). This indicates H3K27ac abundant TEs likely switched from poised to active and were differentially transcribed during IAV infection. It is unclear how H3K27ac enriched TEs remained poised before infection and turned into permissive during infection. However, the genome loci concurrency between CHD4 and H3K27ac likely solves this puzzle, where the system uses CHD4 to repress transcription in the H3K27ac occupied enhancer regions. Although 87% of CHD4 binds to H3K27ac peak regions, only 1.7% of virus-induced-TEs are CHD4 and H3K27ac concurrent (Fig. 5C), indicating that some other DNA binding proteins play similar roles to suppress TE/enhancer expression in the non-infected host cells. Based on our study, we proposed a putative virus and host interaction model where the virus activates host enhancers by changing chromatin accessibility, with TEs playing as either cis and/or trans elements in regulating neighboring or distal genes. (Fig. 5D).eRNAs are the product of enhancer transcription and play critical roles in regulating gene expression15,16. The virus-induced-TEs significantly overlapping with eRNA provides direct evidence of enhancer activation and transcription during IAV infection (Fig. 3B). We also reported that a significant number of TE-eRNA targets are overrepresented in the DE gene (Fig. 4A,B). Of a total 4824 DE genes, 2477 (51.3% with relaxed gap size) overlap the TE-eRNA targets (Suppl Table 5). M any of those were also reported in earlier studies12,31,32,33, suggesting our results are supported by previously published discoveries. The genes that constitute the IFN mediated pathway and other innate immune gene pathways such as STAT signaling pathway are upregulated in the time series samples (Fig. 4C,D), which indicates that these genes are either suppressed or silenced in the host cells prior to IAV infection possibly through the poised enhancer mechanism. Our findings suggest that the poised enhancers and eRNAs where TE docked are likely involved in the gene expression regulation during the host defensive response to IAV infection, which are perhaps the missing pieces in the IAV and host interaction model suggested by peers34,35,36. Of the 4824 DE genes, 2347 do not overlap the TE-eRNA targets. This may be due to the fact that the eRNA target list obtained from the most recent updates is still incomplete, which suggests more computational work to be done in the future. It is also possible that the rest of the DE genes are regulated by different mechanisms. In summary, our study for the first time has revealed a possible new role of TE transcription in regulating downstream gene expression through the poised enhancer and eRNA mechanism during IAV infection. These interesting results may also lead to a new method development for precisely probing enhancers and their targeted genes, in addition to new insights for virus-host interaction mechanisms and therapeutic approaches.Materials and methodsRNA sequencing data acquisition and processing, differentially Gene and TE analysisAll the data in this study was obtained from the GEO database (GSE147832, GSE147507)12,14 and NGDC database (CRA002606)13. The fastq files were first mapped to human genome assembly (Homo.sapiens.GRCh38) using bowtie2 aligner (v.2.3.4)37 with parameters (bowtie2 -local -L 22 -N 1 -k 100). After sorting with samtools (v.1.9)38, the mapped reads were used to summarize genes (Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.87.gtf) and TEs (GRCh38_Ensembl_rmsk_TE.gtf) using featureCounts (v.1.5.1)39 with either strand parameter on (reverse) for projects GSE147832 and GSE147507, or strand parameter off for the project CRA002606 due to non-strand specific protocol applied in the sequencing. The outputs were subsequently used for statistical assessment for the differentially expressed genes and TEs by R/bioconductor package (version 4.0.3/3.12) edgeR (v.3.32.1)40,41. The cutoff for the genes and TEs is FDR < 0.01 with one exception of FDR less than 0.001 for Cov2 24 h sample of CRA002606 dataset.Virus reads mapping and processingThe raw fastq files of IAV infected samples were mapped to in-house bowtie2 index of influenza A virus (bowtie2 -local -L 22 -N 1 -x). The bowtie2 index file along with the fasta sequences and annotation files for IAV and SARS-CoV-2 viruses are available upon request. The featureCounts was used for virus reads assignment. The count per million (CPM) was introduced for normalization of virus reads crossing time series samples, in which the virus reads were normalized against overall library reads (mapped virus reads + host gene reads) per sample for IAV dataset.ENCODE functional genomic datasets and spatial relationship to DE TEsENCODE functional genomic data files10 were used for this study as listed in Supplemental Table 1. The R/Bioconductor package ChIPseeker (v.1.26.2)42 was used for generating epigenetic marker distribution around DE TE and control TE regions. To create genomic regions for plotting, each TE was extended from the center of the TE to both up and down stream for 3000 bps. The peak file of epigenomic markers was used for counting peak frequency in the TE regions with default parameters of ChIPseeker.To screen the DE TEs that overlap epigenetic markers (CHD4, H3K27ac, H3K9me3), we used bedtools (v.3.5) (bedtools closest -a TEs.bed -b Enhancers.bed -mdb all -D b) for measuring the distance of two genomic features43. The 0 bp gap between DE TEs and epigenetic markers was used for determining the spatial relationship of DE TEs.The randomly selected 10,000 TE expressors (non-DE TE, FDR > 0.01) were used as the control for either plotting and/or statistical testing.Distal enhancer dataset and DE TE overlappingThe distal enhancer dataset was downloaded from the Enhancer Atlas website (version 2.0)11. The enhancer coordinates were updated to genome version HG38 with UCSC liftover utility before further analysis44. The distal enhancer data was then overlapped with DE TE loci using bedtools (v.3.5) (bedtools closest -a TEs.bed -b Enhancers.bed -mdb all -D b). To calculate the percentage of distal enhancer related (overlapped) DE TE loci, the number of distal enhancers overlapped DE TE loci were divided by total number of DE TE loci in the same category or same time point. The randomly selected 15,000 TEs are the controls for plotting and statistical testing. Of 15,000 randomly selected TEs, less than 300 have expression values bigger than 0. In addition to the randomly selected TEs, we also used a non-DE TE as a control. The difference between the randomly selected TEs and non-DE TE control is that non-DE TEs have the detectable expression values.Enhancer RNA and DE TE overlappingThe enhancer RNA dataset of whole human tissues was downloaded from HeRA atlas9. The enhancer RNA coordinates were updated to genome version HG38 with UCSC liftover utility before further analysis. To generate the distance matrix, bedtools (v.3.5) (bedtools closest -a TEs.bed -b Enhancers.bed -mdb all -D b) was used for calculating the distance between two genomic features. The randomly selected TEs and non-DE TEs were used as controls for this study to assess the statistical significance. To screen TE eRNAs, we allowed only 0 bp gap between two features.To obtain TE eRNA target genes, we downloaded eRNA targets from HeRA atlas. We grouped TE eRNA targets into overall DE TE, up DE TE, or down DE TE related and plotted a venn diagram for visualizing the TE eRNA targets and differentially expressed genes (DE genes). The 2144 genes that are common between TE eRNA targets and DE genes were further used for hierarchical clustering analysis.Gene clustering, GO TERM analysis, IGV genome browser and statistical testThe ComplexHeatmap R/bioconductor package (v.2.6.2)45 was used for gene clustering and heatmap visualization. For the GO TERM analysis, we used clusterprofiler R/bioconductor package (v.3.18.1)46. We used IGV genome browser for navigating and visualizing the individual eRNA related DE TEs and their spatial relationship to epigenetic markers. The R function chisq.test() and phyper() were used for either chi-square or hypergeometric test for the statistical significance assessment in our study.Datasets used in this studyThe RNAseq data were downloaded from GEO database (GSE147832, GSE147507)12,14 and NGDC database (CRA002606)13. The Chipseq data were downloaded from ENCODE database and dataset names are listed in Supplement Table 1. ReferencesMacchietto, M. G., Langlois, R. A. & Shen, S. S. Virus-induced transposable element expression up-regulation in human and mouse host cells. Life Sci. Alliance. 3(2), e201900536 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Roy, M. et al. Viral infection impacts transposable element transcript amounts in Drosophila. PNAS 117(22), 12249–12257 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Srinivasachar, B. S. et al. HIV-1 infection activates endogenous retroviral promoters regulating antiviral gene expression. Nucleic Acids Res. 48(19), 10890–10908. https://doi.org/10.1093ar/gkaa832 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Ferrarini, M. G. et al. Genome-wide bioinformatic analyses predict key host and viral factors in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. Commun. Biol. 4, 590. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02095-0 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Diehl, A. G., Ouyang, N. & Boyle, A. P. Transposable elements contribute to cell and species-specific chromatin looping and gene regulation in mammalian genomes. Nat. Commun. 11, 1796. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15520-5 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zemach, A. et al. The Arabidopsis nucleosome remodeler DDM1 allows dna methyltransferases to access H1-containing heterochromatin. Cell 153, 193–205 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Igolkina, A. A. et al. H3K4me3, H3K9ac, H3K27ac, H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 histone tags suggest distinct regulatory evolution of open and condensed chromatin landmarks. Cells 5(8(9)), 1034. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells8091034 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Kim, Y. J., Xie, P., Cao, L., Zhang, M. Q. & Kim, T. H. Global transcriptional activity dynamics reveal functional enhancer RNAs. Genome Res. 28(12), 1799–1811. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.233486.117 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, Z. et al. HeRA: An atlas of enhancer RNAs across human tissues. Nucleic Acids Res. 49(D1), D932–D938. https://doi.org/10.1093ar/gkaa940 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Davis, C. A. et al. The encyclopedia of DNA elements (ENCODE): Data portal update. Nucleic Acids Res. 46(D1), D794–D801. https://doi.org/10.1093ar/gkx1081 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Tianshun, G. & Jiang, Q. EnhancerAtlas 2.0: An updated resource with enhancer annotation in 586 tissue/cell types across nine species. Nucleic Acids Res. 48(D1), D58-64 (2019). Google Scholar Fay, E. J. et al. Cell type- and replication stage-specific influenza virus responses in vivo. PLoS Pathog. 16(8), e1008760 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sun, J. et al. Comparative transcriptome analysis reveals the intensive early stage responses of host cells to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Front. Microbiol. 11, 593857 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Blanco-Melo, D. et al. Imbalanced host response to SARS-CoV-2 drives development of COVID-19. Cell. 181(5), 1036–45.e9 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Arnold, P. R., Wells, A. D. & Li, X. C. Diversity and emerging roles of enhancer RNA in regulation of gene expression and cell fate. Front. Cell Develop. Biol. 7, 377. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2019.00377 (2020).Article Google Scholar Kim, Y. W., Lee, S., Yun, J. & Kim, A. Chromatin looping and eRNA transcription precede the transcriptional activation of gene in the β-globin locus. Biosci. Rep. 35(2), e00179 (2015).https://doi.org/10.1042/BSR20140126Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Blank-Giwojna, A., Postepska-Igielska, A. & Grummt, I. lncRNA KHPS1 activates a poised enhancer by triplex-dependent recruitment of epigenomic regulators. Cell Rep. 26(11), 2904–2915. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.059 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Arends, T. et al. CHD4 is essential for transcriptional repression and lineage progression in B lymphopoiesis. PNAS 116(22), 10927–10936. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1821301116 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Heintzman, N. D. et al. Histone modifications at human enhancers reflect global cell-type-specific gene expression. Nature 459, 108–112 (2009).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Creyghton, M. P. et al. Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers and predicts developmental state. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 107, 21931–21936 (2010).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, T. et al. Histone H3K27 acetylation is dispensable for enhancer activity in mouse embryonic stem cells. Genome Biol. 21, 45. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-020-01957-w (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zentner, G. E., Tesar, P. J. & Scacheri, P. C. Epigenetic signatures distinguish multiple classes of enhancers with distinct cellular functions. Genome Res. 21(8), 1273–1283. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.122382.111 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhu, Y., van Essen, D. & Saccani, S. Cell-type-specific control of enhancer activity by H3K9 trimethylation. Mol. Cell 46(4), 408–423. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.011 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Andersson, R. & Sandelin, A. Determinants of enhancer and promoter activities of regulatory elements. Nat. Rev. Genet. 21, 71–87. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-019-0173-8 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hennig, T. et al. HSV-1-induced disruption of transcription termination resembles a cellular stress response but selectively increases chromatin accessibility downstream of genes. PLoS Pathog. 14, e1006954. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1006954 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chauhan, K., Kalam, H., Dutt, R. & Kumar, D. RNA splicing: A new paradigm in host-pathogen interactions. J. Mol. Biol. 431, 1565–1575. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2019.03.001 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vilborg, A. et al. Comparative analysis reveals genomic features of stress-induced transcriptional readthrough. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, E8362–E8371. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1711120114 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hancks, D. C. & Kazazian, H. H. Jr. Roles for retrotransposon insertions in human disease. Mob. DNA. 6(7), 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13100-016-0065-9 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Bourque, G. et al. Ten things you should know about transposable elements. Genome Biol. 19, 199. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-018-1577-z (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Klein, S. J. & O’Neill, R. J. Transposable elements: Genome innovation, chromosome diversity, and centromere conflict. Chromosom. Res.: Int. J. Mol., supramol. Evolut. Asp. Chromosom. Biol. 26(1–2), 5–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10577-017-9569-5 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Sjaastad, L. E. et al. Distinct antiviral signatures revealed by the magnitude and round of influenza virus replication in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115(38), 9610–9615. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1807516115 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kato, H. et al. Differential roles of MDA5 and RIG-I helicases in the recognition of RNA viruses. Nature 441, 101–105 (2006).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Langlois, R. A., Varble, A., Chua, M. A., García-Sastre, A. & tenOever, B. R. Hematopoietic-specific targeting of influenza A virus reveals replication requirements for induction of antiviral immune responses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109(30), 12117–12122. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1206039109 (2012).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Iwasaki, A. & Pillai, P. S. Innate immunity to influenza virus infection. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14(5), 315–328. https://doi.org/10.1038ri3665 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Braciale, T. J., Sun, J. & Kim, T. S. Regulating the adaptive immune response to respiratory virus infection. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12(4), 295–305. https://doi.org/10.1038ri3166 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Weis, S. & Te Velthuis, A. J. W. Influenza virus RNA synthesis and the innate immune response. Viruses 13(5), 780. https://doi.org/10.3390/v13050780 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Langmead, B. & Salzberg, S. L. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Methods. 9(4), 357–359. https://doi.org/10.1038meth.1923 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar https://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools.htmlLiao, Y., Smyth, G. K. & Shi, W. featureCounts: An efficient general purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30(7), 923–930. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt656 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar https://www.bioconductor.org.McCarthy, D. J., Chen, Y. & Smyth, G. K. Differential expression analysis of multifactor RNA-Seq experiments with respect to biological variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 40(10), 4288–97. https://doi.org/10.1093ar/gks042 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yu, G., Wang, L. G. & He, Q. Y. ChIPseeker: An R/Bioconductor package for ChIP peak annotation, comparison and visualization. Bioinformatics 31(14), 2382–2383. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv145 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgLiftOver.Gu, Z., Eils, R. & Schlesner, M. Complex heatmaps reveal patterns and correlations in multidimensional genomic data. Bioinformatics 32(18), 2847–2849. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw313 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yu, G., Wang, L. G., Han, Y. & He, Q. Y. clusterProfiler: An R package for comparing biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS. 16(5), 284–7. https://doi.org/10.1089/omi.2011.0118 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Dr. Max Costa (Professor of NYU) and Dr. David Masopust (Professor of UMN) for the comments on the manuscript and insightful discussions. This work is supported by UL1 TR002494, R01 AI148669. The authors declare no financial conflicts of interest.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsInstitute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USASteven S. Shen, Hezkiel Nanda & Constantin AliferisDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USARyan A. LangloisClinical Translational Science Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USASteven S. ShenAuthorsSteven S. ShenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHezkiel NandaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarConstantin AliferisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRyan A. LangloisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsS.S. conducted study design, data analysis and manuscript writing. H.N. performed data analysis and figure preparation. C.A. and R.A.L. provided resources and manuscript revising and editing.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Steven S. Shen.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information 1.Supplementary Information 2.Supplementary Information 3.Supplementary Information 4.Supplementary Information 5.Supplementary Information 6.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleShen, S.S., Nanda, H., Aliferis, C. et al. Characterization of influenza A virus induced transposons reveals a subgroup of transposons likely possessing the regulatory role as eRNAs. Sci Rep 12, 2188 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-06196-6Download citationReceived: 21 September 2021Accepted: 25 January 2022Published: 09 February 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-06196-6Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Revealing differential expression patterns of piRNA in FACS blood cells of SARS-CoV−2 infected patients Kirill A. KondratovAlexander A. ArtamonovSergey G. Scherbak BMC Medical Genomics (2024) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyResearchers find evidence of first known dinosaur with flu-like symptoms | Globalnews.ca SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT In the news China Tariffs Escaped Monkeys TFW Program Changes Canada Post Global News Home Subscribe Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark Live Search Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark GlobalNews home WatchWorldCanadaLocalPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News Researchers find evidence of first known dinosaur with flu-like symptoms Click to return to homepage Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Full Menu Search Menu Home Trending Watch Local Menu Menu Close Submit Search Topics WatchWorldCanadaLocalChange locationPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News TV Programs Global NationalWest BlockThe Morning ShowVideo CentreMore… Connect Email alertsAlexaBreaking News Alerts from Global NewsLicense ContentContact Us National Change Close Change Close BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram Go Back Close Local your local region National BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Calendar Close Calendar Close All event types Comedy Festival Food Health Music Sports Theatre Virtual Other Search Close Submit search Quick Search Trending Now Add Global News to Home Screen Close Instructions: Press the share icon on your browser Select Add to Home Screen Press Add Comments Close comments menu Want to discuss? Please read our Commenting Policy first. Video link Headline link Advertisement Close X Click to scroll back to top of the page Backto top Health Researchers find evidence of first known dinosaur with flu-like symptoms By Hina Alam The Canadian Press Posted February 10, 2022 4:02 pm Updated February 10, 2022 4:59 pm 3 min read If you get Global News from Instagram or Facebook - that will be changing. Find out how you can still connect with us. Hide message bar This article is more than 2 years old and some information may not be up to date. View image in full screen Diplodocids, a type of long-necked sauropod, are seen in a hypothetical artist's rendering of what they looked like during their lives. Cary Woodruff, a recent PhD graduate from the University of Toronto, and a team of researchers studied a fossil that may provide evidence of the first known case of a bird-style lung disease in a dinosaur. THE CANADIAN PRESS/HO-University of Western Ontario Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Descrease article font size Increase article font size The dinosaur had a flu. A really bad flu. Cary Woodruff, a recent PhD graduate from the University of Toronto, and a team of researchers studied a fossil that may provide evidence of the first known case of a bird-style lung disease in a dinosaur. Researchers named the diplodocid Dolly, after the country western singer Dolly Parton.“So, it’s cool that you can hold that 150-million-year-old bone from Dolly and you literally know how crummy that dinosaur felt when it was sick,” he said.The fossilized remains of a diplodocid – a large, longnecked, herbivorous dinosaur – were first found in southwest Montana, near Yellowstone National Park, in 1990.While the dinosaur was under 20 years old when it died, the fossil dates back to the late Jurassic Period about 150 million years ago. Story continues below advertisement “What we had in Dolly was very consistent with respiratory infections that are found in birds,” Woodruff said in an interview. “It was very, very similar to a respiratory disease that birds get from breathing in fungal spores.”Researchers found “never-before-seen” abnormal bony protrusions of unusual shape and texture in the dinosaur’s neck, he said.The borders of the sockets that connect the respiratory tissue are usually smooth, but the bone growth in this specimen was abnormal, lumpy and textured, he said. Get weekly health news Receive the latest medical news and health information delivered to you every Sunday. Sign up for weekly health newsletter Sign Up By providing your email address, you have read and agree to Global News' Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy. “Imagine a fossilized piece of broccoli.”The infection had moved from the lungs to the bones, which emphasizes just how severe the disease was, he noted. CT imaging of the irregular protrusions showed that they were made of abnormal bone that most likely formed in response to an infection, he said.Until now, he said researchers have found signs of trauma in dinosaur fossils such as broken and healed bones, tooth abscesses, arthritis and cancer. 2:03 Perfectly-preserved dinosaur embryo found inside fossilized egg in China But this specimen is special because it shows researchers that dinosaurs possibly suffered from ailments that are now seen in birds, Woodruff said. Story continues below advertisement The most common respiratory disorder seen in birds today is a fungal disease, he said. This fossil helps researchers trace the evolutionary history of respiratory-related diseases and gives them a better understanding of what infections dinosaurs were susceptible to, he added. Trending Now One person is dead and 16 are injured after a shooting at Tuskegee University The 4B movement: Why some U.S. women are boycotting men after Trump’s win A number of flu strains that infect humans come from birds, Woodruff said. They show symptoms similar to humans including sneezing, coughing, sore throat, fever, diarrhea, headache, breathing difficulties and weight loss.The remains indicate Dolly would have experienced flu or pneumonia-like symptoms, Woodruff said. Past research shows these animals lived up to their mid-to-late 30s. More on Health More videos Canada should be ‘world leader’ on alternative PTSD therapies, veteran says The 4B movement: Why some U.S. women are boycotting men after Trump’s win Canada approves Moderna’s RSV vaccine, first of its kind for older adults ‘More than just a fad’: Federal petition seeks tax relief for those with celiac disease Setting new holiday rules November fall prevention month H5 avian flu detected in teen Health Matters: Walking pneumonia cases spike in Canada & Mounjaro injections for weight loss The remains suggest this animal would have been 18 metres long and weighed about five tonnes, he said.Its neck would have been “very long” extending from the nostrils to the lungs or airsacs, which is a lot of sore throat, he said, adding that it “would have needed a heck of a lot of lozenges.”These types of infections can be fatal in birds if untreated, so a potentially similar infection in the dinosaur could have ultimately caused the death of the animal, he said.“If you could hop in that time machine and go back to when Dolly was alive with this infection, you would have very clearly, evidently been able to see that this was a very, very sick animal.” Story continues below advertisement Diplodocids were herding animals and from studying such creatures now, he said researchers know that when one of them got sick the individual might have gone off on its own to try and heal. Or sometimes the sick animal simply fell behind from the rest of the herd and possibly ended up as prey, Woodruff said.“But I do think, one way or another, it ultimately contributed to the death of this animal.” Journalistic standards Comment Report an error © 2022 The Canadian Press Sponsored content More from Global News Canada should be ‘world leader’ on alternative PTSD therapies, veteran says Canada approves Moderna’s RSV vaccine, first of its kind for older adults Advertisement Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Trending One person is dead and 16 are injured after a shooting at Tuskegee University 1,191 Read Ukraine attacks Moscow with 34 drones, biggest strike on the Russian capital 707 Read 6.8 magnitude earthquake shakes Cuba after hurricanes and blackouts 551 Read The 4B movement: Why some U.S. women are boycotting men after Trump’s win 449 Read Canada may need to let Trump be ‘senior partner’ in U.S. relations: GOP critic 413 Read ‘Moving to Canada’ searches spike after U.S. election, but it’s not so simple 381 Read Top Videos Putin outlines Russia’s terms for Ukraine peace talks 11 Viewed Trump’s promises ‘might cause Canadians to bristle,’ former Republican strategist says 9 Viewed Boats wash up on Vancouver beaches during storm 7 Viewed Remembrance Day: Veterans sell poppies on Amazon to boost campaign reach 6 Viewed Firefighter hailed as hero, carries young girl away from fatal crash 6 Viewed Manitoba rescue dog lactates to feed orphaned feral kitten 4 Viewed More Videos Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Advertisement Report an Error Subscribe here AdChoices Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram AboutPrinciples & PracticesBranded ContentContact usRSSNewslettersNotificationsSmart homeAdvertisers Election RegistryGlobal News Licensing RequestsCookie consent ©2024 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Corus News. All rights reserved. Privacy PolicyCopyrightTerms of UseAdvertiseAdvertising Standards TermsCorus EntertainmentAccessibility AdvertisementStructural analysis of N-glycans in chicken trachea and lung reveals potential receptors of chicken influenza viruses | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Structural analysis of N-glycans in chicken trachea and lung reveals potential receptors of chicken influenza viruses Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 08 February 2022 Structural analysis of N-glycans in chicken trachea and lung reveals potential receptors of chicken influenza viruses Noriko Suzuki1, Tatsuya Abe1 & Shunji Natsuka1,2 Scientific Reports volume 12, Article number: 2081 (2022) Cite this article 1517 Accesses 11 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects GlycobiologyGlycomics AbstractAlthough avian influenza A viruses (avian IAVs) bind preferentially to terminal sialic acids (Sia) on glycans that possess Siaα2-3Gal, the actual glycan structures found in chicken respiratory tracts have not been reported. Herein, we analyzed N-glycan structures in chicken trachea and lung, the main target tissues of low pathogenic avian IAVs. 2-Aminopyridine (PA)-labeled N-glycans from chicken tissues were analyzed by combined methods using reversed-phase liquid chromatography (LC), electrospray ionization (ESI)-mass spectrometry (MS), MS/MS, and multistage MS (MSn), with or without modifications using exoglycosidases, sialic acid linkage-specific alkylamidation (SALSA), and/or permethylation. The results of SALSA indicated that PA-N-glycans in both chicken trachea and lung harbored slightly more α2,6-Sia than α2,3-Sia. Most α2,3-Sia on N-glycans in chicken trachea was a fucosylated form (sialyl Lewis X, sLex), whereas no sLex was detected in lung. By contrast, small amounts of N-glycans with 6-sulfo sialyl LacNAc were detected in lung but not in trachea. Considering previous reports that hemagglutinins (HAs) of avian IAVs originally isolated from chicken bind preferentially to α2,3-Sia with or without fucosylation and/or 6-sulfation but not to α2,6-Sia, our results imply that avian IAVs do not evolve to possess HAs that bind preferentially to α2,6-Sia, regardless of the abundance of α2,6-Sia. Similar content being viewed by others The Human Lung Glycome Reveals Novel Glycan Ligands for Influenza A Virus Article Open access 24 March 2020 Sialic acid O-acetylation patterns and glycosidic linkage type determination by ion mobility-mass spectrometry Article Open access 25 October 2023 Toward robust N-glycomics of various tissue samples that may contain glycans with unknown or unexpected structures Article Open access 18 March 2021 IntroductionInfluenza A viruses (IAVs) cause zoonotic diseases and have a great impact on our lives. Beyond species-specific barriers for virus infections, they are transmitted from the natural hosts, wild waterfowl such as ducks, to other species of birds and mammals, including poultry, livestock, and humans1. Infection of domesticated chickens with avian IAVs is of significance for human lives, because chicken is one of the main poultry species worldwide, and a popular food source. Avian IAVs infecting chickens initially have low pathogenicity, but some evolve into highly pathogenic IAVs by mutations when they circulate among chickens. Highly pathogenic avian IAVs cause severe infections in poultry with high rates of mortality, resulting in serious economic damage.Two spike glycoproteins expressed on the surface of IAVs, hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), are involved in infection of host cells2. Binding of HA to sialic acid (Sia) residues on glycans expressed by target cells initiates virus attachment, thereby mediating the subsequent internalization step. When the amplified viruses are released from host cells, NA cleaves off the terminal Sia residues from host cells to prevent formation of virus aggregates at the budding site. The receptor binding specificities of HA are believed to be one of the main factors determining species tropism of IAVs, implying that glycans on host cells are natural barriers for transmission between different species. The well-known species-specific differences in HA specificities are that avian origin HAs bind preferentially to α2,3-Sia, whereas those of human origin mainly bind to α2,6-Sia3. Since α2,6-Sia is expressed predominantly on human upper airway epithelial cells4, it is thought that IAVs with HA that binds to α2,6-Sia are selected preferentially in humans. These specificities correlate with the amino acid sequences of HAs, and substitution of one or two amino acid residues in the receptor binding site of HAs can confer altered specificity5.Species-specific differences in receptor binding specificities of HAs are also found among avian IAVs. While Siaα2-3Gal appears to be the minimum essential glycan structure for binding to HAs from avian IAVs, which infect either natural hosts or poultry, the fine details of the specificity of HAs differ depending on the original host species. For instance, comparison of the binding specificities of several HAs using synthesized glycan libraries revealed that duck-origin viruses displayed high affinity for glycans having NeuAcα2-3Galβ1-3GlcNAc/GalNAc rather than type II α2,3-sialyl LacNAc (NeuAcα2-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc), and that fucosylation and/or sulfation on these glycans resulted in weaker binding6,7,8. By contrast, some chicken-origin IAVs have stronger affinity for 6-sulfo α2,3-sialyl LacNAc (NeuAcα2-3Galβ1-4(SO3H-6)GlcNAc), sialyl Lewis X (sLex, NeuAcα2-3Galβ1-4(Fucα1-3)GlcNAc), and/or 6-sulfo sLex (NeuAcα2-3Galβ1-4(Fucα1-3)(SO3H-6)GlcNAc) than for α2,3-sialyl LacNAc without fucosylation and sulfation, although the patterns of viral binding to the synthesized glycans varied significantly among viruses of different subtypes and among different isolates6,7,8,9,10. This fact implies that target glycan structures expressed on host cells may differ depending on the avian species, and induce acquisition of appropriate specificities through selective mutation on HAs.Despite extensive studies on the glycan-binding specificities of HAs, information on the actual glycan structures on host cells in avian tissues is limited. Although histochemical staining of avian tissue samples using some lectins or anti-carbohydrate antibodies has been reported9,11,12, these methods can fail to identify the presence of some specific glycan structures that are not recognized by available lectins or antibodies. Recently, we developed a combined method for an N-glycomic analysis of tissue samples using chicken colon13, one of the main target tissues for infection by low pathogenic avian IAVs. Because IAVs are originally resident in the intestinal tract of natural hosts such as ducks1, they may initially infect a similar physiological environment in chickens. While intestines are mainly infected by orally-introduced IAVs, tissues in respiratory tracts such as trachea and lung, are the main target of IAVs entering through the nose9. Infection in these tissues seems to be one of the main route by which low pathogenic IAVs circulate among chickens in a poultry farm14, and such circulation occasionally induces viruses to evolve to highly pathogenic IAVs15,16. Therefore, information of the glycan structures present in these tissues is useful to find important structures that IAVs actually bind.Herein, we report the glycan structures present in chicken trachea and lung to explore the actual glycan receptors of IAVs that influence changes in the glycan specificities of HAs. The results indicate that both the trachea and lung express slightly more Siaα2-6Gal than Siaα2-3Gal, although Siaα2-6Gal is not regarded as a preferred receptor of avian IAVs. Moreover, the chicken trachea expresses large amounts of fucosylated glycans, including Lex (Galβ1-4(Fucα1-3)GlcNAc), sLex, and sulfo fucosyl LacdiNAc on branches, whereas only a trace amount of Lex, and no sLex, was found in chicken lung.Results N-Glycomic analysis of chicken trachea and lung by LC–MS and MS/MSFor glycan structural analysis with LC–MS and MS/MS, we performed two independent experiments to prepare N-glycans from both chicken trachea and lung. The raw data of LC–MS and MS/MS have been deposited to GlycoPOST (https://glycopost.glycosmos.org)17. The results from the two independent experiments were consistent with respect to glycan structural features; therefore, we describe just one of the experiments below.N-Glycans from chicken trachea and lung derivatized with 2-aminopyridine (PA) were separated into eight and six fractions, respectively, by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a diethylaminoethyl (DEAE) anion-exchange column (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. S1A, S1C). The results of LC–MS revealed that seven of the eight fractions (fr. 1, 3–8) from trachea and five of the six fractions (fr. 1, 3–6) from lung separated on the DEAE column contained PA-N-glycans (Supplementary Fig. S1B, S1D). MS/MS spectra indicated some fragment ions such as m/z 366 (Hex1HexNAc1), m/z 657 (Hex1HexNAc1NeuAc1), m/z 512 (Hex1HexNAc1Fuc1), m/z 803 (Hex1HexNAc1Fuc1NeuAc1), m/z 407 (HexNAc2), and m/z 731 (Hex2HexNAc2), which are characteristic B ion fragments derived from complex- or hybrid-type N-glycans, and contributed to the estimation of approximate branch sequences (Supplementary Table S1A, S1B). For convenience, deoxyhexoses are indicated as fucose (Fuc) in this study. Small amounts of artifactual by-products generated by C-2 epimerization of reducing termini, i.e., conversion from GlcNAc to ManNAc, were eluted earlier in reversed-phase HPLC than the corresponding non-epimerized PA-N-glycans as described previously18. In this study, C-2 epimers are simply indicated as “epimer” in Fig. S4 and Table S1. The estimated monosaccharide compositions suggested the presence of highly branched structures, such as tri-, tetra-, or penta-antennary N-glycans, in lung but not trachea (Supplementary Table S1A, S1B). Using some PA-N-glycans from glycoproteins as reference standards (Supplementary Fig. S2), the core and branching structures (Supplementary Fig. S3) of the tissue N-glycans were deduced based on the elution positions, MS, and MS/MS spectra.Figure 1Workflow of procedural steps for structural analysis of N-glycans from chicken tissues. N-Glycans are released enzymatically from tissue glycoproteins, and labeled with PA. After partial fractionation of PA-N-glycans based on their negative charge on an anion-exchange column, each fraction, which contains intact PA-N-glycans (1), is subjected to LC–MS and MS/MS analysis using a reversed-phase column to obtain an overview of the structural features of tissue glycans. Eluents from the column are separated evenly (1:1) using a splitter, and PA-glycans are detected simultaneously using a MS system and a fluorescence detector (FLD). Glycan structures, including anomeric configurations, are confirmed by a combination of exoglycosidase digestions (2). The branching/core structures of N-glycans can be confirmed based on their elution positions, as well as LC–MS and MS/MS analysis, after exoglycosidase digestions. Linkages of sialic acids on sialylated glycans are determined and quantified by SALSA (3), followed by LC–MS and MS/MS analysis. Permethylation of alkylamidated glycans (4) followed by LC–MS, MS/MS, and MSn analysis accompanied by cross-ring cleavages is useful for further determination of glycosidic linkage positions in some glycans.Full size imageA portion of each fraction of PA-N-glycans was subjected to sequential exoglycosidase digestion using neuraminidase, α1-3,4 fucosidase, and β1-4 galactosidase to clarify the sequences of branches and branching patterns. Figure 2 shows a representative example of elution profiles on reversed-phase LC following exoglycosidase digestion of PA-N-glycans in fr. 3 from chicken trachea and lung, which contained monosialylated or monosulfated glycans. The elution profiles of PA-N-glycans in fr. 3 from both trachea and lung were altered markedly by neuraminidase digestion. By contrast, the elution profiles following α1-3,4 fucosidase digestion of PA-N-glycans from chicken trachea were also altered significantly, whereas those from lung were mostly unchanged. These results suggest that chicken trachea expresses abundant α3/4-Fuc on N-glycans, unlike lung. After β1-4 galactosidase digestion, the elution profiles of both trachea and lung were also altered markedly, suggesting that the majority of complex/hybrid-type N-glycans possess type II LacNAc (Galβ1-4GlcNAc). In the case of lung, some minor PA-N-glycans retained one LacNAc sequence, even after treatment with an appreciable amount of β1-4 galactosidase (e.g., Fig. S4-10, fr. 3/4 with β1-4 galactosidase, at m/z 1258.49(2H+) eluted around 71.51 min), implying the presence of type I LacNAc (Galβ1-3GlcNAc) as a minor component.Figure 2Elution profiles of PA-N-glycans from chicken trachea and lung after sequential digestion with exoglycosidases. A portion of fr. 3 from the DEAE column (monosialylated PA-N-glycans, see Supplementary Fig. S1A,C) derived from chicken trachea (A) and lung (B) was sequentially digested with neuraminidase, α1-3,4 fucosidase, and β1-4 galactosidase, and each digest was subjected to LC–MS and MS/MS analyses. Arrows with alphabetical characters indicate the elution positions of the standard PA-N-glycans (Supplementary Fig. S2). Some representative PA-N-glycans, but not all the structures detected by MS/MS, are shown in this figure. Standard Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans was used for monosaccharide symbols30, except for sulfate and phosphate groups.Full size imageMS analysis of characteristic structures of N-glycans in trachea and/or lung using combined methodsThe detailed structural features such as glycosidic linkages and branching patterns of N-glycans in trachea and/or lung were analyzed by the combining sequential exoglycosidase digestion, sialic acid linkage-specific alkylamidation (SALSA), and/or permethylation, as well as the elution position on reversed-phase LC. Using the SALSA method, α2,3-Sia and α2,6-Sia were alkylamidated by methylamine (MA, + 13.032) and isopropylamine (iPA, + 41.063), respectively, resulting in a mass difference (Δ = 28.031)19. This mass difference is maintained even after permethylation20. To deduce the glycan structures, we also used empirical additivity rules, in which the type and position of each constituent monosaccharide additionally contribute positively or negatively to the retention of PA-N-glycans in LC18,21. Some characteristic structures of PA-N-glycans were analyzed as follows:Fucosylated structuresThe results of LC–MS and MS/MS analyses indicated the presence of multiply fucosylated N-glycans in trachea. The positions of Fuc residues, either on branches or the N-glycan core, were deduced by comparison of the elution positions in reversed-phase LC as described previously13. For instance, extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) of neuraminidase–treated fr. 3 from trachea revealed the different elution positions of fucosylated biantennary structures without bisecting GlcNAc, assigned as Hex2HexNAc2Fuc1–3C-PA (C is the trimannosyl core structure, Man3GlcNAc2). As shown in Supplementary Fig. S4-1A, the results indicate that the addition of one core Fuc made a strong positive contribution to retention (10–11 min), whereas addition of one α1,3-Fuc residue on a branch made a strong negative contribution to retention (6–8 min), when the PA-N-glycans do not possess bisecting GlcNAc. The results of MS/MS support the presence of Fuc residues on branches, which are more easily removed by fragmentation with collision-induced dissociation (CID), as shown in Supplementary Fig. S4-1B. Furthermore, the presence of Lex was confirmed by MS3 analysis of permethylated neutral PA-N-glycan possessing Fuc residues on branches (Supplementary Fig. S5-1).Some sialylated PA-N-glycans from trachea possessed Fuc residues either on branches or the N-glycan core (Supplementary Fig. S4-2A). The linkages of Sia to Gal, and the positions of Fuc residues, were deduced based on the elution positions and MS/MS spectra (Supplementary Fig. S4-2B, S4-2C), and then confirmed by SALSA (Supplementary Table S2A, S2B) and a combined SALSA/permethylation method20. For instance, the EIC at m/z 1078.91 of PA-N-glycans in fr.3 from trachea, assigned as Hex2HexNAc2Fuc1NeuAc1C-PA(2H+), exhibited several isomer peaks (Supplementary Fig. S4-2A). Similar to the neuraminidase-treated samples, sialylated PA-N-glycans with Fuc residues on a branch were eluted earlier than those with core Fuc. Previously, we found that in general, biantennary PA-N-glycans with Siaα2-6Gal were eluted earlier than those with Siaα2-3Gal13, and this rule seemed to be applicable in the presence of branch Fuc residues. The results of SALSA/permethylation revealed that branches that contain the Siaα2-6Gal sequence were not fucosylated at the same branches. When PA-N-glycans contain both Fuc residues on a branch and a Siaα2-6Gal sequence, these moieties are located on different branches (Fig. 3A,B). By contrast, one Fuc residue sometimes coexists on the same branch that possesses Siaα2-3Gal sequences (Fig. 3C,D, Supplementary Fig. S5-2), suggesting the presence of sLex or sialyl Lewis A (sLea, NeuAcα2-3Galβ1-3(Fucα1-4)GlcNAc). Because the Gal-GlcNAc linkages were almost completely removed by β1-4 galactosidase digestion (Fig. 2A), the branches are most likely sLex, but not sLea. This branch sequence was further confirmed by SALSA/permethylation and MS3 analyses accompanied by cross-ring cleavages of B/Y fragments at m/z 646 (Fig. 3C,D, Supplementary Fig. S5-2). A small peak at m/z 315 derived from 3,5A cross-ring cleavage of HexNAc (Fig. 3D, Supplementary Fig. S5-2D) was generated, suggesting linkages of Hex1–4HexNAc and dHex1–3HexNAc, which are the part of sLex, as described previously13,20.Figure 3MSn analysis of alkylamidated and permethylated PA-N-glycans from chicken trachea. (A) MS2 spectrum of PA-N-glycans with Lex from the doubly sodiated precursor ion at m/z 1468, corresponding to Hex2HexNAc2Fuc2(NeuAc + iPA)1C-PA. The branch positions of each glycan sequence linked to α3- or α6-Man were not determined. (B) MS3 spectrum of the B ion fragments Hex1HexNAc1Fuc1 at m/z 660. (C) MS2 spectrum of PA-N-glycans with sLex from the triply sodiated precursor ion at m/z 1193, corresponding to Hex2HexNAc3Fuc2(NeuAc + MA)1(NeuAc + iPA)1C-PA. The branch positions of each glycan sequence linked to α3- or α6-Man were not determined. (D) MS3 spectrum of the B/Y ion fragments Hex1HexNAc1Fuc1 at m/z 646.Full size imageSulfated structuresSulfated N-glycans were found in both trachea and lung, but the branch sequences that possess a sulfate group varied. In the case of trachea, sulfated fucosyl LacdiNAc were the main N-glycans, with one or two sulfate groups (Supplementary Fig. S5-3, Supplementary Table S1A), and sulfated fucosyl LacNAc, most likely sulfo Lex (Galβ1-4(Fucα1-3)(SO3H-6)GlcNAc), was also detected as a minor component (Supplementary Fig. S5-4). MS3 analysis of the permethylated glycans suggested that the position of the sulfate group on the sulfated fucosyl LacdiNAc was the 4- or 6-OH of the HexNAc at the non-reducing terminus, which is most likely GalNAc (Supplementary Fig. S5-3). By contrast, based on the results of MS/MS analysis of the permethylated glycans as well as LC–MS and MS/MS analyses after sequential exoglycosidase digestion, the position of a sulfate group on the sulfated fucosyl LacNAc was most likely the 6-OH of the inner GlcNAc (Supplementary Fig. S5-4, Fig. S6). It should be noted that sulfated N-glycans from trachea did not possess Sia residues on the same branches. Some N-glycans possessed sulfate groups and Sia simultaneously (e.g., pk. 6-8-1 and pk. 6-10-1 in Supplementary Table S1A), but they are located at different branches.Unlike trachea, lung contained N-glycans with either sulfated LacdiNAc or sulfated LacNAc without Fuc residues on branches. MS3 analysis of the permethylated glycans suggested that the position of sulfate groups on the sulfated LacdiNAc was the 4- or 6-OH of the HexNAc at the non-reducing terminus, which is most likely GalNAc (Supplementary Fig. S5-5). By contrast, the position of a sulfate group on the sulfated LacNAc was most likely the 6-OH of the inner GlcNAc, based on the results of MS/MS analysis of permethylated glycans as well as LC–MS and MS/MS analyses (Fig. 4). It should be noted that sulfated N-glycans from lung sometimes possessed Sia residues on the same branches, such as NeuAcα2-3Galβ1-4(SO3H-6)GlcNAc and NeuAcα2-6Galβ1-4(SO3H-6)GlcNAc. The linkages of Sia were deduced based on the results of SALSA (Supplementary Table S2B), as well as the elution positions before and after neuraminidase digestion (Supplementary Fig. S6).Figure 4MSn analysis of alkylamidated and permethylated PA-N-glycans with sulfation derived from chicken lung. (A) MS2 spectrum of α2,3-sialylated PA-N-glycans with sulfated LacNAc from the doubly sodiated precursor ion at m/z 1598, corresponding to Hex2HexNAc2Fuc1(NeuAc + MA)2(SO3-H + Na)1C-PA. (B) MS3 spectrum of the B/Y ion fragments Hex1HexNAc1(SO3-H + Na)1 at m/z 560. The peak at m/z 347, indicated by the asterisk (*), was probably generated by rearrangement of sodium sulfate (–SO4Na) on HexNAc to the B/Y ion fragments at m/z 227 derived from Hex on the non-reducing end, according to the result of MS4 analysis at m/z 347 (C). Although the sulfate groups on the glycan structures are represented as if they were located on a branch linked to α3-Man (A), the actual branch positions were not determined.Full size imageLacdiNAc and branching patternsThe presence of multiantennary structures of N-glycans from lung was suggested by the deduced monosaccharide composition: HexnHexNAcnFuc0–1NeuAc0–3C-PA or HexnHexNAc(n+1)Fuc0–1NeuAc0–3C-PA (n = 2–6). Elution positions of PA-N-glycans with different branching patterns were compared using EICs of chicken lung PA-N-glycans with varying compositions (HexNAc4–5Fuc0–1C-PA) prepared by neuraminidase/α1-3,4 fucosidase/β1-4 galactosidase digestion (Supplementary Fig. S4-3A, S4-4A, S4-5A, S4-6A). As we reported previously13, PA-N-glycans can be separated by reversed-phase LC using a C18 column based on the branching pattern. For example, two different types of triantennary structures, designated 2,2′,6′-tri and 2,4,2′-tri (Supplementary Fig. S3), eluted much earlier and later, respectively, than the cognate 2,2′-biantennary structure. These differences are attributable to the negative contribution of branching GlcNAc linked to the C-6 position of α6-Man (β6′-GlcNAc, 7–8 min), and the positive contribution of branching GlcNAc linked to the C-4 position of α3-Man (β4-GlcNAc, 7–9 min), to retention of PA-N-glycans without bisecting GlcNAc. We also found that branching GlcNAc linked to the C-4 position of α6-Man (β4′-GlcNAc) made a small positive contribution (1–2 min) in the case of PA-N-glycans, without bisecting GlcNAc. Accordingly, we deduced PA-N-glycans eluted at 32.55 min (Supplementary Fig. S4-3A, fr. 1, EIC at m/z 901.36, HexNAc4C-PA(2H+)) as a 2,2′,4′,6′-tetraantennary structure. Based on the elution position and MS/MS spectra, the peak at 35.17 min in the same EIC is most likely a 2,2′,6′-triantennary structure with one LacdiNAc, which is characterized by a B ion fragment at m/z 407 upon MS/MS analysis (Supplementary Fig. S4-3B). The elution positions and MS/MS spectra of PA-N-glycans eluted at 39.62, 42.94, and 72.15 min on the EIC at m/z 901.36 (Supplementary Fig. S4-3B) were the same as those from chicken colon13, suggesting that each of their structures is the same.Each structure of PA-N-glycans eluted at the indicated time on EICs at m/z 974.39 (HexNAc4Fuc1C-PA(2H+), Supplementary Fig. S4-4A), at m/z 1002.90 (HexNAc5C-PA(2H+), Supplementary Fig. S4-5A), and at m/z 1075.93 (HexNAc5Fuc1C-PA(2H+), Supplementary Fig. S4-6A), were similarly deduced based on elution position and MS/MS spectra (Supplementary Fig. S4-4B, S4-5B, and S4-6B). The presence of LacdiNAc (GalNAc-GlcNAc) was confirmed by the hallmark B ion fragments at m/z 407. These results suggest that addition of the second HexNAc (most likely GalNAc) to the first HexNAc (most likely GlcNAc) of HexdiNAc resulted in a positive contribution to retention in the range of 3–6 min, and that this contribution differed slightly depending on the arm on which the HexNAc was added, as reported previously13. The presence of LacdiNAc and sialyl LacdiNAc (sLacdiNAc) in chicken lung was confirmed by SALSA/permethylation (Supplementary Fig. S5-6). The results indicated that sLacdiNAc possessed α2,6-Sia but not α2,3-Sia. Interestingly, both 2,4,2′,4′,6′-pentaantennary structures (e.g., eluted at 41.31 min (fr. 1) in Fig. S4-5, eluted at 52.05 min (fr. 1) in Fig. S4-6) and 2,2′,4′,6′-tetraantennary structures (e.g., eluted at 32.55 min (fr. 1) in Fig. S4-3, eluted at 43.66 min (fr. 1) in Fig. S4-4), which are rarely found in mammals, were relatively abundant in chicken lung (Supplementary Fig. S4-3A, S4-4A, S4-5A, S4-6A).LacNAc repeats and multiantennary structures with LacNAcThe presence of multiantennary structures and/or extended LacNAc repeat sequences in chicken lung was supported by the deduced compositions of complex-type PA-N-glycans with HexnHexNAcnFuc0–1NeuAc0–5C-PA or HexnHexNAc(n+1)Fuc0–1NeuAc0–4C-PA (n = 2–6). The branching patterns were deduced based on the elution positions observed in the EICs of PA-N-glycans with the compositions of HexnHexNAcnFuc0–1C-PA(3H+) or HexnHexNAc(n+1)Fuc0–1C-PA(3H+) (n = 4–6) using data from LC–MS and MS/MS analyses of each neuraminidase/α1-3,4 fucosidase–digested fraction (Supplementary Fig. S4-7A, S4-8A, S4-9A, S4-10A). The EICs of their β1-4 galactosidase–digested products (Supplementary Fig. S4-10A) were also examined to confirm the number of remaining Hex (Gal) residues. PA-N-glycans with multiantennary structures (including pentaantennary structures) and/or LacNAc repeats were successfully separated, and their structures were deduced based on the elution positions and MS/MS spectra (Supplementary Fig. S4-7B, S4-8B, S4-9B, S4-10B). For example, EICs at m/z 866.00 [Hex4HexNAc4Fuc1C-PA(3H+)] revealed that PA-N-glycans with this composition were clearly separated into fully galactosylated 2,2′-bi- and 2,2′,6′-tri-antennary structures with LacNAc repeats, as well as 2,2′,4′,6′-tetra- and 2,4,2′,4′-tetra-antennary structures (Supplementary Fig. S4-7A). The PA-N-glycan that eluted around 67.71 min (fr. 3) generated B ion fragments at m/z 1096 (Hex3HexNAc3) and m/z 731 (Hex2HexNAc2), suggesting biantennary structures with a branch containing three LacNAc units connected in tandem (Supplementary Fig. S4-7B). EICs at m/z 1109.42 [Hex6HexNAc6Fuc1C-PA(3H+)] of PA-N-glycans revealed the presence of 2,4,2′,4′,6′-penta- and 2,4,2′,4′-tetra-antennary structures with one and two LacNAc repeats, respectively (Supplementary Fig. S4-10). After the β1-4 galactosidase digestion, the former lost five of the six Gal residues, and the latter lost four of them, confirming the number of LacNAc repeat sequences.Comparison of structural features of N-glycans from chicken trachea and lungA portion of each fraction containing sialylated PA-N-glycans from chicken trachea (fr. 3–6, 8) and lung (fr. 3–6) were chemically modified by SALSA to discriminate α2,3- or α2,6-Sia in PA-N-glycans, as described previously19,22, and then analyzed by LC–MS and MS/MS (Supplementary Fig. S7). Based on the results of full MS and MS/MS analyses, we deduced the monosaccharide compositions and Sia-linkages of each PA-N-glycan detected by a fluorescence detector (FLD) (Supplementary Table S2A, S2B). The proportions of α2,3- and α2,6-Sia at non-reducing termini of PA-N-glycans from trachea and lung were estimated using the peak area of each PA-N-glycan derivatized by the SALSA method (Fig. 5). The results revealed that the proportion of α2,3- and α2,6-Sia in sialylated branches of PA-N-glycans was 43.6% and 56.4%, respectively, in trachea, and 45.7% and 54.3%, respectively, in lung, indicating that the proportion of α2,3-Sia was slightly lower than that of α2,6-Sia in both tissues. It should be noted that the proportion of α2,3-Sia in both trachea and lung was slightly lower than that of α2,6-Sia on mono- and di-sialylated PA-N-glycans, whereas the proportion of α2,3-Sia was slightly higher than that of α2,6-Sia on tri- or tetra-sialylated PA-N-glycans. These results reflect the abundance of α2,6-Sia on biantennary structures. It is also notable that the majority of α2,3-Sia in trachea is further fucosylated, i.e., present as sLex (Fig. 5A).Figure 5Relative content of α2,3- and α2,6-Sia in sialylated N-glycans from chicken trachea (A) and lung (B), estimated using the SALSA method. The proportions of α2,3- and α2,6-Sia in mono-, di-, tri-, or tetra-sialylated glycans, as well as in total glycans from the tissues, were calculated based on the results of LC–MS and MS/MS analyses of PA-N-glycans after SALSA, as indicated in Supplementary Table S2. In the results of trachea, the relative content of sLex is shown as purple bars (A).Full size imageBased on the results of LC–MS, MS/MS, exoglycosidase digestions, SALSA, and SALSA/permethylation, we deduced the structures of almost all major PA-N-glycans from chicken trachea and lung, including the core structures, branching patterns, and branch sequences. The deduced structures are summarized in Supplementary Table S1, along with the relative amounts calculated from the area of each peak detected by fluorescence and full MS analyses. Table S3 lists of all detected PA-N-glycans sorted in descending order of relative amounts. Using the datasets, we calculated the relative amounts of categorized glycan structures (Fig. 6). The ratios of high mannose-, hybrid-, and complex-type glycans were almost the same between trachea and lung, as well as chicken colon13. While lung contains certain amounts of tetra- and penta-antennary structures, trachea contains very few tetraantennary structures. Two types of tetraantennary structures were found in lung, with 2,2′,4′,6′-tetra was more abundant than 2,4,2′,4′-tetra, whereas the reverse is true for chicken colon. Approximately half of the N-glycans in both tissues possessed core Fuc, but the amounts of N-glycans that possess bisecting GlcNAc were slightly higher in trachea (32.2%) than in lung (19.8%). The amounts of sialylated N-glycans or sulfated N-glycans were higher in trachea (37.0% or 5.5%, respectively) than in lung (32.1% or 0.9%, respectively). Although both trachea and lung contain sulfated N-glycans, the former mainly contains sulfo fucosyl LacdiNAc, and the latter contains sulfo LacNAc and sulfo LacdiNAc. Figure 7 shows the sialylated and/or sulfated N-glycans in chicken trachea and lung.Figure 6Summary of the structural features of N-glycans from chicken trachea (A–D) and lung (E–H). (A,E) Relative abundance of high mannose, hybrid, and complex-type N-glycans, categorized by branching pattern (Supplementary Fig. S3). (B,F) Relative abundance of N-glycans, categorized by core structures. (C,G) Relative abundance of neutral, sialylated, sulfated, and phosphorylated N-glycans in chicken trachea and lung. Sulfated glycan groups include those with simultaneously sialylated glycans, whereas sialylated glycan groups do not include any sulfated glycans. Each value (%) in A–C and E–G is expressed relative to the total amount of PA-N-glycans (= 100%) in Supplementary Table S1. (D,H) Relative abundance of characteristic branch sequences on complex or hybrid-type glycans, expressed relative to the total amount of GlcNAc/LacNAc/LacdiNAc-containing branches (= 100%) in all PA-N-glycans in Supplementary Table S1. Each group of GlcNAc (excluding bisecting GlcNAc), LacNAc, sialyl LacNAc (sLacNAc), Lex, and sLex includes the corresponding branches located at the non-reducing termini of complex- and hybrid-type N-glycans. Each group of sulfated LacNAc (sulfo LacNAc), LacdiNAc (including sulfo LacdiNAc and sulfo fucosyl LacdiNAc), and LacNAc repeats includes both sialylated and non-sialylated branch sequences.Full size imageFigure 7Structures and relative amounts of sialylated and/or sulfated PA-N-glycans from chicken trachea and lung. (A,C) Relative amounts of sialylated and/or sulfated PA-N-glycans of trachea (A) and lung (C). The upper values on each bar of the graph indicate the % of each glycan relative to the most abundant glycan (Man9GlcNAc2-PA (pk.1-9-1, 1T) in Supplementary Table S1A and S3 for chicken trachea, Gal2GlcNAc2Fuc1C-PA (pk.1-28-1, 1L) in Supplementary Table S1B and S3 for chicken lung), which was assigned a value of 100. The numbers of each PA-N-glycan indicate the order when they are arranged in descending order of relative amount in each tissue (1T–111T and 1L–187L in Table S3). (B, D) Structures of the numbered PA-N-glycans in A (trachea) and C (lung), respectively. Sia-linkages (α2,3, α2,6) that were identified unambiguously are indicated by a number between the Sia and Gal/GalNAc moieties.Full size imageTo quantify the structural features of branch sequences, the amounts of each GlcNAc/LacNAc/LacdiNAc-containing branch on complex and hybrid-type N-glycans were calculated (Fig. 6D,H). While LacNAc or sialyl LacNAc (sLacNAc) sequences were the dominant sequences in lung, they were decreased in trachea as the proportion of Lex or sLex increased. Small amounts of N-glycans possessing LacNAc repeats were detected in lung (1.1%) but not in trachea. LacdiNAc in trachea (4.5%) were mainly sulfo fucosyl LacdiNAc.DiscussionOne of the main barriers to IAV transmission among species is believed to be the receptor specificity of HAs that bind terminal Sia on host glycans. Different binding preferences among avian IAVs may also be barriers against interspecies transmission among birds. IAVs isolated from ducks rarely infect chickens directly in experiments, although both chicken-origin and duck-origin IAVs bind preferentially to α2,3-Sia. Several groups reported that IAVs from terrestrial poultry including chicken, bind preferentially to 6-sulfo α2,3-sialyl LacNAc, sLex, and/or 6-sulfo sLex, although the binding preferences varied depending on viruses of different subtypes and isolates6,7,8,9,10. For example, Gambaryan et al. reported that some chicken IAVs show strong binding to 6-sulfo α2,3-sialyl LacNAc and/or 6-sulfo sLex6,7,8, whereas Hiono et al. reported that a low pathogenic H5N2 isolate from chicken bound preferentially to sLex rather than to α2,3-sialyl LacNAc9,10. The effect of 6-sulfation and/or fucosylation of the GlcNAc moiety of α2,3-sialyl LacNAc on binding to some chicken IAVs was also found in the publically available data of glycan arrays provided by the Consortium for Functional Glycomics (CFG), as shown in the Supplementary Information and Supplementary Table S4. By contrast, IAVs from duck bind preferentially to Siaα2-3Galβ1-3GalNAc/GlcNAc rather than to α2,3-sialyl LacNAc, and fucosylation and/or sulfation of α2,3-sialyl LacNAc results in weaker binding6,7,8. The different glycan specificities of duck and chicken IAVs suggest that the target tissues in these birds may express glycan structures in a species-specific manner.Although the receptor binding specificity of various HAs of IAVs have been studied extensively, actual glycan structures expressed in avian species have not been extensively studied. Because N-glycans rather than O-glycans and glycolipids are thought to be the major targets of IAV infection23, we analyzed N-glycan structures of chicken trachea and lung, in addition to colon13. Figure 8 represents the summary of structural features of sialylated or sulfated complex-type N-glycans with or without branch fucosylation in chicken trachea, lung, and colon. Our results indicated three major aspects of N-glycans in these tissues in terms of sialylated or sulfated branch structures. First, the relative amounts of α2,6-Sia in trachea and lung were slightly higher than those of α2,3-Sia (Fig. 5), whereas chicken colon expressed more α2,3-Sia than α2,6-Sia13. Second, most branches with α2,3-Sia in trachea are α1,3-fucosylated and exist as sLex (Fig. 8A,B). This glycan epitope was rarely found in lung and only small amounts of N-glycans with sLex were found in colon. Third, 6-sulfo α2,3-sialyl LacNAc, but not 6-sulfo sLex, were detected as minor components in chicken lung and colon (Fig. 8C). In trachea, sulfated N-glycans mainly exist as sulfo fucosyl LacdiNAc (Figs. 7, 8D, Supplementary Table S1A, S3, Fig. S5-3), and 6-sulfo Lex was detected as a minor component (Fig. 8C, Supplementary Fig. S5-4, S6). No 6-sulfo sLex was detected in trachea, lung, or colon, although this structure was reported as the common receptor determinant recognized by H5, H6, H7, and H9 influenza viruses of terrestrial poultry7. In addition to these three major aspects, multiple branching structures (up to pentaantennary structures) with some LacNAc repeat sequences were identified in chicken lung and colon, but not in trachea (Fig. 8A). The N-glycans in the colon appear more complex than those in the lung, due to the presence of multiple sialylations (up to five per glycan) and more extended LacNAc repeats. Currently, no sufficient information is available to evaluate how these complex glycan structures affect the bindings of avian IAVs. They are not covered by the CFG glycan array, even though some of the more complex N-glycans are included in newer versions24,25.Figure 8Comparison of the structural features of sialylated and/or sulfated complex-type PA-N-glycans from chicken trachea, lung, and colon. (A) Summary of the sialylated complex-type PA-N-glycans without branch fucosylation in the three tissues. Double asterisks (**) indicate that the 4-branch and the 6′-branch do not exist simultaneously. (B) Summary of the sialylated complex-type PA-N-glycans with branch fucosylation in chicken trachea and colon. An asterisk (*) indicates that α2,6-sialylations are found only when GlcNAc residues on the same branches are non-fucosylated. (C) Summary of the complex-type PA-N-glycans with 6-sulfated (sialyl) LacNAc branches with or without branch fucosylation from the three tissues. (D) Summary of the complex-type PA-N-glycans with sulfated LacdiNAc branches with or without branch fucosylation from trachea and lung. Each value (%) is expressed relative to the total amount of PA-N-glycans (= 100%) in Supplementary Table S1.Full size imageAbundant expression of sLex on the surface of chicken trachea epithelial cells was reported previously using specific monoclonal antibodies against this epitope9. Our N-glycomic data clearly support the results of immunohistochemical staining. Because previous reports indicated that some chicken IAVs, but not duck IAVs, bind preferentially to sLex7,9,10, our current N-glycomic data suggest that HAs of the chicken IAVs may have adapted to bind sLex. Substitution of two amino acid residues at the receptor binding site of H5 HA was suggested to contribute to increased binding affinity to sLex10. Moreover, our results indicate that Siaα2-6Gal and sLex are often located on the same PA-N-glycans at different branches (Figs. 3, 7, Supplementary Table S1A, S3), suggesting that α2,6-sialyltransferases, α2,3-sialyltransferases, and α1,3-fucosyltransferases acting on N-glycans are expressed in the same cells, and can act on the same glycosylation sites on glycoproteins. This fact is consistent with the results of histochemical staining with specific lectins and antibodies showing that the surfaces of trachea epithelial cells present both Siaα2-6Gal and sLex9,26. Therefore, either Siaα2-6Gal or sLex could be selected to attach to target cells. Nevertheless, HAs of chicken IAVs studied to date bind preferentially to Siaα2-3Gal, including sLex, but not to Siaα2-6Gal, suggesting that only IAVs with HAs that bind Siaα2-3Gal/sLex can propagate in chicken trachea. The opposite appears to be the case for human IAVs, which express HAs that bind preferentially to Siaα2-6Gal. In contrast to the results of lectin staining, which suggested the dominance of α2,6-Sia in human respiratory tracts4, glycan structural analysis suggested a comparable abundance of α2,3-Sia and α2,6-Sia27. However, HAs of some human IAVs bind preferentially to Siaα2-6Gal, unlike HAs of chicken IAVs. Therefore, not only the abundance of Siaα2-6Gal in human respiratory tract, but some other unknown factors in human may influence the alteration of the receptor specificity of IAVs from Siaα2-3Gal to Siaα2-6Gal.There are many lines and breeds of chickens, both commercial and indigenous. Among them, we used Chunky (a chicken broiler) as a source of material for this study. Although there is a lack of information about variations among chicken lines/breeds in terms of glycan structural modifications, we need to be aware of the possibility that glycan variations affect the susceptibility of different lines/breeds to infection by avian IAVs. For generalization of glycan structural features in chicken species, accumulation of data from many other lines/breeds in addition to our data is necessary. Another concern is possible glycan variations among individual chickens, as occurs for blood type glycans in humans. In this study, we used a mixture of trachea mucosa obtained from several chickens as a source to analyze glycan structures, since the amount of N-glycans isolated from a single chicken was not sufficient for detailed structural analysis with our system. Although our qualitative analysis of glycan structures yielded consistent results in the two independent experiments, quantitative differences in glycans among individual chickens remain unknown. Thus, quantitative and comparative analyses of glycans among individuals and lines/breeds of chickens should be conducted in future studies using improved methods with higher sensitivity.Different receptor specificities among avian IAVs has also been reported in those originally isolated from terrestrial birds other than chicken, as well as those from some wild waterfowl such as gulls6,7. However, there is little information about the glycan structures in these birds. Further studies should clarify the glycan structures of other hosts, particularly natural hosts, i.e., wild waterfowl, and other terrestrial poultry species known to be intermediate transmitters of avian IAVs (e.g., quails and turkeys). It will help to explore the relationship between the glycan-binding specificities of HAs of avian IAVs and the glycan structures expressed on host cells of birds. The glycomic analysis of chicken tissues presented herein can form the cornerstone for further studies of avian IAVs based on avian glycomic analysis.Materials and methodsMaterialsTissues from 3-week-old male chickens (Chunky, purchased from a local farmer in the Niigata area) were a kind gift from Dr. Toshie Sugiyama of Niigata University. All reagents used in this study were the same as those reported previously13.Preparation of PA-N-glycans from tissue samplesFor glycan structural analysis with LC–MS and MS/MS, two independent experiments to prepare PA-N-glycans from both chicken trachea and lung were performed. Chicken trachea tissues were obtained from three and four chickens per experiment, whereas chicken lung were obtained from one of the chickens used to obtain trachea per experiments. Isolated chicken trachea and lung were washed several times with phosphate-buffered saline, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, and kept at − 70°C until use. The mucosa covering the tracheal lumen was physically detached from the cartilage by tweezers and used for preparation of glycans. After tissues (100–200 mg, wet weight) were homogenized with a Polytron homogenizer, N-glycans were prepared as described previously13. N-Glycans released by glycoamidase F (GAF, aka N-glycosidase F and PNGase F) treatment were derivatized with PA as described previously28. Mixtures of PA-N-glycans were separated by HPLC using a TSKgel DEAE-5PW column, as described previously22,29. PA-glycans were detected using an FLD with an excitation wavelength of 310 nm and an emission wavelength of 380 nm. Each fraction was analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC–MS) and MS/MS using a C18 reversed-phase LC column as described later, and simultaneously monitored with an FLD (Fig. 1).Linkage-specific derivatization of sialic acids and permethylationTo determine the linkages of sialic acids on non-reducing termini, portions of sialylated PA-N-glycans were derivatized with linkage-specific alkylamidation, as described previously22. For permethylation of alkylamidated PA-N-glycans, sialylated glycans were alkylamidated and permethylated sequentially, as described previously20.Exoglycosidase digestionSialylated PA-N-glycans were digested with neuraminidase (α2-3,6,8,9 neuraminidase from Arthrobacter ureafaciens). Neutral or desialylated PA-N-glycans were digested with α1-3,4 fucosidase from the sweet almond tree, then with β1-4 galactosidase S from Streptococcus pneumoniae. These enzymatic reactions were performed for 16–48 h at 37°C in 50 mM sodium acetate (pH 5.5) containing 5 mM CaCl2. After each glycosidase digestion, the products were analyzed by LC–MS and MS/MS as described below.Online LC–MS, MS/MS, and MSn analyses of glycansMS analysis of PA-N-glycans was performed by ESI–MS on an LTQ XL linear ion trap mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex U3000 HPLC system and an ESI-probe (H-ESI-II, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). MS data were recorded and analyzed using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All conditions for MS analyses of PA-N-glycans, with or without enzymatic or chemical modifications, were as previously described13. Some PA-N-glycans from glycoproteins (Supplementary Fig. S2) were also analyzed under the same LC–MS and MS/MS conditions as reference standards.Glycan structures were deduced based on the elution positions on reversed-phase LC, full MS, MS/MS, and MSn, as well as known biosynthetic pathways of vertebrate glycans. Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans was used for monosaccharide symbols30, except for sulfate and phosphate groups. The relative amount of each PA-N-glycan was quantified based on the integration of fluorescence signals after LC separation. When fluorescence intensity peaks included more than two kinds of PA-glycans with different mass values, their proportions were estimated using the ratios of integrated ion intensities for each m/z value detected at the corresponding times. Data availability The raw LC–MS and MS/MS data for intact PA-N-glycans have been deposited to GlycoPOST (the announced ID: GPST000237). The other datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. ReferencesWebster, R. G., Bean, W. J., Gorman, O. T., Chambers, T. M. & Kawaoka, Y. Evolution and ecology of influenza A viruses. Microbiol. Rev. 56, 152–179 (1992).Article CAS Google Scholar Thompson, A. J., de Vries, R. P. & Paulson, J. C. Virus recognition of glycan receptors. Curr. Opin. Virol. 34, 117–129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coviro.2019.01.004 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rogers, G. N. & Paulson, J. C. Receptor determinants of human and animal influenza virus isolates: Differences in receptor specificity of the H3 hemagglutinin based on species of origin. Virology 127, 361–373 (1983).Article CAS Google Scholar Shinya, K. et al. Avian flu: Influenza virus receptors in the human airway. Nature 440, 435–436. https://doi.org/10.1038/440435a (2006).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Thompson, A. J. & Paulson, J. C. Adaptation of influenza viruses to human airway receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 296, 100017. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.REV120.013309 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gambaryan, A. et al. Receptor specificity of influenza viruses from birds and mammals: New data on involvement of the inner fragments of the carbohydrate chain. Virology 334, 276–283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2005.02.003 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gambaryan, A. S. et al. 6-sulfo sialyl Lewis X is the common receptor determinant recognized by H5, H6, H7 and H9 influenza viruses of terrestrial poultry. Virol. J. 5, 85. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-422X-5-85 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gambaryan, A. S. et al. Receptor-binding profiles of H7 subtype influenza viruses in different host species. J. Virol. 86, 4370–4379. https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.06959-11 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hiono, T. et al. A chicken influenza virus recognizes fucosylated α2,3 sialoglycan receptors on the epithelial cells lining upper respiratory tracts of chickens. Virology 456–457, 131–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2014.03.004 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hiono, T. et al. Amino acid residues at positions 222 and 227 of the hemagglutinin together with the neuraminidase determine binding of H5 avian influenza viruses to sialyl Lewis X. Arch. Virol. 161, 307–316. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00705-015-2660-3 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Costa, T. et al. Distribution patterns of influenza virus receptors and viral attachment patterns in the respiratory and intestinal tracts of seven avian species. Vet. Res. 43, 28. https://doi.org/10.1186/1297-9716-43-28 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Franca, M., Stallknecht, D. E. & Howerth, E. W. Expression and distribution of sialic acid influenza virus receptors in wild birds. Avian Pathol. 42, 60–71. https://doi.org/10.1080/03079457.2012.759176 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Suzuki, N., Abe, T., Hanzawa, K. & Natsuka, S. Toward robust N-glycomics of various tissue samples that may contain glycans with unknown or unexpected structures. Sci. Rep. 11, 6334. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-84668-x (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Okamatsu, M. et al. Low pathogenicity H5N2 avian influenza outbreak in Japan during the 2005–2006. Vet. Microbiol. 124, 35–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.04.025 (2007).Article PubMed Google Scholar Alexander, D. J. & Brown, I. H. History of highly pathogenic avian influenza. Rev. Sci. Tech. 28, 19–38. https://doi.org/10.20506st.28.1.1856 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kida, H. Ecology of influenza viruses in nature, birds, and humans. Glob. Environ. Res. 12, 9–14 (2008). Google Scholar Watanabe, Y., Aoki-Kinoshita, K. F., Ishihama, Y. & Okuda, S. GlycoPOST realizes FAIR principles for glycomics mass spectrometry data. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D1523–D1528. https://doi.org/10.1093ar/gkaa1012 (2021).Article PubMed Google Scholar Natsuka, S., Masuda, M., Sumiyoshi, W. & Nakakita, S. Improved method for drawing of a glycan map, and the first page of glycan atlas, which is a compilation of glycan maps for a whole organism. PLoS One 9, e102219. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0102219 (2014).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nishikaze, T. et al. Differentiation of sialyl linkage isomers by one-pot sialic acid derivatization for mass spectrometry-based glycan profiling. Anal. Chem. 89, 2353–2360. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04150 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Abe, T., Kameyama, A., Natsuka, S. & Suzuki, N. Sequential modifications of glycans by linkage-specific alkylamidation of sialic acids and permethylation. Anal. Biochem. 606, 113861. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ab.2020.113861 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Tomiya, N. & Takahashi, N. Contribution of component monosaccharides to the coordinates of neutral and sialyl pyridylaminated N-glycans on a two-dimensional sugar map. Anal. Biochem. 264, 204–210 (1998).Article CAS Google Scholar Suzuki, N., Abe, T. & Natsuka, S. Quantitative LC-MS and MS/MS analysis of sialylated glycans modified by linkage-specific alkylamidation. Anal. Biochem. 567, 117–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ab.2018.11.014 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chu, V. C. & Whittaker, G. R. Influenza virus entry and infection require host cell N-linked glycoprotein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 18153–18158. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0405172102 (2004).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McQuillan, A. M., Byrd-Leotis, L., Heimburg-Molinaro, J. & Cummings, R. D. Natural and synthetic sialylated glycan microarrays and their applications. Front. Mol. Biosci. 6, 88. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2019.00088 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gao, C. et al. Unique binding specificities of proteins toward isomeric asparagine-linked glycans. Cell Chem. Biol. 26, 535-547.e534. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.01.002 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kuchipudi, S. V. et al. Differences in influenza virus receptors in chickens and ducks: Implications for interspecies transmission. J. Mol. Genet. Med. 3, 143–151. https://doi.org/10.4172/1747-0862.1000026 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Walther, T. et al. Glycomic analysis of human respiratory tract tissues and correlation with influenza virus infection. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003223. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1003223 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kuraya, N. & Hase, S. Release of O-linked sugar chains from glycoproteins with anhydrous hydrazine and pyridylamination of the sugar chains with improved reaction conditions. J. Biochem. 112, 122–126 (1992).Article CAS Google Scholar Morimoto, K. et al. Blood group P1 antigen-bearing glycoproteins are functional but less efficient receptors of Shiga toxin than conventional glycolipid-based receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 295, 9490–9501. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.013926 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Varki, A. et al. Symbol nomenclature for graphical representations of glycans. Glycobiology 25, 1323–1324. https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwv091 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe would like to express gratitude to Dr. Masatoshi Okamatsu for giving us the opportunity to start this research. We thank Dr. Toshie Sugiyama for the kind gift of chicken tissues. For use of CFG data, we acknowledge the Protein-Glycan Interaction Resource of the CFG and the National Center for Functional Glycomics (NCFG) at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School (supporting grants NIH P41 GM103694 and NIH R24 GM137763). This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan (25440014, 20K06520 to NS), and by the Sasaki Foundation for the Environment and Technology (to NS).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsGraduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata University, 8050 Ikarashi-nino-cho, Nishi-ku, Niigata, 950-2181, JapanNoriko Suzuki, Tatsuya Abe & Shunji NatsukaFaculty of Science, Niigata University, 8050 Ikarashi-nino-cho, Nishi-ku, Niigata, 950-2181, JapanShunji NatsukaAuthorsNoriko SuzukiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTatsuya AbeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShunji NatsukaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsN.S. and T.A. conceived and designed the experiments; S.N. provided resources; T.A. acquired the data; N.S. and T.A. analyzed and interpreted the data; and N.S. wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Noriko Suzuki.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Figures.Supplementary Information.Supplementary Table S1.Supplementary Table S2.Supplementary Table S3.Supplementary Table S4.Supplementary Table S5.Supplementary Table S6.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleSuzuki, N., Abe, T. & Natsuka, S. Structural analysis of N-glycans in chicken trachea and lung reveals potential receptors of chicken influenza viruses. Sci Rep 12, 2081 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-05961-xDownload citationReceived: 27 March 2021Accepted: 22 December 2021Published: 08 February 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-05961-xShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingRevealing the hidden value of vaccines Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in ADVERTISEMENT FEATURE Advertiser retains sole responsibility for the content of this article Revealing the hidden value of vaccines Vaccines are one of the most successful public health measures ever designed. Understanding their full value could steer investment in the right direction. Produced by Twitter Facebook Email Investing in vaccines and vaccination generates economic benefits, in part by making it safe to go back to work.Credit: d3sign/Getty ImagesAs the COVID-19 pandemic enters its third year and the Omicron variant looms, the consequences of inequitable global vaccine distribution and delivery weigh heavily. “It’s a disturbing reflection on the state of the world when the availability of potentially life-saving vaccines is divided between those that have a lot of it and those that don’t even have a drop,” says Muhammad Pate, a Harvard University public health expert, and former Global Director for Health, Nutrition, and Population at the World Bank.In many lower- and middle-income countries, vaccine stocks are low, placing the jab out of reach for many eager to get it. In higher-income nations with ample vaccine supplies, vaccine hesitancy has set in. Cheryl Cohen, an epidemiologist at the University of the Witwatersrand in South Africa, notes that South Africa now has ready access to COVID-19 shots, but as of late November, only 34% adults were fully vaccinated. “The challenge now is much more hesitancy than availability,” she says.While there are many explanations for these situations, one is often overlooked: the concept of value. Whether for COVID-19 vaccines, or influenza, measles, and other illnesses, the global public health community has not agreed on a standard by which to value the total economic and social benefit of vaccines. Mark Jit, an epidemiologist at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, says that with COVID-19, “It's very clear that the benefits of a vaccine are not purely health. They allow countries to relax some of these measures that have a big impact on the economy, but also on people's ability to live normal lives.”Jit and other researchers worldwide are working to develop metrics that take into account the broader socioeconomic, regional and global benefits of vaccination. Given that most policy decisions involve some form of cost-benefit analysis, revaluing vaccines could raise their priority in the global public health agenda, and thus boost their development, distribution and uptake worldwide.Not just a matter of life and deathThe impact of infectious diseases are most commonly measured by deaths and hospitalizations, and the perceived success of a vaccine is largely dependent on how it reduces those numbers. But deaths and hospitalizations alone do not capture the full burden of an infectious disease. Non-lethal infections carry costly consequences as well. In South Africa, Cohen notes, roughly 20% of the population develops symptomatic flu every season. “With all of those mild infections, there is absenteeism from work and school, and there are people who are unemployed, but taken away from whatever activity they might be doing to contribute to the family well-being,” she says.By overlooking the combined consequences of milder cases, standard measures can understate the real impact of a disease—and the value of a vaccine to mitigate it. That, in turn, can influence decisions about which vaccines to invest in, and how and where to deploy them.Quantifying the broader impacts of vaccination can be challenging, but Maddalena Ferranna at Harvard School of Public Health sees clear indicators of benefit. “Typically, vaccinated children have better educational attainment; they attend school more frequently, and they perform better on tests,” she says. Caring for sick children, she adds, also puts a burden on families, including missed work and the potential for parents to get sick themselves.Beyond individual households, vaccinated adults can remain active in the workforce, and contribute to broader herd immunity for those who have not received shots. COVID-19 has demonstrated the economic and social impact of a pandemic and the countermeasures meant to combat it. It has caused business closures and unemployment, economic stagnation in certain nations, decreases in collective mental health, and global supply chain disruption—little of which is quantified accurately with standard measures.With better metrics, better decisionsSeveral research groups are now looking into alternative metrics that capture the full value of vaccines. Ferranna and her collaborator David Bloom, for example, are employing a methodology called social welfare analysis. “The first step is to determine the impact of vaccination on individual well-being,” says Ferranna; the researchers then pool individual results to produce “an aggregate measure of how vaccination improves the overall well-being of a society.”This entails assigning monetary value to quantitative and qualitative indicators relating to health, education, work productivity, and overall quality of life. Such an approach could help policymakers and funders to draw direct comparisons between a given vaccine and other public health measures or interventions as well as define clearer value proposition for new vaccine research.While the notion of a broader impacts assessment is decades old, Ferranna notes that “this type of approach hasn't yet taken off from a policy-making perspective.” Until that happens, policy decisions are likely to underestimate the potential benefits of vaccines. To that end, the WHO has recently proposed a framework for such assessments designed to focus on the agenda of all stakeholders, including low- and middle-income countries, rather than emphasize the return on investment for donors, as has been done in the past. “It’s proposing a way of looking at vaccines which isn’t purely reducing everything to a number, but instead takes a multifaceted look at the different benefits of the vaccine and how we assign value to that,” Jit says.Lacking an understanding of the full value of vaccines can lead to missed opportunities to optimally invest in health and economic development. Pate points to funding delays that impeded the COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access (COVAX) facility, a public-private partnership whose mission is to support worldwide vaccine manufacturing and distribution. Wealthier nations delayed for more than eight months before investing the initial $6 billion needed to begin to secure and deliver vaccines to low- and middle-income countries.The rapid spread of the Omicron variant, like Delta before it, shows that until the benefits of vaccines are extended to all, no individual nation will fully benefit from vaccination. In the face of this global threat and future ones, Pate says he hopes that funders will recognize vaccines’ profound socioeconomic impact and invest accordingly. “When you’re financing a global public good, it’s for everyone—not necessarily tied to each country,” he says. To learn more about vaccine valuation, check out this guide from the Value of Vaccination Research Network. To understand the ongoing effort to develop a universal influenza vaccine, explore the Sabin Vaccine Institute’s Influenzer Initiative. The nonprofit Sabin Vaccine Institute is committed to extending the full benefits of vaccines to all people by advancing vaccine access, uptake and innovative R&D. Sabin does not develop or manufacture influenza vaccines. Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Research Custom nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedYou are being redirected... Javascript is required. Please enable javascript before you are allowed to see this page.