Flu and Older Adults | National Institute on Aging Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) National Institutes of Health (NIH) The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Menu Search Search Health Information A-Z Health Topics Alzheimer’s & Dementia Brain Health Caregiving End of Life Exercise and Physical Activity Healthy Eating Español Get Print Publications Infographics Resources for Health Care Professionals Research & Funding All Research & Funding Blog - Inside NIA Clinical Trials Training & Career Development Grants & Funding Health Disparities Research Research Resources Labs at NIA Division of Aging Biology Division of Behavioral and Social Research Division of Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Division of Neuroscience Division of Extramural Activities Quick Links NIA-Specific Funding Policies Scientific Review Small Business Program Training Programs to Enhance Diversity Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias Funding Announcements Data Sharing Resources for Researchers News & Events All News & Events News Releases Announcements Events Research Highlights Multimedia Quick Links Media Inquiries Alzheimer’s & Related Dementias Press Kit About NIA All About NIA Budget & Testimony Strategic Directions National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA) Advances in Aging and Alzheimer's Research Scientific Workforce Diversity Staff Directory Careers Student Resources Connect with NIA Contact NIA Español Search Search Home Health Topics A-Z Flu Flu and Older Adults Share: Print page Facebook share Linkedin share X social media share A-Z Health Topics Alzheimer’s and Dementia Brain Health Caregiving Clinical Trials and Studies Exercise and Physical Activity Healthy Eating Flu and Older Adults EspañolEach year, millions of people suffer from seasonal influenza, which is often called the flu. Flu is a respiratory illness caused by viruses that infect the nose, throat, and sometimes the lungs.Flu is a mild illness for some people. But for others, including older adults and those with chronic (long-lasting) health conditions, the flu can be very serious and even life-threatening. Getting a flu vaccine every year can help prevent the flu. The vaccine is safe, effective, and available for little to no cost to you.How serious is the flu?Most people who get the flu feel better after a few days to two weeks. However, the flu can make you seriously ill. Some people develop other health issues, called complications, because of the flu. Complications can be mild, such as a sinus or ear infection, or more serious, like pneumonia.Anyone can get sick from the flu, but some people are more likely to have complications. You are more at risk for flu and its complications if you:Are age 65 or olderHave certain medical conditions such as asthma, diabetes, or chronic kidney diseaseHave heart disease or have had a strokeLive in a nursing home or other long-term care facilityPregnant people and children younger than five years old are also more likely to get very sick from the flu. Flu vaccination is especially important for people in these higher-risk groups. Learn more about people at increased risk for flu and its complications.Why is the flu more dangerous for older adults?The flu is more dangerous for older adults for a few reasons. One reason is that the immune system — which helps your body fight infections — weakens as you age. For example, because your body is busy fighting off the flu, you might pick up a secondary infection such as pneumonia. A second reason is that older adults are also more likely to have other health conditions, like diabetes, that increase their risk for complications from the flu.The good news is the flu vaccine reduces your risk of getting the flu and of getting seriously ill if you do get sick with the flu. Flu vaccination is especially helpful for people with chronic health conditions. For example, it has been linked to lower rates of heart problems (cardiac events) among people with heart disease and fewer hospitalizations among people who have chronic lung disease or diabetes. Learn more about the benefits of flu vaccination.How does the flu spread?The flu is contagious, which means it spreads from person to person. It mostly spreads through droplets in the air when people with flu cough, sneeze, or talk. It can spread from up to six feet away. Although it isn't as common, the flu can also spread from surfaces — for example, if you touch something the virus is on and then touch your nose, mouth, or eyes.It's possible to spread the flu before you feel sick and when you have symptoms. Typically, people with the flu can spread it a day before, and up to a week after feeling sick. Young children and people with weakened immune systems may be able to spread the flu for even longer. If you or someone you know is sick with the flu, take steps to help prevent spreading the diseaseIs it the flu, a cold, or COVID-19?The common cold, flu, and COVID-19 are respiratory illnesses caused by different viruses. They can all cause similar symptoms. If you have symptoms, a health care provider can determine the cause of your illness and help you take steps to feel better.A cold is often milder than the flu. The flu and COVID-19 have similar symptoms, but COVID-19 spreads more easily and symptoms tend to be more severe. It's also more common to have a change in your sense of smell or taste with COVID-19.People with the flu can have fever, chills, dry cough, general aches and pains, and a headache. They feel very tired. Sore throat, sneezing, stuffy nose, or stomach problems are less common. What some people call "stomach flu" is not influenza. Learn more about the differences between the flu and a cold and flu and COVID-19. Recognizing a fever in older adults Average normal body temperatures in older adults are slightly lower than in younger adults. So when an older adult is sick, their fever temperatures may also be lower. According to the CDC, the following temperatures in older adults may be signs of an infection, such as COVID-19 or the flu:A single temperature reading higher than 100°F (37.8°C)Multiple temperature readings above 99°F (37.2°C)A rise in temperature greater than 2°F (1.1°C) above the person’s normal body temperatureIf you are concerned that you may have a fever, talk with a health care provider to find out what steps you can take to feel better. Common symptoms of a cold, the flu, and COVID-19The chart below shows common symptoms of the three illnesses. Not everyone will have these symptoms. Your symptoms may be more or less severe, or you may only have a few. If you feel sick, stay home and call a health care provider. How can you prevent the flu?The most effective way to prevent the flu is to get a flu vaccine every year. Everyone 6 months and older should get a flu vaccine. It makes it less likely that you will get the flu. It also reduces your chances of being hospitalized or dying if you do get sick with the flu.In addition to getting your flu vaccine, you can help stop the spread of flu by:Washing your handsCovering your mouth when you cough or sneezeAvoiding touching your eyes, nose, or mouthStaying home when you are sickAvoiding close contact with people who are sickCleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces at home, work, or schoolWho should get a flu vaccine and which one should you choose?You can get the flu at any time of year, but it's most common in the fall and winter. It usually starts to spread in October and peaks between December and February. That's why this time is called the flu season.It takes at least two weeks for your flu vaccine to start working, so try to get vaccinated by the end of October. However, getting vaccinated after October can still help protect you from the flu. Because older adults may lose protection from a flu vaccine more quickly, try to avoid getting vaccinated too early (before September).There are flu vaccines designed specifically for older adults. The CDC recommends that people age 65 and older receive a higher-dose flu vaccine or an adjuvanted flu vaccine (one with an additional ingredient called an adjuvant that helps create a stronger immune response). These vaccines are potentially more effective than the standard flu vaccine for people in this age group. Talk with a health care provider or pharmacist about which vaccine is best for you.Where can you get a flu vaccine?You can get your flu vaccine at a doctor's office or from your local health department. Many grocery stores, drug stores, and pharmacies also offer flu vaccines. Visit Vaccines.gov to find a location near you.Why do you need a flu vaccine every year?You need a flu vaccine every year for two reasons. First, flu viruses change and the flu vaccine is updated each year to target the flu viruses that are anticipated to spread that year. Second, the protection you get from a flu vaccine lessens with time, especially in older adults. Getting your flu vaccine every fall gives you the best protection from that year's flu viruses.What are the side effects of flu vaccines?The flu vaccine is safe and cannot give you the flu. Most people have no problems after getting a flu vaccine.When side effects occur, they are generally mild and go away on their own. The most common side effects are soreness, redness, or swelling at the site where you got the shot. Some people also get a headache, fever, nausea, or muscle aches. These side effects start shortly after getting the vaccine and can last up to two days. They typically do not get in the way of daily activities.If you have allergies, talk with a health care provider about your options for flu vaccines. Even people with mild egg allergies can safely get most flu vaccines. Egg-free flu vaccines are also available. You should not get vaccinated if you have had a severe allergic reaction to the flu vaccine in the past.How much does getting a flu vaccine cost?Most people can get a flu vaccine for little to no out-of-pocket cost. Medicare and most private health insurance plans will cover the cost of your flu vaccine. However, some insurance plans require that you receive your vaccine at a specific location. Check with your insurance company. If you do not have health insurance, contact your local or state health department.What can you do if you get the flu?If you get the flu, there are steps you can take to feel better. Act fast! First, talk with a health care provider. The flu and COVID-19 have similar symptoms, so you may need to get tested for an accurate diagnosis. This will also help determine which medications might make you feel better.There are prescription drugs, called antivirals, that are used to treat people with the flu. If you take them within 48 hours after flu symptoms begin, these drugs can make you feel better more quickly. Antivirals can also help reduce your risk of complications from flu. Antibiotics do not help you recover from the flu. However, they are sometimes prescribed to treat a secondary infection if it is caused by bacteria. Bacteria are a different type of germ than viruses.If you are sick, rest and drink plenty of fluids like juice and water, but not alcohol. Over-the-counter medicines, such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen, can bring down your fever and might help with the aches and pains.It is important not to smoke if you are sick with the flu. It is a respiratory illness that can infect your lungs as well as your nasal passages. These same areas are also affected by smoking.Monitor your symptoms and talk with a health care provider if you start feeling worse. For example, contact your provider right away if you:Have shortness of breath or difficulty breathingFeel weak, dizzy, or confusedDevelop ongoing pain or pressure in the chest or abdomenHave a fever or cough that goes away and then comes back, which may be a sign of a secondary infectionExperience worsening of other chronic health problems, such as asthma or heart diseaseDevelop any other symptoms that worry youYou may also be interested inLearning more about vaccinations and older adultsViewing an infographic on common symptoms of a cold, the flu, and COVID-19Reading about common medical problems in people with Alzheimer's disease Sign up for e-alerts about healthy aging *Email Address For more information about the flu Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 800-232-4636 888-232-6348 (TTY) cdcinfo@cdc.gov www.cdc.gov U.S. Food and Drug Administration 888-463-6332 druginfo@fda.hhs.gov www.fda.gov American Lung Association 800-586-4872 info@lung.org www.lung.org National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 866-284-4107 800-877-8339 (TTY) ocpostoffice@niaid.nih.gov www.niaid.nih.gov Vaccines.gov 800-232-0233 888-720-7489 (TTY) www.vaccines.gov This content is provided by the NIH National Institute on Aging (NIA). NIA scientists and other experts review this content to ensure it is accurate and up to date. Content reviewed: June 14, 2022 Return to top Quick links About NIA A-Z health topics Clinical trials Careers at NIA Research divisions & contacts Staff directory Workforce diversity NIA Policies and Notices Contact NIA niaic@nia.nih.gov 800-222-2225 Contact us Follow us Facebook X Linkedin YouTube Newsletters Sign up to receive updates and resources delivered to your inbox. Sign up nia.nih.gov An official website of the National Institutes of Health Accessibility support FOIA requests No FEAR Act data Office of the Inspector General Performance reports Vulnerability disclosure policy Privacy Policy USA.govInfluenza A virus undergoes compartmentalized replication in vivo dominated by stochastic bottlenecks | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Influenza A virus undergoes compartmentalized replication in vivo dominated by stochastic bottlenecks Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 14 June 2022 Influenza A virus undergoes compartmentalized replication in vivo dominated by stochastic bottlenecks Katherine A. Amato1, Luis A. Haddock III ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8916-56932, Katarina M. Braun ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3612-93192, Victoria Meliopoulos ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1442-91773, Brandi Livingston3, Rebekah Honce ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5633-91163, Grace A. Schaack1, Emma Boehm2, Christina A. Higgins ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9865-148X1, Gabrielle L. Barry2, Katia Koelle ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0254-61414, Stacey Schultz-Cherry ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2021-727X3, Thomas C. Friedrich ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9831-68952,5 & …Andrew Mehle ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6060-43301 Show authors Nature Communications volume 13, Article number: 3416 (2022) Cite this article 7707 Accesses 24 Citations 45 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusViral evolution AbstractTransmission of influenza A viruses (IAV) between hosts is subject to numerous physical and biological barriers that impose genetic bottlenecks, constraining viral diversity and adaptation. The bottlenecks within hosts and their potential impacts on evolutionary pathways taken during infection are poorly understood. To address this, we created highly diverse IAV libraries bearing molecular barcodes on two gene segments, enabling high-resolution tracking and quantification of unique virus lineages within hosts. Here we show that IAV infection in lungs is characterized by multiple within-host bottlenecks that result in “islands” of infection in lung lobes, each with genetically distinct populations. We perform site-specific inoculation of barcoded IAV in the upper respiratory tract of ferrets and track viral diversity as infection spreads to the trachea and lungs. We detect extensive compartmentalization of discrete populations within lung lobes. Bottleneck events and localized replication stochastically sample individual viruses from the upper respiratory tract or the trachea that become the dominant genotype in a particular lobe. These populations are shaped strongly by founder effects, with limited evidence for positive selection. The segregated sites of replication highlight the jackpot-style events that contribute to within-host influenza virus evolution and may account for low rates of intrahost adaptation. Similar content being viewed by others Influenza A virus reassortment in mammals gives rise to genetically distinct within-host subpopulations Article Open access 11 November 2022 Archival influenza virus genomes from Europe reveal genomic variability during the 1918 pandemic Article Open access 10 May 2022 Collective interactions augment influenza A virus replication in a host-dependent manner Article 06 July 2020 IntroductionThe constant evolution of influenza viruses results in recurring seasonal epidemics and has the potential to initiate pandemics in the human population. Viral evolution occurs on multiple scales. Influenza A virus evolves rapidly on the global scale, where population-level immunity positively selects new antigenic variants, necessitating frequent reformulation of the seasonal influenza vaccine1,2,3. Yet, on smaller scales, variants with a predicted fitness advantage rarely rise to high frequency within an acutely infected host or transmit to a recipient, even in the face of vaccine-induced immunity4,5,6,7. Within-host variation is low and genetic drift plays a large role8. The level at which selection acts is currently unclear. To reconcile these observations, it is currently thought that positive selection drives more deterministic processes at the global scale while genetic drift dominates within hosts and during local transmission9.Highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza viruses repeatedly spill over into humans and this process can be used as an example to highlight the importance of evolutionary constraints. As few as five amino acid changes are sufficient to adapt these viruses for transmission in mammals, with some of these variants already circulating in avian hosts10,11,12. Despite this relatively modest genetic barrier, there has been no sustained person-to-person transmission. This suggests additional evolutionary processes may raise the barrier to human adaptation by reducing the likelihood that the correct combination of mutations can arise in the correct context or without deleterious mutations over the course of a typical acute infection. Influenza virus infection occurs in heterogeneous cell populations within complex anatomical structures throughout the respiratory tract13. Initial sites of infection are influenced by the tissue-specific distribution of sialic acid receptors and their topology. Avian-origin viruses like highly pathogenic H5N1 strains utilize α2,3-sialic acids for attachment and entry, which are enriched in the lower respiratory tract14,15,16. However, recent evidence shows that viruses in the upper respiratory tract, specifically those replicating in the soft palate or nasal epithelial cells, are the ones that contribute most to the population that is transmitted in animal models17,18,19. Therefore, viruses spilling over from avian hosts must not only acquire mammalian-specific adaptive changes but also migrate within the host to sites of transmission prior to initiating person-to-person spread.Anatomical structures within the respiratory tract may enhance viral evolution and replication by creating local sites with a high multiplicity of infections that increase complementation20. Conversely, these same structures may also restrain evolution by creating distinct compartments of replication that are physically separated, precluding reassortment21. How viral movement in the respiratory tract and potential compartmentalization affect within-host evolution is poorly understood. A clearly defined population structure is required to accurately model and predict influenza virus intrahost evolution and to elucidate how within-host processes link with evolution on the global scale. Although error-prone genome replication generates influenza A viruses with distinct genotypes, the relatively low levels of naturally occurring variation within hosts do not provide sufficient information for fine-grained analysis of population dynamics.In this work, we overcome this limitation by introducing a neutral barcode of 10 random nucleotides into two segments of the influenza virus genome and creating rich viral populations with ~0.6–3 × 105 uniquely quantifiable members. Using these barcoded viral populations, we capture soft selective sweeps in cell culture and show adaptive changes arose independently multiple times, yet only one lineage became dominant. Infection in ferrets reveals a high degree of compartmentalization, as the virus migrated from the upper respiratory tract to the lung. Bottlenecks between sites coupled with heterogeneous replication success in the lobes of the lung lead to stochastic sampling of individual viruses from the upper respiratory tract or the trachea that became the dominant lineage in lung lobes, while there is no evidence of positive selection. Thus, viruses infecting the lung do not constitute a large homogeneously mixed population, but rather multiple isolated populations that each undergo bottlenecking events that can severely constrain population diversity and the potential for selection of fit variants.ResultsLarge-scale incorporation of barcodes avoids artificial bottlenecking of variantsNaturally occurring genetic diversity in influenza virus populations is poorly suited for high-resolution characterization of population-level dynamics and cannot accurately enumerate the full spectrum of individual virions present. Many virions will not have genetically unique markers and genetic mutations may affect the fitness of the virus, biasing the representation of specific variants in the population and precluding their use as a neutral marker. To better resolve and quantify the dynamics of the IAV population, we introduced dual molecular barcodes into the genome of the influenza virus isolate A/California/07/2009 (H1N1; CA07) to create individual viruses that are uniquely recognizable and quantifiable via deep sequencing (Fig. 1a). Barcodes of 10 randomized nucleotides were introduced onto the HA and PA segments that were subsequently used for high-efficiency virus rescue (Fig. 1b). HA is under selective pressure as the viral attachment protein and the principal target of neutralizing antibodies. We might therefore expect barcodes embedded in HA to increase or decrease in frequency as a result of selection on HA that allows hitchhiking of the linked barcode. Conversely, PA is subject to less intense selection pressure, and barcodes on this segment may be expected to better represent the total population size. For both HA and PA, barcodes were encoded between the ORF and the UTR. Packaging and bundling signals were duplicated downstream of the barcode to ensure proper gene replication and virion formation22,23,24. This strategy parallels prior work where small-scale barcoded libraries were successfully used to quantify transmission bottlenecks17. The utility of the system was further increased by using the PA reporter construct that co-transcriptionally expresses Nanoluciferase (PASTN)22. Finally, the HA segment encodes an additional “registration mark,” six nucleotides creating either NheI or PstI restriction sites, that allows us to index and identify separate libraries of HA variants.Fig. 1: Creation of molecularly barcoded influenza A virus populations.a Molecular barcodes containing 10 randomized nucleotides were encoded downstream of the open reading frame in the PA and HA genes, shown as cRNAs. A registration mark was also added to HA to distinguish unique barcode libraries. Sequences were repeated downstream of the barcode to maintain contiguous packaging signals required for replication, and silent mutations were introduced into the open reading frame to avoid direct repeats. b Experimental overview where randomized barcodes were cloned into reverse genetics vectors followed by large-scale, parallel virus rescues to ensure unbiased barcode distribution. c Optimized rescue plasmids enhance viral yield. Rescue efficiency was determined by measuring viral titers at the indicated times post-transfection with the standard 8-plasmid system, a consolidated 3-plasmid system, or the 3-plasmid system plus a vector expressing TMPRSS2. (data presented as the mean of n = 3 ± sd. ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc, *p < 0.05 relative to 8-plasmid rescue, #p < 0.05 relative to three-plasmid system.) Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageThe limited efficiency of virus rescue can introduce artificial bottlenecks25. To increase efficiency and recover a larger, more diverse barcode population, we reduced the number of individual plasmids needed for virus rescue26. We combined the 6 non-barcoded segments of CA07 IAV onto a single plasmid, reducing the entire reverse genetics system from 8 to 3 plasmids (Fig. 1c). Rescue titers of the 3-plasmid system increased >200-fold compared to the 8-plasmid system. Titers were further increased by co-expressing transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) during virus rescue, which cleaves and activates HA. We performed 120 parallel virus rescues, pooled the resultant supernatants, and passaged them at high representation to ensure unbiased barcode distribution (Fig. 1b). NheI and PstI registration marked libraries were prepared independently.Viral barcodes reveal selective sweeps in vitroDeep sequencing revealed ~180,000 unique PA barcodes and over 238,000 HA barcodes in each of our original virus libraries (Fig. 2a). Given that each library has an invariant registration mark, we could measure the fidelity of the quantification pipeline by assessing the number of reads that do not match the predicted registration mark sequence. Over 99% of mapped reads perfectly matched the appropriate registration marks on HA, with the majority of those that did not match differing by a single nucleotide from the intended registration mark, indicating the neutrality of the registration mark sequence and overall high fidelity of our sequencing pipeline. Sequencing errors may create the appearance of unique barcodes, artificially inflating our diversity metrics. To minimize this possibility, we performed clustering on aligned sequences that created networks connecting a parental barcode with mutational derivatives27. All reads in the cluster were then assigned to the parental barcode before quantitation.Fig. 2: Single viruses seed selective sweeps in HA.a Creation of two dual-barcode libraries with distinct registration marks and uniquely addressable members. b Frequency of each lineage as a fraction of total population size. Colors indicate unique barcode identities. c Whole-genome sequencing identifies adaptive variants in HA. Individual single nucleotide variant (SNV) frequencies are indicated at each nucleotide position in a concatenated IAV genome for each library. d Long-read sequencing reveals selective sweeps by linking adaptive mutants in HA to single dominant barcodes. The frequencies of mutations coding for the indicated change that is linked to the dominant barcode are shown for both libraries (left). The actual frequency of K > Q and K > stop mutants versus the contribution from long-read sequencing errors to their appearance is unknown. The frequencies of all barcodes linked to the adaptive glutamic acid variant are indicated (right), with the dominant barcode in each library colored as in b. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageViral populations were characterized by: richness, the total number of unique lineages present; Shannon’s diversity and the Gini-Simpson index, metrics that consider both the presence and relative abundance of a lineage; and, evenness, a parameter that compares the frequencies of all lineages in the population to that of a theoretically evenly distributed population28,29,30. Shannon’s diversity is more influenced by richness where very rare lineages have large effects, whereas the Gini-Simpson gives more weight to dominant lineages and is thus influenced more by evenness31. To account for the possibility that the underlying structure and size of our populations may bias their diversity assessments, we report both. Barcode enumeration for viruses recovered from the transfected cell supernatant (i.e., passage 0, P0) revealed rich and highly diverse populations with evenly distributed lineages (Fig. 2a, b). However, a single passage at an MOI ~0.01 with a total of ~106 virions to create amplified P1 stocks resulted in highly skewed populations in which individual lineages dominated the population, evidenced by dramatic drops in Shannon’s diversity and evenness (Fig. 2b). The dominant barcodes in each library represented 64–77% of the population. Neither of these barcodes was dramatically over-represented in the plasmid or P0 stocks. In fact, the most abundant lineages in the P0 rescue stocks did not become the most prevalent in our amplified stocks.Changes in population composition can occur through drift or selection. We passaged the virus at a large effective population size, minimizing the propensity for drift and raising the possibility that the expanding lineages became dominant because they had acquired a selective advantage. Whole-genome sequencing of the P1 stocks identified the single nucleotide variants (SNVs) A540G (numbering based on cRNA) in almost 50% of reads from NheI registration mark viruses and A543G in almost 70% of reads from PstI marked viruses (Fig. 2c), mirroring the abundance of the dominant barcode. These mutations code for HA K153E and K154E (H1 numbering), respectively. Importantly, these changes in HA had previously been identified as adaptations that provide a growth advantage to CA07 in cell culture32. Long-read sequencing showed that the dominant barcode was linked to the adaptive mutations (Fig. 2d, left). 62–75% of reads containing the dominant barcode also encoded the adaptive mutation. Similarly, the adaptive mutation was primarily linked to the dominant barcode (Fig. 2d, right). However, up to 24% of reads encoding these adaptive variants were associated with different very-low-frequency viral lineages. These data are consistent with a soft selective sweep where HA A540G or A543G arose on multiple genetic backgrounds, even though only one lineage ultimately became the most abundant, possibly suggesting clonal interference. These observations demonstrate that our barcoded viruses capture lineage dynamics and selective processes at extremely high resolution.Pre-adaptation creates large and diverse viral librariesTo create diverse libraries without tissue-culture-induced skewing, we made new libraries on a “pre-adapted” HA K153E background. The libraries contained at least 57,000 unique members with high diversity and evenness (Fig. 3a, b). Multicycle growth curves of HA K153E NheI- or PstI-marked barcoded viruses were indistinguishable (Fig. 3c). Insertion of the barcode cassette and the PA reporter gene slightly reduces titers when compared to HA K153E alone, consistent with prior results22,33. The vast majority of lineages were present at low frequency, and no single lineage in our amplified stocks was present at a frequency above 0.6% for HA, or above 1.2% for PA barcodes (Fig. 3d). We utilized the HA-NheI stock for extensive quality control of our barcode enumeration pipeline. Libraries were prepared from four independent RNA extractions and sequenced. Lineage frequencies from the four replicates showed a strong correlation (Supp. Fig. 1A). There was a high degree of overlap between replicate runs, with sequences present in all four replicates accounting for over 93% of all read counts (Supp. Fig. 1B). Yet, when read counts for identical sequences were collapsed to their corresponding barcode, only ~37% of barcodes were identified in all replicate runs (Supp. Fig. 1C). This apparent discrepancy is due to variable detection of extremely low-frequency lineages. The frequency of an individual lineage was correlated with the number of replicates in which it was detected (Supp. Fig. 1D). Rarefaction-extrapolation curves for each replicate overlapped, indicating reproducible sampling (Supp. Fig. 1E). However, they also suggest that our sampling has not reached saturation and that some low-frequency lineages may not be detected. Further, when compared to the simulated sampling of a population with evenly distributed barcodes, our replicates diverged from the ideal population. This is consistent with the presence of extremely low-frequency lineages. These data highlight the complexity of our viral populations, our ability to reliably detect individual members, and the inherent limitations of this approach. Replicate sequencing of the PA barcode and the HA-PstI stock produced similarly well-correlated results (Supp. Figs. 1F, 2A–C). No additional SNVs were detected at high frequency in our libraries, while K153E remained fixed (Fig. 3e).Fig. 3: Generation of large and evenly distributed dual-barcoded virus libraries.a, b Properties of the A/CA/07/2009 HA-K153E PASTN virus libraries. Data are from a single sequencing replicate; see Supplemental Figs. 1, 2 for additional analyses. c Multistep growth curves of dual-barcoded PASTN libraries compared to the parental strain A/CA/07/2009 HA-K153E. Viral titer was measured by plaque assay (mean of n = 3 ± sd, two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc, *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 compared to the parental). d Frequency distribution of unique barcodes on HA and PA binned in 0.1% increments. e Whole-genome sequencing was performed on amplified viral stocks and SNV frequencies are indicated at each nucleotide position for each library. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageRich and diverse populations replicate in miceThe dual barcoded virus libraries provide a key opportunity to quantify population dynamics in vivo. Mice are frequent models for influenza virus replication, pathogenesis, and immune response34. Mice were inoculated with the CA07 PASTN-barcoded virus libraries containing either barcoded HA-K153E populations or a non-barcoded HA-K153E control. Weight loss was similar for all conditions (Fig. 4a), and viral titers in the lungs were not significantly different at either 3 or 6 dpi (Fig. 4b). Thus, the introduction of barcodes onto HA does not compromise replication in vivo.Fig. 4: Replication of diverse virus populations in mice.a Mice were inoculated with 105 TCIDGlo50 of virus-containing barcoded PASTN with either HA-K153E or barcoded variants and body weights were measured daily. Half of the mice were killed at 3 dpi. Data presented as mean ± sd for n = 6 1–3 dpi, and n = 3 for 4–6 dpi. b Viral titers in mouse lungs harvested at 3 and 6 dpi were determined by plaque assay (left) or TCIDGlo50/mL (right). Data presented as the mean of n = 3 ± sd and analyzed by one-way ANOVA. n.s. = not significant. c Barcodes in the viral stock and mouse lungs were quantified and the frequency of clustered HA barcodes as a fraction of total population size is indicated. Each color in a series represents an individual barcode cluster. A total number of unique barcode clusters per sample and the most abundant barcode with its frequency is listed on right. d Shannon’s diversity index (left) and Gini–Simpson index (right) for viral populations in the stock and mouse lungs (mean of n = 3 ± sd). e Venn diagrams displaying the number of unique and shared lineages within each mouse for NheI and PstI libraries. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageDeep sequencing of mouse lung homogenates revealed that the majority of mice harbored diverse viral lineages (Fig. 4c, d). Mouse infections were characterized by a high richness, where approximately one-third of lineages present in the stock were detected in the lungs at 3 dpi. The frequency of lineages in the NheI-marked stock was moderately predictive of their abundance in the mouse at 3 dpi (Pearson’s R > 0.57) (Supp. Fig. 3A). For example, the most abundant lineage in the HA-NheI stock was also the most abundant lineage in two mice at 3 dpi (Fig. 4c, Supp. Fig. 3A). However, there are notable exceptions in which low-frequency lineages in the stock rose to high relative abundance in the mouse (Supp. Fig. 3A). In addition, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of our barcodes are derived from residual viruses from the inoculum that did not initiate a productive infection. Mice infected with PstI-marked libraries showed less correlation between the inoculum and lungs at 3dpi (Supp. Fig. 3A). For all viral libraries, the titers decreased from 3 to 6 dpi, as did richness and overall diversity (Fig. 4c, d). In an extreme example, a single lineage in mouse 11 rose to over 40% prevalence at 6 dpi (Fig. 4C, Supp. Fig. 3B). The correlation between lineage frequency in the stock and the mouse lung was greatly diminished at 6 dpi (Supp. Fig. 3). The lineage identities are highly heterogeneous among mice, with a small fraction shared across animals, suggesting that barcodes themselves are not under selection in vivo (Fig. 4e). Together, these data show virus populations replicating in mice approximate the diversity present in the inoculum, as might be expected from a high-dose challenge. Within-host richness decreases as the infection are resolved, with lineages lost as the overall population size decreases.Seeding and localized replication dynamics result in the compartmentalization of viral lineages in the ferret lower respiratory tractFerrets are often considered the “gold standard” infection model with lung physiology, sialic acid distribution, pathogenesis, and transmission capacity that are all similar to humans35,36. We intranasally inoculated 3 ferrets with the HA-K153E dual barcoded library containing the NheI registration mark. We used a site-specific inoculation strategy in which the inoculum is retained in the upper respiratory tract without unintentional introduction into the trachea or lower respiratory tract37, allowing us to track the natural movement of the virus. Ferrets were monitored daily for signs of infection with nasal washes obtained 1, 3, and 5 dpi. Ferrets exhibited slight weight loss over the course of infection (Fig. 5a), consistent with prior work33. Similarly, we detected high viral titers in nasal washes 1 dpi that declined over time (Fig. 5b).Fig. 5: Population diversity is reduced when the influenza virus moves from the upper to the lower respiratory tract in ferrets.a Ferrets were inoculated with a site-specific intranasal dose of 105 PFU of dual-barcoded A/CA/07/2009 HA-K153E PASTN virus containing the NheI registration mark. Ferret weight was monitored daily. b Viral titer in ferret nasal washes were determined by TCIDGlo50. c Changes in frequency for HA (top) and PA (bottom) barcodes present in nasal wash samples over the course of infection. d Evenness, Shannon’s diversity index, and Gini-Simpson index for the indicated viral populations. e The richness of each tissue is indicated by the number of distinct barcodes in each sample. N.A. = not attempted. f Virus was recovered from the trachea at 5 dpi and the frequency of barcodes was determined. Distinct dominant barcodes are identified by colored asterisks. g HA barcode frequencies were compared between the nasal wash (3 dpi) and trachea (5 dpi) for ferret 34, 35, and 36. Red arrowheads highlight dominant barcodes with frequency > 30%. R = Pearson’s correlation coefficient. Note that barcodes unique to the nasal wash or trachea are not plotted here. h Virus was recovered from lung lobes 5 dpi and the frequency of barcodes was determined. Lung lobes: upper left (UL), lower left (LL), upper right (UR), middle right (MR), lower right (LR). Distinct dominant barcodes are identified by colored asterisks, matching those in g where appropriate. The limit of detection for viral titer assays is indicated by a dashed line in b. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageSequencing revealed rich and complex viral populations in the nasal washes of ferrets, consistent with a high dose inoculation in this compartment (Fig. 5c–e). Frequency trajectory plots showed heterogeneous and well-mixed viral populations undergoing little if any, selection or bottlenecks in the upper respiratory tract (Fig. 5c). This is consistent with a highly diverse population with generally even lineage distribution, reflected by high Shannon’s diversity and Gini-Simpson indices and evenness (Fig. 5d). Approximately 19,000–22,400 unique lineages were detected in each nasal wash at 1 dpi, and richness remained high over time, with at least 16,800 lineages at 3 dpi and 10,000 lineages at 5 dpi (Fig. 5e). Sequencing of the barcode on PA revealed remarkably similar lineage dynamics (Fig. 5c). The observation that frequencies of HA and PA barcodes moved in parallel is perhaps surprising given that these are unlinked genes and that influenza viruses can undergo frequent reassortment38.Intranasally inoculated viruses spread throughout the respiratory tract by 5 dpi. Low levels of infectious virus were present in the trachea of ferrets 35 and 36 (Supp. Fig. 4A), whereas deep sequencing detected IAV genetic material in all trachea samples (Fig. 5f, g). Compared to the nasal wash, population richness dropped significantly, with fewer than 1300 lineages present in any of the trachea samples. Lineage distribution differed in the trachea of each animal, ranging from a more diverse population in ferret 34 to a largely homogenous population in ferret 36, in which a single lineage accounted for 71% of the population (Fig. 5f). Because our site-specific inoculation requires virus replication in the upper respiratory tract prior to movement into the trachea or lower respiratory tract, we used lineages present in nasal washes at 3 dpi as a comparator for populations in the trachea and lungs at 5 dpi. Lineage frequency is poorly correlated between nasal washes and the trachea (Fig. 5g). Migration into the trachea is associated with a drastic reduction in richness, a poor correlation with the source, and skewed distribution of the resultant population, indicating that viral population bottlenecks between compartments and founder effects may play a role during the seeding of the trachea from the upper respiratory tract.The virus also spread to the lungs of infected animals (Fig. 5h, Supp. Fig. 4A, B). Moderate titers were detected in all five lung lobes in ferret 34, even though infectious viral titers in the trachea were below the limit of detection for this animal. Infectious virus was also detected in all lung lobes for ferret 36, but only the middle right lobe for ferret 35. Thus, while the virus must traverse the trachea to access the lungs, the presence of the virus in the trachea 5 dpi was not predictive of the extent of spread in the lungs. Moreover, populations in lung lobes had higher lineage richness than that detected in the trachea at 5 dpi; the vast majority of lineages in the lung were not detected in the trachea (Supp. Fig. 4C). This raises the possibility that population richness in the trachea at 5 dpi shrank significantly from the populations at earlier time points that may have seeded infection in the lung, or that virus can transit through the trachea to directly inoculate the lung.Lineage analysis revealed heterogeneous populations of barcodes in each of the distinct lobes (Fig. 5h). Over 25,000 lineages were detected across the five lobes in ferret 34. However, each lung lobe of ferret 34 had a different dominant barcode sequence, and when this same barcode was detected in other lung lobes its frequency varied. The only infected lung lobe of ferret 35 had very low viral titers and was dominated by a single lineage reaching ~95% abundance (Fig. 5h, Supp. Fig. 4B). Ferret 36 yielded another outcome, where the same lineage was dominant at a frequency of 35–98% in each lobe except for the upper left. Like ferret 34, the upper left lobe of ferret 36 maintained a richer and more diverse population. For all animals, individual lobes showed reduced diversity and evenness compared to the virus population in the upper respiratory tract (Fig. 5d). In the two animals in which the virus was detected in all lobes, the upper left lobe consistently had the highest richness, diversity, and evenness. These data suggest that anatomical features associated with each lobe, such as tracheal bifurcation patterns or bronchus size37, may affect patterns of virus establishment and replication. The differences in the composition of the populations in each lung lobe were determined. Bray-Curtis dissimilarity assessment revealed a high degree of compartmentalization, in which each lung behaved as a distinct anatomical “island” with a unique population composition (Fig. 6a). Four lobes in ferret 36 showed lower dissimilarity, as they were dominated by the same lineage, yet the non-dominant lineages still contributed unique populations to each lobe. Only 167 lineages were common to all lobes of ferret 34, and only 42 in ferret 36 (Fig. 6b).Fig. 6: Lung lineage diversity and population bottlenecks are dominated by stochastic pressures.a Pair-wise Bray-Curtis dissimilarity for lung lobes within single animals. b The number of barcode lineages common and unique to lung lobes are illustrated. c Whole-HA sequencing of virus in lung homogenates identified multiple iSNVs, but did not rose above the 3% threshold set for accurate estimation of iSNV frequency. d Transmission bottlenecks (Nb) from nasal wash 3 dpi to each lung lobe at 5 dpi were calculated by maximum likelihood estimation. 95% confidence intervals are shown by the lines within the dots. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageThe drastic reduction in richness and diversity between the upper respiratory tract and the lung lobes suggested populations were subject to selection or bottlenecks. HA sequencing from select lung lobes for each animal revealed that no other intrahost SNVs (iSNVs) surpassed the 3% threshold set for an accurate estimate of iSNV frequency (Fig. 6c). We, therefore, assessed the possibility that viral population bottlenecks were driving the observed reduction in richness and diversity. Note that the limited number of animals inherent in ferret experiments does not provide sufficient power to exclude a contribution of positive selection. We developed a simple multinomial model to estimate bottleneck sizes (Nb) as the virus transmits from the nasal wash at 3 dpi to lung lobes at 5 dpi (Fig. 6d). Specifically, this model estimated Nb using data on the lineages and their frequencies in the 3 dpi nasal wash and on the number of lineages observed in a focal 5 dpi lung lobe. The model yielded maximum likelihood estimates of Nb of ~66,000 (ferret 36) and ~217,000 (ferret 34) virions for the upper left lobe, and lower estimates for the other lobes where maximum likelihood estimates spanned between ~200 and ~15,000 virions (Fig. 6d). These high estimates of Nb are consistent with the detection of a relatively large number of lineages in each of the lung lobes, many of which are observed at only a very low frequency in the 3 dpi nasal wash samples. Furthermore, the larger bottleneck size between the nasal wash and the upper left lobe compared to that for the other lung lobes was consistent with higher levels of viral lineage diversity detected in the upper left lobe compared to the others. Nonetheless, the bottleneck size estimates still appeared unexpectedly large to us, given the drastic reductions in richness and diversity observed in Fig. 5d, e. We, therefore, forward-simulated the multinomial model under the estimated bottleneck sizes, plotting the expected frequencies of the lineages in the 5 dpi lung lobe samples, given their frequencies in the 3 dpi nasal wash samples. These simulations predicted a high degree of similarity between lineage frequencies in the viral populations sampled in the nasal wash and lung lobes, inconsistent with the more disparate lineage frequencies observed (Supp. Fig. 5A). To identify possible reasons for these discrepancies, we modified the multinomial model simulations to incorporate environmental noise; this type of noise would be expected if sites within individual lung lobes were heterogeneous, with some allowing for efficient viral replication while others being less conducive for replication. Simulations of this modified model, parameterized with a substantial amount of lobe heterogeneity (>700-fold replication difference between the 5% and 95% percentiles of the viral population), yielded correlations more similar to those observed between nasal wash and lung lobe lineage frequencies (Supp. Fig. 5B). These results indicate that even though many lineages appear to seed the lung lobes, once in the lobes, replication of viral lineages may be subject to large stochastic effects, reducing viral diversity and evenness.Considering the lung as a whole for ferrets 34 and 36, a substantial number of lineages were shared between the nasal wash and lung (Fig. 7a). But, this appeared to be largely driven by the rich and diverse population in the upper left lobe, as this overlap was largely lost when lobes were considered individually. Many of the dominant lineages in a lung lobe were poorly represented in the nasal wash, such as that in the upper right lobe of ferret 34 and the dominant lineage shared in 4 lobes of ferret 36 (Fig. 7b, c, Supp. Fig. 6A, C). Lineage enrichment in the lung samples compared to nasal washes revealed many lineages that were unique to nasal washes or lung lobes (Supp. Fig. 6A–C). These data show that treating the lung as a whole can lead to very different and misleading population structures, highlighting the importance of assessing each lobe individually.Fig. 7: Compartmentalized infections establish replication islands within the lung.a Overlap between barcodes in the nasal wash 3 dpi and those present in distinct lobes, or composite data for all barcodes in the lung. b–d The frequency of barcodes within the nasal wash is compared to frequencies within individual lobes for b ferret 34, c ferret 35, and d ferret 36. Red arrowheads highlight dominant barcodes with frequency >30%, which for ferret 36 is the same barcode that dominated in multiple lobes of the lung. Note that barcodes unique to the nasal wash or lung are not plotted here and can be found in Supplemental Fig. 6. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageThe same lineage dominated in four lobes of the lung for ferret 36, whereas underlying diversity and a lack of overlap in each population still suggest each lobe is seeded by distinct inoculation events (Figs. 5h, 6b, 7d). In this animal, enrichment for the dominating lineage appeared to occur in the trachea (Figs. 5f, g, 7A). This may be a general trend, as high-frequency lineages in the trachea were often over-represented in the lobes (Supp. Fig. 7A, B). Combined, the large differences in lineage identity and frequency show that each lobe is independently seeded, with little mixing between compartments. Moreover, comparisons across compartments suggest that, while each lobe may receive a large number of viral lineages, stochastic replication dynamics within individual lobes may play a role in substantially reducing the evenness and viral genetic diversity of the seeded lineages.DiscussionA quantitative understanding of population dynamics is crucial for determining how evolutionary forces shape viral populations within and between hosts. Error-prone replication by the influenza virus generates genetic diversity within an infected host. However, the full extent of that diversity does not survive transmission to a new host. Transmission events between hosts involve stringent bottlenecks, with only 2–6 viral genomes founding the next infection during aerosol transmission8,17,39. Here we show that the influenza virus also faces multiple bottlenecks within a host as it seeds different compartments. Rich and diverse populations in the upper respiratory tract were stochastically sampled as viruses transited into the lower respiratory tract, introducing strong founder effects that skewed the resultant population. Our data suggest a scenario in which repeated within-host bottlenecks and local heterogeneous growth severely reduce diversity, richness, and evenness, resulting in distinct, compartmentalized “island populations” in each lobe of the lung.Our results show that influenza virus evolution within a host involves multiple stochastic or noisy processes, tempering the impact of positive selection and likely creating additional barriers for host-adaption and onward transmission. This could involve multiple physical bottlenecks as the virus sequentially infects distinct tissues and stochastic replication dynamics within a focal tissue following its infection. Our modeling provides evidence that both of these processes may be at play and suggests that replication kinetics in these largely isolated populations may play a critical role in shaping patterns of viral diversity detected at a sub-organ level. While the model simulations with heterogeneous viral replication were able to recapitulate observed patterns of viral diversity and the relatively weak correlations between nasal wash and lung lobe lineage frequencies, we cannot definitively conclude that heterogeneous viral replication is the process that drives these patterns. Alternative processes not considered explicitly here may also be able to reproduce similar patterns. For example, repeated seeding from the upper respiratory tract may allow viral lineages that reach the lower respiratory tract earlier to expand before the arrival of other viral lineages. This would have a similar effect of reducing the evenness and diversity of viral populations in the lung lobes relative to those sampled in nasal washes. We would also expect a process of repeated seeding to yield weak correlations between nasal wash and lung lobe frequencies. Of course, heterogeneous viral replication within lobes and repeated seeding are also not mutually exclusive processes, and both may be at play in shaping patterns of viral diversity in the lower respiratory tract. Future work is needed to be able to experimentally assess the relative roles of these two processes, and potentially others, in driving these patterns of viral diversity.The high degree of compartmentalization we detected in ferrets has recently been described in other animals, including swine and guinea pigs, reinforcing the importance of these spatial patterns on viral evolution in multiple systems40. And while we considered entire lung lobes, it remains possible that focal infections within tissues may further subdivide viral populations. In all scenarios, bottlenecks and other processes that introduce stochasticity decrease viral diversity and overall population size and are expected to increase the strength of genetic drift41. These processes combine to constrain diversity and evolution during influenza virus infection, which slows the fixation of adaptive variants within a host. Nonetheless, random processes like those driven by bottleneck events can also be advantageous in certain situations, creating small populations that better survey rugged fitness landscapes and escape suboptimal fitness peaks42,43. The strain, the host, and prior immunity will all influence which processes are at play during influenza virus infection.Immune pressure positively selects antigenically advanced influenza virus variants on the global scale1. Yet, these same variants rarely emerge in an acutely infected host, where infections are dominated by purifying selection and low intra-host diversity4,5,7,8,44. The apparent disconnect between influenza virus evolution on the global versus individual scale is incompletely understood. One potential contribution comes from long-term or chronic infections in immunocompromised individuals. Antigenic variants, with some mutations matching those found in future drifted strains, emerged in a cohort of four immunocompromised cancer patients who had extraordinarily prolonged H3N2 influenza virus infections45. Our findings reveal that intrahost bottlenecks are major contributors to the limited evolution detected in an infected individual. This may partially explain why highly pathogenic avian H5N1 strains have not yet acquired the ability to transmit within people. H5N1 strains infect the lower respiratory tract in humans, where the preferred α2,3-sialic acid receptors are more abundant14,15. We saw little evidence of mixing between compartments in the lower respiratory tract. Thus, while only a few mutations are needed to confer airborne transmission to H5N1 strains in experimental settings, the spatial structure and compartmentalization of infection in humans may impose bottlenecks that prevent fixation of variants and migration to the upper respiratory tract, let alone transmission to a new host10,11.Intrahost bottlenecks are common features during viral infections. Physical barriers establish bottlenecks as enteroviruses escape the gut in mouse models46,47. Poliovirus then faces another bottleneck related to IFN responses that restrict diversity as the virus invades the central nervous system46,48,49. Our data do not reveal whether the bottlenecks we describe for influenza virus are due to physical barriers, innate immune response, or other factors. Similar forces shape evolution in arthropod vectors. Repeated bottlenecks winnow diversity as the virus moves between different tissues within mosquitoes for West Nile virus, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, and Zika virus41,50,51. Error-prone replication then repopulates diversity in the new sites of replication. Repeated bottlenecks, such as those we have identified during intra-host dissemination, decrease diversity and may reduce fitness. Yet, they also act to purge deleterious mutations and facilitate escape from local fitness maxima and exploration of additional evolutionary space. The opposing effects of these bottlenecks shape the kinetics of intra-host influenza virus evolution.In summary, we use a very large viral population with uniquely addressable members to demonstrate the existence of multiple bottlenecks during the dissemination of the influenza virus throughout the respiratory tract. We posit that these bottlenecks contribute to the limited impact of positive selection on intrahost evolution. Moreover, they provide additional barriers to initial cross-species transmissions and sustained transmission once a virus spills over into a new host. Coupled with the stringent bottlenecks that occur during inter-host transmission, our results help explain the stochastic nature of influenza virus evolution at the local scale.MethodsCellsMDCK cells (ATCC), MDCK-SIAT1-TMPRSS2 cells52, and 293T cells (ATCC) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals), 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 100 U/mL penicillin at 37 °C and 5% CO2.Generation of pHW2000-all-ΔPA-ΔHA A/California/07/2009Bidirectional cassettes for CA07 PB2, PB1, NP, NA, M, and NS gene segments were sequentially amplified and inserted into a pHW2000 vector via Gibson assembly. The resulting 17.3 kb plasmid was sequence verified. Annotated plasmids sequences can be found at https://github.com/mehlelab/barcoded_flu_analysis.Generation of barcoded PABarcodes were inserted into the previously described PASTN rescue construct that expresses a polyprotein encoding PA and Nanoluciferase separated by the 2 A cleavage site22,53. The barcode was originally synthesized (IDT) as a single-stranded DNA oligo containing ten random nucleotides flanked by sequence to enable cloning immediately downstream of the Nanoluciferase open reading frame (Supplementary Table 1). The oligo was amplified in 25 individual low-cycle PCRs using Q5 polymerase (NEB). The amplicons were pooled and gel purified prior to cloning into a modified PASTN plasmid using 50 individual ligation reactions. Ligations were transformed into Mach1 competent E. coli (Thermo Fisher), plated on LB agar supplemented with 200 μg/mL ampicillin, and grown overnight at 37 °C to yield 220,000 transformants, indicative of theoretical maximum library size. Colonies were scraped off plates, collected in 750 mL liquid LB with ampicillin, and grown for 3 hr at 37 °C. DNA was then purified using the Zymo Midiprep kit to create the plasmid library. Plasmid stocks were deep sequenced to determine library size and diversity.Generation of barcoded HAHA from A/California/07/2009 was cloned into the pHW2000 rescue plasmid. Silent mutations were introduced into the final 25 amino acids of the open reading frame and 80 nt from the 3′-end of the open reading frame were repeated downstream to recreate a contiguous packaging signal23. Initial libraries utilized the native HA sequence, whereas subsequent libraries included the tissue-culture adaptive K153E (nt A540G in cRNA) mutation32. A single-stranded oligo (IDT) was synthesized containing a randomized 10-nt barcode as well as a 6-nt registration mark, either GCTAGC (NheI) or CTGCAG (PstI) (Supplementary Table 1). This registration mark is a conserved and identifiable region for all the individuals within a given library. Barcodes were amplified in 50 low-cycle PCRs and cloned following the same strategy as for PA libraries. Approximately 60,000 transformants were obtained with the NheI registration mark, and 60,000 for the PstI registration mark. Plasmid stocks were deep sequenced to determine library size and diversity.Rescue of dual-barcoded virus librariesBarcoded CA07 virus libraries were rescued via reverse genetics using the pHW2000-all-ΔPA-ΔHA and PA and HA barcoded plasmids described above. Briefly, 293T cells were forward transfected with 2.7 μg pHW2000-all-ΔPA-ΔHA, 450 ng pHW2000-PASTN-barcode library, 450 ng pHW2000-HA-barcode library (NheI or PstI variant), and 400 ng pHAGE2–EF1ɑInt–TMPRSS2–IRES–mCherry-W52 in a 6-well format. Plasmids were combined with 200 μL jetPRIME Buffer and 8 μL jetPRIME reagent (Polyplus) per well. 120 independent transfections were performed per viral library. 24 hr post-transfection, media was removed and cultures were overlaid with MDCK-SIAT1-TMPRSS2 cells in OptiVGM (OptiMEM supplemented with 0.3% bovine serum albumin, 100 μg/mL calcium chloride, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 100 U/mL penicillin). Rescue viruses were harvested 48–72 hr later and pooled based on their registration mark. Viruses were amplified on 20, 15 cm dishes of MDCK-SIAT1-TMPRSS2 cells infected at an MOI ~0.01 in OptiVGM for 66 hr. A total of at least 106 infectious virions spread across the 20 plates were used to amplify each stock. Viruses were pooled based on their registration mark and cellular debris was removed by centrifugation. Viral titers were determined by plaque assay and TCID50Glo assays on MDCK and MDCK-SIAT-TMPRSS2 cells54.Library preparation for barcoded ampliconsViral RNA was extracted from all samples using the Maxwell RSC Viral Total Nucleic Acid Purification Kit (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was subjected to DNAse treatment using the TURBO DNAse (Invitrogen), and reverse transcribed in 20 µl using the SuperScript IV VILO master mix (Invitrogen) with PA and HA gene segment-specific primers (Supplementary Table 1). DNA amplicons for HA and PA gene segments with partial sequencing adapters were generated via PCR amplification of cDNA using the Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (New England BioLabs) and gene segment-specific primers (Supplementary Table 1). To minimize technical bottlenecks during library preparation, reverse transcription and the first PCR amplification for all samples were performed in triplicate and pooled together prior to DNA purification. PCR products from mouse samples were gel purified whereas PCR products from ferret samples were purified with paramagnetic beads using the AMPure XP for PCR Purification kit (Beckman Coulter). Purified PCR products were used in a second PCR reaction for incorporating sample-specific 5′-end indexes and additional Illumina sequencing adapters (Supplementary Table 2). Final PCR products were gel purified and individual DNA concentrations were determined with the Qubit dsDNA High Sensitivity Assay Kit on the Qubit Fluorometer (Invitrogen). Samples were quality controlled using the Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA Analysis Kit and the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent). All samples were prepared and sequenced in technical replicate. Detailed protocols and code were available at https://github.com/mehlelab/barcoded_flu_analysis.Library preparation for whole-genome sequencingLibrary preparation was similar to our prior approaches55. Briefly, viral RNA was extracted from all samples using the Maxwell RSC Viral Total Nucleic Acid Purification Kit (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was subjected to DNAse treatment using the TURBO DNAse (Invitrogen), and reverse transcribed in 20 µl using the SuperScript IV VILO master mix (Invitrogen) with the Uni12 primer (Supplementary Table 1) that targets conserved ends of all gene segments. Segments were amplified by PCR with gene-specific primers (Supplementary Table 1), gel purified, and DNA concentrations were determined using the Qubit dsDNA High Sensitivity Assay Kit on the Qubit Fluorometer (Invitrogen). 1 ng of each segment was pooled and used as input for the Nextera DNA Library Prep kit where samples were tagmented and indexed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Tagmented and amplified products were purified with AMPure XP paramagnetic beads for PCR Purification kit (Beckman Coulter) in two consecutive steps (0.5x and 0.7x) and were quantified using Qubit dsDNA high-sensitivity kit (Invitrogen, USA). Sample quality control was performed using the Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA Analysis Kit in the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent). All samples were prepared and sequenced in technical replicate. Detailed protocols can be found at https://github.com/mehlelab/barcoded_flu_analysis.Deep sequencingAmplicon and whole-genome libraries were sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq system using the MiSeq Reagent Kit v2-500 and v3-600, respectively (Illumina). Amplicon and whole-genome samples that passed quality control were pooled in a 4 nM library with nuclease-free water. 5 μl of the 4 nM library pool was denatured with 5 μl 0.2 N of NaOH and diluted using the HT1 Hybridization Buffer (Illumina) to a concentration of 8 pM for amplicon samples and 10 pm for whole-genome samples. A PhiX library was prepared similarly and added at 30% of the input for amplicon sequencing and 1% for whole-genome libraries. Samples were loaded on the respective MiSeq cartridge and paired-end sequencing reads were generated (Illumina).Sequencing data analysis for barcoded ampliconsWe generated a custom bioinformatics pipeline to process raw FASTQ files and quantify barcode frequencies (https://github.com/mehlelab/barcoded_flu_analysis). Briefly, raw FASTQ paired reads were demultiplexed, merged, and aligned to a custom amplicon reference containing barcode and registration mark regions as strings of N’s (BBMap Tools v38.87). Reads with lengths the same as the average insert size was aligned, sorted, and indexed with Samtools (v1.11, htslib v1.11). BAM files with aligned reads were processed and trimmed to the region containing the registration mark and/or the barcode sequence using command-line tools (Seqtk v1.3, Bash v3.2.57).Sequencing of the invariant registration mark was used to benchmark the fidelity of our sequencing. Over 99.1% of reads were perfect matches, where most differences were the result of a single nucleotide change from the expected sequence. Therefore, to correct for amplification and/or sequencing errors that may inflate the number of unique barcodes, we used UMI-tools (v1.1.1) to generate consensus barcode clusters with reading counts via the adjacency network-based clusterer method27. Parental barcodes and their apparent mutational offspring were clustered prior to enumeration and cluster frequencies were generated and visualized via a custom Python pipeline (Python v3.8.5, Pandas v1.1.3, Matplotlib v3.3.2, Numpy v1.19.2) or in Prism 9. Manual inspection of sequences in the raw FASTQ files confirmed these as bona fide barcodes and not the product of misalignment.Rarefaction-extrapolation was performed with iNEXT (v2.0.20)56,57. The total number of unique barcodes and total reads across all samples was used to establish average read depth for NheI- or PstI-barcoded stocks. These were used to parameterize Poisson sampling in R (v4.0.2) to simulate data from an ideal stock where barcodes are equally distributed.Sequencing data analysis for whole gene segmentsWe generated a custom bioinformatic pipeline to process raw FASTQ files and determine SNV from our barcoded viral samples (https://github.com/mehlelab/barcoded_flu_analysis). Briefly, raw FASTQ paired reads were demultiplexed and downsampled to 2000 reads (BBMap Tools v38.87). We mapped reads to the full IAV genome using a Burrows-Wheeler alignment (BWA v.0.7.17), used Samtools (v1.11, htslib v1.11) to sort aligned reads, and called variants using LoFreq (v2.1.5) with a minimum coverage of 500 reads, the base call quality of at least 30 and a frequency exceeding 0.03 (3%). Our reference IAV genome included barcode insertions in PA and HA, registration marks on HA as a string of 10 N’s, NanoLuc inserted in PA, and repeated packaging signals. SNVs were annotated using SnpEff (v5.0) to determine the impact of each variant on the amino acid sequence, and the resulting variant call format files were manipulated using bcftools (v1.11) to transform into user-defined formats. Plots were generated using custom bioinformatic pipelines in Python language (Python v3.8.5, Pandas v1.1.3, Matplotlib v3.3.2, Seabornv0.11.2, and Numpy v1.19.2).Long-read sequencing of HA and analysisViral RNA was made compatible for sequencing on an Oxford Nanopore Technologies instrument using the 1D PCR Barcoding Kit. Briefly, viral RNA was extracted using the Maxwell RSC Viral Total Nucleic Acid Purification Kit (Promega), subjected to DNAse treatment using TURBO DNAse (Invitrogen), and reverse transcribed and amplified using the SuperScript IV One-Step RT-PCR system with HA-specific primers. Amplified DNA was gel purified using the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) and quantified using the Qubit dsDNA High Sensitivity Assay Kit on the Qubit Fluorometer (Invitrogen). Normalized samples were made compatible for long-read sequencing using the 1D Native Barcoding ONT Kit (SQK-LSK-109), following the manufacturer's protocol. Libraries were loaded onto a flow cell and run on the ONT GridION machine. Bases were called in real-time using the ONT software package Guppy 3.2.6. Minimap2 was used to map reads to the influenza virus HA segment and discard low-quality reads58. The Sam2Tsv (v1.0) module from Jvarkit59 was used to convert the sam to a tsv file so Pandas could be used to extract the bases at position 540 (NheI library) or 543 (PstI library) and the barcode sequence. To account for sequencing error associated with ONT that may inflate the number of unique barcodes, UMI-tools (v1.1.1) was used to generate consensus barcode clusters prior to analysis. Given the higher error rate associated with ONT, the more conservative directional network-based clusterer method was used27 Results were visualized with Prism 9.Growth kineticsTriplicate dishes of confluent MDCK-SIAT1-TMPRSS2 cells were inoculated at an MOI of 0.01 with virus diluted in OptiVGM. Virus was adsorbed for 1 hr at 37 °C, removed from cells, and replaced with fresh OptiVGM. Virus was sampled over time and titered by plaque assay on MDCK-SIAT1-TMPRSS2 cells.Mouse infectionsAll mouse experiments were approved by the University of Wisconsin Madison Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Mice were housed at 22 °C and ~30% relative humidity with a 12 hr light-dark cycle. In all, 18 9-week-old female BALB/c mice (Charles River Labs) were randomly divided into groups of 6 to receive either WT HA, HA-K153E-NheI-bc, or HA-K153E-PstI-bc virus. All viruses contained barcoded PASTN. Mice were inoculated intra-nasally with 105 TCIDGlo50 of virus in 35 μL media. Mice were weighed daily and monitored for clinical signs of infection. Three animals from each group were sacrificed at 3 dpi and the remainder at 6 dpi. Lungs were removed, dounce homogenized in 1× DPBS and clarified at 2000 × g for 5 min. The clarified homogenate was titered via plaque assay and TCIDGlo50 assay on MDCK-SIAT1-TMPRSS2 cells. Viral RNA was recovered from homogenate and sequenced as described above.Ferret infectionsAll ferret experiments were approved by the St Jude Children’s Research Hospital Animal Care and Use Committee. 12-week old male ferrets (Triple F Farms, Sayre, PA) confirmed to be seronegative for influenza virus were housed individually. Each animal was infected intranasally following previous approaches that ensure site-specific inoculation of the upper respiratory tract37. Animals were inoculated with 5 × 105 PFU HA-K153E-NheI-bc with barcoded PASTN diluted in PBS (Corning) containing 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Corning) in a total volume of 500 μl. Nasal washes were collected at 1, 3, and 5 dpi. Briefly, animals were anesthetized with 0.25 mL ketamine and nasal washes were collected by administering 1 mL PBS/pen-strep dropwise onto the nostrils. Animals were sacrificed at 5 dpi and trachea and separated lung lobes were removed and frozen prior to processing. The tissue was homogenized in 10% (w/v) L-15 media using an OMNI TH220-PCRD homogenizer and clarified at 500 × g for 10 min to remove cell debris. Viral titers in homogenates and nasal washes were determined by TCIDGlo50 assay. Viral RNA was recovered from homogenate and sequenced as described above.Statistical analysisViral titers are presented as the mean of n = 3 and significance was tested with a two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc analysis. Replicate sequencing runs were analyzed with Pearson’s and Spearman’s correlation coefficients (Prism 9). Population diversity and evenness were assessed by measuring Shannon’s diversity (H′)30 as follows:$${H}^{{\prime} }=-\mathop{\sum }\limits_{i=1}^{S}{p}_{i}{{{{{\rm{ln}}}}}}{p}_{i}$$ (1) The Gini-Simpson diversity index (HGS) was calculated as:$${H}_{{GS}}=1-\mathop{\sum }\limits_{i=1}^{S}{p}_{i}^{2}$$ (2) For both diversity calculations, S is the total number of barcodes detected (richness) and pi is the frequency of the i-th barcode in that sample.Population evenness is bounded at 0 and 1 and defined as the actual barcode diversity divided by the maximum possible diversity (H′max = ln(richness)) for the sample29:$${evenness}=\frac{H^{\prime} }{{H}_{{\max }}}$$ (3) Bray–Curtis dissimilarity (BCij) was used to assess compositions and compare lung lobes60, defined as:$${{BC}}_{{ij}}=1-\frac{{2C}_{{ij}}}{{S}_{i}+{S}_{j}}$$ (4) where Cij is the sum of the lesser values for only barcodes found in both lobes. Si and Sj are the total number of barcode reads detected in either lobe.Multinomial model of bottleneck sizeWhile several methods currently exist that estimate viral transmission bottleneck sizes between a donor sample and a recipient sample, none of these methods are appropriate for estimating Nb from the viral lineage frequencies available from this study. The beta-binomial approach outlined in Sobel-Leonard et al.61 assumes that each locus is biallelic and unlinked to other loci. A more recent approach developed by Ghafari et al.62 allows for linked loci by reconstructing haplotypes. However, the number of haplotypes that can be considered in their approach is very low relative to the number of viral lineages observed in this study. We thus developed a simple statistical approach to estimate Nb that allows for a large number of observed haplotypes (here, viral lineages). The approach is as follows: 1. Identify the set of lineages observed in the donor sample and calculate their frequencies 2. Calculate the overall number of unique viral lineages present in the recipient sample that is also found in the donor sample 3. Over a range of Nb values, for each Nb do as follows: a. Draw n separate times from a multinomial distribution with the probability vector given by the viral lineage frequencies in the donor sample and the number of trials being the proposed bottleneck size Nb. A given draw can be considered a random realization of viral lineages in a recipient sample seeded by a bottleneck size of Nb. We let n = 500; higher values of n did not appreciably alter the results. b. For each of the n draws from the multinomial distribution, quantify the number of viral lineages present in the simulated recipient sample. c. Calculate the mean and standard deviation of the number of viral lineages present in the n simulated recipient samples. d. Calculate the probability of observing the observed number of viral lineages in the recipient sample using a normal distribution with mean and standard deviation as calculated in step 3c. The log of this probability yields the log-likelihood of the bottleneck size being Nb. 4. Identify the maximum likelihood estimate of Nb as the Nb yielding the highest log-likelihood. Calculate the 95% confidence interval of Nb as the set of Nb values that yield log-likelihood values within 1.92 log-likelihood units of the maximum likelihood estimate of Nb. Note that the bottleneck size Nb that is estimated through this procedure quantifies the number of viral particles that seed the recipient tissue. It does not quantify the number of viral particles that establish genetic lineages in the recipient tissue.Forward simulations of the multinomial model were performed by setting Nb to its maximum likelihood value, performing a single multinomial draw as in step 3a, and plotting the resulting simulated frequencies of the viral lineages in the recipient sample against those observed in the donor sample. Forward simulations of the multinomial model with environmental noise were performed by first similarly setting Nb to its maximum likelihood value and performing a single multinomial draw. Unlike in step 3a, however, the probability vector was instead given by perturbed viral lineage frequencies from the donor sample. Perturbation of lineage frequencies was done by multiplying each lineage frequency by exp(E), and then normalizing, where E is normally distributed random variable with mean 0 and standard deviation σ. Perturbing lineage frequencies in this manner implicitly capture stochastic replication dynamics within the recipient tissue without the need to simulate viral growth explicitly. As in the previous forward simulations, the resulting simulated frequencies of the viral lineages in the recipient sample were then plotted against the observed viral lineage frequencies from the donor sample.We considered a range of σ values. With σ = 0, the original multinomial model described above is recovered, leading to strong correlations between viral lineage frequencies in the nasal wash and the lung lobes that are not empirically observed. At higher values of σ, model-projected evenness and diversity decreased, and the projected correlations between lineage frequencies in the nasal wash and the lung lobes became weaker. Here, we let σ = 2 for each of the lung lobes, based on simulation results that indicated that this level of replication heterogeneity could recover the weak (but apparent) observed correlation between nasal wash and lung lobe lineage frequencies.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability All sequencing files have been deposited as BioProjects PRJNA746307, PRJNA746319, and PRJNA746317 with details and SRA accessions in Supplementary Table 3. Source data are provided in this paper. Code availability Code can be found at https://github.com/mehlelab/barcoded_flu_analysis ReferencesSmith, D. J. et al. Mapping the antigenic and genetic evolution of influenza virus. Science 305, 371–376 (2004).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ghedin, E. et al. Large-scale sequencing of human influenza reveals the dynamic nature of viral genome evolution. Nature 437, 1162–1166 (2005).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rambaut, A. et al. The genomic and epidemiological dynamics of human influenza A virus. Nature 453, 615–619 (2008).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dinis, J. M. et al. Deep sequencing reveals potential antigenic variants at low frequencies in influenza A virus-infected humans. J. Virol. 90, 3355–3365 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Debbink, K. et al. Vaccination has minimal impact on the intrahost diversity of H3N2 influenza viruses. PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006194 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Imai, H. et al. Diversity of Influenza A(H5N1) viruses in infected humans, Northern Vietnam, 2004-2010. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 24, 1128–1238 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Moncla, L. H. et al. Quantifying within-host diversity of H5N1 influenza viruses in humans and poultry in Cambodia. PLoS Pathog. 16, e1008191 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McCrone, J. T. et al. Stochastic processes constrain the within and between host evolution of influenza virus. Elife 7, e35962 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xue, K. S. & Bloom, J. D. Linking influenza virus evolution within and between human hosts. Virus Evol. 6, veaa010 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Imai, M. et al. Experimental adaptation of an influenza H5 HA confers respiratory droplet transmission to a reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 virus in ferrets. Nature 486, 420–428 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Herfst, S. et al. Airborne transmission of influenza A/H5N1 virus between ferrets. Science 336, 1534–1541 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Russell, C. A. et al. The potential for respiratory droplet-transmissible A/H5N1 influenza virus to evolve in a mammalian host. Science 336, 1541–1547 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jonsson, C. B. et al. Molecular imaging reveals a progressive pulmonary inflammation in lower airways in ferrets infected with 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza Virus. PLoS ONE 7, 1–12 (2012). Google Scholar Shinya, K. et al. Avian flu: Influenza virus receptors in the human airway. Nature 440, 435–436 (2006).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar van Riel, D. et al. H5N1 virus attachment to lower respiratory tract. Science 312, 399 (2006).Article PubMed Google Scholar Chandrasekaran, A. et al. Glycan topology determines human adaptation of avian H5N1 virus hemagglutinin. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 107–113 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Varble, A. et al. Influenza A virus transmission bottlenecks are defined by infection route and recipient host. Cell Host Microbe 16, 691–700 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lakdawala, S. S. et al. The soft palate is an important site of adaptation for transmissible influenza viruses. Nature 526, 122–125 (2015).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Richard, M. et al. Influenza A viruses are transmitted via the air from the nasal respiratory epithelium of ferrets. Nat. Commun. 11, 766 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jacobs, N. T. et al. Incomplete influenza A virus genomes occur frequently but are readily complemented during localized viral spread. Nat. Commun. 10, 3526 (2019).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Richard, M., Herfst, S., Tao, H., Jacobs, N. T. & Lowen, A. C. Influenza A virus reassortment is limited by anatomical compartmentalization following coinfection via distinct routes. J. Virol. 92, e02063-17 (2017).Tran, V., Moser, L. A., Poole, D. S. & Mehle, A. Highly sensitive real-time in vivo imaging of an influenza reporter virus reveals dynamics of replication and spread. J. Virol. 87, 13321–13329 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Marsh, G. A., Hatami, R. & Palese, P. Specific residues of the influenza A virus hemagglutinin viral RNA are important for efficient packaging into budding virions. J. Virol. 81, 9727–9736 (2007).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Goto, H., Muramoto, Y., Noda, T. & Kawaoka, Y. The genome-packaging signal of the influenza A virus genome comprises a genome incorporation signal and a genome-bundling signal. J. Virol. 87, 11316–11322 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Doud, M. B. & Bloom, J. D. Accurate measurement of the effects of all amino-acid mutations on influenza hemagglutinin. Viruses 8, 155 (2016).Article PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Neumann, G., Fujii, K., Kino, Y. & Kawaoka, Y. An improved reverse genetics system for influenza A virus generation and its implications for vaccine production. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 16825–16829 (2005).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Smith, T., Heger, A. & Sudbery, I. UMI-tools: modeling sequencing errors in Unique Molecular Identifiers to improve quantification accuracy. Genome Res. 27, 491–499 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jost, L. Entropy and diversity. Oikos 113, 363–375 (2006).Article Google Scholar Pielou, E. C. The measurement of diversity in different types of biological collections. J. Theor. Biol. 13, 131–144 (1966).Article ADS Google Scholar Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27, 379–423 (1948).Article MathSciNet MATH Google Scholar Gregori, J. et al. Viral quasispecies complexity measures. Virology 493, 227–237 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen, Z. et al. Generation of live attenuated novel influenza virus A/California/7/09 (H1N1) vaccines with high yield in embryonated chicken eggs. J. Virol. 84, 44–51 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Karlsson, E. A. et al. Visualizing real-time influenza virus infection, transmission and protection in ferrets. Nat. Commun. 6, 6378 (2015).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bouvier, N. M. & Lowen, A. C. Animal models for influenza virus pathogenesis and transmission. Viruses 2, 1530–1563 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Belser, J. A., Pulit-Penaloza, J. A. & Maines, T. R. Ferreting out influenza virus pathogenicity and transmissibility: past and future risk assessments in the ferret model. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 10, a038323 (2020).Honce, R., Wohlgemuth, N., Meliopoulos, V. A., Short, K. R. & Schultz-Cherry, S. Influenza in high-risk hosts—lessons learned from animal models. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 10, a038604 (2020).Moore, I. N. et al. Severity of clinical disease and pathology in ferrets experimentally infected with influenza viruses is influenced by inoculum volume. J. Virol. 88, 13879–13891 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Marshall, N., Priyamvada, L., Ende, Z., Steel, J. & Lowen, A. C. Influenza virus reassortment occurs with high frequency in the absence of segment mismatch. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003421 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lumby, C. K., Nene, N. R. & Illingworth, C. J. R. A novel framework for inferring parameters of transmission from viral sequence data. PLoS Genet 14, e1007718 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Ganti, K. et al. Influenza A virus reassortment in mammals gives rise to genetically distinct within-host sub-populations. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.02.08.479600 (2022).Grubaugh, N. D. et al. Genetic drift during systemic arbovirus infection of mosquito vectors leads to decreased relative fitness during host switching. Cell Host Microbe 19, 481–492 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nahum, J. R. et al. A tortoise-hare pattern seen in adapting structured and unstructured populations suggests a rugged fitness landscape in bacteria. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 7530–7535 (2015).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Salverda, M. L. M., Koomen, J., Koopmanschap, B., Zwart, M. P. & de Visser, J. A. G. M. Adaptive benefits from small mutation supplies in an antibiotic resistance enzyme. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 12773–12778 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Valesano, A. L. et al. Influenza B viruses exhibit lower within-host diversity than influenza A viruses in human hosts. J. Virol. 94, e01710–e01719 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xue, K. S. et al. Parallel evolution of influenza across multiple spatiotemporal scales. Elife 6, e26875 (2017).Kuss, S. K., Etheredge, C. A. & Pfeiffer, J. K. Multiple host barriers restrict poliovirus trafficking in mice. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000082 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar McCune, B. T., Lanahan, M. R., TenOever, B. R. & Pfeiffer, J. K. Rapid dissemination and monopolization of viral populations in mice revealed using a panel of barcoded viruses. J. Virol. 94, e01590–19 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lauring, A. S. & Andino, R. Exploring the fitness landscape of an RNA virus by using a universal barcode microarray. J. Virol. 85, 3780–3791 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pfeiffer, J. K. & Kirkegaard, K. Bottleneck-mediated quasispecies restriction during spread of an RNA virus from inoculation site to brain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 5520–5525 (2006).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Forrester, N. L., Guerbois, M., Seymour, R. L., Spratt, H. & Weaver, S. C. Vector-borne transmission imposes a severe bottleneck on an RNA virus population. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002897 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Weger-Lucarelli, J. et al. Using barcoded Zika virus to assess virus population structure in vitro and in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. Virology 521, 138–148 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lee, J. M. et al. Deep mutational scanning of hemagglutinin helps predict evolutionary fates of human H3N2 influenza variants. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, E8276–E8285 (2018).ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tran, V. et al. Multi-modal imaging with a toolbox of influenza A reporter viruses. Viruses 7, 5319–5327 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Karlsson, E. A. et al. Measuring influenza virus infection using bioluminescent reporter viruses for in vivo imaging and in vitro replication assays. Methods Mol. Biol. 1836, 431–459 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Poole, D. S. et al. Influenza A virus polymerase is a site for adaptive changes during experimental evolution in bat cells. J. Virol. 88, 12572–12585 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Chao, A. et al. Rarefaction and extrapolation with Hill numbers: a framework for sampling and estimation in species diversity studies. Ecol. Monogr. 84, 45–67 (2014).Article Google Scholar Hsieh, T. C., Ma, K. H. & Chao, A. iNEXT: an R package for rarefaction and extrapolation of species diversity (Hill numbers). Methods Ecol. Evol. 7, 1451–1456 (2016).Article Google Scholar Li, H. Minimap2: pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics 34, 3094–3100 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lindenbaum, P. JVarkit: java-based utilities for Bioinformatics. figshare https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1425030.v1 (2015).Bray, J. R. & Curtis, J. T. An ordination of the upland forest communities of southern wisconsin. Ecol. Monogr. 27, 325–349 (1957).Article Google Scholar Sobel Leonard, A., Weissman, D. B., Greenbaum, B., Ghedin, E. & Koelle, K. Transmission bottleneck size estimation from pathogen deep-sequencing data, with an application to human influenza A virus. J. Virol. 91, e00171–17 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ghafari, M., Lumby, C. K., Weissman, D. B. & Illingworth, C. J. R. Inferring transmission bottleneck size from viral sequence data using a novel haplotype reconstruction method. J. Virol. 94, e00014–e00020 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Jesse Bloom and Yoshihiro Kawaoka for providing key plasmids and reagents. We thank Christopher Brooke and Brigette Martin for their assistance in virus rescue protocols. This work is funded by AI125392 to A.M. and T.C.F. and by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases under HHS contract HHSN27220140006C for the St. Jude Center of Excellence for Influenza Research and Surveillance, NIH grant R01AI140766, and ALSAC to S.S.C. K.A.A. is supported by GM007215. K.M.B. is supported by AI145182. L.A.H. is supported by HG002760. G.A.S. is supported by a Rath Foundation Wisconsin Distinguished Graduate Fellowship and AI007414. A.M. holds an Investigators in the Pathogenesis of Infectious Disease Award from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund and is an H. I. Romnes Faculty Fellow funded by the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Medical Microbiology & Immunology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706, USAKatherine A. Amato, Grace A. Schaack, Christina A. Higgins & Andrew MehleDepartment of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin School of Veterinary Medicine, Madison, WI, 53706, USALuis A. Haddock III, Katarina M. Braun, Emma Boehm, Gabrielle L. Barry & Thomas C. FriedrichDepartment of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 38105, USAVictoria Meliopoulos, Brandi Livingston, Rebekah Honce & Stacey Schultz-CherryDepartment of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USAKatia KoelleWisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53715, USAThomas C. FriedrichAuthorsKatherine A. AmatoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLuis A. Haddock IIIView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKatarina M. BraunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarVictoria MeliopoulosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBrandi LivingstonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRebekah HonceView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGrace A. SchaackView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEmma BoehmView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChristina A. HigginsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGabrielle L. BarryView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKatia KoelleView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarStacey Schultz-CherryView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarThomas C. FriedrichView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrew MehleView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsK.A.A., L.A.H., K.M.B., K.K., S.S.C., T.C.F., and A.M. contributed to the conceptualization. K.A.A., L.A.H., K.M.B., K.K., T.C.F., and A.M. developed methodology. K.A.A., L.A.H., K.M.B., K.K., and A.M. wrote or executed software. K.A.A., L.A.H., K.M.B., V.M., BL, RH, G.A.S, K.K., and A.M. performed validation. K.A.A., L.A.H., K.M.B., K.K., T.C.F., and A.M. performed formal analysis. K.A.A., L.A.H., K.M.B., V.M., B.L., R.H., G.A.S., E.B., C.A.H., G.L.B., K.K., and A.M. did the Investigation. K.A.A., L.A.H., and K.M.B. were responsible for data curation. K.A.A., L.A.H., K.K., T.C.F., and A.M. wrote the original draft, with all authors reviewing and editing. K.A.A., L.A.H., K.M.B., K.K., and A.M. created Visualizations. S.S.C., T.C.F., and A.M. supervised the work with T.C.F. and A.M. as project administrators. K.A.A., L.A.H., K.M.B., G.A.S., S.S.C., T.C.F., and A.M. acquired funding.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Andrew Mehle.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Jesse Bloom, Marcelle Johnson, and Mark Zwart for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationPeer Review FileReporting SummarySource dataSource dataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleAmato, K.A., Haddock, L.A., Braun, K.M. et al. Influenza A virus undergoes compartmentalized replication in vivo dominated by stochastic bottlenecks. Nat Commun 13, 3416 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31147-0Download citationReceived: 01 November 2021Accepted: 03 June 2022Published: 14 June 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31147-0Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by When influenza viruses don’t play well with others Mireille FarjoChristopher B. Brooke Nature (2023) Co-evolution of immunity and seasonal influenza viruses Alvin X. HanSimon P. J. de JongColin A. Russell Nature Reviews Microbiology (2023) Influenza A virus reassortment in mammals gives rise to genetically distinct within-host subpopulations Ketaki GantiAnish BaggaAnice C. Lowen Nature Communications (2022) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingFrontiers | Outbreak of Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses in Hospitalized Patients Alongside the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic Skip to main content Top bar navigation Frontiers in Microbiology About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Search Frontiers in Microbiology Sections Sections Ancient DNA and Forensic MicrobiologyAntimicrobials, Resistance and ChemotherapyAquatic MicrobiologyBiology of ArchaeaExtreme MicrobiologyFood MicrobiologyInfectious Agents and DiseaseMicrobe and Virus Interactions with PlantsMicrobial Physiology and MetabolismMicrobial SymbiosesMicrobiological Chemistry and GeomicrobiologyMicrobiotechnologyMicroorganisms in Vertebrate Digestive SystemsPhage BiologySystems MicrobiologyTerrestrial MicrobiologyVirology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Frontiers in Microbiology Sections Sections Ancient DNA and Forensic MicrobiologyAntimicrobials, Resistance and ChemotherapyAquatic MicrobiologyBiology of ArchaeaExtreme MicrobiologyFood MicrobiologyInfectious Agents and DiseaseMicrobe and Virus Interactions with PlantsMicrobial Physiology and MetabolismMicrobial SymbiosesMicrobiological Chemistry and GeomicrobiologyMicrobiotechnologyMicroorganisms in Vertebrate Digestive SystemsPhage BiologySystems MicrobiologyTerrestrial MicrobiologyVirology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Frontiers in Microbiology Sections Sections Ancient DNA and Forensic MicrobiologyAntimicrobials, Resistance and ChemotherapyAquatic MicrobiologyBiology of ArchaeaExtreme MicrobiologyFood MicrobiologyInfectious Agents and DiseaseMicrobe and Virus Interactions with PlantsMicrobial Physiology and MetabolismMicrobial SymbiosesMicrobiological Chemistry and GeomicrobiologyMicrobiotechnologyMicroorganisms in Vertebrate Digestive SystemsPhage BiologySystems MicrobiologyTerrestrial MicrobiologyVirology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Submit your research Search Download article Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) Share on Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex 3,4K Total views 718 Downloads 9 Citations Citation numbers are available from Dimensions View article impact View altmetric score Share on Edited by Daniel R. Perez University of Georgia, United States Reviewed by Irene Ramos Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, United States Victor C. Huber University of South Dakota, United States Table of contents Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion Data Availability Statement Author Contributions Conflict of Interest Publisher’s Note Supplementary Material References Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex Check for updates Download article Download Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) ORIGINAL RESEARCH article Front. Microbiol., 13 June 2022 Sec. Virology Volume 13 - 2022 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.902476 Outbreak of Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses in Hospitalized Patients Alongside the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic Ilana S. Fratty1,2Shira Reznik-Balter1Ital Nemet1Nofar Atari1Limor Kliker1,3Hilda Sherbany1Nathan Keller4,5Michal Stein5Ella Mendelson1,3Michal Mandelboim1,3* 1Central Virology Laboratory, Public Health Services, Ministry of Health and Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel 2The Israel Center for Disease Control, Israel Ministry of Health, Ramat Gan, Israel 3Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 4School of Health Sciences, Ariel University, Ariel, Israel 5Pediatric Infectious Disease Unit, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel Influenza A and other respiratory viruses, circulate each winter and cause respiratory illness that can lead to severe complications in hospitalized patients. During the COVID-19 pandemic, only a few cases of respiratory viruses were detected in Israel. Our study applied RT-PCR to examine 13,674 samples collected from patients hospitalized with respiratory symptoms in 2019, 2020, and 2021 and the first half of the 2022 winter. A sharp increase in influenza A(H3N2) cases was observed in winter 2021-2022 as compared to 2020, followed by a sudden decrease in influenza cases after the detection of the SARS-CoV-2 omicron variant in Israel. Comparison of the area under the curve (AUC) of influenza infection rates during 7 consecutive winter seasons found that the minimal AUC between 2015 and 2020 was 281.1, while in 2021-2022, it was significantly lower (162.6 AUC; p = 0.0017), although the percentage of positive influenza cases was similar to those of previous years. The presented findings show how the dominance of influenza A(H3N2) abruptly ended upon circulation of the SARS-CoV-2 omicron variant. However, a post-COVID-19 influenza outbreak is possible, hence the planning of the next influenza vaccine is critical to ensure lower influenza-related hospitalization rates. Introduction Each winter season, respiratory viruses, such as influenza, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and human metapneumovirus (hMPV), emerge and cause mild to severe symptoms such as fever, cough and other respiratory symptoms. The infection can lead to serious complications which can be lethal, especially in young children, pregnant women, and the elderly (Meningher et al., 2014; Glatman-Freedman et al., 2020; Kenmoe et al., 2020). These complications occur more frequently during winter seasons and pandemics (Klein et al., 2016). COVID-19 has similar symptoms resembling influenza, including fever, headache, muscle ache and symptoms in the upper respiratory system such as coughing. Studies have shown that mortality rates in case of COVID-19 infection with the wild type SARS-CoV-2 may be even higher than infection with winter respiratory viruses (WHO, 2021; Hedberg et al., 2022). Overall, respiratory infection caused by either influenza, other respiratory viruses or COVID-19 can lead to serious complications such as cardiovascular events and bacterial co-infections that may be lethal (Piroth et al., 2021; Hedberg et al., 2022). The emergence of COVID-19 in 2019-2020 was paralleled by a dramatic decrease in the prevalence of other respiratory viruses such as influenza, RSV and hMPV (Agca et al., 2021). Winter season 2020-2021 was considered historical, with the lowest rate of respiratory virus infection (Olsen et al., 2021). Although vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 led to a decrease in SARS-CoV-2 infections, still other respiratory viruses lack a compatible vaccine (Olsen et al., 2021; Khalil and Bernstein, 2022). The Objective of the study was to examine the prevalence of influenza and other respiratory viruses among hospitalized patients before and during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, including during first, second and third anti-COVID-19 vaccination and novel variants penetration to Israel. This study also compared the rate of influenza infections among hospitalized patients in the winter seasons of 2015 to 2022 and found a particular phenomenon influenced by SARS-CoV-2 presence in Israel. Materials and Methods Patients and Samples The samples included in this study were collected at Sheba Medical Centre (SMC), the largest tertiary medical center in Israel, which provides medical aid mostly to the population in the center of Israel. Demographic information of the patients (Supplementary Tables 1,2) shows similar distribution in gender and age between patients in the years examined. The analysis between August 2019 and January 2022 included lab results of 13,674 nasopharyngeal samples collected from patients hospitalized at SMC due to respiratory illness and influenza-like symptoms. All samples were sent for routine clinical analysis to identify the presence of respiratory viruses. For calculating the area under the curve (AUC), 25,448 nasopharyngeal samples were collected and analyzed. The data collected included the winter seasons of 2015-2016, 2016-2017, 2017-2018, 2018-2019, 2019-2020, 2020-2021, and 2021-2022. Area Under the Curve Calculations and Statistical Analysis Calculation of the AUC of infection rates was conducted using a trapezoidal numerical integration. The statistical analysis between seasons was performed using the T-test. Both calculations were performed with MATLAB MathWorks, Inc. (United States). Viral RNA Extraction Until January 2020, nucleic acids of viral RNA/DNA were extracted using MagNA PURE 96 (Roch, Manheim, Germany). After January 2020, viral RNA/DNA was extracted using the STARMag Viral DNA/RNA 200C universal kit (Seegene Inc., South Korea). Real Time PCR Assay RNA/DNA of influenza A(H1N1pdm or H3N2)/B, RSV, HMPV, parainfluenza, and adenoviruses was detected using real-time reverse transcription-PCR (rRT-PCR) assay by Taqman chemistry, as previously described (Heim et al., 2003; Meningher et al., 2014; Pando et al., 2021). Shortly, the master mix was prepared with Ambion Ag-Path master mix (Life technologies, United States) in multiplex reactions. Two different multiplex reactions were performed: one that included primers for influenza A(H3N2), influenza A (H1N1pdm), influenza B, RSV and the other containing primers for HMPV, parainfluenza and for the DNA virus adenovirus. The RT-PCR assay was performed on an ABI 7500 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United Kingdom). From January 2020, rRT-PCR assays were also performed using the AllplexTM RV essential assay (Seegene Inc., South Korea) in a CFX Real-time PCR system (Bio-Rad, United States) (Folgueira et al., 2019). Results Influenza and SARS-CoV-2 in 2019-2022 Until the emergence of SARS-CoV-2, the 2019-2020 winter was classified as a difficult influenza season with high infection rates, longer symptom durations and more hospitalizations compared to previous winter seasons (Xia et al., 2020; European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control [ECDC], 2022). The associated wave of hospitalized patients began in October 2019 and persisted for 18 weeks (Figure 1). In parallel, in December 2019, SARS-CoV-2 was first detected and rapidly spread worldwide, affecting the population in Israel as well (Figure 1). In 2020, almost no cases of influenza infection were observed worldwide while the prevalence of the SARS-CoV-2 alpha variant (B.1.1.7) increased toward the end of 2020 (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control [ECDC], 2022; Friedman et al., 2022). After the vaccination operation in January (in Israel) 2021, SARS-CoV-2 circulation waned until the SARS-CoV-2 delta variant (B.1.617.2) emerging in July–August 2021. Later, in September another vaccination operation was initiated and SARS-CoV-2 incidence dropped again. By October 2021, only a few cases of SARS-CoV-2 were detected, while the number of positive cases of influenza in hospitalized patients increased. The number of influenza infections later declined gradually when the SARS-CoV-2 omicron variant (B.1.1.529) began to circulate in January 2022. From this point, the percentage of hospitalized influenza-positive patients dramatically dropped within 3 weeks only. FIGURE 1 Figure 1. Incidence of influenza subtypes in winter 2019-2020, before and during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. After SARS-CoV-2 emerged in 2020, almost no influenza cases were found although first, second and third vaccination influenced the number of SARS-CoV-2 positive cases. Influenza Circulation Between 2015 and 2022 To compare the early part of the 2021-22 influenza winter season with previous winter seasons dating back until 2015-2016, we analyzed the positive influenza cases detected among hospitalized patients during each week of each winter season (Figure 2A). Then, we calculated the area under the curve (AUC) of infection rates using a trapezoidal numerical integration. FIGURE 2 Figure 2. Circulation of influenza from week 40 to week 15 the following year for each winter season between 2015 and 2022. A comparison of the area under the curve (AUC) from winter season 2015 to winter season 2022 (A). The percentage of influenza-positive cases among hospitalized patients in each winter season (green columns) alongside the total number of hospitalized patients tested for influenza in each year (black line). *p < 0.0017 (B). Only a few cases of influenza were detected by the end of January and February 2022 (data not shown). The AUC of winter season 2021-2022 influenza infection rates (so far) was significantly lower (p < 0.0017) than that of previous years even though the percentage of influenza hospitalized patients was similar to those of seasons up until 2019-2020 (Figure 2B). Incidence of Other Respiratory Viruses in Winter 2021-2022 The circulation of the main respiratory viruses each winter are presented in Figure 3. The gray area in Figures 3A–D indicates the SARS-CoV-2 waves, which began in Israel in February 2020. A rise in cases of RSV was mainly observed in the winter season of 2019-2020, however, when SARS-CoV-2 began to circulate in February 2020, RSV cases vanished almost completely (Figure 3A). RSV cases rose again after the decline in SARS-CoV-2 infection rates in May 2021, but then declined at the onset of the third wave of SARS-CoV-2 in August 2021. In the same period hMPV showed similar patterns to RSV and was also influenced by the presence of SARS-CoV-2 (Figure 3B). Parainfluenza cases increased in the 2020-2021 winter season (Figure 3C), but the overall number of positive cases in 2020 was relatively low compared to 2021 (Supplementary Table 3). Incidence of parainfluenza decreased in July 2021, and then rose in October 2021 when the winter season began (Figure 3C). FIGURE 3 Figure 3. The rate of cases carrying respiratory viruses detected before and during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. The percentage of hospitalized patients carrying RSV (A), parainfluenza (B), HMPV (C), and adenovirus (D) during the various waves of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic (in gray). The prevalence of adenovirus remained constant over the years 2019-2022, regardless of SARS-CoV-2 infection rates (Figure 3D). Discussion In December 2019, SARS-CoV-2 emerged, spread rapidly and was first detected in Israel in February 2020. Safety measurements, such as wearing protective masks, social distancing and lockdowns, were implemented worldwide, which all contributed to a reduction in the number of SARS-CoV-2 cases globally, as well as in Israel (Last, 2020; Mattia et al., 2021). In parallel to the emergence of COVID-19, the rate of infections by respiratory viruses decreased dramatically (Olsen et al., 2021) after a difficult winter season with influenza A(H1N1pdm), followed by influenza B and sporadic incidents of influenza A(H3N2) (Figure 1). This study focused on hospitalized patients; hence, it was limited to severe cases. However, a report of the Israel Center for Disease Control showed similar influenza infection patterns in its sentinel surveillance in Israel (Israel Center for Disease Control [ICDC], 2022). According to a WHO update, North America and Europe experienced a rapid increase in influenza cases between November and December 2021, followed by a decrease in January 2022 (World Health Oraganization [WHO], 2022). Interestingly, in Europe the number of positive influenza cases was lower in the winter season of 2021-2022 compared to previous years (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control [ECDC], 2022). In Israel, the first COVID-19 lockdown was implemented in Israel in March 2020. Subsequently, the number of cases of COVID-19 waned then rose again. By September 2020 a second lockdown was implemented, which was followed by a decrease in COVID-19 cases. Later that year, the presence of the alpha variant led to a third lockdown in December 2020. In this period preceding the lockdown (March 2020 to December 2020) only sporadic cases of respiratory viruses, such as influenza, RSV, parainfluenza and HMPV, were detected in hospitalized patients (Figures 1, 3A–C). When the vaccination operation began in December 2020-January 2021, the incidence of COVID-19 waned almost completely and restrictions were lifted. Children returned to frontal learning and social distancing ended. During this period, still no cases of influenza were detected, probably because it was the end of the winter season. In contrast to influenza, the number of RSV cases rose off-season in May 2021 and did not decline until August 2021. Similarly, hMPV cases increased after a year with only sporadic reports of infection. Parainfluenza infection rates were mostly low when COVID-19 rose; while fluctuations in infection rates were noted in the winter season of 2020-2021, they remained significantly low in 2020 compared to 2021 (Supplementary Table 3). A comparison between 2019, 2020, and 2021 (2022 was not included since it is still ongoing) showed significantly fewer cases of hMPV and parainfluenza in 2020 (Supplementary Table 3). These findings align with other studies that showed significantly lower incidences of respiratory viruses during the pandemic (Mattia et al., 2021; Olsen et al., 2021). However, infection rates of RSV and adenovirus were similar in 2019, 2020 and 2021. The prevalence of adenovirus in hospitalized patients (Figure 3D) was not influenced by SARS-CoV-2 waves and remained similar to those seen before the COVID-19 pandemic (Olsen et al., 2021). It is important to note that the positive cases of RSV detected in 2020 were part of the 2019-2020 winter season before the pandemic. Later in June 2021, off-season RSV and hMPV infections in hospitalized patients were documented (Figure 3A) as reported by others (Olsen et al., 2021; Weinberger Opek et al., 2021; Friedman et al., 2022). These increases in RSV and hMPV infections are presumably due to lack of previous exposure to RSV in the population (Olsen et al., 2021; Weinberger Opek et al., 2021). In August 2021, the third vaccination operation began, which led to a decrease in SARS-CoV-2 cases, which was followed by detection of the first cases of influenza in hospitalized patients, with numbers growing and peaking in December 2021. Our comparison in Figure 2B shows a similar percentage of hospitalized patients between 2015 and 2019 winter seasons, despite the fact that the analyzed 2021-2022 period was shorter than the full seasons studied from previous years. In other words, the winter season of 2021-2022 was characterized with a high percentage of positive influenza cases in a very short period of time. Herein, we suggest that the immediate drop in influenza cases during circulation of SARS-CoV-2 variant omicron indicates an antagonistic effect on influenza A(H3N2) by SARS-CoV-2. This antagonistic effect was shown in previous studies with other respiratory viruses such as RSV and influenza (Ayegbusi et al., 2019; Drori et al., 2020; Kaaijk et al., 2022), and may act as a form of resistance against a second virus when the host is infected by the first virus. Viral interference was suggested to play a part in reduction of RSV and/or influenza (Drori et al., 2020; Kaaijk et al., 2022). Rhinovirus, for instance, was observed less frequently than expected in the presence of influenza and was also shown in Norway and France to inhibit the circulation of influenza A(H1N1pdm) (Casalegno et al., 2010; Anestad and Nordbo, 2011). Furthermore, as seen in previous studies, the immune system can mediate upregulation of anti-viral proteins to provide immunity against other respiratory viruses (Ayegbusi et al., 2019; Drori et al., 2020). Additionally, severity of the disease was shown to decrease with RSV-influenza co-infections compared to single infection (Ayegbusi et al., 2019). In fact, most of the complications of respiratory virus infection in the lung arise from bacterial co-infections and not viral co-infections (Manna et al., 2022). The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and its inhibitory effect on influenza infection can also be compared to the 2009 influenza A(H1N1pdm), which was accompanied by a marked drop in infection rates of other respiratory viruses. More specifically, the 2009 influenza A(H1N1pdm) brought to a 2.5-month delay in the onset of the RSV season. It also led to a decrease in HMPV infections (Meningher et al., 2014), similar to the effect of SARS-CoV-2. These conclusions do not contrast those of Zhang et al., who showed coinfection with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A(H1N1pdm) but did not examine influenza A(H3N2) (Zhang et al., 2021). In our analysis of 2021-22 samples, we identified only influenza A(H3N2) cases and no influenza A(H1N1pdm) incidences. It has been suggested that the influenza clades circulating in winter season 2019-2020, including influenza A(H1N1pdm), will return. However, the sporadic cases of influenza A(H3N2) have been observed are still circulating now in 2021-2022 (Laurie and Rockman, 2021). Importantly, influenza A(H3N2), the influenza strain circulating in Israel, was part of the quadrivalent influenza vaccine given to the population in Israel. Yet, to date (05/02/2022), only 723,192 individuals, mostly older than 65-year-old, were vaccinated in Israel (∼0.08% of the population in Israel) (Israel Ministry of Health [IMoH], 2021). Multiple methods for developing an influenza vaccine are still under investigation, but, generally, these vaccines are less customized for influenza A(H3N2) (Khalil and Bernstein, 2022). Hence, the planning of the next anti-influenza vaccine will be great significance for hospitalized patients with respiratory symptoms caused by influenza (Kalil and Thomas, 2019). To conclude, circulation of influenza among hospitalized patients began in Israel in September-October 2021 and rapidly became rampant, compensating for the lost year of 2020 when almost no influenza cases were identified. However, the high number of patients hospitalized with influenza declined very quickly with the penetration of the SARS-CoV-2 omicron variant, suggesting an antagonistic affect. In parallel, off-season presence of RSV, parainfluenza and hMPV were affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, as opposed to adenovirus, which did not show significant difference between 2019 and 2022. These findings are important for forecasting future influenza seasons and for the preparation of a compatible vaccine for the coming influenza season, with or without new SARS-CoV-2 variants circulation. Data Availability Statement The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors, without undue reservation. Author Contributions IF: study design and data analysis. SR-B: statistical analysis. IF and MM: data interpretation. IF, IN, NA, LK, and HS: conducted the experiments. MM, MS, EM, and NK: critical revision of manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published the version of the manuscript. Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s Note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Supplementary Material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2022.902476/full#supplementary-material References Agca, H., Akalin, H., Saglik, I., Hacimustafaoglu, M., Celebi, S., and Ener, B. (2021). Changing epidemiology of influenza and other respiratory viruses in the first year of COVID-19 pandemic. J. Infect. Public Health 14, 1186–1190. doi: 10.1016/j.jiph.2021.08.004 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Anestad, G., and Nordbo, S. A. (2011). Virus interference. Did rhinoviruses activity hamper the progress of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) pandemic in Norway? Med. Hypotheses 77, 1132–1134. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.09.021 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Ayegbusi, O. T., Ajagbe, O. A., Afowowe, T. O., Aransi, A. T., Olusola, B. A., Awogbindin, I. O., et al. (2019). Virus genes and host correlates of pathology are markedly reduced during respiratory syncytial and influenza virus co-infection in BALB/c mice. Heliyon 5:e01094. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2018.e01094 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Casalegno, J. S., Ottmann, M., Duchamp, M. B., Escuret, V., Billaud, G., Frobert, E., et al. (2010). Rhinoviruses delayed the circulation of the pandemic influenza A (H1N1) 2009 virus in France. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 16, 326–329. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2010.03167.x PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Drori, Y., Jacob-Hirsch, J., Pando, R., Glatman-Freedman, A., Friedman, N., Mendelson, E., et al. (2020). Influenza a virus inhibits RSV infection via a two-wave expression of IFIT proteins. Viruses 12:1171. doi: 10.3390/v12101171 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control [ECDC] (2022). Flu News Europe. Geneva: World health Organization. Google Scholar Folgueira, L., Moral, N., Pascual, C., and Delgado, R. (2019). Comparison of the Panther Fusion and Allplex assays for the detection of respiratory viruses in clinical samples. PLoS One 14:e0226403. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226403 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Friedman, N., Levy, N., Kaplan, O., Padeh, G., Krupik, K., Jacob, R., et al. (2022). Pediatric hospitalizations after school reopening during the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha (B.1.1.7) variant spread: a multicenter cross-sectional study in Israel. Clin. Infect. Dis. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac065 [Online ahead of print] PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Glatman-Freedman, A., Kaufman, Z., Applbaum, Y., Dichtiar, R., Steiman, A., Gordon, E. S., et al. (2020). Respiratory Syncytial Virus hospitalization burden: a nation-wide population-based analysis, 2000-2017. J. Infect. 81, 297–303. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2020.05.078 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Hedberg, P., Karlsson Valik, J., Van Der Werff, S., Tanushi, H., Mendez, A. R., Granath, F., et al. (2022). Clinical phenotypes and outcomes of SARS-CoV-2, influenza, RSV and seven other respiratory viruses: a retrospective study using complete hospital data. Thorax 77, 154–163. doi: 10.1136horaxjnl-2021-216949 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Heim, A., Ebnet, C., Harste, G., and Pring-Akerblom, P. (2003). Rapid and quantitative detection of human adenovirus DNA by real-time PCR. J. Med. Virol. 70, 228–239. doi: 10.1002/jmv.10382 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Israel Center for Disease Control [ICDC] (2022). Available online at: https://www.health.gov.il/flu_weekly/flu_14032020e.pdf (accessed on April 2, 2022). Google Scholar Israel Ministry of Health [IMoH] (2021). Corona Virus in Israel – General Situation. Available online at: Https://datadashboard.health.gov.il/COVID-19/ [accessed on May 25, 2022]. Google Scholar Kaaijk, P., Swaans, N., Nicolaie, A. M., Bruin, J. P., Boxtel, R. A., Lange, M., et al. (2022). Contribution of influenza viruses, other respiratory viruses and viral co-infections to influenza-like illness in older adults. Viruses 14:797. Google Scholar Kalil, A. C., and Thomas, P. G. (2019). Influenza virus-related critical illness: pathophysiology and epidemiology. Crit. Care 23:258. doi: 10.1186/s13054-019-2539-x PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Kenmoe, S., Kengne-Nde, C., Ebogo-Belobo, J. T., Mbaga, D. S., Fatawou Modiyinji, A., and Njouom, R. (2020). Systematic review and meta-analysis of the prevalence of common respiratory viruses in children < 2 years with bronchiolitis in the pre-COVID-19 pandemic era. PLoS One 15:e0242302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0242302 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Khalil, N., and Bernstein, D. I. (2022). Influenza vaccines: where we are, where we are going. Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 34, 119–125. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001103 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Klein, E. Y., Monteforte, B., Gupta, A., Jiang, W., May, L., Hsieh, Y. H., et al. (2016). The frequency of influenza and bacterial coinfection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 10, 394–403. doi: 10.1111/irv.12398 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Last, M. (2020). The first wave of COVID-19 in Israel-Initial analysis of publicly available data. PLoS One 15:e0240393. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240393 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Laurie, K. L., and Rockman, S. (2021). Which influenza viruses will emerge following the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic? Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 15, 573–576. doi: 10.1111/irv.12866 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Manna, S., McAuley, J., Jacobson, J., Nguyen, C. D., Ullah, M. A., Sebina, I., et al. (2022). Synergism and antagonism of bacterial-viral coinfection in the upper respiratory tract. mSphere 7:e009841. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00984-21 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Mattia, G. D., Nenna, R., Mancino, E., Rizzo, V., Pierangeli, A., Villani, A., et al. (2021). During the COVID-19 pandemic where has respiratory syncytial virus gone? Pediatr. Pulmonol. 56, 3106–3109. doi: 10.1002/ppul.25582 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Meningher, T., Hindiyeh, M., Regev, L., Sherbany, H., Mendelson, E., Mandelboim, M., et al. (2014). Relationships between A(H1N1)pdm09 influenza infection and infections with other respiratory viruses. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 8, 422–430. doi: 10.1111/irv.12249 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Olsen, S. J., Winn, A. K., Budd, A. C., Prill, M. M., Steel, J., Midgley, C. M., et al. (2021). Changes in influenza and other respiratory virus activity during the COVID-19 pandemic-United States, 2020-2021. Am. J. Transplant 21, 3481–3486. Google Scholar Pando, R., Stern, S., Nemet, I., Glatman-Freedman, A., Sefty, H., Zuckerman, N. S., et al. (2021). Diversity in the circulation of influenza A(H3N2) viruses in the northern hemisphere in the 2018-19 season. Vaccines 9:375. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9040375 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Piroth, L., Cottenet, J., Mariet, A. S., Bonniaud, P., Blot, M., Tubert-Bitter, P., et al. (2021). Comparison of the characteristics, morbidity, and mortality of COVID-19 and seasonal influenza: a nationwide, population-based retrospective cohort study. Lancet Respir. Med. 9, 251–259. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30527-0 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Weinberger Opek, M., Yeshayahu, Y., Glatman-Freedman, A., Kaufman, Z., Sorek, N., Brosh-Nissimov, T., et al. (2021). Delayed respiratory syncytial virus epidemic in children after relaxation of COVID-19 physical distancing measures, Ashdod, Israel, 2021. Euro Surveill. 26:2100706. doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2021.26.29.2100706 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar WHO (2021). Available online at: https://www.who.int/mongolia/multi-media/item/common-symptoms-of-covid-19 (accessed October 27, 2021). Google Scholar World Health Oraganization [WHO] (2022). Influenza Update Number 417. Available online at: https://www.who.inteams/global-influenza-programme/surveillance-and-monitoring/influenza-updates/current-influenza-update [accessed on May 16, 2022]. Google Scholar Xia, Z., Yang, L., Li, N., Nie, B., Wang, H., Xu, H., et al. (2020). Seasonal influenza activity in young children before the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, China. Transbound. Emerg. Dis. 67, 2277–2279. doi: 10.1111bed.13799 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Zhang, A. J., Lee, A. C., Chan, F. W., Liu, F., Li, C., Chen, Y., et al. (2021). Coinfection by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 and influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus enhances the severity of pneumonia in golden syrian hamsters. Clin. Infect. Dis. 72, e978–e992. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1747 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Keywords: respiratory viruses, influenza, outbreak, SARS-CoV-2, omicron variant Citation: Fratty IS, Reznik-Balter S, Nemet I, Atari N, Kliker L, Sherbany H, Keller N, Stein M, Mendelson E and Mandelboim M (2022) Outbreak of Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses in Hospitalized Patients Alongside the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic. Front. Microbiol. 13:902476. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.902476 Received: 23 March 2022; Accepted: 13 May 2022;Published: 13 June 2022. Edited by: Daniel Roberto Perez, University of Georgia, United States Reviewed by: Irene Ramos, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, United States Victor C. Huber, University of South Dakota, United States Copyright © 2022 Fratty, Reznik-Balter, Nemet, Atari, Kliker, Sherbany, Keller, Stein, Mendelson and Mandelboim. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. *Correspondence: Michal Mandelboim, Michal.Mandelboim@sheba.health.gov.il Disclaimer: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Footer Guidelines Author guidelinesEditor guidelinesPolicies and publication ethicsFee policy Explore ArticlesResearch Topics Journals Outreach Frontiers Forum Frontiers Policy Labs Frontiers for Young Minds Connect Help centerEmails and alerts Contact us SubmitCareer opportunities Follow us © 2024 Frontiers Media S.A. All rights reserved Privacy policy | Terms and conditionsSwine influenza virus triggers ferroptosis in A549 cells to enhance virus replication | Virology Journal | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search Virology Journal Home About Articles Sections Submission Guidelines Submit manuscript Swine influenza virus triggers ferroptosis in A549 cells to enhance virus replication Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 17 June 2022 Swine influenza virus triggers ferroptosis in A549 cells to enhance virus replication Jinghua Cheng1,2,3, Jie Tao1,2,3, Benqiang Li1,2,3, Ying Shi1,2,3 & …Huili Liu1,2,3 Show authors Virology Journal volume 19, Article number: 104 (2022) Cite this article 7595 Accesses 27 Citations 11 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundRecently, Influenza A virus (IAV) has been shown to activate several programmed cell death pathways that play essential roles in host defense. Indeed, cell death caused by viral infection may be mediated by a mixed pattern of cell death instead of a certain single mode. Ferroptosis is a novel form of regulated cell death (RCD) that is mainly mediated by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation. Based on the proteomic data, we wondered whether IAV causes ferroptosis in host cells.MethodIn this study, a quantitative proteomics approach based on an iTRAQ combined with LC–MS/MS was used to profile proteins expressed in A549 cells infected with H1N1 swine influenza virus (SIV). Meanwhile, we measured the intracellular iron content, reactive oxygen species (ROS) release and lipid peroxidation in response to SIV infection. Finally, a drug experiment was conducted to investigate the effects of ferroptosis on modulating SIV survival.ResultsThe bioinformatics analysis revealed several proteins closely relevant to iron homeostasis and transport, and the ferroptosis signaling pathway are highly enriched in response to SIV infection. In our experiment, aberrant expression of iron-binding proteins disrupted labile iron uptake and storage after SIV infection. Meanwhile, SIV infection inhibited system the Xc−/GPX4 axis resulting in GSH depletion and the accumulation of lipid peroxidation products. Notably, cell death caused by SIV as a result of iron-dependent lipid peroxidation can be partially rescued by ferroptosis inhibitor. Additionally, blockade of the ferroptotic pathway by ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) treatment decreased viral titers and inflammatory response.ConclusionsThis study revealed a new mode of cell death induced by IAV infection, and our findings might improve the understanding of the underlying mechanism involved in the interaction of virus and host cells. BackgroundInfluenza A virus (IAV) is a negative-sense RNA virus in the Orthomyxoviridae family. Swine influenza (SI) is caused by IAV and is an important acute respiratory disease in the swine industry. The major strains found in swine herds are the H1N1, H1N2 and H3N2 subtypes. Pigs are often considered as a “mixing vessel” for the generation of reassorted influenza viruses because they are highly susceptible to human and avian influenza virus infection [1]. The pathogenicity of influenza viruses is determined by many factors, and IAV have evolved strategies that modulate host responses to facilitate their propagation and infectivity [2, 3].Cell death is crucial for various physiological processes in multicellular organisms. Ferroptosis is a novel form of regulated cell death (RCD) that is mainly mediated by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation. Occurrence of ferroptosis is characterized by the elevated levels of iron and phospholipid peroxides [4]. Excessive iron promotes reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation through the Fenton reaction and accelerates lipid peroxidation [5]. The glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) and system Xc− pathways are considered to be the primary signaling pathways associated with ferroptosis [6]. GPX4 reduces the lipid peroxidation rate at the expense of antioxidant glutathione (GSH), preventing cells from undergoing ferroptosis. System Xc− is an amino acid antiporter that mediates the exchange of extracellular cystine and intracellular glutamate across the plasma membrane, which is an important process for GSH synthesis. Inhibition of system Xc− induces ferroptosis through cysteine deprivation, subsequent GSH depletion, and ultimately inactivation of GPX4 [7]. One of the many factors that modulates cell death is viral infection. However, research on ferroptosis mediating the viral response is scarce, and whether IAV can induce ferroptosis is still unknown. In addition, few studies have investigated the role of ferroptosis in modulating virus survival.Previous studies have shown that IAV infection can cause multiple forms of cell death, and the molecular mechanisms driving these pathways vary. The best-studied mechanism of IAV-induced cell death is apoptosis, which has been reported in numerous cell types [8,9,10]. Some IAV strains have also been implicated in manipulating autophagy, necrosis, necroptosis and pyroptosis [11,12,13]. Indeed, cell death caused by viral infection may involve a mixed pattern of cell death, not a certain single mode. In addition to those have been reported, IAV may also induce ferroptosis, as suggested by our proteomic analysis. We showed that SIV-induced ferroptosis depends on labile iron accumulation, ROS release as well as lipid peroxidation, thus, fits the major criteria for ferroptosis. Furthermore, we found that blocking the ferroptotic pathway using ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) treatment suppressed ferroptosis and subsequently modulated SIV replication. Together, this study revealed a novel mode of cell death induced by IAV infection, which might improve our understanding of the underlying mechanism involved in the interaction between viruses and host cells. Additionally, ferroptosis was identified as a component of the host response to SIV infection that benefited the virus.Materials and methodsCells and virusesThe H1N1 SIV A/swine/Shanghai/3/2014 (SH/2014) strain was isolated in our laboratory from pigs with clinical symptoms of swine influenza. A549 cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA) and maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 37 °C with 5% CO2.Sample preparation for proteomic analysis, protein isolation and iTRAQ reagent labelingA549 cells infected with SIV strain SH/2014 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 or uninfected cells were collected at 24 h post-infection (h.p.i.). The cells were lysed with 400 µL of lysis buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8), 6 M urea and 0.2% SDS) followed by ultrasonication on ice for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 1 h and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide for 1 h. The extracted proteins were precipitated with precooled acetone, washed twice, and dissolved in dissolution buffer containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 8 M urea (pH 8.5). The protein concentration was quantified with a Bradford protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). 100 μg of each protein sample was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 °C overnight and then labeled with different iTRAQ tags (iTRAQ® Reagent-8PLEX Multiplex Kit, Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The SIV-infected samples were labeled with iTRAQ 113 (IT113), iTRAQ 114 (IT114), or iTRAQ 115 (IT115), and the mock-infected samples were labeled with iTRAQ 116 (IT116), iTRAQ 117 (IT117), or iTRAQ 118 (118). The labeled samples were then mixed with shaking for 2 h at room temperature (RT). The reaction was stopped by adding 100 μL of 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH = 8). All labeled samples were mixed to be of equal volume, desalted and lyophilized.HPLC fractionationThe iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were fractionated using a Waters BEH C18 column (5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm) with a Rigol L3000 HPLC system. The column oven temperature was set to 50 °C. Mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile adjusted to pH 10.0 using ammonium hydroxide) and mobile phase B (98% acetonitrile adjusted to pH 10.0 using ammonium hydroxide) were used to develop a gradient elution. The solvent gradient was set as follows: 3% B, 5 min; 3–8% B, 0.1 min; 8–18% B, 11.9 min; 18–32% B, 11 min; 32–45% B, 7 min; 45–80% B, 3 min; 80% B, 5 min; 80–5%, 0.1 min; and 5% B, 6.9 min. The elutes were collected every minute in a tube, and 10 fractions were pooled. All fractions were vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA) for subsequent LC–MS/MS analysis.LC–MS/MS analysisThe LC–MS/MS analysis was performed by Novogene Bioinformatics Technology Co. Ltd. The fractionated peptides were analyzed with an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. During data acquisition, the mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and a capillary temperature of 320 °C. The full MS scan resolution was set to 60,000 (at 200 m/z) with an (automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 106 for a scan range of 350–1500 m/z. Forty precursors of with the highest abundances in the full scan were fragmented for higher-energy collision dissociation and subjected to MS/MS analysis with the following parameters: resolution, 15,000 (at m/z 200); AGC target value, 5 × 104; the maximum ion injection time, 45 ms; normalized collision energy, 32%; the intensity threshold, 2.2 × 104; the dynamic exclusion parameter, 60 s.Proteomics data normalization and analysisThe MS raw data files obtained with an Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer were searched with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 search engine (PD 2.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the UniProt database (homo_sapiens_uniprot_2019.01.18.fasta, containing 169,425 sequences). To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides identified at the 99% confidence interval through a Proteome Discoverer probability analysis were counted. For protein quantitation, each confident protein identification contained at least one unique peptide, and the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was no more than 1.0%. The protein quantitation results were statistically analyzed by Mann–Whitney Tests. Only a protein with a fold change ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67 and a P < 0.05 was considered a significantly differentially expressed proteins (DEP).Bioinformatic analysisFunctional classification of DEPs was performed using a Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis (http://www.geneontology.org/). Pathway enrichment analysis of DEPs was carried out using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/). The significance of a KEGG enrichment pathway with a Bonferroni corrected P < 0.05 (q value) was determined using a hypergeometric test.Cell viability assayCell viability was determined using cell counting kit-8 reagent (CCK-8, Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, A549 cells were seeded in 96-well culture plates at a density of 1 × 104 cells per well and cultured for 24 h at 37 °C. The cells were then infected with SIV at an MOI of 0.01, 0.1, or 1 or treated with 10 μM erastin (Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX, USA) as a positive control. Cells were treated with or without the ferroptosis inhibitor Fer-1 (1 μM, Selleck Chemicals) 1 h before SIV infection to determine the role of ferroptosis in SIV-infected cells. After culture for 24 h, 10 μL of the CCK-8 reaction mixture were added to each well and incubated at 37 °C for 4 h. The absorbance of each well was measured at 450 nm with a microplate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the corresponding optical density ratio was expressed as cell viability.Cell morphologyFor the analysis of cell morphology, A549 cells were seeded in 6-well plates and infected with SIV at an MOI of 1 or treated with 10 μM erastin for 24 h. Fer-1 (1 μM) was added 1 h before SIV infection to inhibit cell ferroptosis. Afterward, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at RT and washed with PBS. Images were captured using a Carl Zeiss (Oberkochen, Germany) converted fluorescence microscope (20 × objective).Measurement of cellular iron levelThe intracellular Fe2+ levels were detected using the iron assay kit (Abcam, Cambridge, UK). Briefly, after treatment of the different groups, cells were washed with cold PBS and homogenized in iron assay buffer for 30 min at 37 °C. Sample was then added with iron probe and incubated at 37 °C for 60 min. The absorbance was read at 593 nm. The BCA protein determination method was used for total protein quantification, and the cellular iron concentration is presented as μM/mg protein. The intracellular Fe2+ levels were also detected using FerroOrange probes (Dojindo, Japan) following the manufacturer’s instructions, and Fe2+ image of the living cells was performed using a fluorescence microscope.ROS measurementChanges in intracellular ROS levels were using DCFDA/H2DCFDA in cellular ROS assay kits (Abcam). Briefly, A549 cells were cultured in 6-well plates at a density of 2 × 105 cells per well and allowed to attach overnight. After treatment, cells in groups were labeled with 20 µM DCFDA and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Stained cells were washed with PBS and transferred to FACS tubes. The fluorescence of each probe was detected using a CytoFLEX flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Suzhou, China) and analyzed by FlowJo software.Lipid peroxidation assayLipid peroxidation was determined by measuring the malondialdehyde (MDA) level with a lipid peroxidation MDA assay kit (Beyotime Biotechnology). Briefly, cells were homogenized and the supernatant was mixed with thiobarbituric acid (TBA)-glacial acetic acid reagent. Then, the TBA-MDA mixture was heated at 100 °C for 1 h. The absorbance was measured at 532 nm with a microplate reader and the MDA concentration was calculated as μM/mg protein. Lipid peroxidation was also confirmed by fluorescence observations using Liperfluo (Dojindo, Kumamoto, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After an incubation with the indicated treatments, cells were stained with 5 μmol/L Liperfluo and Hoechst nuclear stain and then visualized under a florescence microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).Reductive GSH content and NADP.+/NADPH assayThe intracellular levels of reductive GSH and NADP+/NADPH were determined using a GSSG/GSH quantification kit (Dojindo) and an NADP+/NADPH assay kit (Beyotime Biotechnology) respectively, following the manufacturer's instructions.Western blottingA549 cells were infected with SIV at an MOI of 1 for the indicated times or treated with 1 μM Fer-1 1 h before SIV infection. The cells were collected and lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime), denatured and loaded on 10% gels for SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The protein bands were then transferred onto 0.2-μm nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), blocked with 5% nonfat milk, and incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies against SLC7A11 (Cell Signaling Technology), SLC3A2L (Abcam), GPX4 (Santa Cruz), transferrin (TF) (Abcam), transferrin receptor (TFRC) (Abcam), NS1 protein (prepared in our lab) and β-actin (Cell Signaling Technology). Membranes were washed and incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology) for 1 h. The antibody-labeled proteins were detected by chemiluminescence using SuperSignal West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescence Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an Amersham Imager 600 (Cytiva Sweden AB, America). Densitometry analysis was performed using the ImageJ software.Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT–PCR)To explore the function of ferroptosis inhibitor treatment on SIV-induced inflammatory cytokine expression, A549 cells were treated with or without Fer-1 before SIV infection and then subjected to qRT–PCR analyses to measure the mRNA levels of IL-6, IL-8, IL-1β and TNF-α at 24 h.p.i.. Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA synthesis was performed using a SuperScript III kit (Invitrogen) and oligo-dT primer. 50 ng of the cDNA product was used as the template for qRT–PCR in a final volume of 10 μl containing SYBR Premix Ex Taq II (TaKaRa, Dalian, China). qRT–PCR was performed on a 7500 Real Time PCR System apparatus (ABI, Madison, WI, USA). The amplification conditions consisted of 95 °C for 30 s and 40 cycles of 95 °C for 5 s, 60 °C for 30 s, and 95 °C for 15 s. The changes in the levels of target mRNAs are presented as fold changes and were calculated using the comparative Ct method as previously described. The following primer sequences were used for amplification: IL-6 (F:AAGCCAGAGCTGTGCAGATGAGTA, R:TGTCCTGCAGCCACTGGTTC), IL-8 (F:TTTCAGAGACAGCAGAGCACA, R:CACACAGAGCTGCAGAAATCAG), IL-1β (F:GCTGATGGCCCTAAACAGATGA, R:TCCATGGCCACAACAACTGAC), TNF-α (F:CTCAGCAAGGACAGCAGAGG, R:ATGTGGCGTCTGAGGGTTGTT), GAPDH (F:GCACCGTCAAGGCTGAGAAC, R:TGGTGAAGACGCCAGTGGA). Titration of virusesA549 cells grown in 96-well plates were treated with Fer-1 and then infected with SIV at an MOI of 1. The cells were then incubated for 24 h. The supernatant of infected culture was harvested, serially diluted and titrated in MDCK cells. Virus titers were calculated by the Reed-Muench method and were expressed as TCID50 per milliliter of supernatant.Statistical analysisGraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) was used for the data analyses and graph creation. All the data are presented as the means ± standard deviations (SD). The significance was determined with either unpaired two-tailed independent Student’s t test for comparisons between two groups or one-way ANOVA. A p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.ResultsDetermination of the protein profile using iTRAQ labeling combined with LC–MS/MS analysisThe proteome profiles of mock- and SIV- infected cells were compared after iTRAQ labeling coupled with LC–MS/MS analysis. In A549 cells infected with SIV strain SH-2014, a total of 5874 proteins were identified and quantified. A volcano plot analysis was constructed and analyzed using the criteria a fold-change ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67 in protein expression and P ≤ 0.05 between mock- and SIV-infected cells (Fig. 1A). Based on these thresholds, 79 DEPs were identified in SIV-infected cells (Additional file 1: Table S1). The expression of 9 DEPs was upregulated, and that of 70 DEPs was significantly downregulated.Fig. 1Overview of the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in SIV-infected cells. A Volcano plots of the DEPs in SIV-infected cells. Fold-changes ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67 and P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Red dots, significantly upregulated proteins; green dots, significantly downregulated proteins. B The top five significantly enriched GO terms of ‘cellular component’, ‘biological process’ and ‘molecular function’ in SIV-infected cells. C KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of DEPs. D Abundance patterns of DEPs in four significantly enriched pathways in SIV-infected cells. E DEPs (TF, TFRC, SLC39A14, ATG7, and NCOA4) expression in the ferroptosis pathway of SIV-infected or mock-infected cells. The western-blot ratio and iTRAQ ratio (SIV infection group/mock group) are shown on the rightFull size imageBioinformatics analysis of the proteome of SIV-infected cellsBased on GO enrichment analysis, all identified DEPs were assigned to three GO term categories: “cellular component”, “biological process” or “molecular function” (Additional file 2: Table S2). The five terms most significantly enriched with DEPs in SIV-infected cells are presented for each GO term category in Fig. 1B. Notably, in the biological process category, the “metal ion transport” (3 DEPs) and “iron ion homeostasis” (2 DEPs) annotations were discovered for the SIV-infected cells, indicating that intracellular iron transport and homeostasis are altered during SIV infection. Overall, GO annotations provide a comprehensive overview of the molecular characterization of SIV-infected cells. In addition, the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis showed that four metabolic pathways (q < 0.05) were enriched after SIV infection (Fig. 1D), of which ferroptosis was the most significantly enriched pathway (q = 0.0016, < 0.01). Besides, DEPs including TFRC, TF, NCOA4, SLC39A14 and ATG7 in the ferroptosis pathway showed decreased expression.To confirm the expression levels of the DEPs in the ferroptosis pathway during SIV infection, five DEPs (TFRC, TF, NCOA4, SLC39A14 and ATG7) were assessed by western blot analysis. The results showed that the expression of TFRC, TF, NCOA4, SLC39A14 and ATG7 was decreased to some extent after SIV infection at 24 h.p.i., similar to the results obtained using the iTRAQ approach (Fig. 1E).SIV infection triggers the ferroptosis in A549 cellsTo confirm that ferroptosis is triggered after SIV infection, A549 cells were infected with SIV at an MOI of 0.01, 0.1 or 1 for 24 h. The ferroptosis inducer, erastin, was used as the positive control. Cell viability analysis showed that SIV infection significantly decreased cell viability in a dose-dependent manner. As shown in Fig. 2A, the viability of A549 cells infected with of SIV at an MOI of 0.01, 0.1 or 1 was 90.4 ± 1.6%, 80.1 ± 2.0% and 67.5 ± 4.7%, respectively, at 24 h.p.i.. Compared to the cells infected with SIV alone, the viability of SIV-infected cells treated with the ferroptosis inhibitor Fer-1 are up approximately 26.5%, indicating that decrease in cell viability caused by SIV can be mitigated by ferroptosis inhibitors(Fig. 2B). Moreover, the morphology of the SIV-infected cells was characterized by cytological changes, including cell shrinkage without nucleus rupture, and death. However, a normal morphology was partially restored by Fer-1 treatment (Fig. 2C). Thus, a ferroptosis inhibitor blocked the SIV-induced cell death of A549 cells, indicating that SIV infection may lead to cell death through ferroptosis.Fig. 2Changes in the viability of A549 cells in response to SIV. A A549 cells were infected of SIV at an MOI of 0.01, 0.1, 1 MOI or treated with erastin (10 μM) for 24 h, and cell viability was measured using the CCK-8 method. B A549 cells were treated with Fer-1 (1 μM) or not 1 h before infection with SIV (MOI of 1), and cell viability was measured at 24 h.p.i.. Erastin (10 μM) was used as the positive control, and Fer-1 (1 μM) was used as the ferroptosis inhibitor. C Morphological changes in cells were observed after treatment with or without Fer-1 (1 μM) 1 h before cells were infected with SIV (MOI of 1). Images were captured at a magnification of 20 × 24 h after treatment by microscopy. The error bars represent the SD of the means on the basis of three independent experiments. (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01)Full size imageSIV-induced ferroptosis is associated with increased intracellular iron levels and oxidative stressSince ferroptosis is mainly characterized by intracellular iron overload and redox imbalance, we first measured the intracellular Fe2+ level with an iron assay kit. As expected, SIV infection significantly increased the Fe2+ level in living cells, and Fer-1 treatment of these cells inhibited SIV-induced Fe2+ levels to some extent (Fig. 3A, B). Intracellular iron Overload can results in excessive ROS generation via the Fenton reaction and, thus, to oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation, ultimately inducing ferroptosis. We examined cellular ROS levels by staining with a DCFDA probe followed by flow cytometry and observed an increased prevalence of ROS accumulation in SIV-infected and erastin-treated cells, while Fer-1 treatment decreased this SIV-induced ROS generation (Fig. 3B). MDA is a product of lipid peroxidation. SIV infection increased MDA levels in A549 cells, but it significantly reduced in cells by treated with Fer-1 before SIV infection (Fig. 3C). Lipid peroxidation was also detected using Liperfluo staining, and the fluorescence signal was found increased in SIV-infected cells, confirming that SIV induced lipid peroxidation in A549 cells (Fig. 3D). As an important antioxidant, GSH is an important factor in determining antioxidant capacity. Therefore, we examined changes in the GSH level upon SIV infection. The results showed that SIV infection led to a remarkable depletion of GSH compared with the control, and this decrease in GSH levels impaired cellular antioxidant defenses. As a coenzyme of GSH reductase, NADPH maintains the GSH content in cells. As shown in Fig. 3F, decreased levels of NADPH were observed in response to SIV infection. Consistently, the reduction in GSH and NADPH levels in SIV-infected cells was also mitigated by Fer-1. Taken together, SIV infection induces iron overload, ROS accumulation and lipid peroxidation through an iron-dependent mechanism, consistent with ferroptosis.Fig. 3SIV induces cell death through ferroptosis. A549 cells were treated with or without 1 μM Fer-1 1 h before infection with SIV at an MOI of 1. The A, B Fe2+ concentration, C ROS level, D MDA concentration, E lipid peroxidation, F reduced GSH content, and G NADP + /NADPH ratio were determined. The error bars represent the SD of the means from three independent experiments. (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01)Full size imageSystem Xc.−/GPX4 suppression and transferrin disorder contribute to SIV induced ferroptosisAs ferroptosis is caused by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation, and transferrin-mediated iron transport into cells is the most common iron uptake pathway, we hypothesized that SIV infection results in an imbalance in iron metabolism in cells. As shown in Fig. 4A, TF and TFRC expression was significantly increased in SIV-treated cells at 12 h.p.i., which is consistent with the high iron content in the SIV infection group. However, the expression of TF and TFRC was decreased at 24 h.p.i., and it may affect iron transport and eventually lead to iron disorder in cells. The system Xc−/GPX4 axis suppresses lipid peroxidation and is a vital pathway involved in inhibiting ferroptosis. In the current study, SIV infection suppressed the expression of the two system Xc− subunits SLC3A2 and SLC7A11 in a time-dependent manner, and GPX4 expression was simultaneously downregulated. Additionally, downregulation of SLC7A11, SLC3A2 and GPX4 expression by SIV infection was partially rescued by Fer-1 treatment, confirming that SIV induced ferroptosis by inhibiting the system Xc−/GPX4 axis (Fig. 4B). Collectively, our results demonstrated that SIV infection causes intercellular iron disorder, inhibits system Xc−/GPX4 axis activation, and subsequently promotes cell lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis.Fig. 4SIV induces ferroptosis by suppressing the system Xc−/GPX4 axis. A A549 cells were infected with SIV at an MOI of 1. At 6, 12, and 24 h.p.i., the expression of GPX4, SLC7A11, SLC3A2, TF, and TFRC was determined by western blot. β-actin was the loading control. B A549 cells were treated with Fer-1 (1 μM), Lip-1 (200 μM) or not followed by infection with SIV at an MOI of 1. At 24 h, the expression of GPX4, SLC7A11, SLC3A2, TF, and TFRC was determined by western blotFull size imageFerroptosis induced by SIV is critical for virus replication and inflammatory responses in A549 cellsTo measure the effect of ferroptosis on SIV infection, SIV-infected cells were treated with or without Fer-1, the supernatant was collected, and the progeny virus in the supernatant was detected by TCID50 assay at the indicated time points. The SIV titers were reduced in Fer-1 treated cells, but with the extension of SIV infection after 24 h.p.i., the effect of Fer-1 on reducing the viral titer decreased. As shown in Fig. 5A, Fer-1 treated cells presented approximately 4.7-fold lower titers at 12 h.p.i and 11-fold lower titers at 24 h.p.i., respectively, compared with untreated cells.. A western blot analysis showed that Fer-1 treatment also inhibited the expression of SIV NS1 protein, showing a reduction of approximately by 43% at 12 h.p.i. and 77% at 24 h.p.i., but no differences in NS1 protein expression were observed between the two groups at 48 h.p.i.. (Fig. 5B). We also used another ferroptosis inhibitor, liproxstatin-1(Lip-1) to exclude the specific actions of Fer-1, and we got the similar results to the Fer-1 treatment. Moreover, we investigated the effect of SIV-induced ferroptosis on inflammatory cytokine production. As shown in Fig. 5C, both erastin treated cells and SIV-infected cells exhibited higher expression of the IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8 mRNAs at 24 h.p.i. and the expression of IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8 was much more strongly induced by SIV infection. In SIV-infected cells treated with Fer-1, inflammatory cytokine production was significantly impaired, although it was still higher than that in the mock groups. These data demonstrated that inhibition of ferroptosis exerts anti-inflammatory effects during SIV infection.Fig. 5Effect of ferroptosis inhibitor on SIV replication and SIV-induced cytokine expression. A549 cells were treated with Fer-1 (1 μM) or not followed by infection with SIV at an MOI of 1. A Viral growth in A549 cells is reported as the TCID50 value 12, 24, 48 and 72 h.p.i.. B Cell lysates were collected at 12, 24 and 72 h.p.i. for western blot analysis of SIV NS1 protein levels. C IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8 mRNA levels in the cell lysates were quantified by qRT–PCR. The error bars represent the SD of the means on the basis of three independent experiments (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01)Full size imageDiscussionAs a form of iron-dependent cell death, ferroptosis is characterized by intracellular iron overload and lipid peroxidation. Recently, IAV has been reported to induce several programmed cell death pathways, such as apoptosis, cell necrosis, necroptosis and pyroptosis, which play essential roles in the host defense against IAV infection. In this study, iTRAQ labing combined with LC–MS/MS proteomic was used to profile protein expression in A549 cells infected with H1N1 SIV. Several proteins closely relevant to iron homeostasis and transport were identified and the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis showed that the ferroptosis signaling pathway was highly enriched in response to SIV infection. After considering these data, we aimed to determine whether SIV infection can induce a newly discovered cell death form, ferroptosis, and the potential mechanisms involved.Iron is involved in regulating many important biological processes, including redox reactions, cell proliferation, the cell cycle, and DNA synthesis. Therefore, iron homeostasis needs to be maintained in the cellular environment. Intracellular iron uptake mainly depends on TFRC, a carrier protein, that binds TF at the cell surface, thereby controlling intracellular iron levels [14]. Our results showed that TF and TFRC expression in A549 cells was increased 6 and 12 h.p.i., but their levels were unexpectedly downregulated at 24 h.p.i.. The results showed the excessive iron uptake and storage were induced by SIV infection, and downregulated expression of carrier proteins TF and TFRC can be interpreted as a compensation mechanism for defensive measures. We hypothesize that supplemental feedback is activated to initiate protective measures against uptake of excessive iron. Pathological labile iron disorder leads to rapid ROS accumulation, which is essential for ferroptosis. The data reported herein suggested that iron accumulates and the expression of iron-binding proteins is altered after SIV infection, facilitating A549 cell ferroptosis.ROS accumulation has been measured in infections with many different viruses, and the failure to maintain a normal cellular redox state contributes to viral pathogenesis through the substantial induction of cell death [15]. A previous study confirmed that ROS are strongly associated with a variety of cell death pathways including necroptosis, ferroptosis and autophagic cell death [16]. In dengue virus (DENV), for instance, ROS are essential for driving mitochondrial apoptosis of infected monocyte-derived dendritic cells and stimulate innate immune responses [17]. You et al. revealed a mechanism by which enterovirus 71 induces apoptosis and autophagy by promoting ROS generation in neural cells [18]. ROS production has also been reported to be required for activation of macroautophagy/autophagy during IAV infection [19]. In the present study, we found that ferroptosis inhibitor reversed the effects of SIV infection on iron overload and ROS release. Consistently, MDA production, GSH and NADPH depletion associated with the response to SIV infection were all mitigated by treatment with ferroptosis inhibitor. System Xc− is an amino acid antiporter that mediates cystine import for the synthesis of the major antioxidant GSH. It consists of a light-chain subunit xCT (SLC7A11) and a heavy-chain subunit CD98 (SLC3A2) [20, 21]. Inhibition of system Xc− impairs GSH production and inactivation of the phospholipid peroxidase GPX4, eventually resulting in overwhelming lipid peroxidation that causes cell death [22]. In the present study, SLC7A11, SLC3A2L and GPX4 levels were all reduced in SIV-infected cells and this effect was partially reversed by Fer-1, supporting that SIV infection regulate system Xc−/GPX4 axis to improve ferroptosis.Recently, ferroptosis has been suggested to induce autophagy. Park et al. confirmed that autophagy was triggered by erastin-induced ROS in ferroptosis [23]. They found that erastin-induced ferroptotic cell death was clearly inhibited in autophagy-deficient cells, suggesting that ferroptosis is an autophagic cell death process. Similarly, Gao et al. documented that ferroptosis initiation activates autophagy to regulate cellular iron homeostasis and cellular ROS generation. In particular, autophagy leads to the degradation of the cellular iron stock protein ferritin and cause an increase in cellular labile iron levels via the NCOA4-mediated autophagy pathway, termed ferritinophagy [24]. NCOA4 is a selective cargo receptor that mediates the autophagic degradation of ferritin in ferroptosis. In our bioinformatics and immunoblotting analyses, NCOA4 was significantly downregulated by SIV infection at 24 h.p.i.. Additionally, the level of ATG 7, which is critical for the formation of autophagosomes, decreased within 24 h.p.i.. The downregulation of ATG7 and NCOA4 expression may have been due to their binding to ferritin in autophagosomes and their subsequent delivery into lysosomes for degradation, thereby releasing iron through the autophagic process [25, 26]. Thus, autophagy is accompanied by ferroptosis and these processes are related to one another somehow. Functional characterization of the ATG7-NCOA4 autophagy pathway in SIV-induced ferroptosis needs further study.IAV infections lead to inflammatory cytokine secretion or even excessive inflammatory reactions known as the cytokine storm. Intracellular pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) such as retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) or Toll-like receptors, typically recognize viral RNA and trigger inflammation [27]. Recently study showed that ferroptosis affects inflammation through immunogenicity, and excessive iron is detrimental to the redox balance and can further enhance the production of inflammatory factors [28]. In studies of secondary brain injury (SBI), Zhang et al. reported that ferroptosis inhibitor could ameliorate brain injury. They found that inhibiting ferroptosis with Fer-1 significantly reduced the levels of ROS and certain inflammatory factors, such as IL-1β and TNFα, in a rat model [29]. Similar to SBI, radiation-induced lung fibrosis (RILF) is considered to involve excessive ROS-induced oxidative damage as the initiation of inflammation. For example, Li et al. showed that Lip-1 treatment blocked RILF by downregulating inflammatory factors [30]. In the present study, ferroptosis inhibitors alleviated virus-induced inflammation, as indicated by the increases in IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8 levels caused by SIV infection, which were abrogated by Fer-1 treatment. In summary, ferroptosis inhibitors have shown significant benefits when applied to certain diseases because of their anti-inflammatory effects and may be potential new therapeutic treatments that protect cells from the dysregulated cytokine production induced by SIV infection.ConclusionsIn summary, SIV infection disrupts intracellular iron and redox homeostasis. Meanwhile, SIV infection inhibits the system Xc−/GPX4 axis, which contributes to overwhelming lipid peroxidation, subsequently leading to cell ferroptosis. In addition, the downregulation of ATG 7 and NCOA4 may imply that autophagy is accompanied by ferroptosis during SIV infection. Availability of data and materials All data generated or analysed during this study were available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. AbbreviationsIAV: Influenza A virus SIV: Swine influenza virus ROS: Reactive oxygen species GPX4: Glutathione peroxidase 4 GSH: Glutathione Fer-1: Ferrostatin-1 Lip-1: Liproxstatin-1 DEPs: Differentially expressed proteins MDA: Malondialdehyde TF: Transferrin TFRC: Transferrin receptor MOI: Multiplicity of infection h.p.i.: Hours post infection GO: Gene ontology KEGG: Encyclopedia of genes and genomes ReferencesScholtissek C. Source for influenza pandemics. Eur J Epidemiol. 1994;10:455–8.Article CAS Google Scholar Jung KI, Pyo CW, Choi SY. Influenza A virus-induced autophagy contributes to enhancement of virus infectivity by SOD1 downregulation in alveolar epithelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018;498:960–6.Article CAS Google Scholar Hale BG, Albrecht RA, García-Sastre A. Innate immune evasion strategies of influenza viruses. Future Microbiol. 2010;5:23–41.Article Google Scholar Dixon SJ, Lemberg KM, Lamprecht MR, Skouta R, Zaitsev EM, Gleason CE, Patel DN, Bauer AJ, Cantley AM, Yang WS, et al. Ferroptosis: an iron-dependent form of nonapoptotic cell death. Cell. 2012;149:1060–72.Article CAS Google Scholar Xu T, Ding W, Ji X, Ao X, Liu Y, Yu W, Wang J. Molecular mechanisms of ferroptosis and its role in cancer therapy. J Cell Mol Med. 2019;23:4900–12.Article Google Scholar Cao JY, Dixon SJ. Mechanisms of ferroptosis. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2016;73:2195–209.Article CAS Google Scholar Conrad M, Sato H. The oxidative stress-inducible cystine/glutamate antiporter, system x (c) (-): cystine supplier and beyond. Amino Acids. 2012;42:231–46.Article CAS Google Scholar Chang P, Kuchipudi SV, Mellits KH, Sebastian S, James J, Liu J, Shelton H, Chang KC. Early apoptosis of porcine alveolar macrophages limits avian influenza virus replication and pro-inflammatory dysregulation. Sci Rep. 2015;5:17999.Article CAS Google Scholar Lam WY, Tang JW, Yeung AC, Chiu LC, Sung JJ, Chan PK. Avian influenza virus A/HK/483/97(H5N1) NS1 protein induces apoptosis in human airway epithelial cells. J Virol. 2008;82:2741–51.Article CAS Google Scholar Tripathi S, Batra J, Cao W, Sharma K, Patel JR, Ranjan P, Kumar A, Katz JM, Cox NJ, Lal RB, et al. Influenza A virus nucleoprotein induces apoptosis in human airway epithelial cells: implications of a novel interaction between nucleoprotein and host protein Clusterin. Cell Death Dis. 2013;4:e562.Article CAS Google Scholar Mosavi SZ, Shahsavandi S, Ebrahimi MM, Hatami AR, Sadeghi K, Shahivandi H. Necrotic response to low pathogenic h9n2 influenza virus in chicken hepatoma cells. Jundishapur J Microbiol. 2015;8:e13770.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hartmann BM. Albrecht RA (2017) Pandemic H1N1 influenza A viruses suppress immunogenic RIPK3-driven dendritic cell death. Nat Commun. 1931;2017:8. Google Scholar Gannagé M, Dormann D, Albrecht R, Dengjel J, Torossi T, Rämer PC, Lee M, Strowig T, Arrey F, Conenello G, et al. Matrix protein 2 of influenza A virus blocks autophagosome fusion with lysosomes. Cell Host Microbe. 2009;6:367–80.Article Google Scholar Gammella E, Buratti P, Cairo G, Recalcati S. The transferrin receptor: the cellular iron gate. Metallomics. 2017;9:1367–75.Article CAS Google Scholar Checconi P, De Angelis M. Redox-modulating agents in the treatment of viral infections. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21:4084.Article CAS Google Scholar Su LJ, Zhang JH, Gomez H, Murugan R, Hong X, Xu D, Jiang F, Peng ZY. Reactive oxygen species-induced lipid peroxidation in apoptosis. Autophagy Ferroptosis. 2019;2019:5080843. Google Scholar Olagnier D, Peri S, Steel C, van Montfoort N, Chiang C, Beljanski V, Slifker M, He Z, Nichols CN, Lin R, et al. Cellular oxidative stress response controls the antiviral and apoptotic programs in dengue virus-infected dendritic cells. PLoS Pathog. 2014;10:e1004566.Article Google Scholar You L, Chen J, Liu W, Xiang Q, Luo Z, Wang W, Xu W, Wu K, Zhang Q. Enterovirus 71 induces neural cell apoptosis and autophagy through promoting ACOX1 downregulation and ROS generation. Virulence. 2020;11:537–53.Article CAS Google Scholar Wang R, Zhu Y, Lin X, Ren C, Zhao J, Wang F, Gao X, Xiao R, Zhao L, Chen H, et al. Influenza M2 protein regulates MAVS-mediated signaling pathway through interacting with MAVS and increasing ROS production. Autophagy. 2019;15:1163–81.Article CAS Google Scholar Xie Y, Hou W, Song X, Yu Y, Huang J, Sun X, Kang R, Tang D. Ferroptosis: process and function. Cell Death Differ. 2016;23:369–79.Article CAS Google Scholar Bridges RJ, Natale NR, Patel SA. System xc− cystine/glutamate antiporter: an update on molecular pharmacology and roles within the CNS. Br J Pharmacol. 2012;165:20–34.Article CAS Google Scholar Stockwell BR, Friedmann Angeli JP, Bayir H, Bush AI, Conrad M, Dixon SJ, Fulda S, Gascón S, Hatzios SK, Kagan VE, et al. Ferroptosis: a regulated cell death nexus linking metabolism, redox biology, and disease. Cell. 2017;171:273–85.Article CAS Google Scholar Park E, Chung SW. ROS-mediated autophagy increases intracellular iron levels and ferroptosis by ferritin and transferrin receptor regulation. Cell Death Dis. 2019;10:822.Article Google Scholar Latunde-Dada GO. Ferroptosis: role of lipid peroxidation, iron and ferritinophagy. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj. 2017;1861:1893–900.Article CAS Google Scholar Hou W, Xie Y, Song X, Sun X, Lotze MT, Zeh HJ 3rd, Kang R, Tang D. Autophagy promotes ferroptosis by degradation of ferritin. Autophagy. 2016;12:1425–8.Article CAS Google Scholar Torii S, Shintoku R, Kubota C, Yaegashi M, Torii R, Sasaki M, Suzuki T, Mori M, Yoshimoto Y, Takeuchi T, Yamada K. An essential role for functional lysosomes in ferroptosis of cancer cells. Biochem J. 2016;473:769–77.Article CAS Google Scholar Malik G, Zhou Y. Innate immune sensing of influenza A virus. Viruses. 2020;12:755.Article CAS Google Scholar Sun Y, Chen P, Zhai B, Zhang M, Xiang Y, Fang J, Xu S, Gao Y, Chen X, Sui X, Li G. The emerging role of ferroptosis in inflammation. Biomed Pharmacother. 2020;127:110108.Article CAS Google Scholar Zhang Z, Wu Y, Yuan S, Zhang P, Zhang J, Li H, Li X, Shen H, Wang Z, Chen G. Glutathione peroxidase 4 participates in secondary brain injury through mediating ferroptosis in a rat model of intracerebral hemorrhage. Brain Res. 2018;1701:112–25.Article CAS Google Scholar Li X, Duan L, Yuan S, Zhuang X, Qiao T, He J. Ferroptosis inhibitor alleviates Radiation-induced lung fibrosis (RILF) via down-regulation of TGF-β1. J Inflamm. 2019;16:11.Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the veterinary research institute of Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Science.FundingThis work was funded by the Shanghai Sailing Program (No. 19YF1443400), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 32002319), and SAAS Program for Excellent Research Team (No. 2022012).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsInstitute of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Science, Shanghai, 201106, People’s Republic of ChinaJinghua Cheng, Jie Tao, Benqiang Li, Ying Shi & Huili LiuShanghai Key Laboratory of Agricultural Genetic Breeding, Shanghai, 201106, People’s Republic of ChinaJinghua Cheng, Jie Tao, Benqiang Li, Ying Shi & Huili LiuShanghai Engineering Research Center of Pig Breeding, Shanghai, 201302, People’s Republic of ChinaJinghua Cheng, Jie Tao, Benqiang Li, Ying Shi & Huili LiuAuthorsJinghua ChengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJie TaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBenqiang LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYing ShiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHuili LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsHLL and JHC conceived and designed this study. JHC performed the experiments, wrote the manuscript and prepared all figures. JT and BQL contributed to analysis of the data and discussion of the results. SY revised the manuscripts. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Huili Liu.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate The experimental protocols were approved by the laboratory animal monitoring committee of Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Science. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationAdditional file 1: The fold changes of all significantly differently expressed proteins in SIV-infected cells.Additional file 2: Gene Ontology analysis of DEPs in SIV-infected cells.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleCheng, J., Tao, J., Li, B. et al. Swine influenza virus triggers ferroptosis in A549 cells to enhance virus replication. Virol J 19, 104 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-022-01825-yDownload citationReceived: 13 January 2022Accepted: 18 May 2022Published: 17 June 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-022-01825-yShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsSwine influenza virusProteomics analysisFerroptosisIron disorder Download PDF Associated content Section Influenza viruses Advertisement Virology Journal ISSN: 1743-422X Contact us Submission enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.The severity of COVID-19 compared to seasonal influenza Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member The severity of COVID-19 compared to seasonal influenza Download PDF Copy Revised By Shanet Susan AlexReviewed by Aimee MolineuxJun 14 2022 In a recent study under review at the Archives of Virology journal and currently posted to the Research Square* preprint server, investigators in Israel assessed the disparities and similarities between seasonal influenza and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infections. Study: SARS-CoV-2 and Seasonal Influenza: Similarity and Disparity. Image Credit: Lightspring / ShutterstockThis news article was a review of a preliminary scientific report that had not undergone peer-review at the time of publication. Since its initial publication, the scientific report has now been peer reviewed and accepted for publication in a Scientific Journal. Links to the preliminary and peer-reviewed reports are available in the Sources section at the bottom of this article. View Sources Background The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) combines radiological and clinical features with influenza virus-induced respiratory illness. Unfortunately, it is tough to determine the difference between these two viruses just by examining their clinical presentations. Since the start of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, researchers have drawn parallels between influenza and COVID-19. The severity of COVID-19 relative to seasonal influenza is still a topic of debate. Further, an early distinction between SARS-CoV-2 infection and influenza viruses is critical among hospitalized patients. This is especially crucial at the moment because healthcare institutions are coping with seasonal influenza and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, the epidemiologic implications, the possibility for airborne transmission, inadequate baseline herd immunity, and differing therapeutic methods emphasize the importance of distinguishing between SARS-CoV-2- and influenza-infected patients. About the study In the present retrospective research, the scientists determined if there were any variations in clinical presentation and disease severity between influenza and COVID-19 across hospitalized patients. The study was carried out at a 1000-bedded university-affiliated tertiary care hospital treating over two million people in northern Israel, named Rambam Health Care Campus (RHCC). Related StoriesCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Seasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicResearch links COVID-19 vaccines to temporary facial palsy in over 5,000 patientsThe investigation included all adults hospitalized in RHCC with confirmed-COVID-19 during the second SARS-CoV-2 wave in Israel between 1 June 2020 and 31 August 2020. These patients were compared to individuals admitted with influenza-induced respiratory illness between 1 November 2019 and 31 August 2020. The outcomes and clinical features of the hospitalized COVID-19 and influenza patients were compared. Data including clinical and demographic details, laboratory measures during admission, and the National Early Warning Score 2 (NEWS2), were collected from the RHCC's electronic medical records. Further, the statistical package for social sciences (SPSS) version 26 software was used to analyze the data. Results and discussions Collectively, the study results depicted that a total of 152 COVID-19 and 136 influenza patients were included in the study. Runny nose, cough, dyspnea, myalgia, and comorbidities were more common in influenza patients than in SARS-CoV-2 patients. Hypoxemia on admission, heightened liver enzymes, or smoking habit was also more prevalent in influenza patients. Overall, the individuals with influenza infection demonstrated typical flu-like symptoms. Patients with COVID-19, on the other hand, were overweight, had lymphopenia of less than 1500, C reactive protein (CRP) of more than 5 mg/dL, or radiographic anomalies. According to the mounting evidence, chronic inflammation, and excess adiposity associated with obesity enhances the vulnerability to viral infections and illness severity because of immune system dysregulation and high proinflammatory cytokines levels. The most prevalent laboratory abnormality in COVID-19 patients was lymphopenia, which was 54 times more frequent than in individuals infected with influenza. Direct lymphocytes viral infection due to the presence of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors on their cell membrane and provoked lymphocyte deficit owing to proinflammatory cytokines were two possibilities that justify the significant lymphopenia in SARS-CoV-2 infection. COVID-19 patients had a higher percentage of abnormal chest x-rays (CXRs), primarily manifested as bilateral infiltrates. This inference was in line with several earlier studies. However, it was at odds with a prior smaller study. Besides, the incidence of dehydration at hospital admission was elevated in SARS-CoV-2 patients. The intravascular exhaustion caused by the virus's direct impact on renal ACE2 receptors might explain this phenomenon. The demand for ventilatory support, duration of hospital stay, and 30-day mortality were similar in both groups, despite influenza patients experiencing a severe illness with a NEWS2 of more than six on admission. Contrary to the present study, a prior investigation from Germany discovered that hospitalized COVID-19 patients had heightened in-hospital death and poorer clinical outcomes, such as length of hospital stay and ventilation, acute renal injury, and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Conclusions Study findings revealed that influenza patients were more critically ill during their stay in the hospital than patients with SARS-CoV-2. Both cohorts, however, had equal in-hospital death and clinical outcomes. Furthermore, the two diseases harbored distinct properties that enable them to be separated from one another during the admission time till laboratory diagnosis. The diverse traits of COVID-19 and influenza facilitate the implementation of appropriate preventative strategies and infection control approaches from the point of hospital arrival. This news article was a review of a preliminary scientific report that had not undergone peer-review at the time of publication. Since its initial publication, the scientific report has now been peer reviewed and accepted for publication in a Scientific Journal. Links to the preliminary and peer-reviewed reports are available in the Sources section at the bottom of this article. View Sources Journal references: Preliminary scientific report. Halima Dabaja-Younis, Eyal Fuchs, Nadeem Shorbaji et al. SARS-CoV-2 and Seasonal Influenza: Similarity and Disparity, 10 June 2022, PREPRINT (Version 1) available at Research Square, DOI: https://doi.org/10.21203s.3.rs-1552697/v1, https://www.researchsquare.com/articles-1552697/v1 Peer reviewed and published scientific report. Dabaja-Younis, Halima, Eyal Fuchs, Nadeem Shorbaji, Tal Appel, Noah Carmon, Yael Shachor-Meyouhas, Manfred S. Green, and Khetam Hussein. 2022. “SARS-CoV-2 and Seasonal Influenza: Similarities and Disparities.” Archives of Virology 167 (12): 2761–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00705-022-05615-3. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00705-022-05615-3. Article RevisionsMay 13 2023 - The preprint preliminary research paper that this article was based upon was accepted for publication in a peer-reviewed Scientific Journal. This article was edited accordingly to include a link to the final peer-reviewed paper, now shown in the sources section. Posted in: Men's Health News | Medical Research News | Women's Health News | Disease/Infection News | Healthcare News Tags: ACE2, Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, Angiotensin, Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2, B Cell, B Lymphocyte, Cell, Cell Membrane, Chronic, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, Cough, covid-19, Cytokines, Dehydration, Dyspnea, Electronic Medical Records, Enzyme, Exhaustion, Flu, Health Care, Healthcare, Hospital, Hypoxemia, Immune System, immunity, Infection Control, Inflammation, Influenza, Laboratory, Liver, Lymphocyte, Lymphopenia, Membrane, Mortality, Obesity, Pandemic, Protein, Research, Respiratory, Respiratory Illness, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Smoking, Software, Syndrome, Virology, Virus Comments (0) Written byShanet Susan AlexShanet Susan Alex, a medical writer, based in Kerala, India, is a Doctor of Pharmacy graduate from Kerala University of Health Sciences. Her academic background is in clinical pharmacy and research, and she is passionate about medical writing. Shanet has published papers in the International Journal of Medical Science and Current Research (IJMSCR), the International Journal of Pharmacy (IJP), and the International Journal of Medical Science and Applied Research (IJMSAR). Apart from work, she enjoys listening to music and watching movies. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APASusan Alex, Shanet. (2023, May 13). The severity of COVID-19 compared to seasonal influenza. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220614/The-severity-of-COVID-19-compared-to-seasonal-influenza.aspx.MLASusan Alex, Shanet. "The severity of COVID-19 compared to seasonal influenza". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220614/The-severity-of-COVID-19-compared-to-seasonal-influenza.aspx>.ChicagoSusan Alex, Shanet. "The severity of COVID-19 compared to seasonal influenza". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220614/The-severity-of-COVID-19-compared-to-seasonal-influenza.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardSusan Alex, Shanet. 2023. The severity of COVID-19 compared to seasonal influenza. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220614/The-severity-of-COVID-19-compared-to-seasonal-influenza.aspx. Suggested Reading Public trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USMasks and smart seating cut COVID-19 risks on flights, review findsResearch identifies respiratory transmission potential of H5N1 virusStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsOne in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19Genetic risk factors for long-COVID uncovered in a large multi-ethnic studyLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reduction Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Hematology (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Unraveling the mechanism of Shufeng Jiedu Capsules in influenza treatmentAfrica's urbanisation increases risks of avian influenza pandemics | Africa at LSE Home About Submissions Video and audio Latest Development Economics Conflict Elections Book Reviews Home About Latest Categories Video and audio Search Search for: Tony Barnett June 15th, 2022 Africa’s urbanisation increases risks of avian influenza pandemics 1 comment | 5 shares Estimated reading time: 5 minutes Tony Barnett June 15th, 2022 Africa’s urbanisation increases risks of avian influenza pandemics 1 comment | 5 shares Estimated reading time: 5 minutes 5 Shares Growing urban populations in Africa increase demand for protein intake, which in many global regions is most easily produced by large scale poultry production in rural areas. But the long value chains modern poultry production creates increase opportunities for biosecurity lapses. With avian flu outbreaks already common in the global North and South, the risk of zoonotic transmission and a human health pandemic indicates why large-scale poultry production should be regulated and the potential for harm to human health kept under surveillance. This article is part of the series “Rethinking zoonoses, the environment and epidemics in Africa”, which examines the effect of changing relationships between human, animal and environmental health on epidemic risk. More affordable protein, more risk? More chickens = more eggs + more meat = affordable protein and better nutrition for growing populations. The equation looks straightforward. And with growing urban populations, poultry production should be an excellent way to produce better health through increased protein intake in Africa. This can be the case. But the approach also creates disease risks to humans as well as chickens. Avian influenza (“bird flu”) is commonly endemic in high density chicken flocks. Like many influenzas, it is a candidate for mutation to zoonotic transmission (infecting humans). The chain of causation goes something as follows: viruses pass from highly migratory wild birds to intensively raised poultry then to humans, and sometimes between humans, when it can become pandemic. Farm biosecurity – the practice of reducing the chances of an infectious disease being transmitted to chickens from wild birds and animals, and onwards between chickens to humans – is important in this regard. If farm biosecurity is inadequate, due to their genetic uniformity intensively reared poultry can provide a facilitating environment for such viral mutation chains, and subsequently develop into Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI). Evidence from Asia, where urban population growth and intensive poultry production have gone hand in hand for several decades, suggests that in some poor and middle-income countries, where value chains are long and producer and trader margins are narrow, producers and traders may economise on biosecurity. This Asian experience is likely to be important as intensive poultry production becomes more common in Africa. Avian influenza is already endemic in many parts of the world, including the UK. Figure 1. Probabilistic forecasts of urban expansion by 2030 in Africa. Source: ‘Urbanization in Africa: challenges and opportunities for conservation’, Environmental Research Letters. Published by IOP Publishing Ltd (2017). Credit: Güneralp, B., Lwasa, S., Masundire, H., Parnell, S. & Seto. K. The European Centres for Disease Control and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention assess the probability of transfer of avian influenza to people working directly with chickens as low to medium. While risk to the general population is judged to be low, there is some evidence of human-to-human transmission via the respiratory route, although this usually seems either to peter out rapidly or go unrecorded or unreported because it has not caused acute disease. Even so, HPAI figures prominently as an avian and human risk in the most recent UK Government’s National Risk Register (2020). As we live through COVID-19, another type of viral respiratory disease pandemic, we should remember that the global pandemic of “Spanish Flu” of 1918-20 killed many millions and possibly originated from mutations in a porcine influenza in the US mid-west. The possibilities of bird-to-human and then human-to-human transmission associated with intensive poultry production should remain on our public health planning radar. In the next decade, the expansion of such production around growing urban centres in Africa should be a focus for care and surveillance. This brings us to the birds themselves. The Cobb 500, Cobb 700 and Ross 308 While the Cobb 500, Cobb 700 and Ross 308 sound like high-performance motorbikes or computers, each is a type of genetically identical hybrid chicken bred specially to reach a final weight of 1.5kg within 42 days of hatching. They provide a nice package of affordable tasty protein for urban families with growing incomes. The genetic material arrives in fertilised egg form at the final hatchery, coming from the genetics company via a chain of “grandparent” and “parent” producers. In Asia, large-scale, integrated production of such birds has become very common. There has also been a similar increase in egg production from specially bred high laying chickens. Production is not small-scale or done in a so-called “back yard” but is very big business. For example, Astral Foods, the largest integrated poultry producer in South Africa, managing 37 million broilers at any one time and processing 5.5 million of these per week, appears to be owned by at least nine large investors, including a branch of the South African government and BlackRock Fund Advisors, M&G Investment managers and Sanlam Investment Management. The “genetic material” is produced in egg form by a few very large corporations specialising in animal genetics more widely, not just poultry. For example, Cobb-Vantress specialises in poultry. Owned by Tyson Foods, the company also produces hybrid cows and pigs. Other large companies developing and dealing in animal genetics globally include the Thai conglomerate CP Foods (producing hybrid ducks, pigs and shrimp in addition to chickens), Hendrix Genetics (“a multi-species animal breeding genetics and technology company” producing laying hens, turkeys, traditional poultry, swine, salmon, shrimp and trout) and Hy-Line International. In many cases final ownership of these genetics companies is hard to trace. The value chain game These poultry companies are highly integrated and control the value chain from genetics, through hatcheries and feed companies including processing plants, to the final products, which include chicken pieces, “lolly pops” and of course whole chickens for the retail freezer or chiller. Integration may consist of total control from genetics to final produce, and in such cases, evidence suggests that biosecurity is good. A popular arrangement is contract farming, where a relatively small producer (perhaps crops of as few as 5,000 birds at a time, with more likely larger units of 20-50,000 birds or more) are closely supervised. Profit opportunities for such small producers are restricted. Whether in Africa or elsewhere, poultry farming for meat or for eggs is a game between participants at different points in the value chain, which constantly shifts risk to maximise or stabilise income and profits. These value chains are changing all the time, responding to consumer demand, feed prices, local politics or – as in recent times – to COVID-19, where rumours that the virus could be caught from chickens or eggs adversely affected demand in some parts of Asia. Cutting down on bio-security measures may often be part of the game, a common way for marginal contract farmers to economise. When this happens, avian flu outbreaks may occur. In the last few years, outbreaks of H5N1 avian influenza have occurred in South Africa, Benin, Nigeria, Togo and elsewhere. Genetic uniformity among hybrid poultry and wild birds mixing with these poultry are important risk factors. The constant struggle to play the poultry value chain game to avoid financial risk and/or maximise profit, at all stages, from genetic material and feed prices to the final prices of chicken portions, can increase the risk of avian influenza outbreaks and new global human influenza pandemics. While rare, such pandemics do happen, and in the light of our experience of COVID-19, we all know what that can look like. The research on which aspects of this blog are based has been funded by the following grants: The BALZAC research programme “Behavioural Adaptations in Live Poultry Trading and Farming Systems and Zoonoses Control in Bangladesh” (Grant No. BB/L018993/1). This was one of 11 programmes funded under Zoonoses & Emerging Livestock Systems, ZELS, a joint research initiative between Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL), Department for International Development (DFID), Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC), Medical Research Council (MRC) and Natural Environment Research Council (NERC). The UKRI GCRF One Health Poultry Hub (BB/S011269/1), one of twelve interdisciplinary research hubs funded under the UK government’s Grand Challenge Research Fund Interdisciplinary Research Hub initiative. Photo by Artem Beliaikin from Pexels. About the author Tony Barnett Tony Barnett is Professor of Social Sciences in the Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences at the Royal Veterinary College, London, and a Visiting Professor at the Firoz Lalji Institute for Africa at LSE. Posted In: Health | Urbanisation 1 Comments James Ronald says: 16/03/2023 at 10:58 am It’s an amazing blog post, and it is really helpful as well. Reply Leave a Reply Cancel reply Read Next Does Africa have the toolkit to combat the next zoonotic pandemic? May 11th, 2022 Related Posts Health Local understandings of zoonotic disease should be built into epidemic preparedness and response June 8th, 2022 Environment Eradicating zoonotic outbreaks means tackling the political and underlying drivers June 1st, 2022 Health Rising populations without sustainable food systems will heighten Africa’s infectious disease burden May 25th, 2022 1 Environment Why we should decolonise the narrative on zoonosis for sustainable health, wildlife, livestock and economic growth in Africa May 18th, 2022 1 © LSE 2024 × Bad Behavior has blocked 3198 access attempts in the last 7 days. We use cookies on this site to understand how you use our content, and to give you the best browsing experience. To accept cookies, click continue. To find out more about cookies and change your preferences, visit our Cookie Policy.ContinueBird flu guide: what is avian influenza, which species does it affect, and how to report dead birds About BBC WildlifeContact usCompetitionsAnimalsAnimal IDQuizzesAmphibiansBirdsFishInsects & InvertebratesMammalsMarine animalsReptilesGalleriesPlantsPlant IDFlowersTreesFungiWater PlantsWildlife GardenHolidays & Days OutUKAfricaAntarticaAsiaEuropeNorth AmericaSouth AmericaOceaniaTravel PlannerHow toIdentify WildlifeHow to make thingsWatch WildlifePhotograph WildlifePhotography MasterclassesWildlife GardeningEnvironmentOn The BBCMagazineCurrent issueSubscribeContact usMeet the teamHistory of BBC WildlifeSubscribeHome Animal Facts Birds Bird flu guide: what is avian influenza, which species does it affect, and how to report dead birdsBird flu guide: what is avian influenza, which species does it affect, and how to report dead birdsA deadly and contagious viral disease known as avian influenza (or bird flu) is infecting wild birds around the UK, particularly affecting seabird populations.Magazine gift subscriptions - from just £14.99 every 6 issues. Christmas cheer delivered all year! Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB)Published: June 15, 2022 at 6:00 amOne of the worst outbreaks of avian influenza ever recorded in the UK is currently sweeping through wild bird populations, with huge numbers of birds suffering and dying from the disease. The bird flu causing these birds to die is a highly mutable and deadly new form that originated in poultry farming. Content warning: This article contains image of dead birds. What is bird flu? Avian influenza, commonly known as bird flu, is a contagious viral disease affecting the respiratory, digestive and/or nervous systems of many species of birds. There are many different forms of the disease, and while it mainly affects birds, it can on occasion also affect humans and other mammals. What are the symptoms of bird flu? There are many different symptoms, including neurological issues such as loss of coordination, moving in circles, and body or head trembling. A comprehensive list can be found on the UK government website.A dead gannet on Shetland. © Stephen Magee/RSPB Bird flu is passed from animal to animal through contact with infected saliva, nasal secretions or faeces. Wild birds, including waterfowl, are often more resistant to bird flu than domestic birds and can carry and transmit the virus without showing evidence of disease, so when they migrate they can spread the virus even further. Moving poultry such as chickens around and between countries is also known to be a major cause of the spread the virus. There are many forms of the virus, not all of them fatal, but the strain known as highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) is the most serious type of bird flu and is often fatal in birds. Related content: Chytridiomycosis guide Ash dieback guide Dutch elm disease guide How to report dead birds and potential bird flu victims If you come across a single dead wild waterfowl (ie swan, goose or duck), a single dead bird of prey, or five or more dead wild birds of any other species (including gulls) at the same place, please report them to the Defra helpline 03459 335577 or in Northern Ireland to DAERA on 0300 200 7840. Which birds have been affected by bird flu? A huge number of species have been affected by bird flu this year, including many species of wildfowl, seabirds such as gannets and fulmars, gulls, birds of prey such as sea eagles, buzzards, kestrels, peregrines, as well as other smaller or more randomised incidents, eg a tawny owl and pied wagtail. On Shetland, birds affected include eider ducks, gannets, bonxies (great skua) and gulls, and the bird flu outbreak at RSPB Minsmere has included black-headed gulls, common terns, Sandwich terns and one kittiwake.A dead fulmar in Shetland. © Stephen Magee/RSPB Defra have a list of bird species that have tested positive, but we do not at this stage have a full picture of the impact on wild birds as not all dead wild birds will have been tested, or even reported. There have also been reports of avian flu occurring in other parts of the world – cranes in Israel being affected over the winter, for example, and North America having had an outbreak of the Eurasian HPAI strain. Why is bird flu such a problem for wild birds? Bird flu is hitting many birds that are already struggling. Seabirds, for example, are already under massive pressure from the climate crisis, declining numbers of fish, entanglement in fishing gear and development along our shores. Seabirds also tend to take longer to reach breeding age and have fewer chicks, meaning that it will take much longer for their numbers to build back up after bird flu. And the impact of the virus on a group can be staggering. Last year alone, one third of the Svalbard barnacle geese that spend their winter around the Solway estuary were lost to bird flu. This also has international implications because Britain has a globally important number of seabirds. The UK, for example, is home to 56% of the world’s amber-listed gannet population, and Scotland has 60% of the world’s amber-listed great skuas. Does bird flu affect domestic birds? Domestic birds can be affected, and the poultry industry was hit hard by bird flu in the past year. As of May 30th, there have been 119 outbreaks since 26 October 2021 on premises with captive birds, poultry, etc. This is now the largest ever UK outbreak of bird flu. As of May 30th, there have been 119 outbreaks since October 2021 on premises with captive birds and poultry. Prior to this, the largest number was 26 cases in 2020/2021 and 13 cases in 2016/2017. Defra have strong biosecurity measures they put in place including Protection Zones and Surveillance Zones around infected premises. Can bird flu infect people? Very few strains of bird flu have been recorded as infecting humans, and the risk to public health is usually extremely low (the virus does not easily infect humans, and then it is not easily transmitted from person to person). Where there have been cases of humans catching bird flu, most of them have come from close contact with infected domestic poultry. We would therefore strongly urge everyone not to touch any sick or dead birds, their droppings, or any water nearby, and in order to best protect your dogs, do not let them approach any sick or dead birds, ideally by keeping them on a lead whilst walking. Main image: A pair of gannets at Great Saltee Island, Republic of Ireland. © Ben Andrew/RSPBShare this articleRoyal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) The RSPB is the UK’s largest nature conservation charity, inspiring everyone to give nature a home. Together with our partners, we protect threatened birds and wildlife so our towns, coast and countryside will teem with life once again. We play a leading role in BirdLife International, a worldwide partnership of nature conservation organisations.A pair of gannets at Great Saltee Island, Republic of Ireland. © Ben Andrew/RSPB© Ann & Steve Toon/GettyfbxinstaTerms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicyCookies PolicyCode of conductLicensingSubscriptionFind UsManage preferencesThis website is owned and published by Our Media Ltd. www.ourmedia.co.uk© Our Media 2024Can the Flu Shot Make Your Joints Hurt? Known Side Effects HealthlineHealth ConditionsFeaturedAllBreast CancerIBD MigraineMultiple Sclerosis (MS)Rheumatoid ArthritisType 2 DiabetesSponsored TopicsArticlesAllAcid RefluxADHDAllergiesAlzheimer's & DementiaBipolar DisorderCancerCrohn's DiseaseChronic PainCold & FluCOPDDepressionFibromyalgiaHeart DiseaseHigh CholesterolHIVHypertensionIPFOsteoarthritisPsoriasisSkin Disorders and CareSTDsDiscoverWellness TopicsAllNutritionFitnessSkin CareSexual HealthWomen's HealthMental Well-BeingSleepProduct ReviewsAllVitamins & SupplementsSleepMental HealthNutritionAt-Home TestingCBDMen’s HealthOriginal SeriesAllFresh Food FastFood hacks to make eating healthier, easier.Diagnosis DiariesReal diagnosis stories from people who get it.You’re Not AloneStories from real people that destigmatize mental health conditions.Present TenseReal-world mindfulness for busy people.Video SeriesAllYouth in FocusMental health challenges facing our youth.Healthy HarvestMeet your food, from farm to table.Through An Artist's EyeA breast cancer story told through art.Future of HealthInnovations shaping the future of health.PlanHealth ChallengesMindful EatingSugar SavvyMove Your BodyGut HealthMood FoodsAlign Your SpineFind CareAllPrimary CareMental HealthOB-GYNDermatologistsNeurologistsCardiologistsOrthopedistsLifestyle QuizzesWeight ManagementAm I Depressed? A Quiz for TeensAre You a Workaholic?How Well Do You Sleep?Tools & ResourcesHealth NewsFind a DietFind Healthy SnacksDrugs A-ZHealth A-ZConnectFind Your Bezzy CommunityBezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.AllBreast CancerInflammatory Bowel DiseaseCOPDMigraineMultiple SclerosisPsoriasisFollow us on social mediaCan't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.SubscribeRheumatoid ArthritisNewly DiagnosedMedication & TreatmentsManaging FlaresLiving WellHolistic HealthMental Well-BeingCommunityNewsletterWhat’s the Connection Between Flu Vaccines and Joint Pain?Medically reviewed by Angelica Balingit, MD — Written by Kirsten Nunez on June 16, 2022Flu shot and joint painCan a flu shot cause an RA flare-up?Flu and RARA medication and flu vaccinesFlu vaccine side effectsSummaryThe flu is a disease caused by influenza viruses. The flu can cause serious complications, which can lead to hospitalization and, in some cases, death.However, the flu vaccine can lower your risk of getting the flu. It also reduces the severity of flu symptoms, even if you do get sick. The vaccine prevents you from transmitting the virus to others as well.But like other vaccines, the flu shot can cause some side effects. They’re usually minor and go away after a few days.The known side effects are muscle aches, swelling, and headache. Joint pain is not common, though some people report joint discomfort after getting the vaccine.Read on to learn more about the link between flu shots and joint pain, including symptoms related to rheumatoid arthritis (RA).Can a flu shot make your joints hurt?The flu shot isn’t usually associated with joint pain.Instead, it typically affects the muscle. This includes side effects like muscle soreness and swelling.Muscle pain and swelling are signs your immune system is responding to the flu vaccine. It’s creating antibodies to protect you from an influenza infection.Also, a flu vaccine involves an injection in your arm. This causes inflammation in the muscle, making your arm feel achy and swollen.For some people, the muscle soreness can also cause joint pain and discomfort.Additionally, according to a 2015 research article, there have been several reports of people developing arthritis after receiving the flu vaccine. These cases are rare.Can a flu shot trigger rheumatoid arthritis?Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease that causes chronic joint inflammation.An autoimmune disease occurs when the immune system attacks your body’s own tissue, causing inflammation. In RA, this involves the joints.Over time, the inflammation causes chronic joint pain and damage. It can also affect other tissues and organs, such as the lungs.Some people with autoimmune conditions, including RA, are concerned about getting vaccines. That’s because vaccines, like the flu shot, stimulate the immune system.But there’s no evidence that the flu vaccine can trigger RA flare-ups. In fact, a 2019 study involving nearly 15,000 people found there’s no link between the flu vaccine and joint paint or RA flares. Thus, researchers concluded the flu vaccine is safe for people with RA.Can the flu itself cause an RA flare-up or joint pain?The flu itself can cause an RA flare. That’s because infections are an RA trigger.When you have an infection like the flu, your immune system tries to fight it off. In RA, this can lead to increased inflammation.The spike in inflammation can lead to a flare-up, causing worse joint pain and RA symptoms.What’s more, the flu can also lead to other complications and infections, such as pneumonia. This can further exacerbate RA symptoms and flares.Should people taking medication for RA get a flu shot?RA itself can increase your risk of the flu and its complications. RA compromises your immune system, making it difficult to fight off infections. However, RA medications can increase your risk as well. Drugs that suppress the immune system, also known as immunosuppressants, are commonly used to treat RA.There’s concern these drugs reduce the effectiveness of the flu shot, which stimulates your immune system.But according to a large 2020 study involving more than 30,700 people, the flu vaccine can still provide protection, even if you’re taking RA medication. Researchers found that the vaccine reduces the risk of flu and its complications, including pneumonia. A 2021 research review also found the vaccine can lower the risk of hospitalization and death of flu complications.Still, there are some other factors to consider. Whether you should get the vaccine depends on your medical history and what medications you’re taking.But in general, it’s recommended for people with RA to get the flu vaccine. Talk with a doctor if you have concerns.What are the known side effects of flu vaccines?The known side effects of the flu vaccine include:sore armswelling at the injection siteredness (in lighter skin tones) or discoloration (in darker skin tones) at the injection sitemuscle achesheadachefevernauseaTypically, these side effects are mild and go away after a few days.TakeawayIn most cases, the flu vaccine causes minor side effects like muscle aches, soreness, and swelling. It typically doesn’t cause joint pain.That said, there’s no evidence the flu vaccine will cause RA flare-ups or joint pain. The flu itself, however, is known to trigger RA flares.If you have RA, experts recommend you get the flu vaccine. RA increases your risk of the flu and its complications. But the vaccine can offer some protection, even if you’re taking immunosuppressants.How we reviewed this article:SourcesHistoryHealthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.Abdelahad M, et al. (2021). A review of the efficacy of influenza vaccination in autoimmune disease patients.https://www.cureus.com/articles/58842-a-review-of-the-efficacy-of-influenza-vaccination-in-autoimmune-disease-patientsArthritis patients: Get your flu shots. (n.d.).http://blog.arthritis.org/living-with-arthritis/flu-shot-arthritis/Costello R, et al. (2016). Influenza and pneumococcal vaccination uptake in patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with immunosuppressive therapy in the UK: A retrospective cohort study using data from the Clinical Practice Research Datalink.https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0153848Fighting flu: The importance of vaccines in rheumatic disease. (2020).https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanrhe/article/PIIS2665-9913(19)30161-4/fulltextIt’s a good time to get your flu vaccine. (2022).https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/its-good-time-get-your-flu-vaccineNakafero G, et al. (2019). Association between inactivated influenza vaccine and primary care consultations for autoimmune rheumatic disease flares: A self-controlled case series study using data from the Clinical Practice Research Datalink.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6691866/Toussirot E, et al. (2015). Vaccination and induction of autoimmune diseases.https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/ben/iadt/2015/00000014/00000002/art00007Why does my arm hurt after a flu shot? (2018).https://www.lung.org/blog/arm-hurts-after-flu-shotShare this articleMedically reviewed by Angelica Balingit, MD — Written by Kirsten Nunez on June 16, 2022related storiesPsoriatic Arthritis and Flu: Does One Affect the Other?She Lived with Chronic Pain for Nearly Two Years, Then She Was Diagnosed with Rheumatoid ArthritisUnderstanding Rheumatoid Arthritis Hypersensitivity TypeCCP Antibody Test: What Is It?Understanding Your Options for Surgery for Rheumatoid ArthritisRead this nextPsoriatic Arthritis and Flu: Does One Affect the Other?Medically reviewed by Brenda B. Spriggs, M.D., MPH, FACPPsoriatic arthritis and its treatment can increase your risk for an infection like the flu and related complications like pneumonia. Get the facts…READ MOREShe Lived with Chronic Pain for Nearly Two Years, Then She Was Diagnosed with Rheumatoid ArthritisAfter nearly two years of living with chronic pain, here’s how Talisa King says she finally found relief once she was diagnosed with rheumatoid…READ MOREUnderstanding Rheumatoid Arthritis Hypersensitivity TypeMedically reviewed by Angelica Balingit, MDRheumatoid arthritis hypersensitivity type is a condition that affects the immune system’s response. Medications are the main treatment.READ MORECCP Antibody Test: What Is It?Medically reviewed by Alana Biggers, M.D., MPHA CCP test may be necessary if a doctor thinks you have rheumatoid arthritis. Here’s what else is necessary to make a diagnosis and what the results…READ MOREUnderstanding Your Options for Surgery for Rheumatoid ArthritisMedically reviewed by Nancy Carteron, M.D., FACRSurgery for rheumatoid arthritis is usually considered after more conservative treatment options have failed. Here's what you need to know.READ MOREYour Guide to Symptoms of Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) in FemalesMedically reviewed by Nancy Carteron, M.D., FACRRheumatoid arthritis tends to affect women more often than it does men. Pay attention to stiffness, pain, swelling, and not-so-obvious RA symptoms.READ MORECan Rheumatoid Arthritis Cause Elevated Liver Enzymes?Medically reviewed by Nancy Carteron, M.D., FACRIt’s possible for RA to cause elevated liver enzymes in some people. This may be due to RA disease activity and/or the effects of RA treatment. Learn…READ MOREThe Connection Between Antibiotic Use and Rheumatoid ArthritisMedically reviewed by Stella Bard, MDAntibiotics are lifesaving medications, but they may also pose problems with autoimmune conditions like rheumatoid arthritis.READ MOREWhat Are the Benefits of an Infrared Sauna for Rheumatoid Arthritis?Medically reviewed by Nancy Carteron, M.D., FACRInfrared saunas may help people with rheumatoid arthritis heal tissue, improve mobility, and reduce pain.READ MOREWhat Are the Benefits of Cryotherapy for Rheumatoid Arthritis?Medically reviewed by Stella Bard, MDThere's limited evidence for cryotherapy's effectiveness for RA. However, some people report temporary pain relief and reduced joint swelling. READ MOREAbout UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsSitemapMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzyUkraine and Poland: why the countries fell out in the past, and are now closely allied Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair Poland has accepted more than one million Ukrainian refugees. Frank Schultze / Alamy Ukraine and Poland: why the countries fell out in the past, and are now closely allied Published: June 15, 2022 3.03pm BST Christoph Mick, University of Warwick Author Christoph Mick Professor of Modern European History, University of Warwick Disclosure statement Christoph Mick does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment. Partners University of Warwick provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK. View all partners Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger No country supports the Ukrainian war effort more passionately than Poland, and no country shelters more Ukrainian refugees. Ukrainian-Polish relations have never been better. Polish political parties might disagree about everything else, but they all strongly support Ukraine and her borders. Russian imperialist ambitions also threaten Polish security. Since Poland joined Nato in 1999 and the European Union in 2004, the country has been a strong advocate of Ukrainian membership in both organisations. To contain an increasingly aggressive Russia, Poles are all too aware that an independent Ukraine is essential. But Polish-Ukrainian relations bear a heavy historical burden. There was a time when Ukrainian and Polish national interests seemed incompatible. To establish good relations with Ukraine, Poles had to accept the loss of their eastern borderlands as agreed over their heads in the conference of Yalta in 1945. In 2000 Ukraine was still one of the nations most disliked by Poles. The main reason for this goes back to events which occurred during the second world war. But WWII and 1,000 years of shared history also provide reasons why Ukrainians and Poles should be allies. Read more: Ukraine: Poland reminds the EU how vulnerable its border nations really are Poles cannot forget the mass murder of Polish villagers in Volhynia in 1943 and in East Galicia in 1944, which cost the lives of 70,000–100,000 people. The perpetrators were nationalist Ukrainian partisans, members of the Ukrainian insurgent army (UPA) which was controlled by the Bandera faction of the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN). They were attempting to “ethnically cleanse” the region to prevent it from ever becoming Polish again. OUN members and leaders are venerated in western Ukraine and were treated as heroes by several Ukrainian governments. Historical grievances Ukrainians, on their part, hold grievances relating to the interwar years between the first and second world wars. In this period, Ukrainian nationalists murdered several dozen representatives of the Polish state. Polish police attacked Ukrainian villages, beating up young Ukrainian men and destroying communal buildings. During WWII, the Polish resistance killed several hundred Ukrainian community leaders in the Chełm region and murdered Ukrainian villagers in acts of retribution for the massacres in Volhynia. Between 20,000 and 25,000 people died. But this pales in comparison with the suffering of both Poles and Ukrainians in the Soviet Union. In 1932-33, 4-5 million Ukrainians starved to death in a man-made famine. Two years later, Soviet security forces murdered more than 100,000 Poles in the so-called “Polish operation”. Many more Poles were deported to Siberia and other parts of the Soviet Union. The election of Poland’s Law and Justice party in 2015 sparked new tensions between Ukraine and Russia. FORUM Polska Agencja Fotografów/Alamy If one can learn one thing from history, it is that if Poles and Ukrainians fight against each other, both sides lose. The 17th-century Ukrainian Cossacks tried to rid themselves of the relatively relaxed Polish overlordship and set up an independent state, the Cossack Hetmanate, but ended up under much stricter Moscow rule. In 1772, Russia, Austria and Prussia began the dismemberment of Poland. The partition of Poland was completed in 1795, only 20 years after the end of Cossack autonomy. Between 1918 and 1920, both nations tried to create independent states. But competing territorial claims led to the Polish-Ukrainian war for East Galicia. The following Polish/Ukrainian-Soviet war ended inconclusively and led to the partitioning of Ukraine, mostly between Poland and the Soviet Union with smaller sections going to Czechoslovakia and Romania. In WWII, the conflict between Poles and Ukrainians, the massacres of Poles committed by the Ukrainian insurgent army and subsequent massacres of Ukrainians committed by Polish units weakened both sides and made it easier for Nazi Germany and for the Soviet Union to subjugate both groups. The war was followed by the expulsion up to 800,000 Poles from what is now western Ukraine and 500,000 Ukrainians from eastern Poland, instigated by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin. In 1947, an additional 100,000 Ukrainians living in Poland were deported in Action Vistula and dispersed in territories which had been taken from Germany. All these population transfers were accompanied by terrible atrocities, following a pattern set by Stalinist terror and the Nazis’ genocide against the Jewish people. All this came to the fore when the right-wing conservative Law and Justice Party won the Polish elections in 2015. A few months earlier, the Ukrainian parliament had passed a law allowing people who denied the heroism of Ukrainian national resistance fighters to be punished. The new Polish government challenged the unwillingness of Ukrainian leaders to accept the responsibility of OUN and UPA for the Volhynia massacres. In January 2018, the Polish parliament passed a bill making it a criminal offence to deny the “crimes of Ukrainian nationalists”. Establishing common ground These historical issues are still unresolved and emotionally highly charged. They have a negative impact on the relationship between the nations without, however, changing Polish political support for Ukraine. Common political interests now prevail, not least because of the increasing threat to its neighbours from Vladimir Putin’s Russia. It was not clear that after the fall of communism, independent Poland and Ukraine would establish good political, cultural and economic ties. The precondition was that Poland gave up its imperial ambitions and stopped treating Ukrainians as inferior. Far into the 20th century, a considerable part of the Polish elite viewed Ukrainians as incapable of sustaining an independent state, and whose fate was to be either absorbed into Polish culture or forced into the Russian orbit. But in 1991 Poland was at the forefront of the support for Ukraine. It was the first country to recognise Ukrainian independence. In 2012, Poland and Ukraine were joint hosts of the UEFA European football championship. In the past 30 years, around 1.5 million Ukrainians have migrated to Poland. Historically, people in the Polish-Ukrainian borderlands spoke both languages and had mixed ancestry. Today, Poles and Ukrainians are discovering in their daily encounters how much they actually have in common. According to an opinion poll from February 2022, taken before the Russian attack, more Poles now like than dislike Ukrainians – a sign of how much things have changed. NATO Poland Ukraine Law and Justice Party (Poland) Ukraine invasion 2022 Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationEffectiveness of a hybrid vaccine against COVID-19 and influenza Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Effectiveness of a hybrid vaccine against COVID-19 and influenza Download PDF Copy By Bhavana KunkalikarReviewed by Aimee MolineuxJun 16 2022 In a recent study published in Vaccines, researchers assessed the efficiency of a hybrid vaccine against influenza and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) viruses. Study: Influenza Virus-like Particle-Based Hybrid Vaccine Containing RBD Induces Immunity against Influenza and SARS-CoV-2 Viruses. Image Credit: insta_photos/Shutterstock People worldwide are exposed to the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) as well as the influenza virus. Therefore the development of a two-in-one vaccine that could elicit protection against both these infections is a subject of great interest. About the study In the present study, researchers developed a hybrid vaccine using influenza virus-like particle (VLP) vaccine incorporated with glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain (RBD) fused to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) fusion protein. The team developed a fusion protein gene by fusing deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences that are specific to the SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) protein RBD domain, GPI-anchor signal derived from human CD59, and mouse GM-CSF. Flow cytometry was subsequently performed to demonstrate the expression of the fusion protein on the transfected CHO-S cells. The team also assessed whether the anti-RBD antibodies present in the convalescent sera collected from SARS-CoV-2-infected patients identified the RBD of the fusion protein by performing an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The team subsequently evaluated whether the fusion protein had two functions as GM-CSF and while also binding to human ACE2. Furthermore, the researchers developed the VLP hybrid vaccine by incorporating the influenza VLP with GPI-RBD-GM-CSF and GPI-interleukin (IL)-12 via protein transfer. Flow cytometry was also conducted using anti-GM-CSF antibodies and fluorochrome-conjugated anti-IL-12 to verify the dual incorporation of the GPI-RBD-GM-CSF and GPI-IL-12 onto VLPs. The retention of function by VLP-incorporated GM-CSF was verified by culturing mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BDMC), followed by the measurement of BMDC proliferation using XTT assay. The team tested the induction of antibody response by the GPI-RBD-GM-CSF fusion protein by immunizing BALB/c mice with either the fusion protein or VLPs incorporated into the fusion protein along with GPI-IL-12. VLP without cytokines or commercially available RBD was used as control. The team administered a booster dose to the mice population two to four weeks after the first dose. Blood samples were obtained from the mice every two to four weeks in order to estimate antibody titer, virus neutralization assays, and ACE2 binding inhibition. Results The study results showed that almost 76% of the fusion protein was secreted from the cell surface of the RBD-GM-CSF fusion protein, which suggested that the fusion protein was anchored into the cell membrane through a GPI tail. The RBD in the fusion protein exhibited ACE2 binding activity while RBD-specific neutralizing antibodies could bind to GPI-RBD-GM-CSF present on the CHO-S cell transfectants. Antibodies found in the sera of COVID-19 patients could efficiently bind to the GPI-RBD-GM-CSF. Moreover, ELISA confirmed that RBD from the purified fusion protein retained its receptor binding activity. Additionally, the XTT assay showed that GPI-RBD-GM-CSF that was incorporated in the VLP vaccine could effectively stimulate BMDC proliferation. Related StoriesAfrican production of mpox vaccines could secure the continent’s healthHexavalent vaccine can reduce spread of whooping coughPublic trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USThe team observed that the VLP hybrid vaccine elicited a significant antibody response after the administration of the GPI-RBD-GM-CSF booster dose. The antibody response elicited by the fusion protein was similar in both the intramuscular and subcutaneous routes of vaccine administration. The antibodies selectively bound to the CHO-S cells which expressed the fusion protein but not to the untransfected CHO-S cells. This indicated the high specificity of the antibody response to the fusion protein. The team also noted that the purified GPI-RBD-GM-CSF fusion protein-induced antibody levels that were comparable to those elicited by the VLP hybrid vaccine. However, the neutralizing antibody titers were considerably low in the mice that were immunized by only the GPI-RBD-GM-CSF protein without any VLP. This suggested that fusion protein that was incorporated with VLP elicited a more robust neutralizing antibody response as compared to that of the soluble fusion protein. Furthermore, the purified GPI-RBD-GM-CSF fusion protein alone or when incorporated with VLPs induced a substantial antibody response. On its own, the fusion protein induced a primarily Th2 type immunoglobulin 1 (IgG1) response while the hybrid VLP vaccine elicited both IgG1 and IgG2a responses. Notably, the incorporation of GPI-IL-12 into the hybrid VLP vaccine did not affect the IgG2a response. The team also observed that the hybrid vaccine by itself and the hybrid vaccine without IL-12 elicited robust antibody responses against the RBD as well as the influenza VLP antigens. These antibodies could sufficiently neutralize live virus infection when assessed via a plaque reduction neutralization titer (PRNT) assay. Moreover, substantially reduced viral replication was observed in the hybrid vaccine-treated mice as compared to the VLP-treated ones. Overall, the study findings showed that the delivery of SARS-CoV-2 RBD protein via influenza VLPs along with cytokine adjuvants served as an effective platform for the development of multivalent vaccines. The researchers believe that the usage of immobilized cytokines as an adjuvant will help elicit anti-viral immunity with minimal adverse effects. Journal reference: Bommireddy, R.; Stone, S.; Bhatnagar, N.; Kumari, P.; Munoz, L.E.; Oh, J.; Kim, K.-H.; Berry, J.T.L.; Jacobsen, K.M.; Jaafar, L.; et al. (2022). Influenza Virus-like Particle-Based Hybrid Vaccine Containing RBD Induces Immunity against Influenza and SARS-CoV-2 Viruses. Vaccines. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines10060944 https://www.mdpi.com/2076-393X/10/6/944 Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: ACE2, Antibodies, Antibody, Assay, B Cell, Blood, Bone, Bone Marrow, Cell, Cell Membrane, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Cytokine, Cytokines, Cytometry, DNA, ELISA, Enzyme, Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA), Flow Cytometry, Fluorochrome, Gene, immunity, Immunoglobulin, Influenza, Interleukin, Macrophage, Membrane, Proliferation, Protein, Receptor, Respiratory, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Vaccine, Virus Comments (0) Written byBhavana KunkalikarBhavana Kunkalikar is a medical writer based in Goa, India. Her academic background is in Pharmaceutical sciences and she holds a Bachelor's degree in Pharmacy. Her educational background allowed her to foster an interest in anatomical and physiological sciences. Her college project work based on ‘The manifestations and causes of sickle cell anemia’ formed the stepping stone to a life-long fascination with human pathophysiology. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APAKunkalikar, Bhavana. (2022, June 16). Effectiveness of a hybrid vaccine against COVID-19 and influenza. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220616/Effectiveness-of-a-hybrid-vaccine-against-COVID-19-and-influenza.aspx.MLAKunkalikar, Bhavana. "Effectiveness of a hybrid vaccine against COVID-19 and influenza". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220616/Effectiveness-of-a-hybrid-vaccine-against-COVID-19-and-influenza.aspx>.ChicagoKunkalikar, Bhavana. "Effectiveness of a hybrid vaccine against COVID-19 and influenza". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220616/Effectiveness-of-a-hybrid-vaccine-against-COVID-19-and-influenza.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardKunkalikar, Bhavana. 2022. Effectiveness of a hybrid vaccine against COVID-19 and influenza. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220616/Effectiveness-of-a-hybrid-vaccine-against-COVID-19-and-influenza.aspx. Suggested Reading Cleveland Clinic presents new findings on triple-negative breast cancer vaccineThrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura cases after CoronaVac raise concerns over vaccine safetyLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Study finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsSeasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicVALANX Biotech and Fina Biosolutions Introduce ClickCRM for Rapid Conjugate Vaccine DevelopmentRecruitment underway for a clinical trial testing new vaccine against respiratory viruses Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Radiology (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Could vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionWhat if the flu were treated more like covid, not the other way round?The EconomistThe Economist/>Skip to contentMenuWeekly editionThe world in briefSearchLog inOpinionLeadersLetters to the editorBy InvitationCurrent topicsUS elections 2024War in UkraineWar in the Middle EastThe World Ahead 2024Climate changeCoronavirusThe world economyArtificial intelligenceCurrent topicsUS elections 2024War in UkraineWar in the Middle EastThe World Ahead 2024Climate changeCoronavirusThe world economyArtificial intelligenceWorldThe world this weekChinaUnited StatesEuropeBritainMiddle East & AfricaAsiaThe AmericasInternationalA-Z of international relationsA-Z of military termsA-Z of US politicsUS election poll trackerIn depthScience & technologyBriefingGraphic detailThe Economist explainsSpecial reportsTechnology QuarterlyEssaySchools briefBusiness & economicsFinance & economicsBusinessBig Mac indexA-Z of economicsEconomic & financial indicatorsCulture & society1843 magazineCultureObituaryThe Economist readsChristmas SpecialsMorePodcastsNewslettersFilmsThe Economist appSecureDropSubscriber eventsEconomist Education coursesEconomist EnterpriseMy EconomistSaved storiesLog outSaved storiesAccountLog outSearchSearchTry AI-powered searchBritain | Business as flusualWhat if the flu were treated more like covid, not the other way round?A post-pandemic thought experiment Jun 14th 2022ShareThe covid-19 pandemic rumbles on. In the week ending May 21st, one in 60 adults in Britain were estimated to be infected; 16,504 people have died with the virus since February 23rd, which was when England’s restrictive measures ended. But only a new, more harmful variant would prompt a return to the rules of the past. This article appeared in the Britain section of the print edition under the headline “Business as flusual”Britain June 4th 2022Britain’s Supreme Court takes a conservative turnBoris Johnson’s position is looking precariousThe fall and rise of the British market hallAn 18th birthday is bad news for children awaiting trialBritain’s overstretched electricity grid is delaying housing projectsWhat if the flu were treated more like covid, not the other way round?From the June 4th 2022 editionDiscover stories from this section and more in the list of contentsExplore the editionShareReuse this contentDiscover moreWhat does it mean to wear a poppy today?Remembrance is part of it. So is jingoismTwo groups are least happy about Labour’s budgetBusinesses and farmers will be hit with more taxFarmer fight: Jeremy Clarkson versus Roald Dahl Why are British farmers so politically feeble? Blighty newsletter: Will Britain’s Trump trauma repeat itself?Higher fees won’t help Britain’s beleaguered universities muchA tax rise could gobble up much of the extra cashThe Labour government picks up a bad Tory habitExpansive and rushed legislation remains a problemSubscribeEconomist EnterpriseReuse our contentHelp and contact usKeep updatedLinkedInFacebookXInstagramThreadsTikTokYouTubeRSSPublished since September 1843 to take part in “a severe contest between intelligence, which presses forward, and an unworthy, timid ignorance obstructing our progress.” The EconomistAboutAdvertisePress centreSecureDropThe Economist GroupThe Economist GroupEconomist IntelligenceEconomist ImpactEconomist Impact EventsWorking hereEconomist Education CoursesExecutive JobsTo enhance your experience and ensure our website runs smoothly, we use cookies and similar technologies.Manage CookiesTerms of UsePrivacyCookie PolicyAccessibilityModern Slavery StatementSitemapYour Data RightsCopyright © The Economist Newspaper Limited 2024. All rights reserved.mRNA vaccines and treatments: beyond COVID-19 Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in mRNA vaccines and treatments: beyond COVID-19 Download PDF ADVERTISEMENT FEATURE Advertiser retains sole responsibility for the content of this article mRNA vaccines and treatments: beyond COVID-19 Knowledge taken from mRNA technologies used against COVID-19 is supporting development of vaccines and therapeutics to fight existing diseases and potentially thwart future pandemics. Produced by Twitter Facebook Email Download PDF The COVID-19 pandemic has triggered an unprecedented mobilization of resources to find vaccines and therapeutics to treat and prevent infection with SARS-CoV-2. mRNA technology was quickly adopted in the COVID-19 vaccine race and has undoubtedly proven its worth.mRNA vaccines use the host cell to generate the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Credit: selvanegra/iStock/Getty Images Plus/GettyLess than a year after the emergence of COVID-19, an entirely new type of vaccine based on mRNA technology was authorized for emergency use. Many billions of doses of the Moderna and Pfizer/ BioNTech mRNA vaccines have now been administered globally, saving millions of lives.During the pandemic, there have been many learnings and breakthroughs, which will improve preparedness and responsiveness to future disease outbreaks. A Moderna-sponsored Nature Conference, ‘Understanding COVID-19 to prepare for the next pandemic’, held on the 4–5 April 2022, brought together experts in infectious disease diagnostics, surveillance, vaccine development and therapeutics.CHALLENGES AND LEARNINGS Over the course of various sessions, they discussed the ongoing challenges and also revelations that could enable a swifter and more focused response to future pandemics.Participants agreed that vaccines and the gathering of real-world evidence on their effects are vital to end the ‘acute’ phase of the pandemic, where it continues to be classed as an international emergency. Hopefully we are now heading towards an endemic phase, where the virus will present less of a health emergency as it continues to circulate.At the conference, two experts from Moderna Inc. in Cambridge, Massachusetts — Jacqueline Miller, Senior Vice President and Therapeutic Area Head, Infectious Diseases; and Paul Burton, Chief Medical Officer — gave presentations on the company’s rapidly expanding development pipeline and the central role of real-world evidence in informing public health policy and the development of vaccines.The success of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines is accelerating the clinical development of many other mRNA vaccines, not just against SARS-CoV-2, but also against other respiratory pathogens, such as influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).Miller explained how the ability to rapidly manufacture mRNA vaccines in the laboratory from a DNA template; the willingness of volunteers to participate in clinical trials; and support from national health and regulatory agencies all contributed to Moderna being able to conduct large-scale trials, involving more than 30,000 people. These rapidly led to the approval of its first COVID-19 vaccine in many parts of the world in 2020 and 2021.REALIZING THE POTENTIAL Unlike vaccines that rely on live attenuated viruses or a specific virus protein, Moderna’s mRNA vaccine carries a single RNA transcript that uses the host cell’s machinery to generate the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. The protein is displayed on the cell surface where it triggers an immune response that protects against future infection.JACQUELINE MILLER, Senior Vice President, Therapeutic Area Head, Infectious Diseases, Moderna“Our experiences with the mRNA platform for SARS-CoV-2 vaccines are informing our development activities going forward,” Miller said. RNA technology enables a mix-and-match approach to vaccinology, whereby the RNA sequences in a vaccine can be replaced and/ or combined to improve their effectiveness against one or more pathogens.One area Moderna is now focusing on is mRNA vaccines against respiratory viruses such as influenza and RSV, which cause serious infection and have a high economic burden. In the US alone, flu is estimated to cost the economy nearly US$11.2 billion annually.1 But vaccines against influenza are only 40–60% effective, depending on the age and health of the person being inoculated and how well the vaccine matches the flu viruses spreading in the community.2 “There is clearly room for improvement,” Miller said.Moderna is also developing a combination vaccine for COVID-19 and flu. It will be tested in healthy adults later this year and its results will be compared to those of standalone mRNA COVID-19 and flu vaccines.In addition, Moderna is embarking on new programmes to create a COVID-19, flu and RSV combination vaccine and a new pan-coronavirus vaccine. “We are developing various components for combination vaccines, which, ultimately, will improve our preparedness for future pandemics caused by respiratory viruses,” Miller explained.The company’s goal is to produce a single, annual, combination vaccine that will reduce the morbidity and mortality caused by many respiratory viruses.HARNESSING REAL-WORLD EVIDENCE During the course of the pandemic, the collection of real-world evidence has undergone a revolution. Innovative methods to rapidly and reliably capture data during routine clinical practice, outside the context of controlled clinical trials, have enabled experts to assess vaccine safety and efficacy in real time and make swift decisions about the need for booster doses or changes to vaccine formulations.PAUL BURTON, Chief Medical Officer, Moderna“Every day, we have been hearing about how SARS-CoV-2 is impacting our life,” said Burton, which has resulted in a “sea-change in our acceptance and understanding of the value of these data.”Real-world evidence is confirming the results of clinical trials, as well as determining the duration of vaccine protection, and their effectiveness against emerging variants. “The analyses, publication and discussion of the data leading to the US Government’s decision to provide booster doses in August 2021 happened in only a couple of weeks,” Burton explained. This example highlights the speed at which clinical data is shaping health policy and decision-making.Real-world evidence continues to show that mRNA vaccines and booster doses are reducing the risk of hospitalization and death from COVID-19, even during recent surges of the highly transmissible Omicron variant. It is also providing information on relatively rare events, such as the risk of myocarditis after mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccination3 and the hospitalization of young children due to infection with SARS-CoV-2 variants. These types of data help public health authorities weigh up the benefits against risk of harm from COVID-19 vaccines.For example, one recent study looking at the clinical outcome of patients concurrently infected with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza showed that co-infection is associated with increased risk of receiving invasive mechanical ventilation, and death, compared with SARS-CoV-2 infection alone.4 “As respiratory virus co-infections are more likely as we go into future winters, this knowledge will allow healthcare systems and governments to prepare in a way that previously would not have been possible,” Burton said.Although uncertainties remain about the transition to endemic COVID-19, due to the risk of new variants of concern and waning immunity, he is optimistic. “The transparent dissemination of rigorous real-world evidence and expansion of vaccine manufacturing capacity will not just help shift this pandemic to the endemic phase, but improve our preparedness for new pandemics,” he said.For more information and for free, on-demand access to 'Understanding COVID-19 to prepare for the next pandemic', please click here.mRNA vaccine technology blooms across Asia-PacificmRNA leader, Moderna, plans to develop and manufacture mRNA vaccines and therapeutics against many diseases. Rami Suzuki, president of its Japanese subsidiary explains how expanding its operations in Asia is helping it reach these goals.As many countries adopt a strategy of living with COVID-19, and drop health restrictions that have characterised the pandemic so far, the World Health Organization (WHO) warns that global recovery is dependent on 70% of the world’s population being vaccinated.5Waning immunity and the emergence of new variants could also hamper recovery it warns. “We need to remain vigilant, hope for the best and prepare for the worst,” says Rami Suzuki, Representative Director and President of Moderna in Japan.In an interview, Suzuki described how Moderna is preparing through the development of variant-specific vaccines and combination vaccines against all SARS-like viruses and other respiratory pathogens. She also emphasized the urgent need to ensure a stable, global supply of COVID-19 vaccines. By opening new subsidiaries in the Asia-Pacific, Moderna hopes to ramp up vaccine production in the region and alleviate supply-chain issues. Credit: kokouu/E+/GettyTo this end, Moderna is establishing long-term strategic partnerships that enable large-scale manufacturing of vaccines and other therapeutics with companies all around the world. “Our goal is to ramp up vaccine production, particularly in countries bearing the highest burden of infectious disease and in those with rapidly ageing populations,” she says.SOLVING HEALTH CHALLENGES Moderna has existing operations in Australia, South Korea and Japan. The announcement that it is opening new subsidiaries in Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan, will help leverage its mRNA vaccine platform to solve health challenges in the Asia- Pacific region.“It has been an incredible journey,” says Suzuki, describing how in just a few years Moderna has gone from being a relatively small, US-based company with no commercial product, to a multinational business with a Japanese subsidiary that will supply nearly 50% of all COVID-19 vaccine doses required in the nation during the second half of 2022. This is just one example of the remarkable global reach of its COVID-19 vaccine.RAMI SUZUKI, President and Representative Director, Moderna JapanSuzuki is excited about the company’s development pipeline. Moderna now has 46 programmes in development across 43 development candidates, of which 29 are in active clinical trials. Moderna is developing vaccines against viruses for which there are no approved jabs today, she says, including Epstein-Barr Virus (Phase 1), HIV (Phase 1) and Cytomegalovirus (Phase 3). Moderna’s technology is also being applied to the development of personalized cancer vaccines and mRNA-based therapeutics for the treatment of heart disease, autoimmune disorders and rare genetic diseases.“We are looking for talented scientists that share our dream of transforming human health through mRNA technology”, says Suzuki. As well as actively recruiting in Asia, Moderna has launched an ‘mRNA Access’ program that enables researchers worldwide to use its mRNA vaccine platform to develop vaccines against emerging and neglected infectious diseases in their own labs.“We are committed to developing vaccines against 15 high-priority targets identified by the WHO by 2025 and to improving the world’s preparedness to control the next outbreak or pandemic,” she adds.Speaking about future opportunities, Suzuki highlighted the importance of sharing health data between countries to be able to track and react to emerging trends, on things such as the number of infections and waning immunity, faster and realize Moderna’s ambition of collectively improving human health. References Putri, W. C. W. S. Vaccine. 36, 3960–3966 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar https://www.cdc.gov/flu/ vaccines-work/vaccineeffect.htmOster M. E. et al. JAMA. 327, 331–340 (2022).Article PubMed Google Scholar Swets M.C. et al. Lancet. 399, 1463–1464 (2022).Article PubMed Google Scholar Strategy to Achieve Global Covid-19 Vaccination by mid- 2022. World Health Organization (accessed 15th April 2022) https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/ default-source/immunization/ covid-19/strategy-to-achieve-global-covid-19-vaccination-by-mid-2022.pdfDownload references Download PDF Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Research Custom nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedResearchers report the detection of a swine influenza A virus with gene segments of avian H9N2 origin Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Researchers report the detection of a swine influenza A virus with gene segments of avian H9N2 origin Download PDF Copy By Tarun Sai LomteReviewed by Danielle Ellis, B.Sc.Jun 14 2022 In a recent study published in Emerging Infectious Diseases, researchers reported natural reassortment of influenza viruses in pigs. Study: Natural Reassortment of Eurasian Avian-like Swine H1N1 and Avian H9N2 Influenza Viruses in Pigs, China. Image Credit: Kateryna Kon/Shutterstock Background Pigs are deemed as vessels for reassortment of influenza A viruses (IAVs). Swine, human, and avian IAVs could co-infect swine and create novel reassortant IAVs with the potential to cause zoonosis or pandemics. One study provided evidence of avian influenza virus infections in pigs. It was revealed that avian IAVs linked to human infections contained internal genes from avian H9N2 viruses, implying that the H9N2 viral genes might aid zoonotic transmission. About the study In the current study, researchers detected a swine IAV with matrix (M) and polymerase basic 1 (PB1) gene segments originating from avian H9N2 influenza. The research team collected nasal swab samples from imported swine at a local Hong Kong slaughterhouse as part of the monthly influenza surveillance program, which resumed in April 2021 following disruptions due to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak. IAVs were isolated from swab samples using Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. Cultures exhibiting cytopathic effect (CPE) were identified and were tested by a standard hemagglutination assay using turkey red blood cells. The cultures positive for hemagglutination were subject to a reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test, specific for M segments. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on PCR-positive samples. Results and conclusion The researchers collected 829 nasal swab samples from April 2021 to February 2022. They isolated eight IAVs, seven from August 2021 and one from September 2021. The authors reported that the deduced viral sequences had been made available on the Global Initiative on Sharing Avian Influenza Data (GISAID) database. These sequences were compared with references. All IAVs from August 2021 were H3N2 viruses, and their neuraminidase (NA) and hemagglutinin (HA) segments were related to human-like H3N2 swine IAV. However, the internal gene segments were derivatives of the pandemic H1N1 (pH1N1) influenza virus. Although these IAVs were not genetically identical, they shared significant similarities. The swine from which IAVs were isolated were imported from two Southern Chinese provinces. Given that the imported animals were slaughtered within 24 hours, the researchers speculated that influenza transmission might have occurred between pigs outside Hong Kong before import. Previously, this genotype (H3N2) was found in pigs raised in Guangxi, China. From the September 2021 samples, the team isolated a swine H1N1 IAV and noted reassortments from multiple lineages of swine IAVs in it. The M and PB1 segments were of avian H9N2 origin. Related StoriesUnraveling the mechanism of Shufeng Jiedu Capsules in influenza treatmentGenetic diagnosis solves medical mystery for 30 undiagnosed patientsElevated antibody responses to Epstein-Barr virus linked to increased risk of multiple sclerosisMoreover, it also contained polymerase acidic, PB2, and NA segments of the pH1N1 lineage. The NA and HA gene segments were of Eurasian avian-like H1N1 lineage, and the non-structural gene segment exhibited a triple reassortant lineage. This viral isolate was further purified on plaque assays, and the resultant plaque-purified clones were genotypically identical, ruling out the possibility of a mixed infection. It also featured an M gene segment of G1-like H9N2 lineage and a PB1 gene segment of SH/F/98-like lineage. Such similar sequences were detected in zoonotic IAVs in humans. However, the two sequences did not contain mutations known for adaptation in mammalian hosts. Additionally, the encoded PB1 and M proteins had amino acid sequences rarely found in avian and mammalian IAVs. One recent study reported multiple Eurasian avian-like H1N1 swine influenza reassortants; of these, one reassortant class (genotype 4) had a genotype similar to the IAV isolated in September 2021. However, its M and PB1 segments were of pH1N1 lineage, unlike the one reported in the present study. The authors posit that Eurasian avian-like H1N1 and genotype 4 viruses might originate from a common ancestor. Nevertheless, further evaluation of its pandemic potential is required. Conclusion In conclusion, various zoonotic IAVs in humans show genes derived from H9N2 viruses. These findings indicated that H9N2 IAVs have been infecting pigs and reassorting with swine IAVs, highlighting the continued need to monitor swine IAVs. Journal reference: Sun W, Cheng SSM, Lam KNT, Kwan TC, Wong RWK, Lau LHK, et al. Natural reassortment of Eurasian avian-like swine H1N1 and avian H9N2 influenza viruses in pigs, China. Emerg Infect Dis. doi: https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2807.220642 https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/28/7/22-0642_article Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Amino Acid, Assay, Avian Influenza, Blood, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Gene, Genes, H1N1, H3N2, Infectious Diseases, Influenza, Kidney, Next generation sequencing NGS, Pandemic, Polymerase, Polymerase Chain Reaction, Red Blood Cells, Research, Transcription, Virus, Zoonosis Comments (0) Written byTarun Sai LomteTarun is a writer based in Hyderabad, India. He has a Master’s degree in Biotechnology from the University of Hyderabad and is enthusiastic about scientific research. He enjoys reading research papers and literature reviews and is passionate about writing. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APASai Lomte, Tarun. (2022, June 14). Researchers report the detection of a swine influenza A virus with gene segments of avian H9N2 origin. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220614/Researchers-report-the-detection-of-a-swine-influenza-A-virus-with-gene-segments-of-avian-H9N2-origin.aspx.MLASai Lomte, Tarun. "Researchers report the detection of a swine influenza A virus with gene segments of avian H9N2 origin". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220614/Researchers-report-the-detection-of-a-swine-influenza-A-virus-with-gene-segments-of-avian-H9N2-origin.aspx>.ChicagoSai Lomte, Tarun. "Researchers report the detection of a swine influenza A virus with gene segments of avian H9N2 origin". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220614/Researchers-report-the-detection-of-a-swine-influenza-A-virus-with-gene-segments-of-avian-H9N2-origin.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardSai Lomte, Tarun. 2022. Researchers report the detection of a swine influenza A virus with gene segments of avian H9N2 origin. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220614/Researchers-report-the-detection-of-a-swine-influenza-A-virus-with-gene-segments-of-avian-H9N2-origin.aspx. Suggested Reading Researchers identify 4-gene signature to predict neonatal sepsis before symptomsA novel synthetic lethal target for ATM inhibitors in pancreatic cancerEpigenetic silencing of BEND4 unveils new path for PDAC treatmentNew model sheds light on APOE4's role in Alzheimer's pathologyCurcumin compound reactivates Epstein–Barr virus, offering safer cancer therapyUAB team develops a combined score to predict cancer treatment successNew imaging method could transform gene expression researchAssessing recurrence risk with ctDNA-based MRD detection in NSCLC patients Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Genetics (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Seasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicCo-circulation of respiratory viruses during the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha surge Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Co-circulation of respiratory viruses during the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha surge Download PDF Copy By Dr. Priyom Bose, Ph.D.Reviewed by Emily Henderson, B.Sc.Jun 16 2022 Scientists and policymakers have devised many strategies to reduce the emergence and spread of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causal agent of the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic (COVID-19). For example, people have been urged to practice physical distance, wear face masks, wash their hands frequently, and dine close to each other indoors. Brief Report: Reduction and persistence of co-circulating respiratory viruses during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Image Credit: Corona Borealis Studio/ Shutterstock Background The implementation of various measures formulated to prevent the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus has also contributed significantly to the reduction in influenza cases. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), only 0.2% of specimens tested positive for influenza between September 28, 2020, and May 22, 2021. However, this was not the case in the previous three influenza seasons, where the number of positive cases ranged between 26.2 and 30.3%. Reduced influenza cases indicate the effectiveness of mitigation measures taken to limit SARS-CoV-2. Yet it remains unclear whether the control measures would be effective against other respiratory viruses as well. A New Study Recently, scientists evaluated the influence of mitigation measures that were originally implemented to restrict COVID-19 transmission, on other respiratory viruses. This study is available as pre-proof in AJIC: American Journal of Infection Control. In this study, researchers studied a molecular respiratory pathogen panel on nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs obtained from symptomatic patients who opted for drive-through COVID-19 testing centers at the University of North Carolina Hospital’s Respiratory Diagnostic Center (RDC) between January 15 and April 15, 2021. The authors considered all samples that were negative for SARS-CoV-2. Researchers used a molecular respiratory pathogen panel, approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), to screen various respiratory pathogens including endemic coronaviruses (HKU1, NL63, 229E, OC43), adenovirus, rhinovirus/enterovirus, parainfluenza virus (PIV) 1, PIV2, PIV3, PIV4, metapneumovirus, influenza A (A/H1, A/H3, A/H1-2009), influenza B, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), Chlamydia pneumoniae, Bordetella pertussis, Bordetella parapertussis, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Key Findings According to this study, 8.5% of 5,068 symptomatic outpatients were infected with SARS-CoV-2. The rest of the samples were available for additional testing by the molecular respiratory panel. Researchers revealed that the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha variant was circulating as the dominant strain during the study period. Related StoriesCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionOne in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19Mild COVID-19 disrupts brain connectivity and reduces memory function in adolescents and young adultsScientists reported that 18% of the samples available for the molecular respiratory panel, exhibited infection by rhinovirus/enterovirus. Other viruses detected were RSV, PIV 2, PIV 3, metapneumovirus, adenovirus, and endemic coronaviruses (229E, NL63, OC43). Interestingly, researchers observed that bacterial targets and influenza viruses were not detected in any of the tested samples. The current study strongly suggested that infection by some respiratory viruses, such as influenza, could be prevented via the implementation of prevention measures (e.g., changes in social behavior). Study Implications The authors stated that the reduction in the transmission of influenza viruses has occurred due to multiple factors, and one of the key factors has been the implementation of mitigation strategies to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 transmission. The presence of other viruses, such as rhinovirus/enterovirus, indicates that their mode of transmission differs from SARS-CoV-2. During the COVID-19 pandemic, scientists and policymakers have particularly focussed on formulating mitigation measures based on preventing the spread of respiratory aerosols and droplets generated by SARS-CoV-2 infected patients. There was less attention paid to the possibility of virus transmission via contaminated surfaces. Previous studies have indicated that enveloped viruses (e.g., SARS-CoV-2 and influenza) are easily inactivated by frequent hand washing and use of disinfectants, while non-enveloped viruses (e.g., rhinovirus/enterovirus) could not be managed via these measures. This study strongly suggests that nonpharmaceutical prevention measures have significantly lowered the spread of the majority of respiratory viruses compared to previous seasons. However, the increased use of surface disinfectants, especially in hospitals and nursing homes, has been strongly recommended. Journal reference: Smedberg, R.J. et al. (2022) Reduction and persistence of co-circulating respiratory viruses during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, AJIC: American Journal of Infection Control. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2022.06.008, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0196655322004795 Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Adenovirus, Chlamydia, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Diagnostic, Enterovirus, Food, Hospital, Infection Control, Influenza, Mycoplasma, Nasopharyngeal, Nursing, Pandemic, Pathogen, Pertussis, Respiratory, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Rhinovirus, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Virus Comments (0) Written byDr. Priyom BosePriyom holds a Ph.D. in Plant Biology and Biotechnology from the University of Madras, India. She is an active researcher and an experienced science writer. Priyom has also co-authored several original research articles that have been published in reputed peer-reviewed journals. She is also an avid reader and an amateur photographer. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APABose, Priyom. (2022, June 16). Co-circulation of respiratory viruses during the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha surge. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220616/Co-circulation-of-respiratory-viruses-during-the-SARS-CoV-2-Alpha-surge.aspx.MLABose, Priyom. "Co-circulation of respiratory viruses during the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha surge". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220616/Co-circulation-of-respiratory-viruses-during-the-SARS-CoV-2-Alpha-surge.aspx>.ChicagoBose, Priyom. "Co-circulation of respiratory viruses during the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha surge". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220616/Co-circulation-of-respiratory-viruses-during-the-SARS-CoV-2-Alpha-surge.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardBose, Priyom. 2022. Co-circulation of respiratory viruses during the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha surge. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220616/Co-circulation-of-respiratory-viruses-during-the-SARS-CoV-2-Alpha-surge.aspx. Suggested Reading Research links COVID-19 vaccines to temporary facial palsy in over 5,000 patientsSARS-CoV-2 hijacks host proteins to escape immune clearanceStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsLeritrelvir shows high efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 protease mutationsCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Genetic risk factors for long-COVID uncovered in a large multi-ethnic studyPublic trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USRecruitment underway for a clinical trial testing new vaccine against respiratory viruses Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Nursing (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × New study reveals long-term brainstem damage in COVID-19 survivors using advanced MRI scansExercising before or after a flu vaccination may make it work better | New Scientist Close Advertisement Skip to content Sign in Search the website Events Tours Shop Courses Jobs Subscribe now Explore by section News Features Newsletters Podcasts Video Comment Culture Crosswords | This week's magazine Explore by subject Health Space Physics Technology Environment Mind Humans Life Mathematics Chemistry Earth Society Explore our products and services Events Tours Shop Courses Jobs Subscribe now Subscribe now Health Exercising before or after a flu vaccine may make it work better People who are usually physically active had increased antibody levels if they exercised around the time they received their flu shot By Grace Wade 15 June 2022 Facebook / Meta Twitter / X icon Linkedin Reddit Email Exercising before a flu shot could make the vaccine more effectiveJordan Vanderzalm/EyeEm via Getty Images For people who are usually physically active, working out around the time of their flu shot may increase the vaccine’s efficacy. The benefit is even more pronounced if they train the muscles about to get jabbed. Erika Bohn-Goldbaum at the University of Sydney in Australia and her colleagues collected data from seven trials to see how exercise impacts the immune response to flu vaccination. Of the 550 healthy adult participants, 382 exercised for 15 to 50 minutes either before or after they received their flu shot. The other 168 sat inactive for an equal amount of time. Researchers collected their blood samples four to six weeks after inoculation to measure antibody levels. About 61 per cent of the participants were already active, meaning they engaged in 2.5 hours of moderate physical activity per week. This group had a better immune response to the vaccine compared with people who were inactive, a finding in line with previous studies. And they got an additional boost if they exercised around the time of vaccination: more than a month later, their antibody levels were significantly higher than those of people who sat idly. This was only true if their flu shot targeted the H1 influenza strain, not the H3 or B strains. Exercise had no significant impact on the antibody levels of people who were usually inactive.Advertisement Read more: The immune system: How to boost it and lower your immune age “If you are a physically active, not-obese person, we know from many studies that your antibody response to influenza and other vaccines is better,” says David Nieman at Appalachian State University in North Carolina. Exercise spurs immune cells to circulate in the bloodstream, where they can better react to pathogens, or in this case, vaccines, says Nieman. However, this effect only lasts for a few hours, which is why consistent physical activity is key for a robust immune response. Physically active participants who engaged in upper body resistance training before vaccination had slightly higher antibody levels than those who did other exercises. This suggests that training the muscles near the injection site also improves immune response, says Bohn-Goldbaum. “We think muscle damage from exercise actually activates local danger signals which stimulate [certain immune] cells and gets the adaptive immune response going,” says Bohn-Goldbaum. PLoS One DOI: 10.1371/journal.prone.0268625 Sign up to our free Health Check newsletter for a round-up of all the health and fitness news you need to know, every Saturday Topics:flu/vaccines/exercise Advertisement Sign up to our weekly newsletter Receive a weekly dose of discovery in your inbox! We'll also keep you up to date with New Scientist events and special offers. Sign up More from New Scientist Explore the latest news, articles and features Health Conspiracy theorists are turning their attention back to HPV vaccines CommentSubscriber-only Health The science of exercise: Which activity burns the most calories? RegularsSubscriber-only Health Flu viruses have evolved proteins that let them break through mucus NewsSubscriber-only Health Weight-loss drugs lower impulse to eat – and perhaps to exercise too NewsFree Popular articles Trending New Scientist articles 1 DNA analysis rewrites the stories of people buried in Pompeii 2 The complete guide to cooking oils and how they affect your health 3 Carbon emissions from private jets have exploded in recent years 4 Is personalised nutrition better than one-size-fits-all diet advice? 5 Why hairy animals shake themselves dry 6 Ancient Mesopotamian clay seals offer clues to the origin of writing 7 If an asteroid were heading towards Earth, could you avert disaster? 8 See nature in close-up in these stunning photographs 9 Chimps do better at difficult tasks when they have an audience 10 Special electrodes can split seawater to produce hydrogen fuel Advertisement Download the app Find us on social media Instagram Facebook X / Twitter Tiktok LinkedIn WhatsApp Subscriptions Subscriber benefits Gift Student & graduate Educational Corporate Support Contact us Help About us Press room Advertise Write for us Tools Events Science Jobs CoLab Syndication RSS feeds Legal and privacy Complaint policy Privacy policy Cookie policy Terms & conditions Cookie Settings © Copyright New Scientist Ltd. Back to the topThe potential role of Ginkgo biloba L. folium extract in the management of COVID-19 Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member The potential role of Ginkgo biloba L. folium extract in the management of COVID-19 Download PDF Copy By Bhavana KunkalikarReviewed by Danielle Ellis, B.Sc.Jun 13 2022 In a recent study published in Archiv der Pharmazie, researchers explored the effectiveness of Ginkgo biloba L. folium extract (EGb) in the management of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) severity. Study: Ginkgo biloba in the management of the COVID-19 severity. Image Credit: v.apl/Shutterstock.com Background COVID-19 is associated with several inflammatory disorders as well as the manifestation of oxidative stress in severe cases. Therefore, the development of therapeutic approaches against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that target inflammation and oxidation can help alleviate COVID-19 complications. Antiviral activity of EGb Various studies have highlighted the broad‐spectrum antiviral activity of EGb and its impact on viral life cycle stages, such as viral binding, viral entry, expression of proteins, as well as assembly and release of proteins. This antiviral activity is mainly observed under the cytotoxic threshold. EGb is also known to have an inhibitory effect against influenza A and B viruses via disruption of the hemagglutinin (HA) to the host cells. In the present study, the team noted that the transmissibility of the influenza A virus depends on the interactions between HA and neuraminidase (NA) with sialic acid present in the cell surface receptor. Ginkgetin, a natural biflavone isolated from GB, can effectively block the sialidase activity of the influenza virus, thus preventing viral adsorption on the host's cell surface. Furthermore, EGb has been found to have a substantial antiviral effect against the H3N2 influenza virus as well as the hepatitis B virus. The antiviral effect of GB is reported to be due to the disruption of viral fusion and the protective effect induced by GB on the host cells by improving its stability and reducing its permeability. Furthermore, studies showed that isorhamnetin, a flavonoid present in EGb, can inhibit NA and HA found in the H1N1 virus. This flavonoid also reduced autophagy induced by a viral infection, production of reactive oxygen species, and the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase. Anti-inflammatory activity of EGb EGb and its components have also displayed anti-inflammatory effects via the inhibition of proinflammatory cytokines and the activation of anti-inflammatory cytokines. Various studies have noted that biflavones present in EGb, such as ginkgetin, significantly reduce the abnormal expression of Akt and p38 pathways in the basal epithelial cells. Biflavones also suppressed the expression of messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) of respiratory tract mucin, which could lead to mucociliary clearance failure. EGb was also found to reduce the inflammation of the airway in asthmatic patients by decreasing the infiltration of the inflammatory cells, such as lymphocytes and eosinophils. It also suppressed the activity of protein kinase alpha (PKC‐α) of lymphocytes, thus preventing the secretion of interleukin 5 (IL-5) in the epithelial cells of the respiratory system. Additionally, a diterpene trilactone of GB called ginkgolide B also reduced the inflammatory reactions incident in the airway of patients who have asthma by reducing the secretion of platelet-activating factor (PAF). EGb and COVID-19 Evidence shows that the 3‐chymotrypsin‐like protease (3CLpro) enzyme plays a crucial role in SARS-CoV-2 replication and is considered an effective target against SARS-CoV-2. GA and a bioflavone called sciadopitysin present in EGb can sufficiently block 3CLpro. Moreover, glycosylated flavonoids found in EGb also display inhibitory effects on SARS-CoV-2 replication by suppressing the function of 3CLpro. The team also noted that a glycosylated derivative of kaempferol present in EGb has one of the highest binding energies to 3CLpro in SARS-CoV-2. Kaempferol inhibited the 3CLpro by exerting modularity effects on the extracellular as well as intercellular signaling pathways. Related StoriesMild COVID-19 disrupts brain connectivity and reduces memory function in adolescents and young adultsGenetic risk factors for long-COVID uncovered in a large multi-ethnic studyStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsFurthermore, the papain‐like protease (PLpro) was also inhibited by quercetin, the primary component of the EGb flavonoids. This inhibition led to the suppression of SARS-CoV-2 replication through the inhibition of both PLpro and CLpro, which further resulted in the mitigation of coagulopathy, hyperinflammatory reactions as well as prothrombotic conditions. Moreover, the channel blocking activity of quercetin and kaempferol inhibited the SARS-CoV-2 envelope (E) protein, thus reducing viral activity and proliferation. Various studies have highlighted the important role of lipoxygenase (LOX) and cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes in worsening bronchial inflammatory reactions as well as the progression of acute lung injury (ALI) in patients experiencing severe COVID-19. Ginkgetin effectively inhibits leukotriene and prostaglandin pathways as a result of the reduction in phospholipase A2 enzyme activity. Altogether, this indicated that EGb showed great potential as a therapeutic approach against ALI. Conclusion Overall, the study findings showed that GB preparations could serve as effective potential candidates in the management of COVID-19 and its disease severity. The researchers believe that further clinical trial studies could verify the effectiveness of EGb against COVID-19 disease progression. Journal reference: Ginkgo biloba in the management of the COVID-19 severity Al-kuraishy, H. M., Al-Gareeb, A. I., Kaushik, A., Kujawska, M., Batiha, G. E.-S., Arch. Pharm. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/ardp.202200188 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ardp.202200188 Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Anti-Inflammatory, Asthma, Autophagy, B Cell, Cell, Clinical Trial, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Cytokines, Enzyme, Flavonoid, Ginkgo, H1N1, H3N2, Hepatitis, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis B Virus, Inflammation, Influenza, Interleukin, Interleukin 5, Kinase, Oxidative Stress, Oxygen, Phosphorylation, Platelet, Proliferation, Protein, Quercetin, Receptor, Respiratory, Ribonucleic Acid, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Stress, Syndrome, Virus Comments (0) Written byBhavana KunkalikarBhavana Kunkalikar is a medical writer based in Goa, India. Her academic background is in Pharmaceutical sciences and she holds a Bachelor's degree in Pharmacy. Her educational background allowed her to foster an interest in anatomical and physiological sciences. Her college project work based on ‘The manifestations and causes of sickle cell anemia’ formed the stepping stone to a life-long fascination with human pathophysiology. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APAKunkalikar, Bhavana. (2022, June 13). The potential role of Ginkgo biloba L. folium extract in the management of COVID-19. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220613/The-potential-role-of-Ginkgo-biloba-L-folium-extract-in-the-management-of-COVID-19.aspx.MLAKunkalikar, Bhavana. "The potential role of Ginkgo biloba L. folium extract in the management of COVID-19". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220613/The-potential-role-of-Ginkgo-biloba-L-folium-extract-in-the-management-of-COVID-19.aspx>.ChicagoKunkalikar, Bhavana. "The potential role of Ginkgo biloba L. folium extract in the management of COVID-19". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220613/The-potential-role-of-Ginkgo-biloba-L-folium-extract-in-the-management-of-COVID-19.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardKunkalikar, Bhavana. 2022. The potential role of Ginkgo biloba L. folium extract in the management of COVID-19. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220613/The-potential-role-of-Ginkgo-biloba-L-folium-extract-in-the-management-of-COVID-19.aspx. Suggested Reading Could vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Public trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USResearch links COVID-19 vaccines to temporary facial palsy in over 5,000 patientsOne in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19Cardiovascular risks post-COVID-19 vaccination: Key findingsNew study reveals long-term brainstem damage in COVID-19 survivors using advanced MRI scansLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Asthma (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Masks and smart seating cut COVID-19 risks on flights, review findsBeing physically active and exercising before a flu vaccine may boost antibody production - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeHealthBeing physically active and exercising before a flu vaccine may boost antibody productionShare Being physically active and exercising before a flu vaccine may boost antibody productionBy science reporter Belinda SmithABC Health & WellbeingTopic:InfluenzaWed 15 Jun 2022Wednesday 15 June 2022Wed 15 Jun 2022 at 7:11pmDisplay captionUsing resistance bands might help elicit a better immune response from a flu vaccine (sweatband optional). (Freepik: robotdean)abc.net.auews/flu-shot-influenza-vaccine-exercise-antibodies-immune-system/101143884Link copiedShareShare articleDoing a few push-ups before you get your flu shot might boost the number of antibodies you make against the virus — and if you're already physically active, that effect could be jacked up even more.Key points:People who are physically active tend to generate a better immune response to vaccinesAnalysis shows a bout of exercise just before vaccination can increase antibody levels against one type of flu virusMore studies are needed to determine the exercises that most effectively enhance antibody productionThis is the upshot from an analysis by researchers at the University of Sydney and UNSW, which was the first to compare the effects of a bout of exercise prior to getting a seasonal influenza vaccine in physically active people, versus their inactive counterparts.The report, published today in the journal PLoS ONE, didn't track if participants eventually caught the flu, but it did suggest exercise might benefit one section of the population in particular — older people.The researchers found younger adults aged 18 to 35 generated high antibody levels regardless of baseline physical activity levels, or if they'd exercised before vaccination.But with each passing birthday, our immune system tends to slow down and be less responsive to vaccines.Jabs urged as flu cases risePhoto shows Sick person lies on couch underneath blanket.As Australians head into winter with little natural immunity from the flu, and facing the potential risk of a co-infection with COVID-19, experts say getting a flu shot is more important than ever.We churn out fewer antibodies, which help protect us against the real disease, should we encounter it.And while we can't stop the inexorable march of time, we can get moving to give our immune system a helping hand, study lead author Erika Bohn-Goldbaum said."Being physically active throughout your life is a good thing, and, in fact, we did see a suggestion that physical activity and [a bout of] acute exercise were more beneficial to older people."So it doesn't matter how old you are — get started."How does exercise affect how we respond to vaccines?When the pandemic put a pin in her PhD experiments, Ms Bohn-Goldbaum and her colleagues pooled data from seven exercise studies, each of which measured antibody levels a month or so after flu vaccination.They ended up with data from 550 people aged between 18 and 87.Those who met the World Health Organization's recommended amount of weekly physical activity were more likely to quadruple their blood antibody levels, compared to pre-vaccination levels, than inactive people.But Ms Bohn-Goldbaum and her team also found an added benefit of weight or resistance training just before vaccination, which elicited a stronger immune response than 45 minutes on an exercise bike.Our immune system response declines with age, so in Australia, over-65s receive an "enhanced" seasonal flu vaccine. (Unsplash: Phillippe Leone)So how does a gym sesh, or even simply using resistance bands, beef up our immune response to vaccines?There are a bunch of different theories. One boils down to the fact that weight training slightly damages our muscles.If we lift a dumbbell into a bicep curl, and our upper arm muscles are under enough strain, their cells suffer minor damage — especially if we're not used to the movement.Why vaccines go into your upper arm and not up your nosePhoto shows An African American woman injecting a vaccine in the upper arm of an African American manWhy not straight in a vein — or even up the nose?This triggers our muscle cells to send "danger signals" to our immune system, which attracts a type of immune cell, called dendritic cells, to the damaged areas.Dendritic cells help build muscle, but — crucially — are also a vital part of our antibody production line.So if you then inject a vaccine into that same muscle afterwards, a whole heap of dendritic cells are already there, ready to kick off antibody production.This was the likeliest explanation for what the researchers found, Ms Bohn-Goldbaum said."The reason we think that is because we saw more of an effect in the people who had done an upper extremity exercise."Not all strains (and studies) are created equalThe yearly flu vaccine is designed to protect us against four flu viruses, and the new analysis found exercise boosts antibodies against one of them — H1N1 — but not necessarily the others.Why this was the case was a mystery, Ms Bohn-Goldbaum said, but different flu viruses provoked different levels of immune response.The flu vax protects against four virusesTwo influenza A:H1N1 was first detected in the Americas in 2009 and caused the 2009-10 swine flu pandemicH3N2 was behind the 1968 flu pandemic, which killed an estimated 1 million people worldwideTwo influenza B:B/Victoria tends to infect younger peopleB/Yamagata may now be eradicatedStudy participants didn't represent a true slice of the population, age-wise. They either skewed younger — 18 to 35 years old — or older — over 65.And because the studies varied their bouts of exercise by type and intensity, it's impossible to identify the most effective antibody-generating workout — or even when to do it, Ms Bohn-Goldberg said."There hasn't been anything that says [exercise] has to be two hours before or within 24 hours of getting a vaccine, and nothing that says you have to exercise the arm you're getting your shot in versus your legs."There are a lot of unknowns because the studies tend to be rather small."I will say that exercise never hurts, just in general, and also for vaccine responses. Exercise is good."Queensland University of Technology exercise physiologist Jonathan Peake, who was not involved in the study, agreed."The paper shows that there are benefits of regular physical activity, regardless of whether that's resistance exercise, strength exercise or aerobic exercise, for enhancing immune responses to vaccinations.ABC Health in your Instagram feedFollow @abchealth on Instagram, where we're busting myths and sharing practical, smart health advice."The benefits of regular exercise are particularly important for older people — if older people can maintain regular levels of physical activity, then they're going to get even more benefit from that vaccination than they otherwise would."The next step, he said, was to find out the optimum form of exercise to boost the immune response to vaccination.And there are other ways we can keep our immune system in its best possible shape, regardless of age.Our immune system isn't a standalone entity; it's interconnected with all our other body systems."Nutrition and sleep are certainly things that are within our control," Dr Peake said."Sleep influences our stress levels, and I think chronic levels of stress, mental health disorders, and nutrition are, in combination with exercise, going to be the major physical factors that influence how the immune system responds to vaccinations."The very basic message is just to focus on having a healthy lifestyle. And it's a little bit cliched, but everything in moderation."Posted Wed 15 Jun 2022 at 7:11pmWednesday 15 Jun 2022 at 7:11pmWed 15 Jun 2022 at 7:11pm, updated Wed 15 Jun 2022 at 8:46pmWednesday 15 Jun 2022 at 8:46pmWed 15 Jun 2022 at 8:46pmShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter) News in LanguageListen to the news in Warlpiri, Yolngu Matha and KriolListenTop StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasPhoto shows Three images in a composite including a man in glasses, an man with orange makeup and another man in glassesAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPhoto shows Workplace surveillancePrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesPhoto shows A young solider. Tax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsPhoto shows Richard Boyle speaks to supporters outside court.Related storiesExperts around the world warned this flu season would be weird. They were rightTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A woman sitting on a couch, wrapped in a cosy white blanket, sneezes into a tissue.Senior doctor warns of health system on the brink, says workers facing immense pressureTopic:Doctors and Medical ProfessionalsPhoto shows A man in a suit jacket and tie Relying on home remedies to fight a cold or the flu? They might give you comfort, but they're not a cureTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A hand holds an open jar of vapour rub, with the lid in the background. Related topicsACTAustraliaExercise and FitnessHealthInfluenzaMedical ResearchNSWNTQLDSATASVICVaccines and ImmunityWATop StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesTax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsJust InConvicted killer fugitive allegedly caught in Alice Springs hotel room with senior NAAJA employeeTopic:Legal Profession6m ago6 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 8:09amLynn Cannon was brutally murdered by estranged partner, now inquest examines police response to call for helpTopic:Domestic Violence22m ago22 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:53amJumbo-sized delivery to get peak-hour police escort to Monarto ZooTopic:Feel Good29m ago29 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:46am'We obviously don't care about losing': Michael Clarke criticises players being rested during series loss to PakistanTopic:Cricket1h ago1 hours agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 6:50amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCSuspicious bird deaths might be linked to Avian Influenza - NWONewsWatch.com Skip to content × FREE local newsletterYour Business Sign in or register Messages Post a Listing Your Listings Your Profile Your Subscriptions Your Likes Your Business Payment History Sign Out Registered Users Already have an account? Sign In New Users Create a free account. Register Sign up for Daily Headlines Sign up for Notifications Contact Us HomeNewsLocal NewsAround the NorthCommunity SubmissionsCrimeNorthwest NewsweekSubmit a News TipNewsletter SignupColumnsFeaturesSpotlightPursuitWomen and GirlsInspireWisdomGas PricesLet's EatBoldObituariesClassifiedsPost an AdAll ListingsMy AdsMy AccountToday's AdsYard SalesJob PostingsAnnouncementsShop LocalFlyersReid’s Furniture Flyers Power Centre Flyers National FlyersFoodRestaurantsJobsPost a Job AdAll Postings Search Type Site Listings Directory Search Home Local News Suspicious bird deaths might be linked to Avian Influenza Ontario Natural Resources and Forestry advises the public not to handle live or dead wild birds Clint Fleury, Local Journalism Initiative Reporter Jun 16, 2022 4:00 PM Share by Email Share on Facebook Share on X Share on LinkedIn Print Share via Text Message Avian influenza — or "bird flu" — is a virus that can affect many different species of birds. This includes farm animals like chickens and turkeys, but can also affect wild and pet birds.BC SPCA Listen to this article 00:02:54 NORTHWESTERN ONTARIO – Beware the birds! No, we are not living in an Alfred Hitchcock movie, where the birds are mobilizing against us. However, there has been an influx of reports of suspicious bird death in the area of Dryden, Kenora, Thunder Bay and Sioux Lookout. In a Facebook post from the Ontario Natural Resources and Forestry, the post reads, “Attention residents in Dryden, Kenora, Thunder Bay and Sioux Lookout: Due to a significant number of dead birds found in these areas, the ministry is reminding the public that as a general guideline, they should not handle live or dead wild birds.” Most of the birds found outside of the Thunder Bay area are waterfowl, shorebirds, and raptors, however, in the Thunder Bay area, there are reports of a group of American White Pelicans that were found dead. Brian Stevens, veterinary pathologist, Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative, is still investigating the incident and wasn’t able to provide a concrete explanation as to what is causing the death of the American White Pelican. “We’ve been working with the ministry as well as other people to get those animals in for an examination,” said Stevens. But Stevens was able to say that the cause of the bird deaths in the Kenora, Dryden, and Sioux Lookout area was possibly Avian Influenza. Yet, at this point, investigations are being done on the extent of the spread of the virus. “The main thing we’ve been dealing with over the past few months, we haven’t seen it much yet in the Thunder Bay area, but we know it’s there, it’s probably been there for at least a couple of weeks, is the Avian Influenza virus, so the bird flu,” commented Stevens. Stevens also acknowledges that reports of the bird flu have been coming in from across North America. “The virus is across North America at this point and it’s been causing the deaths of a number of species of birds. In particular, waterfowl, shorebirds, and raptors. We haven’t been seeing it in Pelican but we suspect they could be susceptible to the virus as well, said Stevens. The Canadian Natural Wildlife Cooperative is still investigating the mysterious death of the Pelicans in the Thunder Bay area, and if it is determined that Avian Influenza isn’t the case, they will continue their work to determine if there is a cause for concern with some of the other wildlife in the area or a potential concern for the public in contracting any unknown pathogens. For now, the Ontario Natural Resources and Forestry and Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative are asking the public to beware of the birds. If residents find sick or dead birds on their property, avoid contact, and call the Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative at 1- 866-673-4781. If contact with wild birds is unavoidable, wear disposable gloves or use a doubled plastic bag and avoid contact with blood, bodily fluids and feces. Always wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water after. See a typo/mistake? Have a storyip? About the Author: Clint Fleury, Local Journalism Initiative Reporter Clint Fleury is a web reporter covering Northwestern Ontario and the Superior North regions. Read more This has been shared 0 times 0 Shares Share by Email Share on Facebook Share on X Share on LinkedIn Print Share via Text Message Get your local news briefing Email Sign Up Comments Sort Oldest Newest Add Show This story was important to me or our community: view results > Not Very Slightly Fairly Very Extremely Trending in Local News NewsLocal NewsAround the NorthCommunity SubmissionsCrimeNorthwest NewsweekSubmit a News TipNewsletter SignupColumnsFeaturesSpotlightPursuitWomen and GirlsInspireWisdomGas PricesLet's EatBoldObituariesClassifiedsPost an AdAll ListingsMy AdsMy AccountToday's AdsYard SalesJob PostingsAnnouncementsShop LocalFlyersReid’s Furniture Flyers Power Centre Flyers National FlyersFoodRestaurantsJobsPost a Job AdAll Postings About About NWONewsWatch.comPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceDownloadsCommunity GuidelinesSponsored Content Social Media Facebook X Contact Us Advertising News Submit a news tip Visit our network of sites: NWOnewswatch SNnewswatch TBnewswatch Global Thunder Bay CKPR Thunder Bay Rock 94 91.5 CKPR Energy 103-104 CFNO © 2024 Dougall Media × Be the first to read breaking stories. Enable push notifications on your device. Disable anytime. No thanks Subscribe No thanks SubscribeAvian flu has jumped into wild seabirds and is spreading fast Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair Seabirds like gannets appear to be particularly at risk. Coatesy / shutterstock Avian flu has jumped into wild seabirds and is spreading fast Published: June 14, 2022 2.52pm BST •Updated: July 21, 2022 5.16pm BST Andrew Suggitt, Northumbria University, Newcastle Author Andrew Suggitt Vice Chancellor's Senior Research Fellow, Northumbria University, Newcastle Disclosure statement Andrew Suggitt does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment. Partners Northumbria University, Newcastle provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK. View all partners Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger After a series of localised outbreaks in the past few years, avian flu has re-emerged as a major driver of bird deaths across the UK. Until the past few weeks, the latest outbreak of the disease – also known as bird flu or, to scientists, highly pathogenic avian influenza – was treated primarily as a problem for chickens and other domestic birds. This triggered localised responses such as culls, and farmers were ordered to keep the animals indoors for six months over the winter, which is why the UK had a period with no free-range eggs. But reports of large numbers of wild seabirds found dead in Scotland and increasingly in England and Wales, suggest that avian flu is now prevalent in wild birds across most of northern Britain. I encountered a number of these birds myself on the Northumberland coast. Scenes like these will make the crisis far more visible to the general public, and naturally they will be asking what more we can do to tackle the outbreak. The 2021-22 avian flu outbreak The 2021-22 outbreak is a global problem, with cases of the virulent H5N1 subtype detected in West Africa, Asia, and nearly every country of Europe and North America. It is primarily a disease of domesticated birds, where it is thought to have originated, and has led to the culling of hundreds of millions of birds, including 38 million in the US this year alone. In the UK, the disease was first detected in October 2021. As elsewhere, the outbreak was at first largely confined to poultry, and farmers were forced to cull 500,000 chickens and other birds. In response the UK established an Avian Influenza Prevention Zone including buffer zones of 10km around detected cases, with restrictions on bird movement and enhanced biosecurity. Over winter there were reports of a number of wild bird populations being affected by avian flu, including great skua, pink-footed geese and barnacle geese. These included the mass death of 4,000 birds on the Solway Firth, representing one-third of the Svalbard barnacle goose population that spend winters in the area. As spring has turned to summer, there is now no doubt that avian flu is now spreading into a wider diversity of wild birds in the UK. For some species this probably reflects their return to summer breeding colonies, and the increased mixing that involves (avian flu is spread by contact with saliva or droppings). As this breeding season reaches its peak, a wide array of seabirds have been affected, including great skua, eider ducks, fulmar, terns, gannets and guillemots. The UK holds over half the world’s population of gannet and great skua, both of which have been officially recognised as birds of moderate conservation concern (“amber status”). Avian flu adds to the litany of problems these birds face – from climate change to entanglement in abandoned fishing gear – and increases the concerns of organisations such as RSPB and Birdlife, who already consider this outbreak to be the worst the UK has ever faced. More resources needed Conservation organisations have asked for more resources to help with monitoring and tackling the problem. Many bird wardens and reserve managers already work on the nature reserves most affected by avian flu, and so they will be an important part of the solution. We could also reduce the level of human disturbance at particularly sensitive sites, for example by introducing buffer zones or seasonal restrictions. Great skuas were already threatened by fishing lines and climate change. Now they’re fighting off the flu. Erni / shutterstock But, more broadly, we simply need more surveillance of avian flu so that we can get a better idea of the problem. This will mean also giving the relevant government departments and agencies the resources they need to monitor and test more wild birds. In summer, avian flu retains infectivity in the environment for up to 18 days. So the large number of dead birds on the coast with possible infections presents a continuing pathway for transmission to birds of prey and carrion feeders, particularly gulls, which are known to be susceptible to avian flu. Increasing the number of carcasses being collected would have the added benefit of removing the potential for carrion feeders to become infected, and so further infect other birds. Given some of these seabirds can range over huge distances in search of food – up to 400km for gannets, for instance – we will need a national approach to this, with coordination across the four nations of the UK. And because the virus has been repeatedly transmitted between the domestic stocks and wild bird populations, we should also look again at biosecurity measures in the poultry industry. What next What does this mean for the general public? Although avian flu is a zoonotic disease like COVID-19, the risk to human health is very low, and cases in humans have almost exclusively arisen from close contact between bird keepers and their stock. The advice for the public is not to touch any dead birds you see and to report them. If you feed wild birds, remember to wash and disinfect feeders every week and to clean bird baths every day, as avian flu is mainly transmitted via saliva and droppings. And if you’re out walking the dog, keep a closer eye on them when you’re on the beach or by water, and use a lead when you’re on a nature reserve or see a dead bird. There is no doubt that the increased visibility of the deaths will bring home the scale of the problem to the general public. Bird flu has now “arrived” in our minds, and will take on more prominence as the summer continues and holidays begin. Though the risk to humans is very low, it serves as another reminder of how connected we are to nature, and how our interactions with the natural world have huge consequences for what we regard as “human” systems. Avian flu H5N1 Seabirds Wildlife conservation Avian flu Bird flu Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationWhich flu shot should I choose? And what are cell-based and 'adjuvanted' vaccines? - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeLatest updatesAsk a questionShare analysisWhich flu shot should I choose? And what are cell-based and 'adjuvanted' vaccines?By Tin Fei SimThe ConversationTopic:Vaccines and ImmunityThu 16 Jun 2022Thursday 16 June 2022Thu 16 Jun 2022 at 12:05amDisplay captionThere are different brands and types of flu vaccines. So when booking in for your shot, your health provider will discuss the best option for you. (Unsplash :CDC)abc.net.auews/which-flu-shot-should-i-get-cell-based-adjuvanted-vaccines/101155052Link copiedShareShare articleWith Australians learning to live with COVID and resuming international travel, cases of influenza are steadily rising.Getting a flu shot reduces your chance of catching the flu caused by four flu virus strains covered by the vaccine, and reduces the risk of severe complications and hospitalisations.An annual flu vaccine is recommended for adults and children six months and older — unless you have a history of anaphylactic reactions to the vaccine or your doctor advises against it.There are different brands and types of flu vaccines. So when booking in for your shot, your health provider will discuss the best option for you.Loading Twitter contentWhat are the options?If you're over 65, you're likely to be offered an "adjuvanted" (Fluad Quad) vaccine. Those aged over 60 can also access the high-dose vaccine (Fluzone High-Dose Quad).If you want to avoid vaccines made with eggs, you can ask for a cell-based vaccine (Flucelvax Quad).But for most other Australians, there isn't much of a difference between brands — Vaxigrip Tetra, Fluarix Tetra, Afluria Quad, FluQuadri, Influvac Tetra — aside from their suitability for different age groups.Adjuvanted vaccines boost older people's immune systems to better protect against the flu. (Reuters: Russell Cheyne)GPs and pharmacists will generally stock one or two of these brands or whichever their state or territory governments supplies.Unlike in previous years, all eight flu vaccines available this year are "quadrivalent", meaning each vaccine protects against four strains of flu viruses.The strains are predicted to be the most commonly circulating strains, based on trends observed in the Northern Hemisphere winter.Flu vaccines are "inactivated", which means they don't contain live viruses and can never give anyone the flu.Over 65sFor people 65 years and older, "adjuvanted" or immune-boosting (Fluad Quad®) or high-dose vaccines (Fluzone High-Dose Quad®) are recommended, as older people tend to have weaker immune systems.Behind the world's strange flu season Photo shows A woman sitting on a couch, wrapped in a cosy white blanket, sneezes into a tissue.A range of specialists are saying the COVID-19 pandemic has set off a chain of consequences that interrupted the spread of influenza, possibly throwing out seasonal trends for years to come.Vaccines work by activating a person's own immune system. The "adjuvanted" vaccine activates a stronger immune response and is therefore more effective at preventing the flu in older age groups than the standard vaccines.High-dose vaccines deliver a higher dose than standard flu vaccines and are also more effective than the standard vaccines at reducing transmission and preventing severe disease in older age groups.Adjuvanted vaccines are free for over-65s under the National Immunisation Program.If you're 60 or over, you can choose a high-dose vaccine, although you may have to pay for it, depending on local government programs.Cell-based vaccines don't use eggsThe flu vaccines are either egg-based or cell-based. Traditionally, flu vaccines were egg-based, meaning the flu viruses were grown in fertilised hens' eggs.But people with egg allergies can safely get the egg-based flu vaccine. The amount of egg protein left in each vaccine at the end of the production process is less than 1 microgram, much less than the estimated amount of 130 micrograms required to cause an allergic reaction.In recent years, newer medical technology has led to the production of cell-based flu vaccines. Here, the virus is grown in host cells. So people who wish to avoid egg products may choose a cell-based vaccine instead.Consider getting the flu shot before heading overseas. (Pexels: Anna Shvets)Currently, Flucelvax Quad is the only cell-based flu vaccine approved for use in Australia and is also suitable for children from two years of age.Some studies have shown cell-based vaccines are better at triggering the body's immune response.This is because the viruses used to make cell-based vaccines are more similar to circulating wild flu viruses — and the closer it resembles the real thing, the more effective it is.However, Flucelvax Quad isn't currently funded under the National Immunisation Program, so you'll need to pay yourself, even if you're eligible for a free vaccine under the national program.When is the best time to get vaccinated?It takes seven to 14 days for our body to respond to a vaccine. Once you receive the vaccine, your body starts to recognise the four strains of flu viruses and starts to develop an immune response over the course of about two weeks.Schools bare brunt of early flu season as cases tipped to reach epidemic levelsPhoto shows Woman in bed with a cold blowing her nose.A Sunshine Coast GP says he expects the virus to reach epidemic levels in the coming months.Once this occurs, when you come into contact with one or more of these four strains of viruses, your body's own immune response will be able to protect and prevent you from getting sick.The flu season typically peaks in Australia between July to September. The vaccine will provide the highest level of protection for three to four months. So late May to early June is generally the best time to get it.For people travelling overseas, your doctor or pharmacist can advise you on what's best for you based on where and when you're travelling.The flu vaccine can also be given at the same time as most other vaccines, including COVID vaccines. It's also safe — and recommended — in pregnancy.What are the side effects?People may experience cold and flu-like symptoms for up to 24–48 hours after getting the vaccine. This shows the body's immune response is kicking in and the vaccine is working.You can take over-the-counter pain medications such as paracetamol or ibuprofen to relieve these symptoms.Other common side effects may include local injection site reactions such as redness, mild swelling and tenderness. This should subside within 48 hours without any treatment. Applying ice or a cold pack can help.Some people may develop more severe reactions, including anaphylaxis (a severe, life-threatening allergic reaction) in extremely rare circumstances. This is also why your doctor or pharmacist recommends waiting on-site for 15 minutes after vaccination for monitoring.If you've had a severe reaction to any vaccine in the past, it's important to tell your doctor or pharmacist.Tin Fei Sim is a senior lecturer in the Curtin Medical School at Curtin University. This piece first appeared on The Conversation.Posted Thu 16 Jun 2022 at 12:05amThursday 16 Jun 2022 at 12:05amThu 16 Jun 2022 at 12:05amShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasPhoto shows Three images in a composite including a man in glasses, an man with orange makeup and another man in glassesAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPhoto shows Workplace surveillancePrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesPhoto shows A young solider. Tax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsPhoto shows Richard Boyle speaks to supporters outside court.Related storiesExperts around the world warned this flu season would be weird. They were rightTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A woman sitting on a couch, wrapped in a cosy white blanket, sneezes into a tissue.Schools bear brunt of early flu season as cases tipped to reach epidemic levelsTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows Woman in bed with a cold blowing her nose.Will you be able to get the free flu jab? Fears Victorians may miss out amid spike in casesTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A woman before a sneeze holding a tissue up to her face.Related topicsAustraliaDoctors and Medical ProfessionalsInfluenzaOlder PeopleTravel Health and SafetyVaccines and ImmunityTop StoriesDonald Trump calls Vladimir Putin and urges him not to escalate Ukraine war, media reportsTopic:World PoliticsPhoto shows Close up of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in conversation Dutton is already testing Trump's campaign slogans. Will they work in Australia?PAnalysis by Patricia KarvelasAs workplace surveillance extends to the home, governments are trying to determine a limit of what employers should seeTopic:PrivacyPrivate Richard Norden awarded Victoria Cross for bravery during Vietnam War half a century agoTopic:Defence ForcesTax office whistleblower Richard Boyle tells court he will take the stand to testify in his own defence during trialTopic:Courts and TrialsJust InConvicted killer fugitive allegedly caught in Alice Springs hotel room with senior NAAJA employeeTopic:Legal Profession6m ago6 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 8:09amLynn Cannon was brutally murdered by estranged partner, now inquest examines police response to call for helpTopic:Domestic Violence22m ago22 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:53amJumbo-sized delivery to get peak-hour police escort to Monarto ZooTopic:Feel Good29m ago29 minutes agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 7:46am'We obviously don't care about losing': Michael Clarke criticises players being rested during series loss to PakistanTopic:Cricket1h ago1 hours agoMon 11 Nov 2024 at 6:50amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCEDITORIAL ANALYSIS: The influenza pandemic and ‘nations within a nation - INSIGHTS IAS - Simplifying UPSC IAS Exam Preparation Insights IAS Brochure | OUR CENTERS Bangalore Delhi Lucknow Srinagar Dharwad HyderabadCall us @ 08069405205 Search Here Search Search Here SearchCall us @ 08069405205 Blog MENUMENUHomeAbout UPSCAn Introduction to the CSE ExamPrelimsMainsPersonality TestSyllabusAnnual Calendar by UPSC-2025BooklistsCommon Myths about the ExamFAQsWho We AreAbout Insights IASOur Mission, Vision & ValuesDirector's DeskBrochureMeet Our TeamOur BranchesCareers at Insights IASFree ResourcesCurrent AffairsDaily Current Affairs+PIB SummaryInsights into EditorialsSansad TVMindmapsInsta Revision Modules for PrelimsQuizzes(Prelims)Current Affairs QuizStatic QuizQUEDCurrent Affairs RTMInsta-DART(CSAT)Insta 75 Days Revision Tests for Prelims 2024MainsSecure (Mains Answer writing)Secure SynopsisEthics Case StudiesInsta EthicsWeekly Essay ChallengeInsta Revision Modules-MainsInsta 75 Days Revision Tests for MainsSecure (Archive)Analyticas: Optional SubjectsSociologyAnthropologyPSIRLaw OptionalKannada LiteraturePublic AdministrationGeographyPsychologyPhilosophyEconomicsHistoryEnglish LiteratureManagementMedical ScienceMathematicsCommerce & AccountancyCoursesDownloadsCurrent AffairsMonthly Magazine: CURRENT AFFAIRS 30Content for Mains Enrichment (CME)InstaMaps: Important Places in NewsWeekly CA MagazineThe PRIME MagazineInsights into EditorialsSansad TVMindmapsYojanaInsta Revision Modules-PrelimsInsta Revision Modules-MainsQuizzesCurrent Affairs QuizStatic QuizRTM QuizQUED QuizInsta-DART(CSAT) QuizInsta 75 days Revision Tests for Prelims 2022MainsInsights SECURE(Mains Answer Writing)Insta 75 Days Revision Tests for MainsInterviewInterview TranscriptsQuestions Papers & SyllabusPrevious Years' Question Papers-PrelimsAnswer Keys for Prelims PYQsSolve Prelims PYQsPrevious Years' Question Papers-MainsUPSC CSE SyllabusBooklistFAQsToppersToppers from Insights IASTestimonialsFelicitationUPSC ResultsInstapediaGeneral Studies – 1Indian Heritage & CultureAncient Indian HistoryMedieval Indian HistoryModern Indian HistoryWorld HistoryWorld GeographyIndian GeographyIndian SocietyGeneral Studies – 2PolityGovernanceSocial JusticeInternational RelationsGeneral Studies – 3EconomyAgricultureEnvironment & EcologyDisaster ManagementScience & TechnologySecurity IssuesGeneral Studies – 4Ethics, Integrity and AptitudeGalleryBlogOUR CENTERSBangaloreDelhiLucknowSrinagarDharwadHyderabadInsights IAS Brochure Facebook Instagram Telegram Youtube Twitter Podcast Posted on June 15, 2022June 15, 2022 by Insights Editor EDITORIAL ANALYSIS: The influenza pandemic and ‘nations within a nation Source: The HinduPrelims: Current events of national importance, Government policies, influenza pandemic, influenza vaccine, Disaster Management Act).Mains GS Paper II: Government policies and interventions for development in various sectors and issues arising out of their design and implementations, Functions and responsibilities of the Union and the States, Significance of Vaccine policy.ARTICLE HIGHLIGHTSMany governments around the world struggle to address the problem of inequity in access to life saving products such asIn developing economies, relatively muted demand for prophylactic products(i.e products for which consumer pays now for some uncertain benefits in future) due to lower disposable income and present bias serves as a disincentive for domestic firms as they fear they may not sell enough vaccines at a price sufficient to recover their costs.In contrast, large foreign multinationals (henceforth MNEs) originating from developed economies can still generate additional economic returns by selling their products in developing economies so long as they can recover the variable costs of their products. INSIGHTS ON THE ISSUEContextH1N1 Virus(Swine flu): Swine flu is a highly contagious respiratory disease in pigs caused by one of several swine influenza A viruses.Transmission of swine influenza viruses to humans is uncommon. However, the swine influenza virus can be transmitted to humans via contact with infected pigs or environments contaminated with swine influenza viruses.Symptoms:cough, fever, sore throat , stuffy or runny nose, headache, body ache etc.Sub-types are based on: The host of the origin, Geographical origin, Strain in number, Year of isolation etc. Spreading of Seasonal Influenza (H1N1):Seasonal influenza viruses circulate and cause disease in humans every year.In tropical climates, disease tends to occur seasonally as well as regular virus spreading from person-to-person through sneezing, coughing, or touching contaminated surfaces.Seasonal influenza viruses evolve continuously, which means that people can get infected multiple times throughout their lives.Diagnosis and treatment:The Centre for Disease Control and Prevention recommend real-time polymerase chain reaction as the method of choice for diagnosing H1N1.Antiviral drugs are the mainstay of clinical treatment of swine influenza and can make the illness milder and enable the patient to feel better faster. Prevention of swine influenza has 3 components:Prevention in swinePrevention of transmission to humansPrevention of its spread among humans.Because of limited treatment options, high risk for secondary infection, and frequent need for intensive care of individuals with H1N1 pneumonia, environmental control, including vaccination of high-risk populations and public education are critical to control of swine influenza outbreaks Outbreaks and impact:The sudden disease outbreaks can bring unanticipated changes in the business environment that could give rise to within-country spatial heterogeneity in business opportunities and challenges for MNEs and domestic firms.Incumbent MNEs may be in a better position to leverage their global scale and reinforce their market dominance across regions within a nation than domestic firms.MNEs may face greater opportunity costs in serving the underdeveloped regions under a condition when there is a spike in global demand. Quadrivalent influenza vaccine:The quadrivalent vaccine(FluQuadri) has two A virus strains H1N1 and H3N2 and two B virus strains.It is for active immunization of adults of age 18 to 64 years.While a trivalent influenza vaccine contains both A subtype viruses, it has only one of the B subtype viruses.The quadrivalent vaccine offers greater breath of protection as it includes both B subtype viruses.It is because of greater breadth of protection that a few other companies too have shifted from a trivalent to a quadrivalent vaccine.The quadrivalent vaccine will contain four influenza virus strains (two A subtypes and two B subtypes H1N1 and H3N2, and Victoria and Yamagata respectively).The viruses used in the vaccine are killed and this eliminates the possibility of the virus in the vaccine itself causing infectionIn 2018, the WHO has recommended the Michigan strain for the southern hemisphere, including India. Vaccine market:2009-10 H1N1 influenza pandemic as a source of a sudden increase in global demand for flu vaccines.Subnational heterogeneity in healthcare infrastructure and political alignment between the federal/ central and regional governments in India influence the market share and revenues of MNEs and domestic firms in the influenza vaccine market relative to non influenza vaccine markets.The market share of MNEs fell much more in region slow in per capita public health expenditures and a lack of political alignment between federalegional governments.The Revenues of MNEs increased postpandemic, as one would expect should happen in the wake of a pandemic induced sudden demand increase.The market entry of de alio domestic firms (that were selling other vaccines) was the core driver of the erosion of the market share of MNEs following the pandemic.Unlike domestic firms, foreign firms did not enter the influenza vaccine market or expand in underdeveloped regions. The defining factors:Direct costs and opportunity costs are two defining features that can lead to heterogeneity across regions within a nation in the choice sets of foreign and domestic firms.Complex challenge of attracting foreign firms to supply vaccines while also seeking self sufficiency in domestic vaccine production.Typically, transnational organizations use the country’s per capita income as the cutoff line to determine a country’s eligibility to receive vaccine donations.Types of vaccinesInactivated vaccines:● Inactivated vaccines use the killed version of the germ that causes a disease.● Vaccines of this type are created by inactivating a pathogen, typically using heat or chemicals such as formaldehyde or formalin.● This destroys the pathogen’s ability to replicate, but keeps it “intact” so that the immune system can still recognize it. (“Inactivated” is generally used rather than “killed” to refer to viral vaccines of this type, as viruses are generally not considered to be alive.)● They usually don’t provide immunity (protection) that’s as strong as live vaccines. So you may need several doses over time (booster shots) in order to get ongoing immunity against diseases.● They are Used to protect: Hepatitis A, Flu (shot only), Polio (shot only), Rabies. Live-attenuated Vaccines:● Live vaccines use a weakened (or attenuated) form of the germ that causes a disease.● Because these vaccines are so similar to the natural infection that they help prevent, they create a strong and long-lasting immune response.● The limitation of this approach is that these vaccines usually cannot be given to people with weakened immune systems.● Live vaccines are used against: Measles, Mumps, Rubella (MMR combined vaccine), Rotavirus, Smallpox among others. Messenger (m) RNA Vaccines:● mRNA vaccines make proteins in order to trigger an immune response.● mRNA vaccines have several benefits compared to other types of vaccines, including shorter manufacturing times and, because they do not contain a live virus, no risk of causing disease in the person getting vaccinated.● The vaccines are used to protect against: Covid-19.Subunit, Recombinant, Polysaccharide, and Conjugate Vaccines:● They use specific pieces of the germ – like its protein, sugar, or capsid (a casing around the germ). They give a very strong immune response.● They can also be used on people with weakened immune systems and long-term health problems.● These vaccines are used to protect against: Hib (Haemophilus influenzae type b) disease, Hepatitis B, HPV (Human papillomavirus), Pneumococcal disease among others. Toxoid Vaccines:● They use a toxin (harmful product) made by the germ that causes a disease.● They create immunity to the parts of the germ that cause a disease instead of the germ itself. That means the immune response is targeted to the toxin instead of the whole germ.● Toxoid vaccines are used to protect against: Diphtheria, Tetanus. Viral Vector Vaccines:● Viral vector vaccines use a modified version of a different virus as a vector to deliver protection.● Several different viruses have been used as vectors, including influenza, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), measles virus, and adenovirus, which causes the common cold.● Adenovirus is one of the viral vectors used in some Covid-19 vaccines being studied in clinical trials.● The vaccines are used to protect against Covid-19 Disaster Management Act, 2005 (DM Act)● It is invoked to manage disasters, including preparation of mitigation strategies, capacity-building.● Section 2 (d) of the DM Act states that a disaster means a “catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence in any area, arising from natural or man made causes.● The Act designates the Ministry of Home Affairs as the nodal ministry for steering the overall national disaster management.● The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) is tasked with laying down disaster management policies and ensuring timely and effective response mechanisms.● An institutional systematic structure at the national, state and district levels. Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897● The Epidemic Diseases Act aims to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic diseases.● Temporary provisions or regulations can be made to be observed by the public to tackle or prevent the outbreak of a disease.● It contains four sections.Section 1: Describes the title and extent of the Act It extends to the whole of India.Section 2: Powers to take special measures >It empowers the state governments to tackle special measures and formulate regulations to contain the outbreak. >Section 2A of the Act empowers the central government to take steps to prevent the spread of an epidemic.>Health is a State subject, but by invoking Section 2 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, advisories and directions of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare will be enforceable.Section 3: Penalty for Disobedience The penalties for disobeying any regulation or order made under the Act are according to section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (disobedience to order duly promulgated by a public servant). Section 4: Legal Protection to Implementing Officers: It gives legal protection to the implementing officers acting under the Act. Way ForwardTo encourage the capability development of domestic firms in markets with positive externalities(such as vaccines), policymakers can award advance market commitments to reduce demand uncertainty for firms.An underdeveloped region within a nation, made worse by the lack of health infrastructure and the lack of political alignment between federal and regional governments, may deserve additional attention during pandemics.Given the subnational heterogeneity within large developing economies, rather than classifying an entire nation as ineligible for vaccine donations, recognising how different subnational regions may fare in health infrastructure and political alignment may lead to a more equitable allocation of supplies for managing the challenges stemming from competitive dynamics in the wake of a pandemic.Addressing the issues associated with the development and distribution of vaccines will augment the effort to efficiently get vaccines to hundreds of millions in the shortest period of time. QUESTION FOR PRACTICE Disease outbreaks can cause unanticipated and disruptive changes, affecting the business environment and policy. Discuss. (200 WORDS, 10 MARKS) CategoriesEDITORIALS, Today's Article TagsEDITORIAL ANALYSIS: The influenza pandemic and ‘nations within a nation, h1n1, SWINE FLURelated Posts TagsEDITORIAL ANALYSIS: The influenza pandemic and ‘nations within a nation, h1n1, SWINE FLU Post navigationPrevious PostPrevious EDITORIAL ANALYSIS: The FATF and Pakistan’s PositionNext PostNext [Mission 2023] Insta– QUED ( Questions from Editorials ) 15 June 2022 Insights IAS - Branches Bangalore ×3rd Floor, Nanda Ashirwad Building, Chandra Layout Main Rd, Maruthi Nagar, Attiguppe, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560040Google Map+ Delhi ×#B-10, 3rd Floor, Bada Bazar Rd, Old Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi, Delhi 110060Google Map+ Srinagar ×3rd Floor, Opposite Hotel Solar Residency, Aramwari, Pathanbagh, Rajbagh, Srinagar-190008Google Map+ Hyderabad ×1-10-209/1 Kamala towers , 1st floor above Punjab National Bank , Ashoknagar X roads, Ashoknagar Hyderabad 500020. Davanagere ×#1092 Jadhav Complex, Ring Road, Nijilingappa Layout, opposite to EDU ASIA School Davangere, Karnataka 577004About UsInsights IAS: Simplifying UPSC IAS Exam Preparation.InsightsIAS has redefined, revolutionized and simplified the way aspirants prepare for UPSC IAS Civil Services Exam. Today, it’s India’s top website and institution when it comes to imparting quality content, guidance and teaching for the IAS Exam. Popular CoursesFoundation Program: OGP (Offline & Online Guidance Program) Prelims Test SeriesIntegrated Prelims-cum-Mains (IPM) Test SeriesMains Test SeriesOptional Subjects Contact Us: Call us at 080 69405205 (toll-free)support@insightsias.comWant to work with us? Write to us atcareers@insightsias.com Copyright © Insights Active Learning HomeAbout UPSCAn Introduction to the CSE ExamPrelimsMainsPersonality TestSyllabusAnnual Calendar by UPSC-2025BooklistsCommon Myths about the ExamFAQsWho We AreAbout Insights IASOur Mission, Vision & ValuesDirector’s DeskBrochureMeet Our TeamOur BranchesCareers at Insights IASFree ResourcesCurrent AffairsDaily Current Affairs+PIB SummaryInsights into EditorialsSansad TVMindmapsInsta Revision Modules for PrelimsQuizzes(Prelims)Current Affairs QuizStatic QuizQUEDCurrent Affairs RTMInsta-DART(CSAT)Insta 75 Days Revision Tests for Prelims 2024MainsSecure (Mains Answer writing)Secure SynopsisEthics Case StudiesInsta EthicsWeekly Essay ChallengeInsta Revision Modules-MainsInsta 75 Days Revision Tests for MainsSecure (Archive)Analyticas: Optional SubjectsSociologyAnthropologyPSIRLaw OptionalKannada LiteraturePublic AdministrationGeographyPsychologyPhilosophyEconomicsHistoryEnglish LiteratureManagementMedical ScienceMathematicsCommerce & AccountancyCoursesDownloadsCurrent AffairsMonthly Magazine: CURRENT AFFAIRS 30Content for Mains Enrichment (CME)InstaMaps: Important Places in NewsWeekly CA MagazineThe PRIME MagazineInsights into EditorialsSansad TVMindmapsYojanaInsta Revision Modules-PrelimsInsta Revision Modules-MainsQuizzesCurrent Affairs QuizStatic QuizRTM QuizQUED QuizInsta-DART(CSAT) QuizInsta 75 days Revision Tests for Prelims 2022MainsInsights SECURE(Mains Answer Writing)Insta 75 Days Revision Tests for MainsInterviewInterview TranscriptsQuestions Papers & SyllabusPrevious Years’ Question Papers-PrelimsAnswer Keys for Prelims PYQsSolve Prelims PYQsPrevious Years’ Question Papers-MainsUPSC CSE SyllabusBooklistFAQsToppersToppers from Insights IASTestimonialsFelicitationUPSC ResultsInstapediaGeneral Studies – 1Indian Heritage & CultureAncient Indian HistoryMedieval Indian HistoryModern Indian HistoryWorld HistoryWorld GeographyIndian GeographyIndian SocietyGeneral Studies – 2PolityGovernanceSocial JusticeInternational RelationsGeneral Studies – 3EconomyAgricultureEnvironment & EcologyDisaster ManagementScience & TechnologySecurity IssuesGeneral Studies – 4Ethics, Integrity and AptitudeGalleryBlogOUR CENTERSBangaloreDelhiLucknowSrinagarDharwadHyderabadInsights IAS Brochure HomeAbout UPSCAn Introduction to the CSE ExamPrelimsMainsPersonality TestSyllabusAnnual Calendar by UPSC-2025BooklistsCommon Myths about the ExamFAQsWho We AreAbout Insights IASOur Mission, Vision & ValuesDirector’s DeskBrochureMeet Our TeamOur BranchesCareers at Insights IASFree ResourcesCurrent AffairsDaily Current Affairs+PIB SummaryInsights into EditorialsSansad TVMindmapsInsta Revision Modules for PrelimsQuizzes(Prelims)Current Affairs QuizStatic QuizQUEDCurrent Affairs RTMInsta-DART(CSAT)Insta 75 Days Revision Tests for Prelims 2024MainsSecure (Mains Answer writing)Secure SynopsisEthics Case StudiesInsta EthicsWeekly Essay ChallengeInsta Revision Modules-MainsInsta 75 Days Revision Tests for MainsSecure (Archive)Analyticas: Optional SubjectsSociologyAnthropologyPSIRLaw OptionalKannada LiteraturePublic AdministrationGeographyPsychologyPhilosophyEconomicsHistoryEnglish LiteratureManagementMedical ScienceMathematicsCommerce & AccountancyCoursesDownloadsCurrent AffairsMonthly Magazine: CURRENT AFFAIRS 30Content for Mains Enrichment (CME)InstaMaps: Important Places in NewsWeekly CA MagazineThe PRIME MagazineInsights into EditorialsSansad TVMindmapsYojanaInsta Revision Modules-PrelimsInsta Revision Modules-MainsQuizzesCurrent Affairs QuizStatic QuizRTM QuizQUED QuizInsta-DART(CSAT) QuizInsta 75 days Revision Tests for Prelims 2022MainsInsights SECURE(Mains Answer Writing)Insta 75 Days Revision Tests for MainsInterviewInterview TranscriptsQuestions Papers & SyllabusPrevious Years’ Question Papers-PrelimsAnswer Keys for Prelims PYQsSolve Prelims PYQsPrevious Years’ Question Papers-MainsUPSC CSE SyllabusBooklistFAQsToppersToppers from Insights IASTestimonialsFelicitationUPSC ResultsInstapediaGeneral Studies – 1Indian Heritage & CultureAncient Indian HistoryMedieval Indian HistoryModern Indian HistoryWorld HistoryWorld GeographyIndian GeographyIndian SocietyGeneral Studies – 2PolityGovernanceSocial JusticeInternational RelationsGeneral Studies – 3EconomyAgricultureEnvironment & EcologyDisaster ManagementScience & TechnologySecurity IssuesGeneral Studies – 4Ethics, Integrity and AptitudeGalleryBlogOUR CENTERSBangaloreDelhiLucknowSrinagarDharwadHyderabadInsights IAS BrochureHow air purifiers work to fight against the fluWatch TVNewsSportLifestyleTravelEntertainmentProduct ReviewsCouponsStanDomainDriveConnect with us Search NationalNSWVICQLDSAWAACTTASNTLatestUS Election 2024Israel-HamasCrimeTechnologyHealthFinanceExplainersCost of LivingPoliticsWorldAsiaEuropeNZUKUSAChinaAfricaVideosLiveToday ShowACA60 MinutesSportOlympicsAFLCricketFootballLive scoresNRLWeatherFinanceBusiness newsFind and comparePersonal financeSmall businessCelebrityEntertainment newsCelebrityRoyal newsTV guideAppApp StoreGoogle PlayMeet The TeamAbout 9NewsContact usMeet the teamPrivacyTerms of useYour location:SYDNEYSYDNEY, NSWPERTH, WAMELBOURNE, VICHOBART, TASBRISBANE, QLDDARWIN, NTADELAIDE, SACANBERRA, ACTYour web browser is no longer supported. To improve your experience update it hereBREAKINGAdult dead, child injured in Victorian kindergarten truck crashNewsTechnologyHow air purifiers work to fight against the flu and COVID-19By Julian Price10:44am Jun 18, 2022 Tweet Facebook Mail When used correctly, air purifiers can help reduce airborne bacteria and viruses, like COVID-19 and influenza - but they aren't guaranteed protection.Viruses spread when an infected person exhales small aerosol particles, coughs or sneezes into the air.A good air purifier can assist by filtering most of the bacteria left behind in a room.Airborne COVID-19 and influenza particles can be caught by some air purifiers. (Getty)But it's worth noting that air purifiers aren't going to clean the entire home's air, they'll only filter the air in the room they're operating - all dependent on size.Standards hygiene practice is still the best preventative measure against influenza and COVID-19.Air purifiers for your home - how do they work and how much are they?There's a variety of air purifiers designed specifically for homes, but they can also be quite pricey - some of the bigger brands start from around $1000 for a standard air purifier.So how does $1000 of technology crammed into a plastic box keep your home's air fresh and "pure"?In simple terms, air purifiers suck air into the machine's filters to remove particles, such as dust, pet hair, smoke, bad odours, bacteria, viruses and more, before releasing clean air back into the room.READ MORE: Google engineer claims AI chatbot is 'sentient'Electronics brand Mitsubishi Electric offers a number of HEPA based air purification models for home usage. (Mitsubishi Electric)These air purifiers suck in hundreds of cubic metres (m3/h) of air each hour, filtering it through the machine and blowing "purified air" it back out into the room.Most air filters work in the same way, but what you're really paying for is filtration quality.There are multiple filters inside the unit to make sure nothing is getting past, most of these filters can be replaced or cleaned.The main filtering component used to fight bacteria and viruses is known as the HEPA filter, or "high-efficiency particulate air" filter.Multiple filters, including carbon and HEPA filters, work to catch dust, bacteria and viruses. (Mitsubishi Electric)No home air purifiers with HEPA filters claim to be 100 per cent effective, the majority of HEPA filters are able to stop particles no smaller than 0.3μm, which equates to 300 nanometres.For some added perspective, a nanometre is about one billionth of a metre, and your standard coronavirus particle is about 100 nanometres.Particles can remain airborne for hours at a time, so utilising an air purifier with a HEPA filter can greatly help to capture any lingering sneezes or coughs.Wearable air purifiers - what are they?Wearable air purifiers are an entirely new concept, recently introduced by vacuuming leaders Dyson.It's certainly an interesting piece of technology, and not something you'd expect from a company like Dyson, but they did it anyway.Dyson says six years and 500 prototypes later, they're finally ready to show the world their latest technological advancement. The Dyson wearable air purifier also doubles as headphones. (Dyson)READ MORE: Dyson unveils 'air-purifying headphones' after six-year developmentAs for the design, Dyson says they've taken inspiration from a horse's saddle. Despite the air-purifying attachment being a major part of the design, it is detachable and Dyson says you can just use the Dyson Zone as normal headphones. How does the wearable air purifier work?Compressors in the earcups draw air through layered filters and project two streams of purified air to the wearer's nose and mouth, all of this is channelled through the non-contact visor.Dyson engineers used a mock-up of a human including mechanical lungs to test its headphones. (Supplied)The visor ensures purified airflow is kept near to the nose and mouth and Dyson says this makes sure the air is diluted as little as possible by the wind. The device has four air purification modes: low, medium, high, and auto, which is able to sync with the user's breathing. Dyson hasn't confirmed how much something like this costs just yet, but we can imagine it'll be considered a premium product.Continue readingTechhealthExplainerfluCOVID 19TechnologyInfluenzaCONTACT USSend your stories to contact@9news.com.auProperty News: World's biggest building kicks off $75 billion construction.Top Stories'Tragically sad': Worker killed, child injured after water tanker crashes into kinder34 minutes agoHe charged a machine gun one minute before WWI endedInside the Sydney Harbour mansion that sold for $26 millionVictoria Cross awarded posthumously to Vietnam War heroAboutContactWatch TVLive TVTV ShowsCategoriesConnect your TVHow to watchTV GuideNewsLatestNationalWorldPoliticsTechWeatherFinanceToday ShowA Current Affair60 MinutesSportLive ScoresOlympicsNRLCricketTennisAFLRugbyFootballAthleticsGolfCombatLifestyleLatestRoyalsStyleCelebrityKitchenTravelCoachYouParentingMoneyHoroscopesEntertainmentLatestTV ShowsMAFSThe BlockLove IslandLego MastersTipping PointThe SummitGetawayTravel GuidesProduct ReviewsTechnologyBeautyStyle + FashionLivingKitchenHealth + FitnessParentingGift IdeasRadio2GB3AW4BC6PRStanTV ShowsMoviesSportStan OriginalsDomainAdvice & GuidesProperty SearchHome LoansHome Price GuideDriveCar ReviewsCar NewsNew Car ShowroomCars for SalePedestrian TVEntertainmentNewsOnlineTelevisionCouponsUber EatseBayAmazonNikeHomeNewslettersWork with usAdvertise with usSupportTerms of usePrivacy© 2024 Nine Entertainment Co.Domestic pilgrims must take two more vaccines before Hajj - Saudi Gazette Monday November 11, 2024 / 09 , Jumada al-ula , 1446 Leading The Way SG Saudi Arabia Opinion Discover Saudi World Sports Business Life Advertisements SAUDI ARABIA Domestic pilgrims must take two more vaccines before Hajj June 18, 2022 The Ministry of Health (MoH) stated that domestic pilgrims inside the Kingdom who will be doing Hajj must take two vaccines before performing the rituals. Follow Saudigazette on Saudi Gazette reportRIYADH — The Ministry of Health (MoH) stated that domestic pilgrims inside the Kingdom who will be doing Hajj must take two vaccines before performing the rituals.The Ministry of Health revealed the two vaccinations that domestic pilgrims must take, and they are:1 - The meningitis vaccination.The Ministry said that the meningitis vaccination must be taken by domestic pilgrims who have not received the vaccination during the past 5 years, at least 10 days before going to Hajj.2 - The seasonal influenza (Flu) vaccination.The MoH said that domestic pilgrims, who have not ever received the seasonal influenza vaccination, must take it at least 10 days before going to Hajj.It is noteworthy that the Ministry of Hajj and Umrah said earlier that citizens and residents under 65 years are required to complete three doses of the COVID-19 vaccine, and the definition of an immunized person in Saudi Arabia is one who has completed three doses of the vaccine.The ministry has instructed that all pilgrims must follow the health instructions and comply with all precautionary measures to preserve their health and safety while performing the Hajj rituals.< Previous PageNext Page > June 18, 2022 13100 views HIGHLIGHTS SAUDI ARABIA Iran’s president hails Saudi Arabia’s summit initiative in call with crown prince 11 hours ago Iran’s president hails Saudi Arabia’s summit initiative in call with crown prince SAUDI ARABIA Minister of National Guard inaugurates Riyadh Global Medical Biotechnology Summit 2024 13 hours ago Minister of National Guard inaugurates Riyadh Global Medical Biotechnology Summit 2024 SAUDI ARABIA Prince Faisal meets Palestinian PM, Lebanese FM in Riyadh 16 hours ago Prince Faisal meets Palestinian PM, Lebanese FM in Riyadh COPYRIGHT © 2024 WWW.SAUDIGAZETTE.COM.SA - ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Powered by NewsPress NEWS CATEGORY saudi arabia world opinion business sports life advertisements COMPANY about us Epaper contact us Archive OTHER Epaper contact us ArchiveFree doctors' visits attempt to alleviate hospital strain | RNZ News Navigation for News Categories New ZealandWorldPoliticsPacificTe Ao MāoriSportBusinessCountryLocal Democracy ReportingComment & AnalysisIn DepthWeather New Zealand Covid-19 18 Jun 2022 Free doctors' visits attempt to alleviate hospital strain 6:38 am on 18 June 2022 Share this Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share via email Share on Reddit Share on Linked In Finn Blackwell, Reporter @FinnBlackwell Finn.Blackwell@rnz.co.nz With a large surge of winter illness sweeping Auckland, GPs in South Auckland are offering free doctors' visits this weekend and next. Photo: 123rf A patient died at Middlemore Hospital this week after earlier leaving the emergency department due to long wait times. There has been a record number of people turning up to try and get treatment at Middlemore Hospital this week. Influenza has far surpassed Covid as the leading cause of respiratory related hospitalisation in Tāmaki Makaurau, with Counties Manukau being particularly hard hit. To help ease the pressure GPs are offering free appointments and free pain relief drugs for children without a prescription until the end of next weekend. Counties Manukau Health chief executive Pete Watson said the move is a crucial one. "We know many of those GPs and nurses who are putting their hands up to help over the next two weekends are already very busy with the winter surge, and we're incredibly grateful for their support," he said in a statement. Dr Watson encouraged those feeling unwell at home to use Healthline if they had further questions. The free appointments will apply from 5pm Friday 17 June through to 7am Monday 20 June, and 5pm Thursday 23 June through to 7am Monday 29 June and may be extended if needed. More information is on the regional health website. Tags: Covid-19 health Share this Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share via email Share on Reddit Share on Linked In Copyright © 2022, Radio New Zealand Subscribe to RNZ's Daily Newsletter View latest newsletter Next story in New Zealand Former refugees urged to dive into fun at Nelson event Sign up for daily emails Full coverage Related Stories Patients dying in ED a 'psychological hit' for doctors 17 Jun 2022 Crisis meetings and investigations are continuing after Middlemore ED's long wait times appear to have cost a life on Wednesday. Patients dying in ED a 'psychological hit' for doctors 'Understaffed, overworked' - Nurses warn more lives at risk if crisis not fixed 17 Jun 2022 The warning comes as Middlemore Hospital investigates the death of a patient who left the emergency department because of long waiting times. Audio Nurses warn more lives at risk if health staffing crisis not addressed GPs, paediatricians want free flu vaccine for all 1 Jun 2022 An estimated 1.8 million people - just over a third of the population - are entitled to a free flu vaccine this year under Pharmac's widened eligibility criteria. Flu season: Doctors call for free influenza vaccinations Have you got the flu - or Covid-19? 25 May 2022 Cases of the flu are spiking around Australia after the virus was forced underground for two years thanks to tight Covid-19 restrictions. But it's hard to tell the difference between the flu and… Flu cases are spiking, so how do I know if I have Covid-19 or influenza? New Zealand DOC warns government it will lose money investing in Tongariro Chateau repair Hīkoi mō te Tiriti day one: 'Lets make this hīkoi build a nation' Man on trial for murdering Yanfei Bao has accused police of falsifying evidence Gulls are pooping on Christchurch cafés, and no one knows what to do Free lower North Island counselling service facing uncertain future Storm-affected Muriwai residents frustrated with ongoing category changes Get the RNZ app for ad-free news and current affairs Top News stories DOC warns government it will lose money investing in Tongariro Chateau repair Hīkoi mō te Tiriti day one: 'Lets make this hīkoi build a nation' Man on trial for murdering Yanfei Bao has accused police of falsifying evidence Gulls are pooping on Christchurch cafés, and no one knows what to do Free lower North Island counselling service facing uncertain future Subscribe Subscribe to RNZ's Daily Newsletter View latest newsletter New Zealand RSS Follow RNZ News