1918 influenza: The deadliest pandemic in history | Live Science Skip to main content Open menu Close menu Live Science Live Science Search Search Live Science Subscribe RSS Space Health Planet Earth Animals Archaeology Physics & Math Human Behavior Technology Chemistry More Science news About us Newsletter Follow us Story archive How It Works MagazineWhy subscribe?The ultimate action-packed science and technology magazine bursting with exciting information about the universeSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with checkout code 'LOVE5'Engaging articles, amazing illustrations & exclusive interviewsIssues delivered straight to your door or device From$26.49View Deal Trending'Superheavy' elementPompeii victimsJames Webb Space TelescopeCrocodile quizBest cameras for wildlife photography Health Viruses, Infections & Disease Flu 1918 influenza: The deadliest pandemic in history References By All About History last updated 2 August 2022 Facts about the Spanish flu. When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works. In 1918, a strain of influenza known as Spanish flu caused a global pandemic, spreading rapidly and killing indiscriminately. Young, old, sick and otherwise-healthy people all became infected, and at least 10% of patients died. Estimates vary on the exact number of deaths caused by the disease, but it is thought to have infected a third of the world's population and killed at least 50 million people, making it the deadliest pandemic in modern history. Although at the time it gained the nickname "Spanish flu," it's unlikely that the virus originated in Spain.Related: What was the Black Death?What caused the Spanish flu? The outbreak began in 1918, during the final months of World War I, and historians now believe that the conflict may have been partly responsible for spreading the virus. On the Western Front, soldiers living in cramped, dirty and damp conditions became ill. This was a direct result of weakened immune systems from malnourishment. Their illnesses, which were known as "la grippe," were infectious, and spread among the ranks. Within around three days of becoming ill, many soldiers would start to feel better, but not all would make it. During the summer of 1918, as troops began to return home on leave, they brought with them the undetected virus that had made them ill. The virus spread across cities, towns and villages in the soldiers' home countries. Many of those infected, both soldiers and civilians, did not recover rapidly. The virus was hardest on young adults between the ages of 20 and 30 who had previously been healthy. In 2014, a new theory about the origins of the virus suggested that it first emerged in China, National Geographic reported. Previously undiscovered records linked the flu to the transportation of Chinese laborers, the Chinese Labour Corps, across Canada in 1917 and 1918. The laborers were mostly farm workers from remote parts of rural China, according to Mark Humphries' book "The Last Plague" (University of Toronto Press, 2013). They spent six days in sealed train containers as they were transported across the country before continuing to France. There, they were required to dig trenches, unload trains, lay tracks, build roads and repair damaged tanks. In all, over 90,000 workers were mobilized to the Western Front. Humphries explains that in one count of 25,000 Chinese laborers in 1918, some 3,000 ended their Canadian journey in medical quarantine. At the time, because of racial stereotypes, their illness was blamed on "Chinese laziness" and Canadian doctors did not take the workers' symptoms seriously. By the time the laborers arrived in northern France in early 1918, many were sick, and hundreds were soon dying.Image 1 of 6A nurse collects water at a special camp to treat infected servicemen, Brookline, Massachusetts.(Image credit: National Archives)Conductors wearing influenza masks, New York, 1918.(Image credit: National Archives)A street sweeper in New York wearing a protective mask.(Image credit: National Archives)A U.S. soldier receives preventative treatment for the flu.(Image credit: National Archives)A police officer conducts traffic in New York during the Spanish flu pandemic, 1918.(Image credit: National Archives)A postal worker wearing a gauze mask, New York, 1918.(Image credit: National Archives)Why was it called the Spanish flu?Spain was one of the earliest countries where the epidemic was identified, but historians believe this was likely a result of wartime censorship. Spain was a neutral nation during the war and did not enforce strict censorship of its press, which could therefore freely publish early accounts of the illness. As a result, people falsely believed the illness was specific to Spain, and the name "Spanish flu" stuck.Even in late Spring 1918, a Spanish news service sent word to Reuters' London office informing the news agency that "a strange form of disease of epidemic character has appeared in Madrid. The epidemic is of a mild nature, no deaths having been reported," according to Henry Davies' book "The Spanish Flu," (Henry Holt & Co., 2000). Within two weeks of the report, more than 100,000 people had become infected with the flu.Related: World War I: The science of communicationsThe illness struck the king of Spain, Alfonso XIII, along with leading politicians. Between 30% and 40% of people who worked or lived in confined areas, such as schools, barracks and government buildings, became infected. Service on the Madrid tram system had to be reduced, and the telegraph service was disturbed, in both cases because there were not enough healthy employees available to work. Medical supplies and services couldn't keep up with demand. The term "Spanish influenza" rapidly took hold in Britain. According to Niall Johnson's book "Britain and the 1918-19 Influenza Pandemic" (Routledge, 2006), the British press blamed the flu epidemic in Spain on the Spanish weather: "… the dry, windy Spanish spring is an unpleasant and unhealthy season," read one article in The Times. It was suggested that microbe-laden dust was being spread by the high winds in Spain, meaning that Britain's wet climate might stop the flu from spreading there.Members of the Red Cross give a demonstration at an Emergency Ambulance Station in Washington, D.C., during the influenza pandemic of 1918 (Image credit: Library of Congress)What were the symptoms of the flu?Initial symptoms of the illness included a sore head and tiredness, followed by a dry, hacking cough; a loss of appetite; stomach problems; and then, on the second day, excessive sweating. Next, the illness could affect the respiratory organs, and pneumonia could develop. Humphries explains that pneumonia, or other respiratory complications brought about by the flu, were often the main causes of death. This explains why it is difficult to determine exact numbers killed by the flu, as the listed cause of death was often something other than the flu. By the summer of 1918, the virus was quickly spreading to other countries in mainland Europe. Vienna and Budapest, Hungary, were suffering, and parts of Germany and France were similarly affected. Many children in Berlin schools were reported ill and absent from school, and absences in armament factories reduced production. By June 25, 1918, the flu epidemic in Spain had reached Britain. In July, the epidemic was hitting the London textile trade hard, with one factory having 80 out of 400 workers go home sick in one evening alone, according to "The Spanish Influenza Pandemic of 1918-1919: New Perspectives" (Routledge, 2003). In London, reports on government workers absent due to the flu range from 25% to 50% of the workforce. The epidemic had rapidly become a pandemic, making its way around the world. In August 1918, six Canadian sailors died on the St. Lawrence River. In the same month, cases were reported among the Swedish army, then in the country's civilian population and also among South Africa's laboring population. By September, the flu had reached the U.S. through Boston harbor.Officials feared mass hysteria in major cities. Citizens were urged to stay indoors and avoid congested areas. Here, policemen patrol the streets to ensure public safety (Image credit: The National Archives)What advice were people given? Doctors were at a loss as to what to recommend to their patients; many physicians urged people to avoid crowded places or simply other people. Others suggested remedies included eating cinnamon, drinking wine or even drinking Oxo's meat drink (beef broth). Doctors also told people to keep their mouths and noses covered in public. At one point, the use of aspirin was blamed for causing the pandemic, when it might actually have helped those infected. On June 28, 1918, a public notice appeared in the British papers advising people of the symptoms of the flu; however, it turned out this was actually an advertisement for Formamints, a tablet made and sold by a vitamin company. Even as people were dying, there was money to be made by advertising fake "cures." The advert stated that the mints were the "best means of preventing the infective processes" and that everyone, including children, should suck four or five of these tablets a day until they felt better. Americans were offered similar advice about how to avoid getting infected. They were advised not to shake hands with others, to stay indoors, to avoid touching library books and to wear masks. Schools and theaters closed, and the New York City Department of Health strictly enforced a Sanitary Code amendment that made spitting in the streets illegal, according to a review published in the journal Public Health Reports. World War I resulted in a shortage of doctors in some areas, and many of the physicians who were left became ill themselves. Schools and other buildings became makeshift hospitals, and medical students had to take the place of doctors in some instances.Nurses preparing masks to prevent the spread of influenza in 1918. (Image credit: National Archives)How many people died? By the spring of 1919, the numbers of deaths from the Spanish flu were decreasing. Countries were left devastated in the wake of the outbreak, as medical professionals had been unable to halt the spread of the disease. The pandemic echoed what had happened 500 years earlier, when the Black Death wreaked chaos around the world. Nancy Bristow's book "American Pandemic: The Lost Worlds of the 1918 Influenza Epidemic" (Oxford University Press, 2016) explains that the virus affected as many as 500 million people around the world. At the time, this represented a third of the global population. As many as 50 million people died from the virus, though the true figure is thought to be even higher. Bristow estimates that the virus infected as much as 25% of the U.S. population, and among members of the U.S. Navy, this number reached up to 40%, possibly due to the conditions of serving at sea. The flu had killed 200,000 Americans by the end of October 1918, and Bristow claims that the pandemic killed over 675,000 Americans in total. The impact on the population was so severe that in 1918, American life expectancy was reduced by 12 years. Bodies piled up to such an extent that cemeteries were overwhelmed and families had to dig graves for their relatives. The deaths created a shortage of farmworkers, which affected the late summer harvest. As in Britain, a lack of staff and resources put other services, such as waste collection, under pressure.The pandemic spread to Asia, Africa, South America and the South Pacific. In India, the mortality rate reached 50 deaths per 1,000 people — a shocking figure. How does this compare to seasonal flu?The Spanish flu remains the most deadly flu pandemic to date by a long shot, having killed an estimated 1% to 3% of the world's population. The most recent comparable flu pandemic occurred in 2009 to 2010, after a new form of the H1N1 influenza strain appeared. The disease was named the "swine flu" because the virus that causes it is similar to one found in pigs (not because the virus came from pigs). The swine flu caused respiratory illnesses that killed an estimated 151,700-575,400 people worldwide in the first year, according to the Centers for Disease Prevention and Control. That was about 0.001% to 0.007% of the world's population, so this pandemic was much less impactful than the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic. About 80% of the deaths caused by swine flu occurred in people younger than 65, which was unusual. Typically, 70% to 90% of deaths caused by seasonal influenza are in people older than 65. A vaccine for the influenza strain that causes swine flu is now included in annual flu vaccines. People still die from the flu every year, but the numbers are far lower, on average, compared to those for the swine flu or Spanish flu pandemics. Annual epidemics of seasonal flu result in about 3 million to 5 million cases of severe illness and about 290,000 to 650,000 deaths, according to the World Health Organization. Additional resources: Find more information on how the World Health Organization manages epidemics and pandemics. Learn what the top 10 causes of death are, from the World Health Organization.Read more about influenza pandemics and their effects on the U.S. population, from the CDC. This article was adapted from a previous version published in All About History magazine, a Future Ltd. publication. To learn more about some of history's most incredible stories, subscribe to All About History magazine. Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter nowGet the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox.Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over. All About HistorySocial Links NavigationAll About History is the only history magazine that is as entertaining as it is educational. Bringing History to life for readers of all ages. More about fluH5N1 bird flu is evolving to better infect mammals, CDC study suggestsHow to get better faster when you have the flu, according to scienceLatestSpace Force's mysterious X-37B begins 'aerobraking' to lower orbit. Here's how it works.See more latest ► Most PopularWhat are ultraprocessed foods?Who invented video games?Easter Island (Rapa Nui) and its famous Moai statuesWhat's the highest place on Earth that humans live?Follow Live Science on social mediaLive Science daily newsletter: Get amazing science every dayWhat is artificial intelligence (AI)?Why is the 'T-zone' on your face so oily?Is it possible to have too many antioxidants?How do fevers kill germs?Is it too late to get a flu shot? LATEST ARTICLES1Space Force's mysterious X-37B begins 'aerobraking' to lower orbit. Here's how it works.2Do ostriches really bury their heads in the sand? 3How did the Concorde fly so fast?4Forgetting may provide a surprising evolutionary benefit, experts say5Evolution quiz: Can you naturally select the correct answers? Live Science is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookies policy Accessibility Statement Advertise with us Web notifications Careers Editorial standards How to pitch a story to us © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.Seeking Answers to Optimizing Influenza Vaccines in Older Adults through New Study - UConn Today Our websites may use cookies to personalize and enhance your experience. By continuing without changing your cookie settings, you agree to this collection. For more information, please see our University Websites Privacy Notice. UConn Today News Series School and College News Alumni Arts & Culture Athletics Community Impact Entrepreneurship Health & Well-Being Research & Discovery UConn Health University Life UConn Voices University News Archives Contact Us UConn University of Connecticut Search University of Connecticut Search UConn A to Z Index UConn A to Z Search Skip to content November 11, 2024 UConn Today Menu News November 11, 2024 UConn Health August 3, 2022 | Jennifer Walker - UConn Health Seeking Answers to Optimizing Influenza Vaccines in Older Adults through New Study The UConn Center on Aging in Partnership with The Jackson Laboratory is seeking participants for an Influenza Vaccine to ultimately understand which influenza vaccine works best for which individuals. Influenza causes about 36,000 deaths each year in the United States and disproportionally affects older adults. While COVID-19 has been the focus of our health care attention in the past several years, the flu is still a serious illness, especially for those over the age of 65 who account for the largest amount of deaths due to influenza. Age-related changes weaken the immune system, placing older people at greater risk for severe illness from influenza. We also know that with aging, the body’s ability to have a good immune response after receiving the influenza vaccine decreases. With a shared mission of uncovering answers to the most pressing challenges of aging and health, the UConn Center on Aging in partnership with The Jackson Laboratory (JAX) is investigating which age-related changes in the immune system reduce individuals’ responses to the influenza vaccine, and whether we can boost these immune responses with next generation influenza vaccines including the first FDA approved adjuvanted influenza vaccine (FluAD) and future mRNA influenza vaccines. “There is an urgent need to understand who does and does not respond to influenza vaccines and to assess the efficacy of new generation vaccines (adjuvanted or mRNA) in this high-risk population. These studies will help us understand what predicts good responses to each vaccine and eventually personalize vaccine recommendations, a field known as precision vaccinology” says Jackson Laboratory Associate Professor and UConn School of Medicine Genomics and Genome Medicine faculty member Duygu Ucar, PhD. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases has awarded a five-year grant totaling $9,046,988 to Dr. Ucar (JAX), Dr. George Kuchel (UConn Center on Aging), and Dr. Adolfo Garcia-Sastre (Mount Sinai), and their collaborators to pinpoint age-related immune alterations that reduce influenza vaccine effectiveness. The goal of the study is to learn the response to different types of influenza vaccines in older adults and to understand which factors contribute to vaccine responsiveness. The team is seeking participants to be part of this exciting influenza vaccine study. “This project is perfectly aligned with the focus of our NIH-funded Older Americans Independence ‘Pepper’ Center on Precision Gerontology in that we are seeking to ultimately understand which influenza vaccine works best for which individuals,” says Dr. George Kuchel, Director, UConn Center on Aging, University of Connecticut and Chief, Geriatric Medicine, UConn Health. “By participating in a study such as this you are contributing to science for both the current population and for future generations.” Rita Agarwal of Wethersfield who participated in a previous influenza vaccine says “I was happy to make that contribution, it’s my small way of contributing to society and making a difference.” In order to participate in the study, participants must: Be of age 65 years or older by September 1, 2022. You must not have any immunosuppressive disorders or be on any immunosuppressive medications. Be willing to receive the FDA-approved seasonal influenza vaccines as part of the study for three consecutive years for free. There will be six visits for the 2022 and 2023 influenza seasons and seven visits for the 2024 season. Visits will take place at the UConn Center on Aging. There are no costs to participate and monetary compensation for your participation is provided If you would like more information, please call (860) 679-3043 or email Megan Wing, wing@uchc.edu. IRB# 22-179J-1 George Kuchel, M.D. Principal Investigator, Center on Aging, Director Recent Articles November 8, 2024 Cato T. Laurencin Lifetime Research Award Given to Dr. Selwyn M. Vickers, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center President and CEO Read the article November 8, 2024 Students, Trainees Shine at Symposium Read the article November 8, 2024 Seeding Success: Internal Funding Has Ripple Effect in Research Innovation Read the article UConn Today University Communications universitycommunications.uconn.edu Contact Us | (860) 486-3530 Subscribe © 2024 University of Connecticut Disclaimers, Privacy & Copyright AccessibilityShorter duration of protection and lower geometric mean titers against A/H3N2 antigen of the quadrivalent influenza vaccine in children post-allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation | Bone Marrow Transplantation Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature bone marrow transplantation correspondence article Shorter duration of protection and lower geometric mean titers against A/H3N2 antigen of the quadrivalent influenza vaccine in children post-allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation Download PDF Download PDF Correspondence Published: 01 August 2022 Shorter duration of protection and lower geometric mean titers against A/H3N2 antigen of the quadrivalent influenza vaccine in children post-allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation Kyu Ri Kang1, Ye Ji Kim1,2, Moon Bae Ahn2, Hyun Mi Kang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0513-84071,2, Seong Koo Kim ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1860-30672, Jae Wook Lee ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0735-02872, Nack-Gyun Chung2, Bin Cho ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6675-695X2, Dae Chul Jeong2 & …Jin Han Kang1,2 Show authors Bone Marrow Transplantation volume 57, pages 1620–1622 (2022)Cite this article 784 Accesses 1 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Preventive medicineTranslational research To the Editor:Children that have undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) are at a higher risk for complications from influenza and progression to severe disease [1]. Therefore, influenza vaccines are recommended starting post-transplant 6 months [2]. Previous studies have shown lower prevalence and hospital admission rates in post-HSCT adults immunized with the influenza vaccine compared to those unimmunized [3]. Although there is a lack of data on children that have undergone HSCT, one study showed superior serologic response compared to age-matched controls for all vaccine strains [4]. However, there remains a paucity of data on the effectiveness and duration of seroprotection of the influenza vaccine in children, especially those that have undergone HSCT or chemotherapy. Therefore, the primary aim of this study was to investigate immunogenicity and duration of seroprotection in children that have undergone HSCT compared to those that received chemotherapy and healthy age-matched controls.We conducted a prospective study of patients below 18 years old that received HSCT or chemotherapy at the pediatric bone marrow center of Seoul St. Mary’s hospital, South Korea. An age-matched control group of healthy subjects without any underlying immunocompromising disease or immunosuppressants and immunomodulator use within 4 weeks prior to vaccine administration were included. Participants below 18 years of age received either one dose or 2 doses of the quadrivalent influenza vaccine administered at least 4 weeks apart according the appropriate schedule for children during the 2020–2021 influenza season from October 2020 to January 2021 [5].The inclusion criteria for the HSCT group were as follows: 1) received HSCT for underlying malignancy or primary immune deficiency, and 2) received the influenza vaccine at least 6 months post-transplant. For the chemotherapy group: 1) received chemotherapy for underlying malignancy, 2) 1st influenza vaccine after initiating chemotherapy, and 3) non-neutropenic at the time of influenza vaccination.The Institutional Review Board of the Catholic University of Korea Seoul St. Mary’s Hospital approved this study (IRB No. KT21TASI0182). All study participants and/or their legal guardians signed informed consent forms prior to the enrollment in this study.The types of quadrivalent seasonal vaccines administered to the patients are on Supplementary Table 1, and influenza virus strains included in vaccines during the 2020–2021 Influenza season are on Supplementary Table 2.Hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay was performed according to the WHO manual [6]. Seropositive or seroprotection in an individual was defined as a post vaccination HI titer of ≥1:40. The seroprotection rate (SPR) was defined as the percentage of subjects with a post vaccination titer of ≥1:40. The HI antibody responses were described as geometric mean titers (GMT) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated.The chi square test was used to compare categorical variables. The Kruskal-Wallis One-Way ANOVA was used to determine any statistically significant differences in continuous variables between the three groups. The Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare the differences in the duration of antibody response within the groups, 3–6 months versus 7–8 months. All tests were two sided, and statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.A total of 77 study participants (control group, n = 20; chemotherapy group, n = 24; HSCT group, n = 33) were included in the study, and the median age of the patients was 8.9 (6.0–12.7) years old (Supplementary Table 3). According to the timing of blood sampling after vaccination, patients were categorized into the 3–6-month group or 7–8-month group (Supplementary Fig.). None of the study participants were confirmed with or had any flu-like symptoms prior to sampling (Supplementary Table 3).None of the study participants in the control group had any underlying immunocompromising diseases, and all received blood sampling during routine follow up at the growth clinic. The underlying diseases of the patients are listed on Supplementary Table 4. The median interval of influenza vaccination after graft infusion of patients that received their first influenza vaccination post-HSCT (n = 23/33) was 17.8 months (IQR, 13.9–22.7 months), and 18.2% (n = 6/33) were on immunosuppressants when influenza vaccine was administered (Supplementary Table 5).The SPR was found for each of the four antigens within the quadrivalent vaccine at 3–6 months versus 7–8 months post-vaccination in each group (Fig. 1a). Compared to the control group, no statistically significant difference in the SPR was observed in patients that received chemotherapy or HSCT except for in A/H3N2, where subjects in the HSCT group that received their 1st influenza vaccination post-HSCT had a significantly lower SPR at 7–8 months post-vaccination compared to the control group (50% vs. 100%, P = 0.006, respectively). Across all three groups, the SPR at 3–6 months and 7–8 months against both B strains were below 62%. Also, a trend towards lower SPR was observed in the HSCT group at 7–8 months post vaccination for B/Yamagata compared to the control group (62% vs. 13%, P = 0.067, respectively).Fig. 1: Comparison of the seroprotection rates and geometric mean titers of the patients included in this study.(a) Seroprotection rate (SPR) (%) of the subjects in each group with a post vaccination titer of ≥1:40 for A/H1N1, A/H3N2, A/H3N2 (including subgroup analysis of patients that received their 1st influenza vaccination post-HSCT), B/Victoria, and B/Yamagata antigens at 3–6 months versus 7–8 months post-vaccination. Compared to the control group, no statistically significant difference in the SPR was observed in patients that received chemotherapy or HSCT except for A/H3N2, where subjects in the HSCT group that received their 1st influenza vaccination post-HSCT had a significantly lower SPR at 7–8 months post-vaccination compared to the control group. A trend towards lower SPR was observed in the HSCT group at 7–8 months post vaccination for B/Yamagata compared to the control group. (b), (c) Median HI response presented as GMT (+95% CI) of the seropositive samples (≥1:40) according to sampling time in each group. For A/H1N1, B/Victoria, and B/Yamagata, there were no significant differences in the GMT between the control, chemotherapy, and HSCT groups at (b) 3–6 months post-vaccination as well as (c) 7–8 months post-vaccination. However, for A/H3N2, at (b) 3–6 months post-vaccination, the GMT was lower in the HSCT group compared to the control group, as well as at (c) 7–8 months post-vaccination. To comply with licensure criteria (EMA CHMP, CBER) for CHMP the seroprotection rate must be >70%. CBER Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, CHMP Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use, CI Confidence interval, EMA European Medicines Agency’s, GMT geometric mean titer, HI hemagglutination inhibition, HSCT Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.Full size imageThe neutralizing GMT of the HI antibody response to the four antigens in seropositive subjects were compared between the groups at 3–6 months (Fig. 1b) and 7–8 months (Fig. 1c) post-vaccination. For A/H1N1, B/Victoria, and B/Yamagata, there were no significant differences in the GMT between the control, chemotherapy, and HSCT groups at 3–6 months post-vaccination as well as 7–8 months post-vaccination. However, for A/H3N2, at 3–6 months post-vaccination, the GMT was lower in the HSCT group (77.63; 95% CI, 40.0–209.7) compared to the control group (195.0; 95% CI, 40.0–539.9) (P = 0.033), as well as at 7–8 months post-vaccination (HSCT group, 56.6; 95% CI, 40.0–146.7 vs control group, 178.0; 95% CI, 40.0–530.7) (P = 0.009). The chemotherapy group showed a trend towards a lower GMT (84.1; 95% CI, 40.0–216.0) compared to the control group (195.0; 95% CI, 40.0–539.9) (P = 0.067) at 3–6 months post-vaccination.There is currently a lack of data on the immunogenicity, effectiveness, and duration of seroprotection of the quadrivalent influenza vaccine in children, especially those that have undergone HSCT. This study found that the control, chemotherapy, and HSCT group all had 100% SPRs for the A/H1N1 antigen up to 7–8 months post-vaccination. However, patients that received their first influenza vaccination after HSCT showed shorter duration of protection against A/H3N2, as only 50% of the recipients were seropositive after 6 months of vaccination (Fig. 1a). Also, the HI response of patients that received HSCT, regardless of previous influenza vaccination history, had lower HI GMTs compared to the control group at 3–6 months (P = 0.033) (Fig. 1b) and 7–8 months (P = 0.009) (Fig. 1c) post-vaccination for A/H3N2.Observational studies have shown low vaccine effectiveness for the B lineages, even in immunocompetent subjects [7, 8]. Another study on children showed that in children aged 6 months to 3 years, post-vaccination SPR against B/Yamagata was 63.1% and 49.5% for B/Victoria, failing to meet the Korea Ministry of Food & Drug Safety (MFDS) standard of 70% [9]. Our study showed similar results, with study participants in all three groups showing below 60% SPRs at 3–6 months for B/Victoria and below 52% at 3–6 months for B/Yamagata.There were several limitations in this study. The pre-vaccination HI titers were unavailable; therefore, the seroconversion rates could not be determined. However, none of the patients in the HSCT group received the influenza vaccine during the prior influenza season, therefore, patients in this group were most likely seronegative for the four antigens included in the quadrivalent influenza vaccine. Second, none of the patients in this study were infected with influenza during the 2020–2021 Influenza season regardless of low GMTs against vaccine strains, largely due to the missed influenza seasonal outbreak during 2020–2021 in South Korea because of social distancing and mandatory mask wearing in public as infection control precautions during the COVID-19 pandemic.To conclude, children that received their first influenza vaccine after HSCT had a shorter duration of seroprotection against A/H3N2. The GMTs against A/H3N2 was lower in the HSCT group compared to the control group at 3–6 months and 7–8 months post-vaccination. There were no significant differences in the immunogenicity or duration of seroprotection against A/H1N1 and B lineages in children that underwent HSCT or chemotherapy compared to children without underlying diseases. The overall SPR and HI GMT against B lineages were low across all three groups. Solutions such as higher vaccine doses, 2-dose protocols, different adjuvants, etc. are imperative in improving the overall immunogenicity to better prevent Influenza in children, especially those immunocompromised. Data availability The hemagglutination inhibition assay titers (raw data) are available on Supplementary Table 5. ReferencesNichols WG, Guthrie KA, Corey L, Boeckh M. Influenza infections after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: risk factors, mortality, and the effect of antiviral therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;39:1300–6. https://doi.org/10.1086/425004.Article PubMed Google Scholar Rubin LG, Levin MJ, Ljungman P, Davies EG, Avery R, Tomblyn M, et al. 2013 IDSA clinical practice guideline for vaccination of the immunocompromised host. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;58:e44–e100. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cit684.Article PubMed Google Scholar Piñana JL, Pérez A, Montoro J, Giménez E, Gómez MD, Lorenzo I, et al. Clinical effectiveness of influenza vaccination after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a cross-sectional, prospective, observational study. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;68:1894–903. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciy792.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ryan AL, Wadia UD, Jacoby P, Cheung LC, Kerr F, Fraser C, et al. Immunogenicity of the inactivated influenza vaccine in children who have undergone allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplant. Bone marrow Transplant. 2020;55:773–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41409-019-0728-5.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Curtis C, Shetty N. Recent trends and prevention of infection in the neonatal intensive care unit. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2008;21:350–6. https://doi.org/10.1097/QCO.0b013e3283013af4.Article PubMed Google Scholar World Health Organization. Manual for the laboratory diagnosis and virological surveillance of influenza. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011.Belongia EA, McLean HQ. Influenza vaccine effectiveness: defining the H3N2 problem. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;69:1817–23. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciz411.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Levine MZ, Martin JM, Gross FL, Jefferson S, Cole KS, Archibald CA, et al. Neutralizing Antibody responses to antigenically drifted influenza A(H3N2) viruses among children and adolescents following 2014-2015 inactivated and live attenuated influenza vaccination. Clin Vaccin immunology: CVI. 2016;23:831–9. https://doi.org/10.1128/cvi.00297-16.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee J, Lee K-Y, Kim J-H, Kim CS, Eun BW, Kim HM, et al. Safety and immunogenicity of an egg-cultivated quadrivalent inactivated split-virion influenza vaccine (GC3110A) in healthy Korean children: a randomized, double-blinded, active-controlled phase III study. J Korean Med Sci. 2018;33:e100.Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis study was supported by the Research Fund of Seoul St. Mary’s Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, and Green Cross Pharma.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsVaccine Bio Research Institute, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of KoreaKyu Ri Kang, Ye Ji Kim, Hyun Mi Kang & Jin Han KangDepartment of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of KoreaYe Ji Kim, Moon Bae Ahn, Hyun Mi Kang, Seong Koo Kim, Jae Wook Lee, Nack-Gyun Chung, Bin Cho, Dae Chul Jeong & Jin Han KangAuthorsKyu Ri KangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYe Ji KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMoon Bae AhnView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHyun Mi KangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSeong Koo KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJae Wook LeeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNack-Gyun ChungView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBin ChoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDae Chul JeongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJin Han KangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsHMK designed the study. KRK conducted the experiments. HMK analyzed the data. KRK, YJK, MBA, HMK, SKK, JWL, N-GC, BC, DCJ and JHK collected and retrieved the data. HMK, KRK and JHK wrote the manuscript. KRK, YJK, MBA, HMK, SKK, JWL, N-GC, BC, DCJ and JHK read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Hyun Mi Kang.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Ethics approval The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary Table 1Supplementary Table 2Supplementary Table 3Supplementary Table 4Supplementary Table 5Supplementary figureRights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleKang, K.R., Kim, Y.J., Ahn, M.B. et al. Shorter duration of protection and lower geometric mean titers against A/H3N2 antigen of the quadrivalent influenza vaccine in children post-allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 57, 1620–1622 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41409-022-01768-6Download citationReceived: 07 June 2022Revised: 18 July 2022Accepted: 20 July 2022Published: 01 August 2022Issue Date: October 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41409-022-01768-6Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Information About the Editors Contact For Advertisers Subscribe Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For Authors and Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Bone Marrow Transplantation (Bone Marrow Transplant) ISSN 1476-5365 (online) ISSN 0268-3369 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedA combined influenza and COVID-19 mRNA vaccine Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member A combined influenza and COVID-19 mRNA vaccine Download PDF Copy By Suchandrima BhowmikReviewed by Benedette Cuffari, M.Sc.Aug 3 2022 The coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic, which was caused by the emergence of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has adversely impacted the health of people throughout the world. To date, over 584 million have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, of whom over 6.4 million have died. The clinical symptoms of COVID-19 can range from cough, fever, and sore throat to mild or severe pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Study: Rational development of a combined mRNA vaccine against COVID-19 and influenza. Image Credit: taa22 / Shutterstock.com Background The spread of other epidemic respiratory diseases during the cold season increases the risk of co-infections with two or more respiratory pathogens. One of the most common respiratory pathogens is the influenza virus, which has previously been reported to co-infect with SARS-CoV-2. Both these viruses have similar transmission routes and cause comparable clinical symptoms after infection. Several recent studies have suggested that influenza infection can facilitate the entry of SARS-CoV-2 inside host cells, subsequently leading to severe pneumonia and lung lesions. Co-infection with influenza and SARS-CoV-2 has also been reported to cause severe weight loss and a higher number of deaths in mammals. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop a combined vaccine capable of providing protection against both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza. Recently, messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA)-based vaccines with a lipid nanoparticle (LNP) delivery system have been used to mitigate the spread of SARS-CoV-2. Several mRNA vaccine candidates against influenza and other respiratory diseases are currently under different developmental stages. A new npj Vaccines study describes the efficacy of an mRNA vaccine referred to as ARIAV that encodes the hemagglutinin (HA) antigen of influenza A virus (IAV) H1N1. ARIAV was then incorporated into a previous LNP-encapsulated mRNA (mRNA-LNP) vaccine (ARCoV) that encodes the SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain (RBD) to design a combined vaccine formulation referred to as AR-CoV/IAV. Design and characterization of ARIAV mRNA-LNP encoding HA protein of influenza A (H1N1) virus as a vaccine candidate. a Schematic diagram of ARIAV, encoding the full-length HA protein. b Indirect immunofluorescence assay of HA protein expression in HEK293T cells 48 h post-transfection. Scale bar, 20 μm. c HA expression in HEK293T cells was determined by immunoblotting. d HA-specific IgG antibody titers were determined by ELISA. e Hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) titers were determined 14 and 28 days post-initial immunization. Data are shown as the mean ± SEM (n = 8). Statistical differences were analyzed by using two-tailed unpaired t tests. *P < 0.05,**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. About the study The study involved the synthesis of mRNA that encoded the full-length HA of IAV and the SARS-CoV-2 RBD, followed by LNP formulation of the mRNA and transfection. Six- to eight-week-old female BALB/c mice were immunized with equal doses of ARIAV, AR-CoV/IAV, or placebo, which was followed by a booster dose 14 days later. Related StoriesRecruitment underway for a clinical trial testing new vaccine against respiratory virusesSeasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicVALANX Biotech and Fina Biosolutions Introduce ClickCRM for Rapid Conjugate Vaccine DevelopmentSerum samples were collected from the mice before administration of the vaccines, as well as 14 and 28 days post-administration. Some of the mice were sacrificed post-challenge with either of the viruses or co-infection with both viruses for histopathological analyses and viral detection. The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used for the detection of SARS-CoV-2- and IAV-specific IgG antibodies. Thereafter, pseudovirus-based neutralization assay, hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assay, enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assay, and multiplex immunofluorescent assay were conducted. Total RNA was isolated from infected mice and quantified by the quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) assay, followed by in situ hybridization assay. Flow cytometry was also carried out, followed by histopathological, cytokine, chemokine, and phylogenetic analyses. Study findings ARIAV was found to induce an HA-specific IgG antibody response, as well as an increase HAI titers that continued to rise after booster immunization in a dose-dependent manner. Immunization with two doses of AR-CoV/IAV provided protection against IAV and SARS-CoV-2 infection. AR-CoV/IAV was observed to activate antigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses, along with the secretion of several cytokines, including interleukin-2 (IL-2), tumor necrosis factor- α (TNF-α), and interferon γ (IFN-γ). Histopathological analysis revealed pathological changes in the lung sections following IAV and SARS-CoV-2 infections in the placebo group. However, no pathological changes were observed in AR-CoV/IAV vaccinated mice following infection. High levels of viral RNA were detected in both IAV- and SARS-CoV-2- infected mice receiving the placebo vaccine post-infection. AR-CoV/IAV immunization reduced the viral RNA load post-infection and conferred protection against IAV and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, AR-CoV/IAV immunization protected infected mice from severe weight loss. This vaccine was also found to protect against infection with the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha and Delta variants. Additionally, AR-CoV/IAV vaccination reduced the levels of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, as well as provided protection against IAV and SARS-CoV-2 co-infection. Conclusions The current study demonstrated that a combined mRNA vaccine is capable of inducing broad and durable protection against co-infection with SARS-CoV-2 and IAV, as well as against multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants. Further development of universal vaccines is important to control the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the spread of other respiratory viruses. Journal reference: Ye, Q., Wu, M., Zhou, C., et al. (2022). Rational development of a combined mRNA vaccine against COVID-19 and influenza. npj Vaccines 84. doi:10.1038/s41541-022-00478-w. Posted in: Drug Discovery & Pharmaceuticals | Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News | Pharmaceutical News Tags: Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, Antibodies, Antibody, Antigen, Assay, B Cell, CD4, Cell, Chemokine, Chemokines, Cold, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, Cough, covid-19, Cytokine, Cytokines, Cytometry, Efficacy, ELISA, Enzyme, Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA), Fever, Flow Cytometry, H1N1, Healthcare-Associated Infection HAI, Hybridization, Immunization, Influenza, Interferon, Interleukin, Interleukin-2, Messenger RNA (mRNA), Nanoparticle, Necrosis, Pandemic, Placebo, Pneumonia, Polymerase, Polymerase Chain Reaction, Pseudovirus, Receptor, Respiratory, Ribonucleic Acid, RNA, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Sore Throat, Syndrome, T-Cell, Throat, Transcription, Transfection, Tumor, Tumor Necrosis Factor, Vaccine, Virus, Weight Loss Comments (0) Written bySuchandrima BhowmikSuchandrima has a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) degree in Microbiology and a Master of Science (M.Sc.) degree in Microbiology from the University of Calcutta, India. The study of health and diseases was always very important to her. In addition to Microbiology, she also gained extensive knowledge in Biochemistry, Immunology, Medical Microbiology, Metabolism, and Biotechnology as part of her master's degree. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APABhowmik, Suchandrima. (2022, August 03). A combined influenza and COVID-19 mRNA vaccine. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220803/A-combined-influenza-and-COVID-19-mRNA-vaccine.aspx.MLABhowmik, Suchandrima. "A combined influenza and COVID-19 mRNA vaccine". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220803/A-combined-influenza-and-COVID-19-mRNA-vaccine.aspx>.ChicagoBhowmik, Suchandrima. "A combined influenza and COVID-19 mRNA vaccine". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220803/A-combined-influenza-and-COVID-19-mRNA-vaccine.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardBhowmik, Suchandrima. 2022. A combined influenza and COVID-19 mRNA vaccine. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220803/A-combined-influenza-and-COVID-19-mRNA-vaccine.aspx. Suggested Reading Study finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionHexavalent vaccine can reduce spread of whooping coughAfrican production of mpox vaccines could secure the continent’s healthThrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura cases after CoronaVac raise concerns over vaccine safetyPublic trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Link between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Nanomedicine (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Cleveland Clinic presents new findings on triple-negative breast cancer vaccineCould we ever eradicate the flu? | Live Science Skip to main content Open menu Close menu Live Science Live Science Search Search Live Science Subscribe RSS Space Health Planet Earth Animals Archaeology Physics & Math Human Behavior Technology Chemistry More Science news About us Newsletter Follow us Story archive How It Works MagazineWhy subscribe?The ultimate action-packed science and technology magazine bursting with exciting information about the universeSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with checkout code 'LOVE5'Engaging articles, amazing illustrations & exclusive interviewsIssues delivered straight to your door or device From$26.49View Trending'Superheavy' elementPompeii victimsJames Webb Space TelescopeCrocodile quizBest cameras for wildlife photography Health Viruses, Infections & Disease Flu Could we ever eradicate the flu? News By Isobel Whitcomb published 1 August 2022 Eradication isn't the only worthwhile goal. When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works. An illustration of human antibodies (orange) neutralizing a influenza virus particle (blue). Each Y-shaped molecule has two arms that can bind to specific antigens. In doing this they mark bacterial or viral antigens for destruction by phagocytes - white blood cells that ingest and destroy foreign bodies. (Image credit: NANOCLUSTERING/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY) For many people, catching the flu might not seem like that big of a deal — you might feel crummy, miss a few days of work or school, and then return to daily life. But this common illness causes tens of thousands of hospitalizations and deaths each year: Between 2010 and 2020, up to 342,000 people died of influenza in the U.S., according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). During three out of the four flu pandemics in the past two centuries, including the 1918 influenza pandemic, that number jumped into the millions worldwide. Ending this disease would prevent countless deaths. But is it possible to eradicate the flu?The short answer is no, said Mark Slifka, an immunologist at the Oregon National Primate Research Center. The closest we came to this holy grail of epidemiology was in the 2020-2021 flu season — the first full winter of the coronavirus pandemic, when masking and isolating at home were more common, he said. That season, the CDC reported roughly 150,000 confirmed flu cases (the true number was likely higher), which pales in comparison to the 39 million who contracted the flu during the 2019-2020 season. One type of the flu virus likely went extinct, Slifka said. "That's exciting, but it doesn't make much of a dent," Slifka said. With the return to air travel, school, work and regular socialization, the flu is back with a vengeance, he said.That's because influenza viruses, which cause the flu, constantly mutate, creating thousands of versions of themselves; these different versions of the viruses are called "variants" or "strains." If one strain disappears, "others just fill in," Slifka said. Each year brings new influenza variants, which necessitates a new vaccine. That makes it difficult to manufacture a vaccine. To get ready for flu season, scientists have to predict which variants will be dominant in the upcoming season, based on which variants are circulating in humans in the opposite hemisphere."It's a guess; sometimes they don't get it right," said Marc Jenkins, an immunologist at the University of Minnesota Medical School. Related: Why is the flu shot less effective than other vaccines?Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter nowGet the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox.Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.Symptoms of the flu include a high temperature, feeling tired, headache and an achy body. (Image credit: Shutterstock)Some years, the flu virus mutates so quickly that it outpaces vaccine manufacturers. By the time a shot is ready to be administered to the general population, it might not be very effective against the newest variants. And sometimes, the viruses used in the flu vaccine mutate during the manufacturing process; this means that the viruses aren't a "good match" by the time they're killed and added to the vaccine. As a result, the flu vaccine's effectiveness ranges from 10% to 60% from year to year, according to the CDC. In other words, a person who receives the flu vaccine has a 10% to 60% lower chance of getting the flu than someone who did not receive the vaccine. That effectiveness peaks one month after vaccination and then weakens over time, declining by roughly 10% each month.There might be a way to keep up with these rapid mutations, Jenkins said. Some scientists are working on producing a universal flu vaccine — that is, a vaccine that would work against many possible variants of influenza. Currently available flu vaccines present the immune system with a protein from the surface of the flu virus, called hemagglutinin. In response, the immune system produces antibodies, proteins that prevent invading pathogens from hijacking our cells, produced to recognize and target that specific protein. Here's the problem: the antibodies we produce in response to the flu vaccine tend to recognize just one part of hemagglutinin. This protein is shaped a lot like a piece of broccoli. "The immune system tends to make antibodies against the top part, the broccoli's floret," Jenkins said. Unfortunately, this top part, also called the head, tends to mutate rapidly. In contrast, the "stalk" of the protein doesn't change much — but the immune system pays very little attention to it, producing just a small amount of stalk antibodies. A universal flu vaccine would teach the immune system to recognize hemagglutinin's stalk, rather than its head. Recently, scientists did just that: They engineered live, weakened versions of influenza to have what they called "chimeric" hemagglutinin. This version of the protein has unusual heads that don't trigger the immune system. No longer distracted by the head, the immune system produces more antibodies in response to the stalk. Phase I clinical trials for this universal vaccine wrapped up in 2020. The results, published in the journal Nature Medicine, included 51 participants and found that, overall, the vaccine was safe and that vaccinated individuals produced stalk antibodies. However, this trial was very small and didn't measure infection rates in the population, so it's too soon to say whether those antibodies will provide actual protection against the flu. "You can certainly have antibodies and not good protection," Jenkins said. Related: It's safe to follow the vaccine schedule for babies. Here's why.Let's say we do eventually adopt a universal vaccine. In one extremely unlikely hypothetical scenario, the vaccine is nearly 100% effective and all humans receive it. Even that wouldn't be enough to eradicate influenza. That's because influenza infects many kinds of animals, and from time to time, it makes the jump from a different species into humans or vice versa — these are called zoonotic infections. Since the first recorded zoonotic influenza outbreak in 1958, scientists have identified 16 zoonotic influenza variants in humans. The 2009 swine flu outbreak was caused by a strain of H1N1, which looked "suspiciously" like the deadly 1918 flu, Slifka said. At some point, this variant had jumped into pigs, combined with a different influenza virus, and then jumped back into humans. "To stop transmission, we'd have to vaccinate every duck and pig simultaneously," Slifka said. Otherwise, it's feasible that influenza could persist and mutate in a different animal species until it's once again unrecognizable to the human immune system.Related mysteries—The flu shot isn't that effective. Here's why you should still get it.—Do rusty nails really give you tetanus?—Do other viruses have as many variants as SARS-CoV-2?A universal flu vaccine isn't the only tool for tackling the flu. Some researchers aim to develop an mRNA vaccine for the flu. Similar to the Pfizer and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines, this vaccine would teach the immune system to produce the target protein — hemagglutinin for example — in house, Ryan Langlois, a virologist at the University of Minnesota, told Live Science. These vaccines don't take as long to produce as traditional flu vaccines, and would give scientists more time to guess the next flu season's dominant variants. Other scientists, including Mark Slifka's team at Oregon Health and Science University, are working to develop more effective vaccines by using intact viral proteins, in contrast to current flu vaccines, which break those viral proteins into small, soluble pieces. With a more effective vaccine or one that protects against more variants, it's possible to prevent hospitalizations and deaths, Jenkins said. In the end, eradicating the flu isn't the only worthwhile goal, Jenkins said: "It's a high bar. I'm not convinced we need to achieve it in order to have clear benefits." Originally published on Live Science. TOPICS vaccines Isobel WhitcombSocial Links NavigationLive Science ContributorIsobel Whitcomb is a contributing writer for Live Science who covers the environment, animals and health. Her work has appeared in the New York Times, Fatherly, Atlas Obscura, Hakai Magazine and Scholastic's Science World Magazine. Isobel's roots are in science. She studied biology at Scripps College in Claremont, California, while working in two different labs and completing a fellowship at Crater Lake National Park. She completed her master's degree in journalism at NYU's Science, Health, and Environmental Reporting Program. She currently lives in Portland, Oregon. More about fluH5N1 bird flu is evolving to better infect mammals, CDC study suggestsHow to get better faster when you have the flu, according to scienceLatest'A direct relationship between your sense of sight and recovery rate': Biologist Kathy Willis on why looking at nature can speed up healingSee more latest ► Most PopularBoost for Mars life? Red Planet's magnetic field may have lasted longer than thought'Gravity waves' from Hurricane Helene seen rippling through the sky in new NASA imagesHow many galaxies orbit the Milky Way?Did plate tectonics give rise to life? Groundbreaking new research could crack Earth's deepest mystery.H5N1 bird flu is evolving to better infect mammals, CDC study suggestsMysterious, city-size 'centaur' comet gets 300 times brighter after quadruple cold-volcanic eruptionHumans' big brains may not be the reason for difficult childbirth, chimp study suggests'Purple tunic' from royal tomb belonged to Alexander the Great, scholar claims — but not everyone agreesCretaceous 'Pompeii' of China isn't what we thoughtPando: The world's largest tree and heaviest living organismSurprised Russian school kids discover Arctic island has vanished after comparing satellite images LATEST ARTICLES1'A direct relationship between your sense of sight and recovery rate': Biologist Kathy Willis on why looking at nature can speed up healing2'The prescription is nature': How satellites can show us the healing effects of nature3NASA's Chandra X-ray telescope sees 'knots' blasting from nearby black hole jets4Space Force's mysterious X-37B begins 'aerobraking' to lower orbit. Here's how it works.5Do ostriches really bury their heads in the sand? Live Science is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookies policy Accessibility Statement Advertise with us Web notifications Careers Editorial standards How to pitch a story to us © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.Australia’s bad flu season is a warning for the U.S. this yearIE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Skip to ContentNBC News Logo2024 ElectionMeet the PressU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthShoppingTiplineScienceCulture & TrendsShare & Save —My NewsManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearchSearchProfile My NewsSign Out Sign InCreate your free profileSectionsU.S. NewsDecision 2024PoliticsWorldLocalBusinessSportsInvestigationsCulture & TrendsHealthScienceTech & MediaWeatherVideo FeaturesPhotosNBC SelectNBC Asian AmericaNBC BLKNBC LatinoNBC OUTtvTodayNightly NewsMSNBCMeet the PressDatelineFeaturedNBC News NowNightly FilmsStay TunedSpecial FeaturesNewslettersPodcastsListen NowMore From NBCCNBCNBC.COMNBCU AcademyPeacockNEXT STEPS FOR VETSNBC News Site MapHelpFollow NBC News news AlertsThere are no new alerts at this timeSearchSearchFacebookTwitterEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardPinterestLinkedinLatest Stories2024 ElectionMeet the PressU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthShoppingTiplineScienceCulture & TrendsHealth newsAustralia’s bad flu season is a warning for the U.S. this yearFlu surged in Australia for the first time since the coronavirus pandemic began. That doesn't bode well for the U.S.A health care worker prepares a free flu vaccination shot at a YMCA in Los Angeles in September 2020. Patrick T. Fallon / Bloomberg via Getty ImagesAug. 4, 2022, 8:11 AM UTCBy Erika EdwardsThe U.S. may be in for a severe flu season this year if trends in the Southern Hemisphere — historically a seasonal harbinger for the U.S. — hold true.It isn't the first time since the Covid pandemic began that experts have warned of a bad flu season or even a "twindemic": a bad flu season on top of a winter surge of Covid. But so far, that hasn't materialized.What makes this year different, however, is that flu is surging in Australia for the first time since the pandemic began. Flu season in Australia can be an indication of what's to come in the U.S.Australia is nearing the end of its worst flu season in five years, according to the latest report from the country's Department of Health and Aged Care."We watch the all of the Southern Hemisphere countries very closely, hoping that we get some sort of insight, but it's not perfect by any means," said Dr. Alicia Fry, the chief of the Epidemiology and Prevention Branch of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Still, she said, the CDC is "very alert" for signs of an early and/or aggressive flu season in the U.S.Up to 41 million people catch the flu every year, on average, resulting in about 52,000 deaths, according to the CDC.Warning signs for winterFlu season in Australia began earlier than usual, which can be an indicator of a severe season. "The earlier it starts, the worse it tends to be," said Dr. Robert Citronberg, the executive medical director of infectious disease and prevention for Advocate Aurora Health in Illinois. That is mostly a function of time — the longer the flu circulates, the more damage it will do in a population. Australia's flu season has also hit children hardest, according to the country's health agency. Kids ages 5 through 9 have had the highest rate of flu cases this year, followed by children ages 4 and younger and teenagers. Australian health authorities say it’s too soon to tell whether their flu vaccine has proven to be a good match for circulating influenza strains.The flu shots that will be offered in the U.S. this year will protect against two strains of influenza A and two strains of influenza B.How a vulnerable population can prepareUsually, people are exposed to a variety of flu strains every year, which helps to build up immunity to the virus.But with little flu in the past two seasons, that immunity has waned. Young children in particular may be most at risk, experts said, because their immune systems have had even less exposure to the virus. "There are a lot of young kids who have not had flu at all over the past couple of years," said Dr. James Cutrell, an infectious disease expert at UT Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. "That's going to make them more susceptible to get it and then to spread it to other people."Cutrell said that people shouldn't panic about the coming flu season but that "it is time for people to prepare."That mainly involves staying up to date on vaccines for both the flu and Covid. Protection against one viral infection can help protect against the other, and vice versa, said Dr. Robert Citronberg, the executive medical director of infectious disease and prevention for Advocate Aurora Health. Both Covid and influenza can cause "significant lung inflammation," Citronberg said. "Once you have lung inflammation, you're more susceptible to other infections or pathogens."Doctors offices and pharmacies in the U.S. will be getting flu vaccine shipments in the coming weeks. Fry of the CDC said the best time for most people to get the shot is in September or October.Two groups in particular should get them earlier if possible, she said: young children who will need two shots this year and women in their third trimesters of pregnancy. "It's a good idea to get the vaccine before they deliver so that the baby gets some of the antibodies that Mom develops and the baby's protected," Fry said. Infants aren't eligible for flu shots until age 6 months.According to the CDC, children younger than age 9 who have never had flu shots should get two doses this year, at least four weeks apart. In addition, kids in that age group who got only one shot during previous flu seasons may also need two shots this year. Historically, however, Americans don't rush to get their flu shots. Just about half of the U.S. population got the shot during the 2020-21 season, the CDC reported. And while there is no guarantee the shots will prevent infection, studies have shown they can reduce the risk of dying or ending up in the hospital with severe flu."Flu is not completely preventable by the vaccine, but it's controllable," Citronberg said. "If we get a significantly fewer number of people getting vaccinated this year for flu, then it could really impact how many cases we have and the severity of those cases."If that occurs, Citronberg predicted, "we're going to have our hands full."Follow NBC HEALTH on Twitter & Facebook.Erika EdwardsErika Edwards is a health and medical news writer and reporter for NBC News and "TODAY."AboutContactHelpCareersAd ChoicesPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023)NBC News SitemapClosed CaptioningAdvertiseSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday LogoHarbour Seals in St. Lawrence Affected by Avian Flu - Baleines en direct About Contact Us Donate Marine Mammal Emergencies Français A Gremm project Discover The Ecosystems of the Whales Saguenay River The St. Lawrence The Species of the St. Lawrence The 13 Species Northern Bottlenose Whale North atlantic right whale Beluga Sperm Whale Atlantic white-sided dolphin White-beaked dolphin Killer Whale Long-Finned Pilot Whale Harbour Porpoise Minke Whale Humpback Whale Blue Whale Fin Whale Life of Whales Morphology The Origin of Whales (evolution) Skeleton Teeth and Baleen Physiology The Five Senses Echolocation Parasites Respiratory System Reproductive System Thermoregulation Behaviour Feeding Communication Mysterious behaviours Mourning Intelligence Playing Migration Swimming Diving Predation and defence Mother-Calf Relationships Reproduction Society Sleeping Spout Whale’s Future Threats Conservation Recovery Strategies Whale Researchers Scientific Techniques Whale Researchers Research groups in Quebec Marine Mammal Interpretation Center (CIMM) About Observe Where Observation maps Côte-Nord – The Whale Route Bas-Saint-Laurent Gaspésie When The Best Timing How On Land On the Water Observation Tips Who How to recognize them? Whale portraits Act You act Take Action With a donation With our partners We act Our actions in research Our actions in education Our actions in conservation Magazine Harbour Seals in St. Lawrence Affected by Avian Flu Harbour seal carcass that caused an appeal to the RQUMM. @GREMM Last June, the Quebec Marine Mammal Emergency Response Network (QMMERN) received an abnormally high number of reports of dead or sick seals. Subsequent analyses have revealed the presence of the bird flu virus in harbour seals, a disease that has been rapidly spreading in wild bird populations across the country since the beginning of the year. Alarming figures What caught the attention of the scientific community? The QMMERN has identified 93 harbour seal carcasses since the beginning of the year, which is 6 times more than an average year and 3 times more than the record year. In June alone, 65 carcasses were reported. Avian flu was quickly suspected of playing a role in this uptick in mortality. The QMMERN recovered and sampled 15 carcasses for analysis by the Centre québécois sur la santé des animaux sauvages (Quebec wildlife health centre). The results show that 11 of the 15 harbour seals sampled were infected with the Eurasian strain of avian influenza H5N1 (HPAI). This is a highly pathogenic strain that is easily transmitted from one animal to another and causes severe illness. For now, only harbour seals seem to be getting infected with the virus and the spread in Quebec is limited to the Bas-Saint-Laurent region. Avian flu: just for the birds? The name of this strain can be confusing! In Canada, the disease affects species such as gannets, Canada and snow geese, common eiders, gulls, turkey vultures, corvids [Translator’s note: ravens, crows and jays], bald eagles and several species of domesticated birds. However, it is known that this particular strain of flu can be transmitted from birds to mammals. In the U.S., the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has also confirmed the presence of this virus in beached seals in Maine. In North America, H5N1 is also believed to have infected other mammal species, notably raccoons, otters, lynx, red fox, skunks and two humans. Experts do not know exactly how the virus made the leap from birds to harbour seals. The proximity of the two species at haulouts may have favoured close contact between them and exposed the seals to the bodily fluids and feces of infected birds. It is not yet known for sure whether the virus can be transmitted from one seal to another. This summer, birds' carcasses are more abundant. @GREMM Avian flu on a global scale Is bird flu a pandemic? This disease, which is currently rampant in Canada, is also found in other countries in North America, Europe, Asia and Africa. It is believed to have been present for about 2 years. Can it be considered a pandemic? In humans, when an infectious disease is limited to a given region, it is called an epidemic. If it spreads beyond the borders of a given country and affects a continent or the entire world, it becomes a pandemic. Different terms are used when referring to other animal species: epizootic is equivalent to an epidemic and panzootic is equivalent to a pandemic. In our case, we would therefore be dealing with a panzootic! What is bird flu? To understand bird flu, one needs to be familiar with the virus that causes it. There are four types of influenza virus: A, B, C and D. These distinct types have the ability to cause infections in different species and with varying severity. Type B viruses generally only affect humans and can cause epidemics, but not pandemics. Type C viruses infect mostly humans, but occasionally dogs or pigs as well. They cause mild symptoms and are not associated with epidemics. Type D viruses are only found in cattle. Bird flu, or avian influenza, is caused by different subtypes of the Type A influenza virus. Viruses of this type have the ability to infect a number of different species including birds, mink, pigs, dogs, horses, wild boar, whales, seals, humans and many others. Different strains of Type A viruses can cause avian flu, including H7N1, H9N2, H5N1 and H7N9. The strain currently causing the avian flu pandemic (which is also affecting seals) is H5N1. As veterinarian Stéphane Lair of Université de Montréal explains, “Although the risks of transmission of this flu virus to humans and pets appear to be low, it is recommended not to approach, and especially not to touch, a sick or dead seal. It is also important to keep one’s pets away from dead seals or birds.” The arrival of summer offers a glimmer of hope since the spread of this virus seems to subside in the hottest months. According to Dr. Stéphane Lair, seals' necropsies also revealed histological lesions associated with avian flu. @ GREMM To learn more Human health issues related to avian influenza in Canada (Public Health Agency of Canada – Government of Canada, August 1, 2005) Protégez votre troupeau contre la grippe aviaire (Agence canadienne d’inspection des aliments – Gouvernement du Canada, 15/04/2022) Protect your flock from bird flu (Canadian Food Inspection Agency – Government of Canada, April 15, 2022) Fact Sheet – Avian Influenza (Canadian Food Inspection Agency – Government of Canada, June 13, 2022) Highlights in the History of Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) Timeline – 2020-2022 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 08/07/2022) Seal Strandings in Maine Linked to Bird Flu (Smithsonian Magazine, 11/07/2022) Mortalities of harbour seals in the St. Lawrence Estuary in Quebec associated with infections by a highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza virus, Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative, July 12, 2022) Frequent Questions – Maine Seal Stranding Event (NOAA Fisheries, 13/07/2022) OSH Answers Fact Sheets – Avian Influenza (Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety – Government of Canada, July 19, 2022) Marine Mammal Emergencies - 2/8/2022 Véronique Genesse Véronique is a biologist and a writer for Whales online. She has discovered her love for cetaceans following memorable encounters with these giants of the sea. She then grew interested in conservation after becoming aware of the numerous threats they face. She believes that participation from the general public is essential for the success of conservation projects. Recommended articles Out-of-Habitat Cetaceans What a surprise it was for Montréal’s urbanites when a humpback whale visited the city’s port in 2020! This event… Thalia Cohen Bacry |Marine Mammal Emergencies 31/10/2024 Tic Tac Toe – Live The humpback whale Tic Tac Toe has been back in the Marine Park since May 29. Images transmitted to the… Équipe Baleines en direct |Marine Mammal Emergencies 11/6/2024 2023 Beluga Mortality Assessment: The Trend Continues According to data from the Quebec Marine Mammal Emergency Response Network (QMMERN), last year saw the recovery of 17 beluga… Odélie Brouillette |Marine Mammal Emergencies 25/4/2024 Visit our museum Donate Subscribe to our newsletter Partners © 2019 - 2024 GREMM - All rights reserved.GSK to supply Europe with 85mn pandemic flu vaccines RecommendedNew webinar with Fujifilm: Monocyte activation test (MAT): Insight into examining regulations and markets prospectsNew webinar: The path to optimisation in pharmaceutical microbiologyJoin our webinar: An alternative medium to support sterility testing using the Growth Direct® Rapid Sterility SystemDiscover more in our new application note: validating recombinant cascade reagents in 3 simple steps About us | Advertise with us | Contact us MenuHomeAI HubNewsArticlesVideosPodcastsPublicationsWhitepapers/App Notes/PostersWebinarsContent HubsEventsThe Future of Bio Pharmaceutical Analysis 2024 (Online Summit)PHARMA MICROBIOLOGY – Navigating Compliance and Best Practices (Online Summit)Pharma 4.0: Breakfast BriefingThe Future of Pharmaceutical Analysis 2023 (Online Summit)Industry EventsAnalytical techniquesBiopharmaDrug deliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegs & Legs newsGSK to supply Europe with 85mn pandemic flu vaccines0SHARES Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardPosted: 2 August 2022 | Hannah Balfour (European Pharmaceutical Review) | No comments yetNew agreement reserves million doses of GSK’s pandemic influenza vaccine Adjupanrix to support Europe’s pandemic preparedness. GSK has signed a framework contract with the European Commission’s (EC) Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Authority (HERA) for the reservation of future production and supply of 85 million doses of its pandemic influenza vaccine Adjupanrix [pandemic influenza vaccine (split virion, inactivated, adjuvanted)].Influenza pandemics, in which a new strain to which there is little or no pre-existing immunity in the human population, are impossible to predict and could cause mild, moderate or severe disease, as well as death.HERA was established in September 2021 to prevent, detect and rapidly respond to health emergencies by working closely with other EC and national health agencies, industry and international partners to improve Europe’s readiness for health emergencies.The GSK contract is among the first signed by HERA since its inception and is the last in a series of contracts secured by the company this year. In February 2022 GSK extended its pandemic influenza vaccine stockpile contract with the US Government, in June the enterprise renewed its supply agreement with the World Health Organization (WHO), and in July it signed a contract with the Government of Canada for both seasonal and pandemic influenza vaccines.Under these contacts, GSK could provide at least 200 million doses of pandemic influenza vaccine to governments around the world.Welcoming this contract, Roger Connor, President Vaccines and Global Health, GSK, commented: “I am delighted that HERA has chosen GSK as a key partner in pandemic flu preparedness. This contract follows three other agreements GSK has made, in the US, Canada and with the WHO. These agreements leverage GSK’s world class global vaccine manufacturing network to continue our long-standing partnerships on pandemic preparedness and response.“We have all seen the devastating human, economic and social consequences of a pandemic and the important part that vaccines are playing in helping us return to normal life. Through this agreement for 85 million doses, we can help the EU and European countries, as well as other countries and regions, be better prepared for future pandemics.”CEPI provides $30m to advance novel coronavirus vaccine…Related topicsBig Pharma, Biologics, Drug Manufacturing, Drug Supply Chain, Vaccines, VirusesRelated organisationsEuropean Health Emergency preparedness and Response Authority (HERA)Related drugsAdjupanrix [pandemic influenza vaccine (split virion inactivated adjuvanted)]Related peopleRoger ConnorRelated diseases & conditionsInfluenza By Hannah Balfour (European Pharmaceutical Review)2 August 2022No comments yetShares0 Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardRelated topicsBig Pharma, Biologics, Drug Manufacturing, Drug Supply Chain, Vaccines, VirusesRelated organisationsEuropean Health Emergency preparedness and Response Authority (HERA)Related drugsAdjupanrix [pandemic influenza vaccine (split virion inactivated adjuvanted)]Related peopleRoger ConnorRelated diseases & conditionsInfluenza Most popular...Sustainability continues to steer pharmaceutical packaging marketFirst-of-a-kind EU approval granted for eosinophilic esophagitis medicineFinal Chapter text published for early adoptionEncouraging data revealed for schizophrenia long-acting injectablesSingle-use bioreactor market to witness favourable expansion to 2030 Read the latest issueAll subscriptions include online membership, giving you access to the journal and exclusive content. Download free copyRelated content webinarUnmasking the unknown: how mass spectrometry delivers accurate identificationsBy newsOxford/AZ COVID-19 vaccine to be discontinuedBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsWuXi facility boosts bioprocessing capacity with new bioreactorsBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsFirst-of-a-kind trial holds promise for obesity and pre-diabetes treatmentBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) whitepaperA data-driven approach to Container Closure IntegrityBy West Pharmaceutical Services Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment *Name * Email * Website ContentNewsArticlesMagazineWhitepapers & App NotesEventsWebinarsVideosCompany ProfilesTopicsAnalytical TechniquesBiopharmaDrug DeliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegulation & LegislationAdvertising & EditorialAdvertising OpportunitiesAdvertising Tech SpecsAdvisory BoardInformation for AuthorsMedia PlannerPermission to reuse our contentWrite for us | Advertise with us Contact Subscribe TodayT: +44 (0)1959 563311 F: +44 (0)1959 563123 Company InformationEuropean Pharmaceutical Review is published by: Russell Publishing Ltd.Court LodgeHogtrough HillBrasted, Kent, TN16 1NUUnited KingdomAboutCareers @ Russell PublishingTerms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyManage your cookies© Russell Publishing Limited, 2010-2024. All rights reserved.Website development by e-Motive Media Limited. This website uses cookies to enable, optimise and analyse site operations, as well as to provide personalised content and allow you to connect to social media. By clicking "I agree" you consent to the use of cookies for non-essential functions and the related processing of personal data. You can adjust your cookie and associated data processing preferences at any time via our "Cookie Settings". Please view our Cookie Policy to learn more about the use of cookies on our website.Manage your cookies I agreeCookie Settings Close Cookie SettingsThis website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as ”Necessary” are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. For our other types of cookies “Advertising & Targeting”, “Analytics” and “Performance”, these help us analyse and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these different types of cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. You can adjust the available sliders to ‘Enabled’ or ‘Disabled’, then click ‘Save and Accept’. View our Cookie Policy page. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncookielawinfo-checkbox-advertising-targetingThe cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Advertising & Targeting".cookielawinfo-checkbox-analyticsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Analytics".cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessaryThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".cookielawinfo-checkbox-performanceThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Performance".PHPSESSIDThis cookie is native to PHP applications. The cookie is used to store and identify a users' unique session ID for the purpose of managing user session on the website. The cookie is a session cookies and is deleted when all the browser windows are closed.viewed_cookie_policyThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data.zmember_loggedThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls whether you are able to see content which is only available to logged in users. Performance performancePerformance cookies are includes cookies that deliver enhanced functionalities of the website, such as caching. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncf_ob_infoThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and, in conjunction with the cookie 'cf_use_ob', is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.cf_use_obThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.free_subscription_onlyThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls which types of content you are able to access.ls_smartpushThis cookie is set by Litespeed Server and allows the server to store settings to help improve performance of the site.one_signal_sdk_dbThis cookie is set by OneSignal push notifications and is used for storing user preferences in connection with their notification permission status.YSCThis cookie is set by Youtube and is used to track the views of embedded videos. Analytics analyticsAnalytics cookies collect information about your use of the content, and in combination with previously collected information, are used to measure, understand, and report on your usage of this website.CookieDescriptionbcookieThis cookie is set by LinkedIn. The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.GPSThis cookie is set by YouTube and registers a unique ID for tracking users based on their geographical locationlangThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.lidcThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.lisscThis cookie is set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.vuidWe embed videos from our official Vimeo channel. When you press play, Vimeo will drop third party cookies to enable the video to play and to see how long a viewer has watched the video. This cookie does not track individuals.wow.anonymousIdThis cookie is set by Spotler and tracks an anonymous visitor ID.wow.scheduleThis cookie is set by Spotler and enables it to track the Load Balance Session Queue.wow.sessionThis cookie is set by Spotler to track the Internet Information Services (IIS) session state.wow.utmvaluesThis cookie is set by Spotler and stores the UTM values for the session. UTM values are specific text strings that are appended to URLs that allow Communigator to track the URLs and the UTM values when they get clicked on._gaThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. It stores information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors._gatThis cookies is set by Google Universal Analytics to throttle the request rate to limit the collection of data on high traffic sites._gidThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visited in an anonymous form. Advertising & Targeting advertising-targetingAdvertising and targeting cookies help us provide our visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns.CookieDescriptionadvanced_ads_browser_widthThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the browser width.advanced_ads_page_impressionsThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the number of previous page impressions.advanced_ads_pro_server_infoThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets geo-location, user role and user capabilities. It is used by cache busting in Advanced Ads Pro when the appropriate visitor conditions are used.advanced_ads_pro_visitor_referrerThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets the referrer URL.bscookieThis cookie is a browser ID cookie set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.IDEThis cookie is set by Google DoubleClick and stores information about how the user uses the website and any other advertisement before visiting the website. This is used to present users with ads that are relevant to them according to the user profile.li_sugrThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used for tracking.UserMatchHistoryThis cookie is set by Linkedin and is used to track visitors on multiple websites, in order to present relevant advertisement based on the visitor's preferences.VISITOR_INFO1_LIVEThis cookie is set by YouTube. Used to track the information of the embedded YouTube videos on a website. Save & AcceptPeptidic defective interfering gene nanoparticles against Omicron, Delta SARS-CoV-2 variants and influenza A virus in vivo | Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature signal transduction and targeted therapy articles article Peptidic defective interfering gene nanoparticles against Omicron, Delta SARS-CoV-2 variants and influenza A virus in vivo Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 03 August 2022 Peptidic defective interfering gene nanoparticles against Omicron, Delta SARS-CoV-2 variants and influenza A virus in vivo Hanjun Zhao1,2,3,4, Chuyuan Zhang2, Hoiyan Lam2, Xinjie Meng2,3, Zheng Peng2, Man Lung Yeung1,2,3,4, Jasper Fuk-Woo Chan ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6336-66571,2,3,4,5,6, Kelvin Kai-Wang To ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1921-58241,2,3,4,5,6 & …Kwok-Yung Yuen1,2,3,4,5,6 Show authors Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy volume 7, Article number: 266 (2022) Cite this article 2075 Accesses 4 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Drug deliveryMicrobiology AbstractDefective interfering genes (DIGs) are short viral genomes and interfere with wild-type viral replication. Here, we demonstrate that the new designed SARS-CoV-2 DIG (CD3600) can significantly inhibit the replication of SARS-CoV-2 including Alpha, Delta, Kappa and Omicron variants in human HK-2 cells and influenza DIG (PAD4) can significantly inhibit influenza virus replication in human A549 cells. One dose of influenza DIGs prophylactically protects 90% mice from lethal challenge of A(H1N1)pdm09 virus and CD3600 inhibits SARS-CoV-2 replication in hamster lungs when DIGs are administrated to lungs one day before viral challenge. To further investigate the gene delivery vector in the respiratory tract, a peptidic TAT2-P1&LAH4, which can package genes to form small spherical nanoparticles with high endosomal escape ability, is demonstrated to dramatically increase gene expression in the lung airway. TAT2-P1&LAH4, with the dual-functional TAT2-P1 (gene-delivery and antiviral), can deliver CD3600 to significantly inhibit the replication of Delta and Omicron SARS-CoV-2 in hamster lungs. This peptide-based nanoparticle system can effectively transfect genes in lungs and deliver DIGs to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 variants and influenza virus in vivo, which provides the new insight into the drug delivery system for gene therapy against respiratory viruses. Similar content being viewed by others Molecular targeting of vulnerable RNA sequences in SARS CoV-2: identifying clinical feasibility Article 12 November 2020 A trifunctional peptide broadly inhibits SARS-CoV-2 Delta and Omicron variants in hamsters Article Open access 30 June 2022 An intranasal ASO therapeutic targeting SARS-CoV-2 Article Open access 03 August 2022 IntroductionClinical studies showed that early treatment or prophylactic treatment is more effective for controlling the viral respiratory diseases such as influenza. Apart from the therapeutic antivirals being developed, the prophylactic antivirals play important roles in preventing transmission, especially in outbreak settings. Vaccination is currently the most effective strategy in preventing viral infection, but vaccine effectiveness was virus strain dependent and varied from 10–60% protection for influenza.1 Vaccine effectiveness of SARS-CoV-2 has been affected by the variants.2,3 The onset of effective vaccine protection requires at least two weeks to generate sufficient titers of neutralizing antibodies. The neuraminidase inhibitors (zanamivir and oseltamivir) against influenza viruses are approved for prophylaxis, but both need to be administrated daily and there are concerns about drug resistance if these neuraminidase inhibitors are frequently used for prophylaxis. Antivirals directly targeting the virus, such as remdesivir, only showed benefits for patients with the mild or moderate symptoms,4,5,6 which implicates that early treatment or prophylactic treatment should be considered for COVID-19 cases. Thus, it is necessary to develop prophylactic antivirals with new antiviral mechanism and broad-spectrum antiviral efficacy for emerging influenza virus and coronavirus, especially for people with risk factors of susceptibility and/or severe diseases.Defective interfering genes (DIGs) are viral genes with internal deletion.7 Influenza DIGs could inhibit the replication of the cognate full-length viral RNA and the antiviral activity is affected by DIG lengths and the origin of DIGs.8,9,10,11,12 The identification of sub-genomic RNAs of coronaviruses implicated that coronaviruses could generate defective genes during viral replication. However, it is not clear which DIG works best for inhibiting influenza virus and coronavirus in vitro and in vivo. We have previously found that influenza defective interfering genes (DIG-3) delivered by TAT-P1 in mouse lungs could protect mice from influenza A virus infection.12 DIG antiviral activity in lungs was related to the antiviral activity of DIGs and the transfection efficiency of DIGs in the lung airway. The gene transfection mediated by HIV TAT peptide is mainly through the endocytosis, including clathrin-mediated endocytosis,13 caveolae/lipid-raft-mediated endocytosis,14 micropinocytosis,15 and endocytosis independent pathways.16 In the airway and lungs, the passive cellular uptakes of nanoparticles are mainly mediated through endocytosis pathways and affected by the sizes of nanoparticles because of the barrier effect from airway mucus.17,18,19 One feasible way to increase the uptake efficiency in the airway and lung is to optimize the nanoparticle size to reduce the barrier effect of mucus so as to overcome the limit set by the average pore sizes (100–200 nm) in the airway mucus.18,20,21 Although nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems have been studied for decades, a simple gene delivery system with a reproducible and scalable product is needed for gene therapy in the lung airway.In this study, we first investigated that the defective interfering gene (CD3600) designed from SARS-CoV-2 significantly inhibited the replication of SARS-CoV-2 variants in human HK-2 cells, which indicated that DIG from non-segmented RNA virus could significantly inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication. We also demonstrated that a defective interfering influenza PA gene (PAD4) showed the best antiviral activity in human A549 cells when compared with twelve other DIGs from polymerase genes of segmented-RNA influenza virus. Treatment of mice with the combination of three defective interfering gene DIG-4 (including PAD4, PB1D3, and PB2D3) conferred the best protection against A(H1N1)pdm09 virus when compared with that of mice treated by PAD4 or DIG-3. A single dose of peptidic nanoparticle TAT2-P1/DIG-4 could efficiently protect 90% mice when TAT2-P1/DIG-4 was given to mice at 3-day before A(H1N1)pdm09 challenge. A single dose of peptidic nanoparticle TAT2-P1/CD3600 could inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication in hamsters when CD3600 was given to hamster lungs at 1-day before viral challenge. To investigate the delivery vector for gene therapy in lungs, we further developed a peptidic TAT2-P1&LAH4, which significantly increased luciferase expression in lungs, could deliver CD3600 to broadly inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication of Delta and Omicron variants in hamster lungs. Results from these experiments demonstrated that peptidic nanoparticle DIGs could provide pre-exposure protection on animals infected with influenza virus or SARS-CoV-2. Because of the low possibility of DIGs inducing drug-resistant virus22,23 and less metabolic toxicity of peptide, peptidic DIG nanoparticles can circumvent the drug-resistance problems with broad-spectrum antiviral activities against SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus.ResultsCoronavirus DIGs inhibited the replication of SARS-CoV-2 in human HK-2 cellsTo identify DIGs against SARS-CoV-2, according to the possible packaging sequences of coronaviruses including 5’-end, sequences in ORF1b (nsp15), and 3’-end sequences,24,25,26,27 we constructed coronavirus DIGs (CD2100 and CD3600) which included the 5’-end sequences, internal sequences in ORF 1b and the 3’-end sequences of SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 1). We first tested the gene expression of DIGs transfected into human cell lines, including 293 T, Calu-3 and HK-2. High RNA levels of CD2100 and CD3600 were demonstrated in transfected HK-2 cell line, similar to that of RNA expression in 293 T cells (Fig. 1b). Thus, we selected HK-228 for the antiviral assay of CD2100 and CD3600 against SARS-CoV-2. After DIG transfection in HK-2 cells, SARS-CoV-2 was added to cells for infection. CD3600 and CD2100 significantly inhibited SARS-CoV-2 replication when compared with empty vector PHW (Fig. 1c) without obvious cytotoxicity (Supplementary Fig. 1). CD3600 showed significantly better antiviral activity than that of CD2100. To further confirm the antiviral efficacy of CD3600 in cells, we showed that CD3600 significantly inhibited SARS-CoV-2 replication in the dose-dependent manner when compared with PHW (Fig. 1d).Fig. 1SARS-CoV-2 DIG construction, expression and antiviral activity in cells. a Construction of SARS-CoV-2 DIG (CD2100 and CD3600). Dotted lines show the internal deletion in the wild-type HKU001a (SARS-CoV-2). The three solid-line sequences linked together were inserted into phw2000 vector to generate CD2100 and CD3600. b DIG RNA expression in 293 T, Calu-3 and HK-2 cells (n = 3). After 24 h plasmid transfection, RNA expression in cells was measured by RT-qPCR. c The antiviral activity of DIG (1.0 µg ml−1) in HK-2 cells (n > 6). SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.1.63) was added to DIG-transfected cells for viral replication. At 48 h post infection, the viral titers in cell supernatants were measured by plaque assay. d Does-dependent antiviral activity of CD3600. CD3600 or PHW (1.0 µg, 0.5 µg, or 0.25 µg ml−1) were transfected to HK-2 cells one day before viral infection. Viral titers in cell supernatants were measured at 48 h post infection. e, f Antiviral activity of CD3600 during multi-cycle viral replication after viral passage (n = 3). The supernatant viruses (50 PFU) collected from HK-2 cells, transfected with PHW or CD3600 and then infected with SARS-CoV-2, were passaged in VeroE6-TMPRSS2 (VeroE6-T) cells. The viral titers in supernatants were determined at 24 h and 72 h post infection. g Supernatant CD3600 RNA copies of PHW- and CD3600-treated virus (n = 3) were determined at 72 h post infection. h Representative images of viral particles of PHW- or CD3600-treated SARS-CoV-2. Viruses (50 PFU of PHW or CD3600) were cultured in VeroE6-T and then were harvested at 72 h post infection for RT-qPCR and TEM assay. White arrows indicated the small spherical particles. Black arrows indicated the wild-type virus. Scale bars, 200 nm. i The broad-spectrum antiviral activity of CD3600 (0.5 µg ml−1) against SARS-CoV-2 variants in HK-2 cells (n = 4). PFU (%) was the plaque number of CD3600-treated virus normalized to the plaque number of PHW-treated virus. Data were presented as mean ± SD of independent biological samples. * indicates P < 0.05 and ** indicates P < 0.01. P values were calculated by the two-tailed Student’s t testFull size imageIn order to test if coronavirus DIG could exert antiviral activity in multiple growth cycles which can contribute to the expanded antiviral activity of DIG, we demonstrated that virus in supernatants of cells treated with CD3600 showed significantly less viral replication at 24 h and 72 h post infection during viral passages in VeroE6/TMPRSS2 cells when compared with non-DIG empty vector (PHW) control (Fig. 1e, f). These indicated that the transfected CD3600 could exert extended activity against SARS-CoV-2 replication even during viral passages in multiple growth cycles. To further investigate the presence of CD3600 defective virus in passaged supernatants in VeroE6/TMPRSS2 cells, we cultured the same PFU of PHW-treated virus and CD3600-treated virus and collected the supernatants at 72 h post infection for ultracentrifugation to recover the virus for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) assay (Fig. 1g and Supplementary Fig. 2). CD3600-treated cell culture supernatants showed more small spherical particles (<40 nm) when compared with PHW-treated cell culture supernatants (100–150 nm), which indicated that treatment with CD3600 could led to the packaging of smaller particles with less plaque form unit (Fig. 1f). As expected, RT-qPCR showed high CD3600 RNA copies in the supernatants (Fig. 1g) of CD3600-treated virus when compared with PHW-treated virus. These results indicated that CD3600 could be packaged to show the extended antiviral activity in the subsequent virus passage. Moreover, we demonstrated the broad antiviral activity of CD3600 against SARS-CoV-2 variants (Fig. 1i), which was consistent with the antiviral mechanism of DIG against virus by consuming the packaging components of viral replication to competitively inhibit wild-type viral RNA packaging without targeting a specific viral protein. In conclusion, these results indicated that CoV-DIG with the 5’-end, internal sequence in ORF1b, and 3’-end of SARS-CoV-2 could broadly inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication by maintaining its self-sustaining DIG production in multiple growth cycles.The optimal DIG against influenza virus in A549 cells and in miceTo identify the potent antiviral DIG against influenza virus, based on our previous DIGs (PAD3, PB1D3 and PB2D3),12 we here designed and constructed ten new DIGs with diverse gene lengths at 3’ and 5’ ends of polymerase genes ranging from 150 nt to 600 nt (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Table 2 and Supplementary Table 3). Each DIG was transfected into A549 cells and then cells were infected with H7N7 virus at 24 h post transfection. We used H7N7 virus which did not require trypsin for virus culture in A549 cells (Fig. 2b). The PAD4, which consists of 450 nt at 3’ and 5’ end of PA gene segment, exhibited the most potent antiviral activity with 4 log reduction of viral load, which was 4 to 10 folds lower than that of PAD3, PB1D3 and PB2D3 used in the previous study.12 The PB2D3, PB1D3, PAD2, and PAD3 showed potent antiviral activity with 2–3 log inhibition of viral replication. The PB2D2, PB2D4, PB1D2, PB1D4, and PAD5 showed weak antiviral activity (Fig. 2b). The PB2D1, PB1D1, and PAD1 with ~150 nt at 3’ and 5’ ends did not show significant antiviral activity, which is consistent with the fact that the polymerase genes need at least 150 nt at 5’ end for viral gene packaging, as demonstrated by previous studies.9,29 These data indicated that PAD4 with 450 nt at 3’ and 5’ ends showed the best antiviral activity. The PB2D3 with 300 nt and PB1D3 with 300 nt at 3’ and 5’ ends showed better antiviral activity than those with shorter or longer DIGs, respectively. Next, we further tested and compared the antiviral activity of single PAD4 with two combinational DIGs (Fig. 2c) in different concentrations. The PAD4 alone showed more potent antiviral activity with > 5-fold lower viral load than that of DIG-3 (the combination of PAD3, PB1D3, and PB2D3) or the combination of DIG-4 (PAD4, PB1D3, and PB2D3) in a dose-dependent manner.Fig. 2The design of diverse lengths of influenza DIGs and the antiviral efficiency of DIGs. a Construction of defective interfering genes (DIGs). The diverse defective interfering (DI) genes of DI-PA, DI-PB1 and DI-PB2 with internal deletion were generated by fusion PCR. Dotted lines show the internal deletion in wild-type viral polymerase genes. The solid-line sequences of shortened viral polymerase gene PA, PB1 and PB2 were inserted into phw2000 vector, respectively. b The antiviral activity of single DIG against A(H7N7) virus in A549 cells. c The dose-dependent antiviral efficiency of single PAD4 and combinational DIG-3 (including PAD3, PB2D3, and PB1D3) and DIG-4 (including PAD4, PB2D3, and PB1D3). The plasmid DIG or empty vector (PHW) with indicated concentrations were transfected into A549 cells and then cells were infected by H7N7 virus at 24 h post transfection. Viral titers in cell supernatants were measured by plaque assay at 48 h post infection. Data were presented as mean ± SD of at least three independent experiments. * indicates P < 0.05 and ** indicates P < 0.01. P values were calculated by the two-tailed Student’s t test. d The protection of two doses of DIG on A(H1N1)-infected mice. DIG-4 (5 µg/mouse, n = 5), PAD4 (5 µg/mouse, n = 5), DIG-3 (5 µg/mouse, n = 5), or empty vector (PHW, 5 µg/mouse, n = 5) packaged by TAT-P1 were intratracheally inoculated into mice at 48 h and 24 h before viral challenge. e The protection of one dose DIG on A(H1N1)-infected mice. DIG-4 (5 µg/mouse, n = 10), PAD4 (5 µg/mouse, n = 10), DIG-3 (5 µg/mouse, n = 10), or PHW (5 µg/mouse, n = 10) packaged by TAT-P1 were intratracheally inoculated into mice at 24 h before viral challenge. Survivals were generated from 10 mice in each group. P values were calculated by Gehan–Breslow–Wilcoxon testFull size imageConsidering multiple DIGs having higher likelihood to interfere with multiple cognate full-length genes in vivo, we selected DIG-4, single PAD4, and DIG-3 to evaluate the antiviral efficacy in mice. Theoretically, three DIGs can generate seven types of defective interfering influenza viruses, which might have more likelihood to inhibit wild-type virus replication than that of single DIG in mouse lungs. To transfect DIG in vivo, DIGs packaged by TAT-P1 were intratracheally inoculated to mice. Two doses of DIG-4, single PAD4, or DIG-3, given at 48 h and 24 h prior to A(H1N1)pdm09 infection, could protect 100%, 80%, and 80% mice from lethal challenge by A(H1N1)pdm09 virus, respectively (Fig. 2d), which was significantly better than that of empty plasmid PHW (0%). For 1-dose regimen given intratracheally at 24 h prior to infection (Fig. 2e), the survival rate of mice receiving DIG-4 (90%) was significantly higher than those receiving single PAD4 (50%) or DIG-3 (50%). DIG-4 could significantly reduce body weight loss of mice when compared with PHW (Supplementary Fig. 3). The survival data indicated that combinational DIG-4 can provide better protection than the single PAD4 or DIG-3 in mice.TAT2-P1 showed better gene delivery efficiency in lung tissuesIn order to show better antiviral activity of DIG in vivo, we tried to identify a TAT-peptide based vector with better transfection efficiency in vivo. Previous studies indicated that TAT2 (RKKRRQRRR) is a shorter form of TAT which had better transduction efficiency than that of TAT (YGRKKRRQRRR) in vitro.30,31 Therefore, we constructed a TAT2-P1 vector for evaluating the transfection efficiency in vitro when compared with TAT-P1 (Supplementary Table 4). DNA binding ability of these peptide-based vectors was determined using gel retardation assay (Supplementary Fig. 4a). When the weight ratios of peptide to plasmid DNA were more than 2, plasmid DNA could be completely packaged by these vectors. The in vitro transfection results indicated that TAT-P1 and TAT2-P1 showed similar transfection in 293 T cells (Supplementary Fig. 4b). Next, to assess the DNA transfection efficiency of these vectors in vivo, pCMV-Luc packaged by TAT-P1, TAT2-P1 or in vivo jetPEI was intratracheally inoculated into mice, and the luciferase was measured at 24 h post transfection. TAT2-P1 showed significantly better transfection efficiency in mouse lungs than that of TAT-P1 (Fig. 3a) and TAT2-P1 caused less body weight loss than that of TAT-P1 in mice (Supplementary Fig. 5).Fig. 3Gene transfection efficiency of TAT2-P1 in vivo. a The transfection efficiency of TAT-P1, TAT2-P1, and in vivo jetPEI in mouse lungs. The pCMV-Luc was packaged by the indicated vectors with the weight ratio (4:1) of peptide:DNA. The luciferase expression in mouse lungs was measured at 24 h post transfection. Luciferase expression in mouse lungs was normalized to TAT-P1 (1000). Mock means mice treated with 5% glucose without pCMV-Luc. * indicates P < 0.05 and ** indicates P < 0. b Hydrodynamic diameter of nanoparticles of plasmid DNA packaged by indicated vectors. Sizes were measured by DynaPro Plate Reader. Data were presented as mean ± SD of six independent experiments. c The representative pictures of transmission electron micrographs (TEM) of nanoparticles. Peptides (1 mg ml−1 or 2 mg ml−1 for TAT2-P1-2mg) were mixed with equal volume of plasmid DNA (0.25 mg ml−1 or 0.5 mg ml−1) for measuring hydrodynamic diameter or for TEM negative staining. Scale bars, 200 nm. d The expression of luciferase in mouse lungs transfected with nanoparticle TAT2-P1/pCMV-Luc (1 mg ml−1/0.25 mg ml−1) and TAT2-P1/pCMV-Luc (2 mg ml−1/0.5 mg ml−1), respectively. Data were presented as mean ± SD of more than four mice in each group. e Representative image of In Vivo Imaging System showed decreased luciferase expression of pCMV-Luc packaged by 2 mg ml−1 of TAT2-P1 (TAT2-P1-2mg) in mouse lungs. The same amount of TAT2-P1/pCMV-Luc was inoculated to corresponding mouse lungs at 24 h before measuring luciferase expression. Mock, mouse lungs inoculated with TAT2-P1. * indicates P < 0.05. P values were calculated by the two-tailed Student’s t testFull size imageTo identify the mechanism of better transfection efficiency of TAT2-P1 in vivo, we measured the particle sizes of these peptide/pCMV-Luc particles. The pCMV-Luc packaged by TAT2-P1 could form smaller particles than that of TAT-P1 (Fig. 3b). TEM pictures of these nanoparticles (Fig. 3c) showed that the particles formed by TAT2-P1 were uniform spherical nanoparticles, which could be beneficial to penetrate the airway mucosal barrier.17,18 The higher transfection efficiency of TAT2-P1 in mouse lungs should be related to the small particle sizes but not due to the transmission efficiency in cells because TAT2-P1 and TAT-P1 showed similar transfection efficiency in cells (Supplementary Fig. 4b). In order to directly confirm the particle size significantly affecting the gene delivery of TAT2-P1 in lungs, we made TAT2-P1/pCMV-Luc with different sizes by mixing TAT2-P1 with DNA in different concentrations but with the same amount of peptide/DNA and ratio (4:1). As shown in Fig. 3b, c, the particle size of TAT2-P1/pCMV-Luc (2 mg ml−1/0.5 mg ml−1) was bigger (~190 nm) than that (~130 nm) of TAT2-P1/pCMV-Luc (1 mg ml−1/0.25 mg ml−1). Furthermore, pCMV-Luc packaged by TAT2-P1 (1 mg ml−1) showed significantly higher transfection efficiency than that of pCMV-Luc packaged by TAT2-P1 (2 mg ml−1) in mouse lungs (Fig. 3d, e), but the transfection efficiency of TAT2-P1 (2 mg ml−1) was similar as TAT2-P1 (1 mg ml−1) in 293 T cells (Supplementary Fig. 6). These data indicated that the higher transfection efficiency of plasmid DNA packaged by TAT2-P1 (1 mg ml−1) than that of TAT2-P1 (2 mg ml−1) in mouse lungs was not due to the difference of DNA package efficiency, but due to the small nanoparticles. Collectively, these results demonstrated that TAT2-P1/DNA caused less body weight loss of mice and could form uniform spherical nanoparticles less than 140 nm, which would penetrate the barrier of the average pore sizes (100–200 nm) in airway mucus so as to increase DNA uptakes for high gene expression in the lung airway.Antiviral activity of DIGs against influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2To investigate prophylactic protection of DIG in vivo, a single dose of TAT2-P1/DIG-4 was given to influenza-infected mice 3-day before viral challenge. The survival (90%) of mice treated with single dose of TAT2-P1/DIG-4 was higher than that of mice treated with a single dose of zanamivir (20%) or TAT2-P1/PHW (0%, negative control) (Fig. 4a). Significantly less body weight loss was observed in TAT2-P1/DIG-4 treated mice from day 2 to day 8 when compared with TAT2-P1/PHW group (Fig. 4b). To test the effectiveness of zanamivir, a single dose of zanamivir administrated to mice one day before viral challenge could protect 90% mice (Supplementary Fig. 7), which was consistent with the half-life time of zanamivir.32 The effective antiviral activity of TAT2-P1/DIG-4 was further demonstrated by the reduced viral loads in mouse lungs when compared with viral loads in mice treated with TAT2-P1/PHW (Fig. 4c). These results provided the evidence of using TAT2-P1/DIG as a prophylactic antiviral against influenza virus.Fig. 4One dose of TAT2-P1/DIG showed rapid-onset prophylactic protection on infected animals. a The protective efficacy of antivirals administrated to mouse lungs 3-day before A(H1N1)pdm09 virus challenge. TAT2-P1/DIG-4 (20 µg/5 µg, n = 10), zanamivir (40 µg, n = 5), or TAT2-P1/PHW (20 µg/5 µg, n = 5) were intratracheally inoculated into corresponding mice 3-day before A(H1N1)pdm09 virus challenge. b The body weight changes of infected mice corresponding to (a). c Viral loads in H1N1-infected mouse lungs treated with TAT2-P1/PHW or TAT2-P1/DIG-4 at 3-day before virus challenge. Viral titers were measured at 2-day post infection by plaque assay. d CD3600 could inhibit delta SARS-CoV-2 replication in hamster lungs. TAT2-P1/CD3600 (50 µg/12.5 µg, CD3600, n = 4) was inoculated to hamster lungs at day 1 before SARS-CoV-2 (Delta) challenge. TAT2-P1/PHW (PHW, n = 5) was given to hamster lungs at day 1 before viral challenges. Lung tissues were collected at 2-day post infection for measuring viral loads by plaque assay. Data were presented as mean ± SD of 4–5 hamsters in each group. * indicates P < 0.05, calculated by the two-tailed Student’s t testFull size imageTo evaluate the in vivo antiviral activity of CD3600 against SARS-CoV-2, TAT2-P1/CD3600 was inoculated into hamster lungs at 1-day before SARS-CoV-2 inoculation. Because of the non-lethal model of hamsters for SARS-CoV-2 infection and the peak viral titer emerged at 2-day post infection in hamster lungs,33,34 viral titers in hamster lungs were measured by plaque assay at 2-day post infection. The result showed that CD3600 inhibited SARS-CoV-2 replication in hamster lungs when compared with PHW (Fig. 4d). In conclusion, these in vivo data showed that TAT2-P1 could deliver DIGs in the lung airway to provide prophylactic protection on mice against influenza A virus and on hamsters against SARS-CoV-2 replication.TAT2-P1&LAH4 showed high-efficiency gene transfection in lung tissuesTo further investigate peptide-based vectors for gene delivery in the lung airway, we demonstrated that peptide LAH435 showed significantly higher transfection efficiency than TAT2-P1 in cells (Fig. 5a) with TC50 higher than 125 μg ml−1 (Supplementary Fig. 8), but significantly lower transfection efficiency than TAT2-P1 in lung tissues (Fig. 5b). The high transfection efficiency in cells indicated that the high endosomal escape ability of LAH4-packaged plasmids demonstrated by previous study.35 However, the low transfection efficiency in lung tissues might be due to the big size of LAH4-nanoparticles (Fig. 5c) which were not spherical in TEM pictures (Supplementary Fig. 9). Because the size and the shape could be the barrier to pass the mucosal layer in lung tissues,17,18,36 our hypothesis was that we might increase the transfection efficiency by using TAT2-P1 plus LAH4 which could form the small spherical nanoparticles with high endosomal escape ability. When the ratio of TAT2-P1:LAH4 was 4:1 (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Fig. 9), TAT2-P1&LAH4-pCMV could form spherical nanoparticles (~140 nm). The transfection efficiency (4:1) was significantly higher than that of TAT2-P1 in cells (Fig. 5a) and the TAT2-P1&LAH4 nanoparticles could be stable in room temperature for more than 72 h (Supplementary Fig. 10). Importantly, TAT2-P1&LAH4 showed significantly higher transfection efficacy in mouse lungs than that of TAT2-P1 or LAH4 only (Fig. 5b). These results further demonstrated that small nanoparticle sizes (TAT2-P1&LAH4) were important for penetrating airway mucus to increase gene expression in lungs.Fig. 5TAT2-P1&LAH4 enhanced the gene expression and inhibited SARS-CoV-2 variants in vivo. a The luciferase expression in 293 T cells. The pCMV-Luc was packaged by the indicated vectors (TAT2-P1, LAH4, and TAT2-P1:LAH4 = 3: 2, 4:1 or 9:1) and was transfected into 293 T cells (n = 4). b The luciferase expression in mouse lungs (n = 4). The pCMV-Luc was packaged by the indicated vectors and was inoculated to mouse lungs. The expression of luciferase in mouse lungs was detected at 24 h post transfection. c Peptidic nanoparticle sizes of plasmids packaged by the indicated vectors (n = 4). * indicates P < 0.05 and ** indicates P < 0.01. d TAT2-P1&LAH4 could deliver CD3600 to significantly inhibit Omicron (n = 3) variant replication in hamster lungs. One dose of CD3600 was intratracheally inoculated to hamster lungs at 1-day before viral challenge. Viral loads in hamster lungs were measured at 2-day post infection. e TAT2-P1 significantly inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection (n = 4) in VeroE6 cells. SARS-CoV-2 treated by indicated peptides for plaque reduction assay. PFU (%) was the plaque number of peptide-treated virus normalized to the plaque number of untreated virus. ** indicates P < 0.01. f Two doses of PBS (n = 4), TAT2-P1 (n = 3), TAT2-P1&LAH4 with CD3600 (n = 4) or PHW (n = 3) were given to hamster lungs at 1-day before and 8 h after Omicron SARS-CoV-2 infection. g PBS (n = 4) or TAT2-P1&LAH4 with CD3600 (n = 4) were given to hamster lungs at 1-day before and 8 h after Delta SARS-CoV-2 infection. Viral loads were measured at 2-day post infection. * indicates P < 0.05 and ** indicates P < 0.01. P values were calculated by the two-tailed Student’s t testFull size imageTAT2-P1&LAH4/CD3600 inhibited SARS-CoV-2 variants in hamstersWe first demonstrated that TAT2-P1&LAH4/CD3600 inhibited the replication of SARS-CoV-2 (Omicron) in hamster lungs when one dose was given to hamsters at one day before viral challenge (Fig. 4d). Our previous study showed that defensin derived peptide P9R could inhibit SARS-CoV-2.37 P1 is derived from P9R (Supplementary Table 4). We further demonstrated that P1 and TAT2-P1 significantly inhibited SARS-CoV-2 replication (Fig. 5e). When two doses of TAT2-P1&LAH4/CD3600 were given to hamster lungs at 1-day before and 8-hour after SARS-CoV-2 challenge, TAT2-P1&LAH4/CD3600 could more effectively inhibit SARS-CoV-2 Omicron replication in hamster lungs (Fig. 5f). TAT2-P1&LAH4-PHW also inhibited the replication of SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 5g), which could be attributed to the antiviral activity of TAT2-P1 against SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 5e, f). The dual function of TAT2-P1 (gene-delivery and antiviral) conferred TAT2-P1&LAH4/CD3600 to show more potent antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 in vivo. Moreover, we demonstrated that two doses of TAT2-P1&LAH4/CD3600 significantly inhibited the replication of Delta SARS-CoV-2 in hamster lungs (Fig. 5f). The NP staining further indicated that CD3600 could reduce Omicron and Delta variant replication (Supplementary Fig. 11) in hamster lungs. These results indicated that peptidic TAT2-P1&LAH4 nanoparticles with the advantages of small spherical particles and high efficiency of endosomal escape ability could effectively penetrate airway mucus to express gene in the lung airway and deliver DIG to significantly inhibit the replication of SARS-CoV-2 variants in hamster lungs.DiscussionIn this study, we designed new defective interfering genes (DIGs) of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A virus and investigated the antiviral activity of DIGs against SARS-CoV-2 variants and influenza A virus. Peptidic DIG nanoparticles with the high efficiency of gene delivery in the lung airway could significantly inhibit SARS-CoV-2 variants and influenza A virus in animal models. With the development of high-efficient gene delivery vectors, DIGs can serve as broad-spectrum antivirals with high barrier to drug resistance.22For respiratory virus diseases, vaccination is the most effective strategy for prevention. Short of vaccination, the early initiation of antiviral treatment is important for better outcome in patients, which is clearly shown in COVID-19 and influenza. Currently, prophylactic drugs for pre-exposure and post-exposure of influenza virus are recommended by WHO for daily administration for 10 days despite the concern of drug resistance. No widely available and effective drug is yet recommended for the prophylaxis of coronavirus.38,39 Thus, it is important to identify antivirals with new antiviral mechanism for pre- or post-exposure use, which should have the characteristics of rapid-onset and low possibility to induce drug resistant virus. For influenza A virus, one dose of DIG-4 or zanamivir could show prophylactic protection on infected mice when given one day prior to viral challenge. However, one dose of zanamivir could not provide the same protection as DIG-4 for three-day prophylactic protection in our experiments, which indicated that DIG-4 could have the long-term prophylactic antiviral activity against influenza virus.SARS-CoV-2 vaccines have been found to be promising in controlling COVID-19 in many countries. Due to vaccine hesitancy and variants of concern, antivirals for SARS-CoV-2 are also needed as an alternative approach for the better control of SARS-CoV-2 infection and reduction of mortality. Recently, a therapeutic interfering particle showed promising antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2,22 which used the lipid nanoparticles as the RNA delivery vector with different design of interfering genome when compared with our study using peptide-DIG nanoparticles. In this study, TAT2-P1&LAH4/CD3600 showed broad activity against SARS-CoV-2 variants in hamsters. The high transfection efficiency of TAT2-P1&LAH4 in the lung airway could be attributed to the small nanoparticle sizes adjusted by TAT2-P1 for better penetration in the airway mucus and the high endosomal escape ability adjusted by LAH4 for gene release. The development of peptide-based gene vectors, with less metabolic toxicity, can provide a promising system for the gene therapy in the lung airway. The toxicity testing showed that peptide-DIG nanoparticles did not show obvious toxicity in vitro (Supplementary Fig. 1) and could slightly reduce the body weight after day 1 inoculation and then the body weight could recover after day 3 inoculation (Supplementary Fig. 5). Further studies to discover peptide vectors causing less or no body weight loss and in vivo safety studies are valuable.The shorter CD2100 showed less activity than that of CD3600 against SARS-CoV-2, and PAD4 showed the most potent activity against influenza A virus in vitro. These results indicated that the length of DIGs can determine the effectiveness of competitively inhibiting wild-type viral RNA replication.40 Apart from optimizing gene delivery system in the lung airway, further studies on DIGs might identify DIGs with more potent activity against SARS-CoV-2. In addition, the small spherical particles in the supernatants of CD3600-treated virus could show inhibition on viral replication in multiple viral growth cycles, which indicated that the small spherical particles could be virus-like particles with infectious activity and might have immunogenic activity in vivo. Further studies are warranted to investigate the potential possibility against SARS-CoV-2.Previous studies showed that influenza defective interfering virus did not rely on interferon response to protect influenza challenged mice and could protect elderly mice.41,42 Also, the antiviral activity of influenza DIG was not relying on DIG protein expression.8 The rapid-onset of prophylactic antiviral activity of peptide-DIG nanoparticles against influenza virus in mice and SARS-CoV-2 in hamsters also implicated that the antiviral activity of DIG relies on the competitively inhibition on wild-type viral replication. The broad-spectrum antiviral activities of influenza DIG against different influenza A viruses and CD3600 against SARS-CoV-2 variants suggest that antiviral DIG is less prone to develop viral resistance.8,22,23 These peptide-DIG nanoparticles can be a potential candidate for providing the rapid-onset prophylactic protection with high barriers to drug resistance against influenza A virus and SARS-CoV-2 variants.Material and methodsAnimal experimentsAnimal experiments in this study were evaluated and approved by the Committee on the Use of Live Animals in Teaching and Research of the University of Hong Kong.Cell and virus culturesMadin Darby canine kidney (MDCK, CCL-34), A549 (CCL-185), 293 T (CRL-3216), VeroE6 (CRL-1586), Calu-3 (HTB-55),43 VeroE6-TMPRSS2 (VeroE6-T),and HK-2 (CRL-2190)28 cells from ATCC were cultured in Dulbecco minimal essential medium (MEM), DMEM or DMEM-F12K with 5–10 % fetal bovine serum, 100 μg ml−1 streptomycin and 100 IU ml−1 penicillin. Viruses used in this study included A/Hong Kong/415742Md/2009 (H1N1),44 A/Netherlands/219/2003 (H7N7),45 and SARS-CoV-2 variants.46,47,48 Influenza A viruses were cultured in MDCK cells, while SARS-CoV-2 variants were cultured in VeroE6 or VeroE6-TMPRSS2 cells,Coronavirus DIG construction and expressionAccording to previous studies which identified the possible packaging genes for coronavirus,24,25,49 we synthesized the 5’-end sequences (~700 and 1200 bp), the internal sequences in ORF1b and the 3’-end sequences of SARS-CoV-2 of HKU-001a (GenBank: MT230904.1, Supplementary Table 1). The synthesized genes were inserted into phw2000 vector to generate plasmid CD2100 and CD3600 for expressing defective genes of SARS-CoV-2. The constructed plasmid DIGs were verified by Sanger sequencing. The CD2100 and CD3600 expression in 293 T, A549 and HK-2 cells were measured by RT-qPCR after the plasmids were transfected into cells at 24 h post transfection. For determining DIG RNA expression, RNA samples were treated by DNase I (QIAGEN, Cat # 79254) and further purified by RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Cat # 74106). The RNA expression levels were detected by RT-qPCR with DIG primers (Supplementary Table 5).Influenza DIG constructionAccording to our previous DIGs having ~300 nt located at the 5’ and 3’ ends,12 we firstly constructed DIGs with ~150 nt and 450 nt located at the 5’ and 3’ ends (Supplementary Table 2 and Supplementary Table 3). Based on the antiviral activities in A549 cells, we further constructed DIGs with about 225 nt and 600 nt at the 3’ and 5’ ends. The wild-type A/WSN/1933 PB2, PB1 and PA genes were used as the templates to generate defective interfering PB2, PB1 and PA genes (DI-PB2, DI-PB1 and DI-PA). Short gene segments at the 5′ and 3’ ends of DIGs were amplified by specific primers (Supplementary Table 6 and Supplementary Table 7). The amplified short gene fragments were fused by fusion PCR50 to generate DI-PB2, DI-PB1 and DI-PA genes using two pairs of primers for each gene (Supplementary Table 6 and Supplementary Table 7). The fused DI-PB2, DI-PB1 and DI-PA genes (Supplementary Table 2 and Supplementary Table 3) were inserted into the phw2000 vector to generate plasmid DIGs of pDI-PA, pDI-PB1, and pDI-PB2, respectively. The constructed plasmid DIGs were verified by sequencing.In vitro DIG transfection and antiviral assayTo test the antiviral activity of DIGs in vitro, plasmid DIGs or empty vector phw2000 (PHW) were transfected into A549 or HK-2 cells by Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen, Cat # 1857483) or GeneJuice (Sigma, Cat # 70967). After 24 h transfection, cells transfection media were replaced by fresh DMEM with 0.005 MOI of A(H7N7) virus or 0.01 MOI of SARS-CoV-2 for infection in A549 (influenza) or HK-2 (SARS-CoV-2) cells. Supernatants viral culture were collected at 48 h post infection for measuring viral titers by plaque assay as what we described previously.44 The antiviral activity of DIG was generated by comparing the viral titers in supernatants of cells transfected with plasmid DIGs or PHW.Peptide synthesisTAT-P1, TAT2-P1, LAH4, P1 and TAT were synthesized by the company of ChinaPeptide (Hefei, China) as shown in Supplementary Table 4. The purity of peptides was >90%. The mass and purity of peptide was verified by mass spectrometry and HPLC.Toxicity assayTo detect the cytotoxicity, the 50% cytotoxic concentration (CC50) of peptide was measured by MTT assay as what we described previously.44 The 293 T or HK-2 cells (3 × 104 cells per well in DMEM) were seeded in 96-well cell culture plate supplemented with 10% FBS. After overnight culture, culture media were replaced with DMEM supplemented with different concentrations of peptides and 1% FBS. After 24 h culture at 37 °C, MTT (10 μl of 5 mg ml−1) was added to cells for incubation at 37 °C for 4 h, and then100 μl of 0.01 M HCl in 10% SDS was added to cells for further incubation at room temperature with shaking overnight. Finally, plates were read at OD570. Cells without peptides were used as the experiment control. The in vivo toxicity of nanoparticles was measured by testing the body weight change of mice intratracheally inoculated with 40 μl of TAT-P1/DNA (20 μg/5 μg) or TAT2-P1/DNA (20 μg/5 μg).Gel retardation assayAccording to the previous study,12 peptide TAT-P1 and TAT2-P1 (1 mg ml−1, 0.5 mg ml−1 and 0.25 mg ml−1) and DNA (0.5 μg) were premixed at various weight ratios in 4 μl of H2O at room temperature for 15 mins. Samples were loaded into a 1.2% w/v agarose gel and gel electrophoresis was performed in TAE buffer at 100 V for 25 min and then the agarose gel was visualized by the ultraviolet (UV) illumination.Hydrodynamic sizes of nanoparticlesAccording to the previous study,12 peptides and DNA were mixed at various weight ratios. Peptides and plasmid DNA were prepared separately in H2O and then equal volumes of peptides and DNA were mixed together to give a final volume of 4 μl containing 0.5 μg of plasmid and DNA. After the incubation of the complexes at room temperature for 15 min, the 4 μl complexes were diluted to 50 μl by distilled water and then the particle sizes were measured by DynaPro® Plate Reader (WYATT, USA).Transmission electron microscopy analysisTo determine virus or nanoparticle size and shape, virus or peptide/DNA nanoparticles were mixed with the weight ratio (4:1) of peptide:DNA for inoculation at room temperature for 30 min and then were applied to continuous carbon grids. The excess solution was removed. The grids were transferred into 4% uranyl acetate for 1 min incubation and then remove the solution. Finally, the grids were air-dried at room temperature.37 For each peptide/DNA nanoparticle, TEM images were taken from two independent experiments by FEI Tecnal G2-20 TEM.In vitro luminescence assayPeptides (1 mg ml−1, 0.5 mg ml−1 and 0.25 mg ml−1) and plasmid DNA (0.5 μg) were mixed at various weight ratios in 4 μl of H2O. After incubation at room temperature for 15 min, 293 T cells in 24-well plate were transfected with the peptide/DNA complexes (4 μl in 400 μl DMEM media) including peptides and 0.1 μg of each pHW2000 plasmid encoding the NP, PA, PB1, PB2 and the mini-genome of pPoLI-fluc-RT (pLuciferase).45 Finally, the luminescence was measured by Luciferase assay system (Promega, Cat # E1910) at 24 h post transfection,.In vivo bioluminescence assayPeptides and pCMV-Luc (ThermoFisher, Cat # RF233236) were prepared at weight ratios (4:1) of peptide:DNA with 20 μg peptides and 5 μg plasmid in 40 μl of H2O. After incubating the complexes for 15 min, the complexes were intratracheally inoculated to mice at 24 h before measuring the luciferase in mouse lungs. The in vivo jetPEI (Polyplus, Cat # 201-10 G) mixed with pCMV-Luc (0.7 μl + 5.0 μg) were used as a positive control. Mouse lungs inoculated with in vivo jetPEI or peptide only were collected as the negative control. To detect bioluminescence, lung tissues were homogenized and centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min. The supernatants were used to measure the luciferase expression by Cypridina luciferase kit (ThermoFisher, Cat # 16168). The relative luciferase expression in lungs was normalized to 1 mg protein. For in vivo bioluminescence imaging, the substrate was added to lungs for taking images by IVIS® Spectrum In Vivo Imaging System (PerkinElmer, USA).RT-qPCR assayReal-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) was performed as what we did previously.44 Extracted RNAs were transcribed to cDNA using primer Uni-12 or random primers by Strand cDNA synthesis Kit (Takara, Cat # 6210 A). The cDNA was then amplified using gene specific primers (Supplementary Table 5) for DI-PB2, DI-PA, DI-PB1, CD2100 and CD3600 using SYBR Green I Master (Takara). For quantitation, 10-fold serial dilutions of standard plasmid equivalent from 101 to 106 copies per reaction were used to generate the standard curve. RT-qPCR was performed using LightCycler® 96 system (Roche, USA).Nucleocapsid (NP) immunofluorescence assayInfected hamster lungs were collected at day 2 post infection. Tissues were processed for anti-nucleocapsid assay. Tissue slides were blocked by Sudan Black B and 1% BSA at room temperature for 1 h. Slides were incubated with rabbit IgG anti-NP (1:1000)51 at room temperature for overnight at 4 °C and then washed by PBS and then incubated with goat anti-rabbit IgG Alexa-488 (Life Technologies, Cat # A32731, 1:200) at room temperature for 30 min. Finally, slides were washed by PBS and incubated with DAPI for nucleus staining. Fluorescence images were taken by confocal microscope (LSM 900, Germany).In vivo antiviral assayAntiviral analysis of nanoparticle DIG in vivo was carried out in BALB/c mice and hamsters.43 Female BALB/c mice (9–12 weeks) and female hamsters (4–6 weeks) were obtained from The University of Hong Kong Centre for Comparative Medicine Research. All experimental protocols followed the standard operating procedures of the approved biosafety level 2/3 animal facilities.52 For the influenza DIG experiments, we used the mouse adapted A(H1N1)pdm09 virus to challenge mice to investigate the DIG antiviral activity. To identify the prophylactic efficacy, mice were intratracheally inoculated with 40 μl of TAT-P1/DIG (20.0 μg/5.0 μg), TAT2-P1/DIG (20.0 μg/5.0 μg), or zanamivir (40.0 μg/mouse in PBS) at 1–3 days before viral challenge. After nanoparticle DIG inoculation, mice were intranasally inoculated with 3 LD50 of A(H1N1)pdm09 virus. Survivals and general conditions were monitored for 16 days or until death. For DIGs against SARS-CoV-2 variants including Delta and Omicron in hamsters, TAT2-P1/CD3600, TAT2-P1/PHW, TAT2-P1&LAH4/CD3600, TAT2-P1&LAH4/PHW (50.0 μg/12.5 μg), or TAT2-P1 (50 μg) were intratracheally inoculated to hamsters at 1-day before viral challenge (250 PFU) and intranasally inoculated to hamsters at 8 h post infection. Experimental animals were randomly allocated to each group. Viral loads in hamster lungs were tested at 2-day post infection. Data availability All data that support the conclusions of the study are available from the corresponding authors upon a reasonable request. ReferencesCenters for Disease, C. & Prevention Update: drug susceptibility of swine-origin influenza A (H1N1) viruses, April 2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 58, 433–435 (2009).Lopez Bernal, J. et al. Effectiveness of Covid-19 Vaccines against the B.1.617.2 (Delta) Variant. N. Engl. J. Med 385, 585–594 (2021).Article PubMed Google Scholar Choi, A. et al. Serum Neutralizing Activity of mRNA-1273 Against SARS-CoV-2 Variants. J. Virol. 95, e0131321 (2021).Article PubMed Google Scholar Beigel, J. H. et al. Remdesivir for the Treatment of Covid-19 - Final Report. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 1813–1826 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Spinner, C. D. et al. Effect of Remdesivir vs Standard Care on Clinical Status at 11 Days in Patients With Moderate COVID-19: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama 324, 1048–1057 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Thiruchelvam, K., Kow, C. S., Hadi, M. & Hasan, S. S. The use of remdesivir for the management of patients with moderate-to-severe COVID-19: A systematic review. Expert. Rev. Anti. Infect. Ther. 20, 211–229 (2021).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Huang, A. S. & Baltimore, D. Defective viral particles and viral disease processes. Nature 226, 325–327 (1970).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Meng, B. et al. Unexpected complexity in the interference activity of a cloned influenza defective interfering RNA. Virol. J. 14, 138 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Duhaut, S. D. & Dimmock, N. J. Defective segment 1 RNAs that interfere with production of infectious influenza A virus require at least 150 nucleotides of 5’ sequence: evidence from a plasmid-driven system. J. Gen. Virol. 83, 403–411 (2002).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Dimmock, N. J., Rainsford, E. W., Scott, P. D. & Marriott, A. C. Influenza virus protecting RNA: an effective prophylactic and therapeutic antiviral. J. Virol. 82, 8570–8578 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bdeir, N. et al. A system for production of defective interfering particles in the absence of infectious influenza A virus. PLoS One 14, e0212757 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao, H. et al. Dual-functional peptide with defective interfering genes effectively protects mice against avian and seasonal influenza. Nat. Commun. 9, 2358 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Richard, J. P. et al. Cellular uptake of unconjugated TAT peptide involves clathrin-dependent endocytosis and heparan sulfate receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 15300–15306 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ferrari, A. et al. Caveolae-mediated internalization of extracellular HIV-1 tat fusion proteins visualized in real time. Mol. Ther. 8, 284–294 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wadia, J. S., Stan, R. V. & Dowdy, S. F. Transducible TAT-HA fusogenic peptide enhances escape of TAT-fusion proteins after lipid raft macropinocytosis. Nat. Med. 10, 310–315 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Duchardt, F., Fotin-Mleczek, M., Schwarz, H., Fischer, R. & Brock, R. A comprehensive model for the cellular uptake of cationic cell-penetrating peptides. Traffic 8, 848–866 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhao, F. et al. Cellular uptake, intracellular trafficking, and cytotoxicity of nanomaterials. Small 7, 1322–1337 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Duncan, G. A., Jung, J., Hanes, J. & Suk, J. S. The Mucus Barrier to Inhaled Gene Therapy. Mol. Ther. 24, 2043–2053 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Foroozandeh, P. & Aziz, A. A. Insight into Cellular Uptake and Intracellular Trafficking of Nanoparticles. Nanoscale Res Lett. 13, 339 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Mastorakos, P. et al. Highly compacted biodegradable DNA nanoparticles capable of overcoming the mucus barrier for inhaled lung gene therapy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 8720–8725 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Suk, J. S. et al. The penetration of fresh undiluted sputum expectorated by cystic fibrosis patients by non-adhesive polymer nanoparticles. Biomaterials 30, 2591–2597 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chaturvedi, S. et al. Identification of a therapeutic interfering particle-A single-dose SARS-CoV-2 antiviral intervention with a high barrier to resistance. Cell 184, 6022–6036.e6018 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dimmock, N. J. & Easton, A. J. Defective interfering influenza virus RNAs: time to reevaluate their clinical potential as broad-spectrum antivirals? J. Virol. 88, 5217–5227 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Qin, L. et al. Identification of probable genomic packaging signal sequence from SARS-CoV genome by bioinformatics analysis. Acta Pharm. Sin. 24, 489–496 (2003).CAS Google Scholar Masters, P. S. Coronavirus genomic RNA packaging. Virology 537, 198–207 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Escors, D., Izeta, A., Capiscol, C. & Enjuanes, L. Transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus packaging signal is located at the 5’ end of the virus genome. J. Virol. 77, 7890–7902 (2003).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kuo, L. & Masters, P. S. Functional analysis of the murine coronavirus genomic RNA packaging signal. J. Virol. 87, 5182–5192 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yeung, M. L. et al. Soluble ACE2-mediated cell entry of SARS-CoV-2 via interaction with proteins related to the renin-angiotensin system. Cell 184, 2212–2228.e2212 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Duhaut, S. D. & Dimmock, N. J. Heterologous protection of mice from a lethal human H1N1 influenza A virus infection by H3N8 equine defective interfering virus: comparison of defective RNA sequences isolated from the DI inoculum and mouse lung. Virology 248, 241–253 (1998).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Park, J. et al. Mutational analysis of a human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat protein transduction domain which is required for delivery of an exogenous protein into mammalian cells. J. Gen. Virol. 83, 1173–1181 (2002).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vives, E., Brodin, P. & Lebleu, B. A truncated HIV-1 Tat protein basic domain rapidly translocates through the plasma membrane and accumulates in the cell nucleus. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 16010–16017 (1997).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Brown, A. N. et al. Effect of half-life on the pharmacodynamic index of zanamivir against influenza virus delineated by a mathematical model. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55, 1747–1753 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chan, J. F. et al. Simulation of the clinical and pathological manifestations of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in golden Syrian hamster model: implications for disease pathogenesis and transmissibility. Clin. Infect. Dis. 71, 2428–2446 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kaptein, S. J. F. et al. Favipiravir at high doses has potent antiviral activity in SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters, whereas hydroxychloroquine lacks activity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 26955–26965 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lam, J. K. et al. Effective endogenous gene silencing mediated by pH responsive peptides proceeds via multiple pathways. J. Control Release 158, 293–303 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wang, Z., Tiruppathi, C., Minshall, R. D. & Malik, A. B. Size and dynamics of caveolae studied using nanoparticles in living endothelial cells. ACS Nano 3, 4110–4116 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao, H. et al. A broad-spectrum virus- and host-targeting peptide against respiratory viruses including influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Commun. 11, 4252 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Principi, N. et al. Drugs for Influenza Treatment: Is There Significant News? Front. Med. 6, 109 (2019).Article Google Scholar Anand, U. et al. Potential Therapeutic Targets and Vaccine Development for SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 Pandemic Management: A Review on the Recent Update. Front. Immunol. 12, 658519 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Marriott, A. C. & Dimmock, N. J. Defective interfering viruses and their potential as antiviral agents. Rev. Med. Virol. 20, 51–62 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Scott, P. D., Meng, B., Marriott, A. C., Easton, A. J. & Dimmock, N. J. Defective interfering virus protects elderly mice from influenza. Virol. J. 8, 212 (2011).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Easton, A. J. et al. A novel broad-spectrum treatment for respiratory virus infections: influenza-based defective interfering virus provides protection against pneumovirus infection in vivo. Vaccine 29, 2777–2784 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhao, H. et al. Cross-linking peptide and repurposed drugs inhibit both entry pathways of SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Commun. 12, 1517 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao, H. et al. A novel peptide with potent and broad-spectrum antiviral activities against multiple respiratory viruses. Sci. Rep. 6, 22008 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao, H. et al. Novel residues in the PA protein of avian influenza H7N7 virus affect virulence in mammalian hosts. Virology 498, 1–8 (2016).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Chen, L. L. et al. Impact of SARS-CoV-2 variant-associated RBD mutations on the susceptibility to serum antibodies elicited by COVID-19 infection or vaccination. Clin. Infect. Dis. 74, 1623–1630 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Zhao, H. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant shows less efficient replication and fusion activity when compared with delta variant in TMPRSS2-expressed cells. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 11, 1–18 (2021). Google Scholar Zhao, H. et al. Fusion-inhibition peptide broadly inhibits influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 including Delta and Omicron variants. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 11, 926–937 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Seim, I., Roden, C. A. & Gladfelter, A. S. Role of spatial patterning of N-protein interactions in SARS-CoV-2 genome packaging. Biophys. J. 121, 1580 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Heckman, K. L. & Pease, L. R. Gene splicing and mutagenesis by PCR-driven overlap extension. Nat. Protoc. 2, 924–932 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhao, H. et al. A trifunctional peptide broadly inhibits SARS-CoV-2 Delta and Omicron variants in hamsters. Cell Disco. 8, 62 (2022).Article CAS Google Scholar Zheng, B. J. et al. Delayed antiviral plus immunomodulator treatment still reduces mortality in mice infected by high inoculum of influenza A/H5N1 virus. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 8091–8096 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis study was supported by fundings from Health@InnoHK, Innovation and Technology Commission, the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region; the Health and Medical Research Fund, the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (COVID1903010-Project 13); the National Program on Key Research Project of China (2020YFA0707500), Theme-Based Research Scheme of the Research Grants Council (T11-709/21-N), Emergency Key Program of Guangzhou Laboratory (EKPG22-01), the National Key Research and Development Programme on Public Security Risk Prevention and Control Emergency Project, the Health and Medical Research Fund (22210792), and donations of Michael Seak-Kan Tong, Richard Yu and Carol Yu, Lee Wan Keung Charity Foundation Limited, May Tam Mak Mei Yin, Respiratory Viral Research Foundation Limited, the Shaw Foundation Hong Kong, Hui Ming, Hui Hoy and Chow Sin Lan Charity Fund Limited, Chan Yin Chuen Memorial Charitable Foundation, The Chen Wai Wai Vivien Foundation Limited, and Marina Man-Wai Lee. We thanks Dr Jenny K.W. Lam for providing LAH4 for the experiments.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsState Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, ChinaHanjun Zhao, Man Lung Yeung, Jasper Fuk-Woo Chan, Kelvin Kai-Wang To & Kwok-Yung YuenDepartment of Microbiology, School of Clinical Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, ChinaHanjun Zhao, Chuyuan Zhang, Hoiyan Lam, Xinjie Meng, Zheng Peng, Man Lung Yeung, Jasper Fuk-Woo Chan, Kelvin Kai-Wang To & Kwok-Yung YuenCentre for Virology, Vaccinology and Therapeutics, Hong Kong Science and Technology Park, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, ChinaHanjun Zhao, Xinjie Meng, Man Lung Yeung, Jasper Fuk-Woo Chan, Kelvin Kai-Wang To & Kwok-Yung YuenDepartment of Infectious Disease and Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong-Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, ChinaHanjun Zhao, Man Lung Yeung, Jasper Fuk-Woo Chan, Kelvin Kai-Wang To & Kwok-Yung YuenCarol Yu Centre for Infection, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, ChinaJasper Fuk-Woo Chan, Kelvin Kai-Wang To & Kwok-Yung YuenGuangzhou Laboratory, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, ChinaJasper Fuk-Woo Chan, Kelvin Kai-Wang To & Kwok-Yung YuenAuthorsHanjun ZhaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChuyuan ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHoiyan LamView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXinjie MengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZheng PengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMan Lung YeungView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJasper Fuk-Woo ChanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKelvin Kai-Wang ToView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKwok-Yung YuenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsH.Z., and K.Y. designed this study. H.Z., H.L., C.Z., X.M., and Z.P. performed experiments. H.Z., MY., J.F.C., K.T., and K.Y. provided experiment materials. H.Z. wrote the manuscript. H.Z., K.T., and K.Y. interpreted the results and revised the manuscript. K.Y., and H.Z. provided the grants for this study. All authors have read and approved the article.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Hanjun Zhao or Kwok-Yung Yuen.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Supplementary informationSupplementary Figures and tablesRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleZhao, H., Zhang, C., Lam, H. et al. Peptidic defective interfering gene nanoparticles against Omicron, Delta SARS-CoV-2 variants and influenza A virus in vivo. Sig Transduct Target Ther 7, 266 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-022-01138-0Download citationReceived: 15 May 2022Revised: 11 July 2022Accepted: 25 July 2022Published: 03 August 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-022-01138-0Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Identification of the protein coding capability of coronavirus defective viral genomes by mass spectrometry Ching-Hung LinFeng-Cheng HsiehHung-Yi Wu Virology Journal (2023) Generation of “OP7 chimera” defective interfering influenza A particle preparations free of infectious virus that show antiviral efficacy in mice Tanya DograLars PelzUdo Reichl Scientific Reports (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Open Access Publishing About the Editors Editorial Board Journal Staff About the Partner Contact Journal open lectures Awards Publish with us For Authors & Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy (Sig Transduct Target Ther) ISSN 2059-3635 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedRespiratory Virus Infection Drugs Market Size | USD 82.1 Billion by 2030 - BioSpace News Drug Development FDA Drug Delivery Deals Business Policy Cell and Gene Therapy Weight Loss Rare Disease Cancer Job Trends Artificial Intelligence NextGen: Top Start Ups to Watch Podcasts Reports Webinars Press Releases All News & Releases Insights Jobs Career Advice Companies Hotbeds More Best Places to Work Employer Resources Post Jobs Talent Solutions Advertise Submit a Press Release SUBSCRIBE Menu SUBSCRIBE Show Search News Drug Development FDA Drug Delivery Deals Business Policy Cell and Gene Therapy Weight Loss Rare Disease Cancer Job Trends Artificial Intelligence NextGen: Top Start Ups to Watch Podcasts Reports Webinars Press Releases All News & Releases Insights Jobs Career Advice Companies Hotbeds More Best Places to Work Employer Resources Post Jobs Talent Solutions Advertise Submit a Press Release Search Query Submit Search Respiratory Virus Infection Drugs Market Size | USD 82.1 Billion by 2030 August 2, 2022 | 6 min read Twitter LinkedIn Facebook Email Print According to latest report, the global respiratory virus infection drugs market size valued at US$ 38.8 billion in 2020 and is predicted to hit around US$ 82.1 billion by 2030, expanding at a CAGR of 7.1% from 2021 to 2030. According to latest report, the global respiratory virus infection drugs market size valued at US$ 38.8 billion in 2020 and is predicted to hit around US$ 82.1 billion by 2030, expanding at a CAGR of 7.1% from 2021 to 2030. The viral respiratory infection affects the upper and lower respiratory tract. The respiratory virus infection is commonly caused by respiratory syncytial viruses, rhinoviruses, parainfluenza viruses, and influenza viruses. The global respiratory virus infection drugs market is driven by investments by key players to develop advanced therapeutics. Moreover, increase in acceptance of combination therapy to boost success rate of respiratory treatment presents significant opportunities to market players. These factors drive the global market. Immediate Delivery Available | Get the sample copy of report@ https://www.visionresearchreports.comeport/sample/38183 Rise in R&D Helps Address Low Solubility of Favipiravir in Aqueous Media The respiratory virus infection drugs market is expected to surpass a value of US$ 82.1 Bn by the end of 2030. However, individuals are becoming increasingly aware about the disadvantages and side effects of influenza drugs, namely favipiravir and baloxavir. Pharma companies need to address low solubility of favipiravir in aqueous media, which may reduce its efficacy in vitro. This indicates that pharma companies need to increase their R&D activities to prevent adverse events of drugs. Pharma companies are focusing on discoveries in influenza virus polymerase complex. It has been found that influenza viruses are severe human pathogens that pose as a persistent threat to public health. Hence, companies in the respiratory virus infection drugs market are capitalizing on this issue to increase their R&D in influenza virus polymerase complex. Efficient Drug Delivery via Nanotechnology Offers Growth Prospects in Clinical Practice Companies in the respiratory virus infection drugs market are increasing their focus in nanomaterials designed for antiviral drug delivery of adenovirus infection. This has become important, since respiratory virus infections have become a global health problem causing a significant amount of mortality and morbidity in individuals. Emerging drug resistance and constant viral replication have led to the demand for nanotechnology in antiviral therapies, as nanomaterials offer unique physic-chemical properties ideal for the treatment of adenovirus infection. Different nanomaterials such as nanosheres, liposomes, nanoparticles, nanogels, and the likes hold promising potentials for efficacious drug administration in order to improve patient outcomes. Companies in the respiratory virus infection drugs market are innovating in nanosuspensions and nanoemulsions to enable drug delivery of unique antiviral agents with prospects in clinical practice. AI-based Multi-program Approach Enables Development of Successful Candidates for Antibiotic Resistance The COVID-19 pandemic has brought startups in the respiratory virus infection drugs market under great emphasis. For instance, Vir Biotechnology— a specialist in immune therapeutics, is leveraging the advantages of AI and ML in influenza drug development. It has been found that infectious diseases have increased resistance to antibiotics. Startups in the respiratory virus infection drugs market are capitalizing on this opportunity to integrate AI and ML in common cold and influenza drug development. In order to broaden their revenue streams, the U.S.-based tech startups are working on solutions to address antibiotic resistance in certain strains of influenza A, SARS-CoV-2, and tuberculosis. They are adopting a multi-program and multi-platform approach to develop successful candidates in order to tackle antibiotic resistance. Manufacturers are innovating in antibody platforms and T cell platforms to isolate rare antibodies and use them to boost the immune system. Report Highlights In terms of drug type, the global respiratory virus infection drugs market has been classified into antibiotics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), cough suppressants, nasal decongestants, and others. Macrolides are a group of antibiotics considered promising treatment option for respiratory viral infections. This is likely to augment the segment. Based on infection type, the global respiratory virus infection drugs market has been divided into respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection, influenza virus infection, parainfluenza virus infection, adenovirus infection, rhinovirus infection, and others. Adults with asthma, congestive heart failure, and COPD are at higher risk of suffering from respiratory syncytial virus infection. Hence, increase in the number of patients with these risk factors is projected to propel the segment. In terms of route of administration, the global respiratory virus infection drugs market has been bifurcated into oral and parenteral. The preference of oral route due to better patient compliance, ease of administration, and versatility to accommodate various types of drug is anticipated to boost the growth of segment. Based on mode of purchase, the global respiratory virus infection drugs market has been categorized into prescription-based drugs and over-the-counter drugs. Increase in awareness about the usage of antibiotics and standard guidelines for prescription antibiotics fuel the growth of the segment. In terms of distribution channel, the global respiratory virus infection drugs market has been segregated into hospital pharmacies, drug stores, retail pharmacies, clinics, and others. Introduction of newer prescription products and availability of different dosage forms at hospital pharmacies are likely to drive the segment. North America dominated the global respiratory virus infection drugs market in 2020, followed by Europe. North America accounted for a major share of the global respiratory virus infection drugs market in 2020. Presence of key players and focus on research & development are key factors projected to propel the respiratory virus infection drugs market in the region. The respiratory virus infection drugs market in Asia Pacific is anticipated to grow at a rapid pace during the forecast period. The increase in investment by key players is expected to augment the respiratory virus infection drugs market in the region. Key Players Key players in the global respiratory virus infection drugs market include GlaxoSmithKline plc, Merck & Co., Inc., AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., Sanofi, Cipla, Inc., CHIESI Farmaceutici S.p.A., and Orion Corporation. Market Segmentation By Drug Type Antibiotics Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDS) Cough Suppressants Nasal Decongestants Others By Infection Type Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) Infection Influenza Virus Infection Parainfluenza Virus Infection Adenovirus Infection Rhinovirus Infection Others By Route of Administration Oral Parenteral By Mode of Purchase Prescription-based Drugs Over-the-counter Drugs By Distribution Channel Hospital Pharmacies Drug Stores Retail Pharmacies Clinics Others By Region North America Europe Asia Pacific Latin America Middle East & Africa Immediate Delivery Available | Buy this Premium Research Report@ https://www.visionresearchreports.comeport/cart/38183 You can place an order or ask any questions, please feel free to contact at sales@visionresearchreports.com | +1 9197 992 333 Twitter LinkedIn Facebook Email Print Precedence Research LATEST Alzheimer’s Leqembi, Kisunla and Beyond: The Next Wave of Alzheimer’s at CTAD 2024 November 11, 2024 · 6 min read · Kate Goodwin Huntington’s After Decades of Failure, First Disease-Modifying Huntington’s Treatment on the Horizon November 11, 2024 · 7 min read · Heather McKenzie Opinion Drugs Are Becoming “Smarter.” Here’s How November 11, 2024 · 6 min read · David Benshoof Klein Huntington’s 5 Huntington’s Therapies to Watch November 11, 2024 · 5 min read · Kate Goodwin Alzheimer’s disease Eisai Cuts Fiscal 2024 Guidance for Biogen-Partnered Leqembi as Sales Disappoint Analysts November 8, 2024 · 2 min read · Tristan Manalac FEATURED STORIES Editorial Lilly vs. Novo: The ‘He Said, She Said’ Row About Catalent’s GLP-1 Work November 8, 2024 · 4 min read · Greg Slabodkin Funding Navigating a Biotech Exit in a Rebounding Market November 6, 2024 · 8 min read · Ana Mulero Job trends Cell Therapy Biotechs Hunt for Autoimmune Expertise in Pivot From Oncology November 6, 2024 · 6 min read · Annalee Armstrong Business Lacks Family Lawsuits Seek Share of Profits Stemming from HeLa Cells November 5, 2024 · 7 min read · Sanjukta Mondal CAR T CAR T and Related Therapies Home In on Autoimmune Disease November 4, 2024 · 9 min read · Shawna Williams BioSpace is the digital hub for life science news and jobs. We provide essential insights, opportunities and tools to connect innovative organizations and talented professionals who advance health and quality of life across the globe. Explore News Insights Jobs Career Advice Newsletters Podcasts Webinars Reports Companies NextGen: Top Start Ups To Watch Best Places to Work Hotbeds About About BioSpace Editorial Join Our Team Support Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy More Employer Login Employer Resources Post Jobs Talent Solutions Advertise Submit a Press Release RSS Feeds © 1985 - 2024 BioSpace.com. All rights reserved. twitter instagram facebook linkedinSwine flu investigated after people sickened at WVa fair - Morning Ag Clips Subscribe ❯ PORTAL ❯ LOGIN ❯ By Keyword By topic By state Home Events Jobs Work With Us Skip to primary navigation Skip to main content Skip to primary sidebar Skip to footer Subscribe to ourdaily email❯ SubmitYour Content❯ Login❯ policy tractors & machinery education conservation webinars business dairy cattle poultry swine corn soybeans organic specialty crops Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Home Events Jobs Work With Us Morning Ag Clips Search By keyword By topic By state policy tractors & machinery education conservation webinars business dairy cattle poultry swine corn soybeans organic specialty crops For the best mobile experience, get the MAC App Today!Home » Swine flu investigated after people sickened at WVa fair livestock health nutrition and health swine events HUMAN AND LIVESTOCK HEALTH ...Swine flu investigated after people sickened at WVa fairSeveral people developed a flu-like illness after working closely with pigs that exhibited respiratory symptomsPUBLISHED ON August 4, 2022The illnesses occurred at the Jackson County Fair. Dr. Ayne Amjad, the state's health officer, said in a statement that symptoms such as fever, runny nose, sore throat, cough or congestion usually show up one to three days after exposure to infected animal livestock at an outdoor event. (Photo by Diego San on Unsplash)CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) — Health officials said they are investigating after several people developed a flu-like illness after working closely with pigs that exhibited respiratory symptoms and fever at a county fair. The state Department of Health and Human Resources said the H3N2v strain of influenza A was confirmed on at least one human test Tuesday. The sample has been forwarded to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for Confirmation. The illnesses occurred at the Jackson County Fair. Dr. Ayne Amjad, the state’s health officer, said in a statement that symptoms such as fever, runny nose, sore throat, cough or congestion usually show up one to three days after exposure to infected animal livestock at an outdoor event. The statement that swine influenza viruses may circulate in pig populations throughout the year and do not usually infect humans. The same antiviral drugs used to treat seasonal influenza can also be used for treatment of swine flu infection in humans. Residents are encouraged to take routine precautions when visiting animal exhibits, including washing hands with soap and water before and after exposure to animals and avoid taking personal items, food or drinks into swine barns or areas with animals. –Associated Press Spread the word RECOMMENDED ARTICLES Pork Checkoff decides to cancel World Pork ExpoApril 11, 2019DES MOINES, Iowa — The National Pork Board today offered a statement of support to the National Pork Producers Council as it took the extremely rare step to cancel the 2019 […] Researchers Track Antimicrobial Resistance in E. Coli Isolated From SwineMay 14, 2023CHAMPAIGN, Ill. — The spread of drug-resistant microbes has become a global health concern that threatens our ability to treat infections. The widespread use of antimicrobials in livestock, such as […] "Swine Flu" Strain Has Passed From Humans to Swine Nearly 400 Times Since 2009July 31, 2023SAN FRANCISCO, Calif. — A new study of the strain of influenza A responsible for the 2009 H1N1 pandemic—pdm09—shows that the virus has passed from humans to swine about 370 […] ‘No nitrite-added’ cured meats are in the worksFebruary 21, 2023COLLEGE STATION, Texas — Imagine your favorite cured meat like beef jerky, pepperoni or bacon without any added sodium nitrite from any source currently necessary for color and shelf life. […] Browse More Clips Congrats to Dr. Delate of ISU! USDA increases funding for partnerships to safeguard, restore wetland ecosystems Primary Sidebar MORENATIONAL CLIPS How to Help Your Tropical Plants Survive the Winter BluesNovember 8, 2024 Team Reports Breakthrough Research Toward Global Food ChallengeNovember 8, 2024 Nomadic Roots, Modern RoutesNovember 8, 2024 NASS Releases Additional Census of Agriculture DataNovember 8, 2024 Registration Open for GEAPS ExchangeNovember 8, 2024 Trending Latest TRENDING CLIPS Svalbard Global Seed Vault Evokes Epic Imagery and Controversy November 4, 2024 Bio-Based Fibers Could Pose Greater Threat to the Environment Than Conventional Plastics November 5, 2024 DEC Declares Drougt Watch for 15 New York Counties November 6, 2024 Mexico City’s Floating Gardens Have Fed People for Hundreds of Years. Now They’re Threatened November 6, 2024 Turkey Prices Low Ahead of Thanksgiving Holiday November 6, 2024 One Step Closer to an Alternative Fruit and Vegetable Treatment Option November 5, 2024 Carl Sagan’s Scientific Legacy Extends Far Beyond ‘Cosmos’ November 5, 2024 Native Warm Season Grasses: A Drought-Resistant Forage? November 5, 2024 YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE... Bi-State Conference Series Kicks Off with Crops Conference in Covington, Ind.November 10, 2024 Dairy Signal: Calf Transportation, Organization Vision, Market UpdatesNovember 10, 2024 Hundreds of thousands flock to the State Fair of VirginiaNovember 10, 2024 Submit Soil Samples for Testing by Nov. 26 to Avoid Peak Season FeesNovember 10, 2024 Clemson Scholars Named Rhodes, Marshall FinalistsNovember 10, 2024 FooterMORNING AG CLIPS Contact Us Sponsors About Us Advertise with Us Privacy Statement Terms of Service Write For Us CONNECT WITH US Like Us on Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Twitter YouTube TikTok TRACK YOUR TRADE Markets & Economy Cattle Updates Dairy News Policy & Politics Corn Alerts QUICK LINKS Account Portal Membership Just Me, Kate Morning Ag Communications Weather Beef Blueprints Submissions Get the MAC App Today! © 2024 Morning Ag Clips, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Stay In The Know! Subscribe to Your Favorite Newsletter! Click here to Subscribe today by selecting your desired edition and scrolling down to click “All Set!” From the field to your inbox, the Weekend Edition of the Morning Ag Clips features stories, trends, and unique perspectives from the farming community. Morning Ag Clips. All Ag. All the time. CLOSE Search Post Post Filter Apply Filters Close CLOSE Search Post Post Filter Apply Filters Close CLOSE Mac Calendar Contest Photo Contest Name(Required) First Last Email(Required) Enter Email Confirm Email Your Photo Entry(Required) Drop files here or Select files Accepted file types: jpg, jpeg, png, Max. file size: 50 MB, Max. files: 5. Please attach a high-resolution image that is at least 900 by 500 pixels. Please provide a caption for your photo along with town and state you are located in.(Required)Competition Terms and Conditions(Required)Terms and Conditions are outlined below in the Terms and Conditions section of the Calendar Photo Contest page I agree to the competition terms and conditions.CAPTCHA ×How does the flu vaccine affect the risk of contracting COVID-19? Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member How does the flu vaccine affect the risk of contracting COVID-19? Download PDF Copy Revised By Suchandrima BhowmikReviewed by Benedette Cuffari, M.Sc.Aug 4 2022 The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an acute respiratory disease that is caused by infection with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). As a result of the rapid transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and its high morbidity and mortality rates, COVID-19 remains a significant threat. Study: Does Influenza vaccination reduce the risk of contracting COVID-19? Image Credit: alessandro guerriero / Shutterstock.comThis news article was a review of a preliminary scientific report that had not undergone peer-review at the time of publication. Since its initial publication, the scientific report has now been peer reviewed and accepted for publication in a Scientific Journal. Links to the preliminary and peer-reviewed reports are available in the Sources section at the bottom of this article. View Sources Background Initially, the development of herd immunity once the vaccinated population reached 70% was believed to reduce the transmission of SARS-CoV-2. However, the rate of vaccination in different nations varies depending on their specific economic situation. As a result, developed countries often have a higher vaccination rate as compared to underdeveloped countries. This increases the risk of prolonging the pandemic due to the emergence of mutated strains of SARS-CoV-2. Several studies have observed that the risk of infection and disease transmission are independent of completing a COVID-19 vaccination regimen. Although the risk of developing a severe infection is lower in vaccinated people, the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 variants between vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals still occurs and can subsequently lead to the emergence of new variants. Currently, ten SARS-CoV-2 variants are being monitored, two of which are considered variants of concern (VOCs). Thus, there remains an urgent need to better understand the evolution of SARS-CoV-2, as well as develop novel treatments and preventive measures that mitigate its spread and adverse effects on human health. Previous studies have assessed whether countermeasures used to protect against other types of viruses could reduce the adverse effects of COVID-19. Influenza and COVID-19 are two respiratory viral diseases that have similar modes of transmission, clinical outcomes, hospitalizations, complications, and death rates. Additionally, the transmission of these viruses often peaks during the winter months. The most effective strategy to prevent and control influenza epidemics is annual influenza vaccination. Similar vaccination campaigns have also been important in controlling the COVID-19 pandemic. The SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant, which was first detected in South Africa on November 24, 2021, acquired at least one of its mutations from the common cold virus that was also present in the same infected cell. The symptoms of Omicron infection are also very similar to that of the common cold. Related StoriesAfrican production of mpox vaccines could secure the continent’s healthRecruitment underway for a clinical trial testing new vaccine against respiratory virusesCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Notably, flu vaccination has previously been found to reduce intensive care unit (ICU) admissions, hospitalizations, and mortality from SARS-CoV-2 infections. However, such findings are contradictory and insufficient. Further research is needed to better understand the protective role of the flu vaccine on COVID-19 infections. A new Spanish study published on the preprint server medRxiv* describes the association between the risk of contracting COVID-19 and the seasonal flu vaccine in patients for whom the flu vaccine is recommended. About the study The current study involved patients who were considered high-risk for flu complications and were, as a result, recommended for vaccination. The clinical history of the patients was collected to obtain information on COVID-19 diagnosis and flu vaccination. Study participants living in nursing homes were studied separately due to different living conditions. Both trivalent and quadrivalent flu vaccines were administered to the study participants. The Mortality in small Spanish areas and Socioeconomic and Environmental Inequalities (MEDEA) deprivation index was used for the analysis of health inequalities and identification of regions with socioeconomic vulnerability. Information on the gender, age, risk factors for flu vaccination, the incidence of COVID-19, and flu vaccine receipt were also collected. Study findings Out of the 429,537 study participants, about 45% were vaccinated against the flu, while 56.8% were women. Participants over the age of 80 were most likely to be vaccinated. Moreover, about 4% of vaccinated people and 4.44% of unvaccinated people contracted COVID-19. Patients with risk factors for flu complications, such as those with cardiovascular diseases, lung problems, diabetes mellitus, and kidney problems, who also received the flu vaccine were at a lower risk of contracting COVID-19. Probability of contracting COVID-19 depending on whether or not the patient had received the flu vaccine. High MEDEA values were associated with lower vaccination rates and a higher risk of COVID-19. Additionally, at high MEDEA index values, people under 60 years of age were associated with higher COVID-19 incidence rates as compared to those over the age of 60. Conclusions The current study demonstrates that the flu vaccine could reduce the risk of COVID-19 among individuals who are at high risk for flu complications. However, continuous and effective immunizations are required to reduce the burden of respiratory diseases, especially during a period in which influenza and COVID-19 overlap. Further research is needed to develop preventive strategies against both diseases simultaneously, as there is a high probability of living with both viruses for a long time. This news article was a review of a preliminary scientific report that had not undergone peer-review at the time of publication. Since its initial publication, the scientific report has now been peer reviewed and accepted for publication in a Scientific Journal. Links to the preliminary and peer-reviewed reports are available in the Sources section at the bottom of this article. View Sources Journal references: Preliminary scientific report. Alòs, F., ZAldua, Y. C., Reijoo, M. V., et al. (2022). Does Influenza vaccination reduce the risk of contracting COVID-19? medRxiv. doi:10.1101/2022.08.01.22278264. https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.08.01.22278264v1. Peer reviewed and published scientific report. Alòs, Francesc, Yoseba Cánovas Zaldúa, María Victoria Feijóo Rodríguez, Jose Luis Del Val Garcia, Andrea Sánchez-Callejas, and Ma Àngels Colomer. 2022. “Does Influenza Vaccination Reduce the Risk of Contracting COVID-19?” Journal of Clinical Medicine 11 (18): 5297. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm11185297. https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/11/18/5297. Article RevisionsMay 13 2023 - The preprint preliminary research paper that this article was based upon was accepted for publication in a peer-reviewed Scientific Journal. This article was edited accordingly to include a link to the final peer-reviewed paper, now shown in the sources section. Posted in: Men's Health News | Medical Research News | Medical Condition News | Women's Health News | Disease/Infection News | Pharmaceutical News Tags: B Cell, Cell, Cold, Common Cold, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Diabetes, Diabetes Mellitus, Evolution, Flu, immunity, Influenza, Intensive Care, Kidney, Mortality, Nursing, Omicron, Pandemic, Research, Respiratory, Respiratory Disease, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Vaccine, Virus Comments (0) Written bySuchandrima BhowmikSuchandrima has a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) degree in Microbiology and a Master of Science (M.Sc.) degree in Microbiology from the University of Calcutta, India. The study of health and diseases was always very important to her. In addition to Microbiology, she also gained extensive knowledge in Biochemistry, Immunology, Medical Microbiology, Metabolism, and Biotechnology as part of her master's degree. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APABhowmik, Suchandrima. (2023, May 13). How does the flu vaccine affect the risk of contracting COVID-19?. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20220804/How-does-the-flu-vaccine-affect-the-risk-of-contracting-COVID-19.aspx.MLABhowmik, Suchandrima. "How does the flu vaccine affect the risk of contracting COVID-19?". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20220804/How-does-the-flu-vaccine-affect-the-risk-of-contracting-COVID-19.aspx>.ChicagoBhowmik, Suchandrima. "How does the flu vaccine affect the risk of contracting COVID-19?". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20220804/How-does-the-flu-vaccine-affect-the-risk-of-contracting-COVID-19.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardBhowmik, Suchandrima. 2023. How does the flu vaccine affect the risk of contracting COVID-19?. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20220804/How-does-the-flu-vaccine-affect-the-risk-of-contracting-COVID-19.aspx. Suggested Reading Link between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsPublic trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USCleveland Clinic presents new findings on triple-negative breast cancer vaccineHexavalent vaccine can reduce spread of whooping coughCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionVALANX Biotech and Fina Biosolutions Introduce ClickCRM for Rapid Conjugate Vaccine DevelopmentStudy reveals how COVID-19 affected the spread and evolution of seasonal influenza Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive healthLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disorders Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsHeat exposure significantly heightens risks for maternal and newborn healthGenetic links between osteoarthritis and cardiovascular disease reveal hidden common risksDoes more education reshape your brain?How gut bacteria regulate stress and sleep cyclesBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancers Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Respiratory Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Diabetes (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura cases after CoronaVac raise concerns over vaccine safetyDeveloping broad-spectrum vaccines that target the heart of mutating viruses RecommendedNew webinar with Fujifilm: Monocyte activation test (MAT): Insight into examining regulations and markets prospectsNew webinar: The path to optimisation in pharmaceutical microbiologyJoin our webinar: An alternative medium to support sterility testing using the Growth Direct® Rapid Sterility SystemDiscover more in our new application note: validating recombinant cascade reagents in 3 simple steps About us | Advertise with us | Contact us MenuHomeAI HubNewsArticlesVideosPodcastsPublicationsWhitepapers/App Notes/PostersWebinarsContent HubsEventsThe Future of Bio Pharmaceutical Analysis 2024 (Online Summit)PHARMA MICROBIOLOGY – Navigating Compliance and Best Practices (Online Summit)Pharma 4.0: Breakfast BriefingThe Future of Pharmaceutical Analysis 2023 (Online Summit)Industry EventsAnalytical techniquesBiopharmaDrug deliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegs & Legs articleDeveloping broad-spectrum vaccines that target the heart of mutating viruses5SHARES Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardPosted: 3 August 2022 | Alexandre Le Vert (Osivax) | 1 commentAlexandre Le Vert, CEO and Co-Founder of Osivax, explores some evolving approaches to vaccine development that aim to counter the effects of virus mutation. The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the need for an improved vaccine approach to temper the serious threat of constantly mutating viruses, such as influenza and coronaviruses, on global health. Current vaccines often employ a B-cell immune response through the production of specific antibodies that target the virus’ surface, which can be highly prone to mutation. This strategy cannot anticipate virus mutations and leaves individuals vulnerable to infection when new strains emerge. New T cell-based approaches move beyond the surface and can be combined with B-cell vaccines to address the internal, less variable, parts of viruses to provide broad-spectrum protection against current strains and those yet to come.1Addressing the ever-changing virusThe surface of a virus is covered with exposed proteins or antigens, which enable it to bind to the receptors of a host cell. Once attached, the virus can alter the function of a cell, allowing it to replicate and produce thousands of copies of itself. Eventually, this leads to the breakdown of the cell’s membrane, releasing more viruses into circulation that can proceed to infect nearby cells. Viruses such as influenza or Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2; the cause of COVID-19) typically infect cells located in the respiratory system, causing inflammation of the trachea and/or the lungs.Figure 1: Internal and external virus structures2In influenza and SARS-CoV-2, the haemagglutinin and spike surface antigens are capable of spontaneous mutation and thus display several functioning shapes of these antigens, further splitting themselves into various strains or variants. As a virus circulates and infects host cells to replicate and proliferate, this new virus entity could carry a different protein structure than its ancestral virus, leading to the emergence of a new strain. These spontaneous mutation events are quite common and often do not lead to an improved version of the pathogen. However, sometimes, the new variant exhibits advantageous features, such as faster propagation due to an improved affinity of its mutated surface antigens with the host cell receptors.Current vaccine strategies and their limitationsAlongside improved sanitation and better nutrition, vaccination remains one of the most cost-effective measures to reduce the burden of infectious diseases. Most currently available vaccines are developed to treat viruses by attacking surface antigens. In influenza, the haemagglutinin is targeted using a small dose of the weakened virus to trigger the production of specific antibodies that bind to it, thereby neutralising the virus when a real infection arises. These quadrivalent influenza vaccines (QIV), however, lack the capacity to produce cross-reactive responses that can neutralise multiple influenza strains. Cross-reactivity is a necessary component in targeting the antigenic plasticity of the haemagglutinin. Each year, global vaccine organisations must ‘predict’ the future circulating strain months in advance. If the prediction is incorrect, this could lead to antigenically drifted viruses and potential mismatches with vaccine strains.3 Improved, broad-spectrum vaccines are needed to address the challenges posed by the difficulty and time-sensitivity of making accurate predictions against these highly mutating viruses.The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the need for an improved vaccine approach to temper the serious threat of constantly mutating viruses”One approach to achieving this goal is to target the more conserved regions of the virus, such as internal antigens, which are not under selection pressure from the antibody component of the immune system and are therefore far less prone to mutations. Unlike surface antigens that are visible on the membrane of the virus and can be detected by antibodies, internal antigens are inside the virus and can only be detected by the cellular T-cell component of the immune system.The adaptive immune response to a natural infectionOur immune system creates new cells daily to combat harmful pathogens. When a virus escapes the first line of defence (the innate immune response) and starts replicating widely, the immune system deploys a highly specific adaptive response composed of two arms: antibody responses that can directly neutralise the virus, and cytotoxic T cells that will destroy and clear the cells infected by the virus.When a cell is infected by a virus, all the proteins produced by the infected cell, including its inner component, are presented on the cell surface. Cytotoxic T cells can recognise those viral proteins and release chemical signals to induce apoptosis, or the death of the infected cell. These cells also produce memory T cells to respond faster and prevent future infections from occurring. Presenting surface antigens of a virus to the immune system to trigger an antibody-based response has been the landmark of vaccine development. It has worked efficiently against the dangerous pathogens that cause measles, rubella and tetanus. However, relying solely on this vaccine strategy to tackle viruses with high mutation rates has its limitations, as mutating surface antigens evolve constantly. Several biotechs in the space have identified that vaccines that combine a T cell-mediated immune response with the antibody response could potentially improve protection in line with the natural function of the immune system.Improved, broad-spectrum vaccines are needed to address the challenges posed by the difficulty and time-sensitivity of making accurate predictions against these highly mutating viruses”Both B-cell and T-cell responses are mediated by two different synergistic pathways that can recognise different parts of the virus and attack at different stages of its proliferation. Several approaches are in development, including nanoparticles or messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines that have been engineered to display multiple regions of the haemagglutinin known to provide better cross-protection across all lineages of a single virus.Another disruptive approach, explored by private biotech companies such as Osivax or Imutex, consists of vaccines targeting the heart of a virus, rather than its mutating surface, and doing so with the cellular component of the immune system (T cells).Targeting the heart of the virus with a T-cell approachOsivax, a French biotech, has developed its proprietary oligoDOM® technology platform to elicit a T-cell immune response targeting the internal antigens of a virus. Its mechanism of action relies on the combination of (i) a cargo effect of nanoparticles presenting seven copies of the targeted antigens and (ii) a targeting and activating sequence towards the immune system’s cellular surfaces. Results demonstrate the oligoDOM® platform’s ability to trigger a universal response capable of protection against all variants of a single virus. In influenza, the company’s lead programme, OVX836, targets the nucleoprotein – an inner and conserved antigen, which has more than 90 percent genetic similarity among A-strains of the influenza virus.Figure 2: Osivax’ innovative oligoDOM® technology, an improved self-assembling nanoparticle approach, targeting internal and invariant parts of viruses2In pre-clinical models, this approach demonstrated cross-protection against all A and B strains tested. In Osivax’ Phase IIa clinical trial in 300 healthy volunteers, OVX836 demonstrated an excellent safety profile, a robust and dose-dependent activation of the cellular component of the immune system, and a strong signal of protection against influenza symptoms.4 An additional Phase II clinical trial is planned to evaluate the co-administration of OVX836 with a standard QIV, empowering a double-punch approach to tackle the virus. Simultaneously, Osivax is advancing another broad-spectrum pre-clinical vaccine candidate against coronaviruses, which targets the nucleocapsid – an internal antigen of the SARS-COV-2 virus.Conserved antigens, such as the nucleoprotein in influenza and the nucleocapsid in SARS-COV-2, have been recognised as significant targets for T cell-based broad-spectrum vaccine development. Combining a T-cell and B-cell response to tackle highly mutating viruses appears to be a promising means of providing enhanced efficacy in protection and cross-reactivity against all strains of a virus.Anatomy of a ‘correlate of protection’ for T-cell vaccines…Upcoming developmentsBroad-spectrum vaccines could provide robust protection against potential future outbreaks and/or pandemics of highly mutating viruses. While the emergence of COVID-19 certainly demonstrated the need for improved approaches to immunisation, it also showcased that progress in this area can be made rapidly when innovators work together.5 The vaccinology space remains one to watch as companies continue developing next-generation technologies, such as those focused on T-cell responses, intending to provide protection against viruses currently in circulation and those that are yet to come.About the authorAlexandre Le Vert is the Chief Executive Officer and Co-Founder of Osivax. He has more than 20 years of experience in healthcare, ranging from research and development to commercialisation of vaccines and therapeutics. He is an experienced entrepreneur in biotech and innovation and currently serves as a Board Member of several biotech companies in France and the US. Alexandre is a graduate of EcolePolytechnique and Harvard University.ReferencesAre more powerful vaccines coming? Shots targeting T cells show promise. [Internet]. Science. 2022 [cited 26 April 2022]. Available from: https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/article/are-more-powerful-vaccines-coming-shots-targeting-t-cells-show-promiseTechnology – Osivax [Internet]. Osivax. 2022 [cited 26 April 2022]. Available from: https://osivax.comechnology/Madsen A, Cox R. Prospects and Challenges in the Development of Universal Influenza Vaccines. Vaccines. 2020;8(3):361.Leroux-Roels I, Waerlop G, Tourneur J, et al. Randomized, double-blind, reference-controlled, phase 2a study evaluating the immunogenicity and safety of OVX836, a nucleoprotein-based influenza vaccine [Internet]. Frontiers. Frontiers; 1AD [cited 2022Apr26]. Available from: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2022.852904/fullWe’re Getting Close to ‘Universal’ Vaccines. It Hasn’t Been Easy. [Internet]. Nytimes.com. 2022 [cited 26 April 2022]. Available from: https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/08/magazine/universal-vaccines.htmlRelated topicsAntibodies, Biologics, Drug Development, Immunisation, mRNA, Research & Development (R&D), t-cells, Vaccine Technology, Vaccines, VirusesRelated organisationsImutexRelated diseases & conditionsCoronavirus, Covid-19, Influenza, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) By Alexandre Le Vert (Osivax)3 August 20221 commentShares5 Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardRelated topicsAntibodies, Biologics, Drug Development, Immunisation, mRNA, Research & Development (R&D), t-cells, Vaccine Technology, Vaccines, VirusesRelated organisationsImutexRelated diseases & conditionsCoronavirus, Covid-19, Influenza, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) Most popular...Sustainability continues to steer pharmaceutical packaging marketFirst-of-a-kind EU approval granted for eosinophilic esophagitis medicineFinal Chapter text published for early adoptionEncouraging data revealed for schizophrenia long-acting injectablesSingle-use bioreactor market to witness favourable expansion to 2030 Read the latest issueAll subscriptions include online membership, giving you access to the journal and exclusive content. Download free copyRelated content webinarTurning quality management into quality leadershipBy newsInnovative static culturing method developedBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsSingle-use bioreactor market to witness favourable expansion to 2030By Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsFirst-of-a-kind EU approval granted for eosinophilic esophagitis medicineBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) whitepaperWhitepaper: Risk-Based Approach to Development – Injectable Combination ProductBy West Pharmaceutical Services One response to “Developing broad-spectrum vaccines that target the heart of mutating viruses” Albert Cheok says: 10 January 2023 at 8:44 amA very well written article on a highly technical subject which even a layman like me can understand. The technical case is clear. But what about matters relating to economics? Is a broad spectrum vaccine affordable without Government subsidy? Would it just be another product for the rich?ReplyLeave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment *Name * Email * Website ContentNewsArticlesMagazineWhitepapers & App NotesEventsWebinarsVideosCompany ProfilesTopicsAnalytical TechniquesBiopharmaDrug DeliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegulation & LegislationAdvertising & EditorialAdvertising OpportunitiesAdvertising Tech SpecsAdvisory BoardInformation for AuthorsMedia PlannerPermission to reuse our contentWrite for us | Advertise with us Contact Subscribe TodayT: +44 (0)1959 563311 F: +44 (0)1959 563123 Company InformationEuropean Pharmaceutical Review is published by: Russell Publishing Ltd.Court LodgeHogtrough HillBrasted, Kent, TN16 1NUUnited KingdomAboutCareers @ Russell PublishingTerms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyManage your cookies© Russell Publishing Limited, 2010-2024. All rights reserved.Website development by e-Motive Media Limited. This website uses cookies to enable, optimise and analyse site operations, as well as to provide personalised content and allow you to connect to social media. By clicking "I agree" you consent to the use of cookies for non-essential functions and the related processing of personal data. You can adjust your cookie and associated data processing preferences at any time via our "Cookie Settings". Please view our Cookie Policy to learn more about the use of cookies on our website.Manage your cookies I agreeCookie Settings Close Cookie SettingsThis website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as ”Necessary” are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. For our other types of cookies “Advertising & Targeting”, “Analytics” and “Performance”, these help us analyse and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these different types of cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. You can adjust the available sliders to ‘Enabled’ or ‘Disabled’, then click ‘Save and Accept’. View our Cookie Policy page. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncookielawinfo-checkbox-advertising-targetingThe cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Advertising & Targeting".cookielawinfo-checkbox-analyticsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Analytics".cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessaryThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".cookielawinfo-checkbox-performanceThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Performance".PHPSESSIDThis cookie is native to PHP applications. The cookie is used to store and identify a users' unique session ID for the purpose of managing user session on the website. The cookie is a session cookies and is deleted when all the browser windows are closed.viewed_cookie_policyThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data.zmember_loggedThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls whether you are able to see content which is only available to logged in users. Performance performancePerformance cookies are includes cookies that deliver enhanced functionalities of the website, such as caching. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncf_ob_infoThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and, in conjunction with the cookie 'cf_use_ob', is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.cf_use_obThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.free_subscription_onlyThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls which types of content you are able to access.ls_smartpushThis cookie is set by Litespeed Server and allows the server to store settings to help improve performance of the site.one_signal_sdk_dbThis cookie is set by OneSignal push notifications and is used for storing user preferences in connection with their notification permission status.YSCThis cookie is set by Youtube and is used to track the views of embedded videos. Analytics analyticsAnalytics cookies collect information about your use of the content, and in combination with previously collected information, are used to measure, understand, and report on your usage of this website.CookieDescriptionbcookieThis cookie is set by LinkedIn. The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.GPSThis cookie is set by YouTube and registers a unique ID for tracking users based on their geographical locationlangThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.lidcThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.lisscThis cookie is set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.vuidWe embed videos from our official Vimeo channel. When you press play, Vimeo will drop third party cookies to enable the video to play and to see how long a viewer has watched the video. This cookie does not track individuals.wow.anonymousIdThis cookie is set by Spotler and tracks an anonymous visitor ID.wow.scheduleThis cookie is set by Spotler and enables it to track the Load Balance Session Queue.wow.sessionThis cookie is set by Spotler to track the Internet Information Services (IIS) session state.wow.utmvaluesThis cookie is set by Spotler and stores the UTM values for the session. UTM values are specific text strings that are appended to URLs that allow Communigator to track the URLs and the UTM values when they get clicked on._gaThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. It stores information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors._gatThis cookies is set by Google Universal Analytics to throttle the request rate to limit the collection of data on high traffic sites._gidThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visited in an anonymous form. Advertising & Targeting advertising-targetingAdvertising and targeting cookies help us provide our visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns.CookieDescriptionadvanced_ads_browser_widthThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the browser width.advanced_ads_page_impressionsThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the number of previous page impressions.advanced_ads_pro_server_infoThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets geo-location, user role and user capabilities. It is used by cache busting in Advanced Ads Pro when the appropriate visitor conditions are used.advanced_ads_pro_visitor_referrerThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets the referrer URL.bscookieThis cookie is a browser ID cookie set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.IDEThis cookie is set by Google DoubleClick and stores information about how the user uses the website and any other advertisement before visiting the website. This is used to present users with ads that are relevant to them according to the user profile.li_sugrThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used for tracking.UserMatchHistoryThis cookie is set by Linkedin and is used to track visitors on multiple websites, in order to present relevant advertisement based on the visitor's preferences.VISITOR_INFO1_LIVEThis cookie is set by YouTube. Used to track the information of the embedded YouTube videos on a website. Save & AcceptSANCCOB Goes to Incredible Lengths to Save Penguins Skip to content Good Things Guy People Environment Fun Business Lifestyle Travel Sport Opinion Charity Lists Mega Menu More Menu Search Search for: Menu Good Things Guy Search Search for: About Us Contact The Good Things Guy Get Involved Submit a Story Order Book More SANCCOB Goes to Incredible Lengths to Save Penguins by TYLER LEIGH VIVIER@TylerleighvAugust 5, 2022August 5, 2022 438 0 Photo Credit: Jean van der Meulen from Pexels From hatching abandoned eggs, rehabilitating emaciated penguins and securing food sources by working with fisheries, SANCCOB is doing everything to save the penguins. Cape Town, South Africa (05 August 2022) – Earlier this year, SANCCOB (Southern African Foundation for the Conservation of Coastal Birds) started hatching rescued penguin eggs; the fuzzy chicks are considered the hope for the species’ future. But the team are not only working to save their rescues; they work tirelessly with all the colonies along our coastlines to save them! Penguin numbers across South African coastlines are in decline. This is worrying, which makes saving every penguin vital. Raising awareness for the work being done at SANCCOB, marine conservationist and WaddleOn Socks founder Martine Viljoen has been sharing snippets of information, highlighting the work being done by the organisation. Declining numbers of fish along the West Coast is a worrying factor for the team, but they have worked with local fisheries to ensure that the remaining 10,300 breeding pairs are well-fed and cared for. “African penguins’ main prey consists of sardine and anchovy; these are oily fish, providing a rich source of nutrients, which is largely consumed by humans and top marine predators. However, penguins must compete with industrial fishing companies for this marine resource. At SANCCOB, we are witnessing this threat first-hand where penguins are rescued from colonies in a weak and emaciated state, meaning that they are dangerously thin as a result of starvation. Every year #SANCCOB along with incredible rangers working on the colonies rescue abandoned penguin chicks owing to their parents no longer being capable of feeding themselves or further caring for these chicks out in the wild – shouldn’t this reality of our endangered African penguins drive further change?” It is very concerning when an emaciated penguin is brought in, and the prognosis is always a guarded one. Many of these sickly birds are so anaemic they require a blood transfusion. If they can be saved, their rehabilitation is a long one! SANCCOB has established a good relationship with various conservation partners over the years, and together they are working hard to secure sufficient fish stocks for African penguins and other seabirds for the coming years and beyond. Rangers that watch over local colonies often go out to weigh some of the penguins to make sure the overall health and access to food is good.Related StoryAdorable Hawksbill Turtles "Oink and Olive" on the Mend Following KZN Beach Strandings We can all support the efforts and in the most simple ways too! If you can’t donate financially, the organisation also welcomes the donation of baby socks (read about that adorable donation here), clean towels, washing of laundry, training as volunteers for when big emergencies take place, and so much more! Check out their website for details here. Our penguins are international stars, so let’s help SANCCOB save them! View this post on Instagram A post shared by Martine Viljoen (@martineviljoen) Sources: Martine Viljoen – Linked Above Don’t ever miss the Good Things. Download the Good Things Guy App now on Apple or Google. Have something to add to this story? Please share it in the comments or follow GoodThingsGuy on Facebook & Twitter to keep up to date with good news as it happens, or share your good news with us by clicking here or click the link below to listen to the Good Things Guy Podcast with Brent Lindeque – South Africa’s very own Good Things Guy. He’s on a mission to change what the world pays attention to, and he truly believes there’s good news around us. In the Good Things Guy podcast, you’ll meet these everyday heroes & hear their incredible stories: Or watch an episode of Good Things TV below, a show created to offer South Africans balance in a world with what feels like constant bad news. We’re here to remind you that there are still so many good things happening in South Africa & we’ll leave you feeling a little more proudly South African. by TYLER LEIGH VIVIER0Shares 0SharesShareTweetShareSharePin itEmailMore Tagged: #AwesomeSA Animals Awesome Cape Town Change One Thing Charity Do good Don't Miss Environment Featured Good News Inspiration Nature Social Media South Afri-CAN South Africa Wildlife WOW About the AuthorTyler Leigh Vivier Tyler Leigh Vivier is a writer for Good Things Guy. Her passion is to spread good news across South Africa with a big focus on environmental issues, animal welfare and social upliftment. Outside of Good Things Guy, she is an avid reader and lover of tea. Related Stories The Annual Smile Foundation Movie Night is Set to be a Magical Night Under the Stars! November 11, 2024November 11, 2024 New Leadership Takes the Helm of the Academy of Science of South Africa November 11, 2024November 8, 2024 Short Films Making South Africa Proud on the Film Fest Circuit November 11, 2024November 8, 2024 Raziel Hoffman Finds His Forever Furry Friend with Autism Support Dog Nala! November 11, 2024November 8, 2024 Did America “Steal” Our Milk Tart? South Africans Aren’t Having It! November 11, 2024November 11, 2024 Where’s Wally Stars in Christmas Ad With Heartwarming Reminder! November 10, 2024November 8, 2024 You May Also Like Adorable Hawksbill Turtles “Oink and Olive” on the Mend Following KZN Beach Strandings November 10, 2024November 8, 2024 Rescued from Trauma: Diego the Lion Finds Hope and a New Beginning November 10, 2024 More Southern White Rhino Move as Part of Massive Rewilding Initiative! November 8, 2024November 8, 2024 Leave a Comment Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * Email * Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Subscribe To Feel Good Friday Would you like to receive truly phenomenal, inspirational and good thing stories right to your inbox. Then subscribe to our weekly GoodThingsGuy newsletter today. Please agree to the privacy policy below in order to subscribe to our newsletter. I accept GTG’s Privacy Policy. Trending Today Rescued from Trauma: Diego the Lion Finds Hope and a New Beginning Watch: Stellenbosch University Choir’s ‘Jerusalema’ Brings Back the Joy! Did America “Steal” Our Milk Tart? South Africans Aren’t Having It! Where Prince William and Robert Irwin Went During Their SA Trip! An Underwater Clean-up Helped Restore Two Tidal Pools! Facebook Twitter Tweets by @GoodThingsGuy Where mind meets heart“You have to find what sparks a light in you so that you in your own way can illuminate the world.” ― Oprah Winfrey About Good Things Guy GoodThingsGuy is the home of everything good, and those are the things that really matter! We believe that there is good news all around us and over 1 million readers a month agree with us. GoodThingsGuy was officially launched on the 1 August 2015 in order to only promote good news, inspirational stories and promote only positive, upbeat media. GoodThingsGuy is a global, multi-platform media company that distills unique content across multiple media platforms. We consider individual and corporate contributions through the website or mail us directly here. Newest Stories The Annual Smile Foundation Movie Night is Set to be a Magical Night Under the Stars!November 11, 2024 New Leadership Takes the Helm of the Academy of Science of South AfricaNovember 11, 2024 Short Films Making South Africa Proud on the Film Fest Circuit November 11, 2024 Raziel Hoffman Finds His Forever Furry Friend with Autism Support Dog Nala!November 11, 2024 Tags#AwesomeSA #TheGoodStuff Animals Awesome Business Cape Town Change One Thing Charity Do good Don't Miss Environment Featured Good News Hero Inspiration International Lifestyle Social Media South Afri-CAN South Africa The Good Stuff Trending Video Wildlife WOW © Copyright 2024 by Good Things Guy. All Rights Reserved. Privacy Policy