Influenza and COVID-19: Five tips for a safer winter Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific Countries Countries, territories and areas in the WHO Western Pacific Region: American Samoa (USA) Australia Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China Cook Islands Fiji French Polynesia (France) Guam (USA) Hong Kong SAR (China) Japan Kiribati Lao People's Democratic Republic Macao SAR (China) Malaysia Marshall Islands Micronesia, Federated States of Mongolia Nauru New Caledonia (France) New Zealand Niue Northern Mariana Islands (USA) Palau Papua New Guinea Philippines Pitcairn Islands (UK) Republic of Korea Samoa Singapore Solomon Islands Tokelau Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Viet Nam Wallis and Futuna (France) When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English Western Pacific Home Health topics All health topics »ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Popular health topics Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Reproductive health Air pollution Obesity Mental health Vaccines Resources Data Publications Library Multimedia Report of the Regional Director Our work Our work Programmes Activities Initiatives Groups Regional Priorities Health security and AMR NCDs and ageing Climate change Reaching the unreached Resources Data Publications Library Communication for Health WHO / Yoshi Shimizu A WHO field staff talks to a woman fetching water from a water catchment tank in Kiribati. © Credits Newsroom All news News releases Feature stories Photo stories Commentaries Speeches Events Photo library Multimedia Press contact Spotlights Headlines People of the Western Pacific Emergencies Outbreaks and emergencies Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Dzud in Mongolia Mpox outbreak Surveillance Seasonal influenza Avian influenza Dengue Pacific islands Response Emergency medical teams The Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) Preparedness Data Health Data Platform >> About us Overview How we work Where we work Our programmes Country support Pacific technical support Governance Regional Director Regional Committee Partnerships Collaborating Centers Partners Donors Regional health initiatives Contact us Careers RCM 2024 Home/ Newsroom/ Feature Stories/ item/ Influenza and COVID-19: Five tips for a safer winter Influenza and COVID-19: Five tips for a safer winter 25 November 2022 Millions of people in the Western Pacific Region could face a winter in which both influenza and COVID-19 are circulating. Cases of seasonal influenza, known as the flu, could be higher now than earlier in the COVID-19 pandemic, when the spread of flu was limited by measures that people took to stop the spread of COVID-19, such as physical distancing, mask wearing, and hand and cough hygiene. The coming months could bring more flu because people are mixing and travelling more, and they have less immunity to the flu because it circulated less last winter. At the same time, there is still pressure on health systems because of the pandemic. Even countries and areas in the Southern Hemisphere or near the equator may see a rise in the flu over the next few months as more people travel globally. Both the flu and COVID-19 can be fatal. Before the pandemic, seasonal influenza caused up to 650 000 deaths globally a year. Here are five tips for a safer winter from the World Health Organization: 1. Know the symptoms The flu and COVID-19 are caused by different viruses, but they are both infectious respiratory diseases, spread by droplets and aerosols when infected people cough, sneeze, speak, sing, breathe, etc. They have similar symptoms, including cough, runny nose, sore throat, fever, headache and fatigue. People may have varying levels of illness with both the flu and COVID-19. Some may have no symptoms, while others have mild symptoms or severe disease. Because symptoms are similar, you may need to take a test if you are in a risk group, so that treatment can begin quickly, if needed. The flu is different from the common cold, which can be caused by several viruses. People with colds are more likely to have a runny or stuffy nose than those with the flu or COVID-19. Colds do not usually result in serious health problems. Another virus that might be in circulation is respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), which is mostly seen in young children and the elderly. It causes wheezing and breathing problems. Most people recover in a week or two; however, RSV can be serious, especially for infants and older people, leading to death in some cases. 2. Know who is at risk For both the flu and COVID-19, the people most at risk of serious illness are older people, anyone who is pregnant and people with underlying conditions, such as cancers and chronic respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. The flu can put children under five at risk of severe disease; whereas anyone at any age can get sick, become seriously ill and die from COVID-19. Health-care workers are at high risk of getting both diseases because they are more exposed to patients. They, in turn, risk spreading the diseases to people who are at risk. 3. Get vaccinated against the flu and COVID-19 Vaccination is very effective at protecting people against severe illness and death from the flu and COVID-19. It is especially important to be vaccinated if you are a health-care worker or a person at higher risk of severe illness. The best time to get the flu vaccine is just before the flu season starts. The best time to get the COVID-19 vaccine or booster shot is when you become eligible. It is safe to get your COVID-19 vaccination and annual flu shot at the same time. 4. Keep flu away from yourself and others The same measures to stay safe from COVID-19 also limit the risk of catching or spreading the flu: Keep your hands clean by regularly washing them with soap and water or alcohol-based hand rub Cover coughs and sneezes with a bent elbow or a tissue and dispose of the used tissue in a bin with a lid Stay at home if you feel sick Avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth Avoid close contact with sick people Open windows to encourage air flow Wear a mask 5. Stay home if you feel unwell If you feel unwell, stay at home, if you can. This will help to make sure you don’t pass viruses onto others and it will help to reduce pressure on health services. This simple step saves lives. If you are in a high-risk group and feel unwell with the flu or COVID-19, seek medical care as soon as possible. If you are not in a high-risk group, isolate at home and treat the symptoms, such as fever and sore throat. Many people who test positive for COVID-19 and have no symptoms or mild symptoms can safely recover at home in isolation. People who are aged over 60, pregnant, immunocompromised or unvaccinated, or who have underlying conditions, should contact their health-care provider for advice. Learn the eight steps to safe home-based recovery from COVID-19, including the red flags for when you should seek help. The viruses that cause the flu and COVID-19 do not respond to antibiotics. However, some people who become ill with viruses can also develop bacterial infections as a complication. In this case, antibiotics may be recommended by a health-care provider. Learn more about COVID-19 and antibiotics. A safer winter There is an increased risk of both the flu and COVID-19 circulating over the next few months. For a safer winter, you should know the symptoms and who is at risk, get vaccinated, take steps to protect yourself and others, and stay safe if you get sick. Related Science in 5 on Flu and COVID-19Watch a video about influenzaSeasonal influenza in the Western Pacific RegionQ&A on influenza and COVID-19Situation reports on seasonal influenzaAdvantages of administering influenza and COVID-19 vaccines at the same timeRecommended composition of influenza virus vaccines Fact sheets Influenza (Seasonal) 3 October 2023 Quick links Newsroom Emergencies Data Campaigns Publications About us Overview Programmes Country support Governance Partnerships Help Contact us Press Careers Cyber security Privacy Legal Notice © 2024 WHOObstetric Care Professionals Urge: The Time for Influenza Vaccination is Now | AAFP Search search close Obstetric Care Professionals Urge: The Time for Influenza Vaccination is Now Flu season is here, and many parts of the country are already seeing unprecedented levels of influenza-like illness and confirmed influenza infection. That is why, collectively, the American Academy of Family Physicians; American College of Nurse-Midwives; American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; Association of Women’s Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses; National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Women’s Health, and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine are urging health care professionals to strongly recommend flu vaccination for all patients—especially those who are pregnant—and offer vaccination in your office whenever possible. Flu activity is surging at alarming rates. Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention indicate that flu-related hospitalizations are the highest they have been in over 10 years. At the time of this Call to Action, there have already been five pediatric deaths this season (1). Data indicate fewer people are getting vaccinated. In pregnant people alone, there has been an 8% decrease in vaccination since the 2019–2020 flu season (2). Pregnant individuals are at increased risk of severe illness and poor outcomes related to influenza infection. Flu can be an especially serious disease for this population because of the increased risk of fetal demise (3), preterm labor, and preterm birth (4,5). Influenza can also cause severe, life-threatening illness in pregnant individuals themselves (6, 7). Influenza vaccination plays a critical role in protecting pregnant individuals against serious illness and potentially devastating outcomes. Influenza vaccination helps prevent severe illness and hospitalization in pregnant people who get the flu. Influenza vaccination during pregnancy transfers antibodies to the fetus, helping to protect infants after birth against the flu before they become eligible for vaccination at 6 months (8). Flu vaccines have an excellent safety profile and have been safely administered to millions of pregnant and lactating people. Data from the Southern Hemisphere indicate that this year’s vaccine effectively reduced the risk of hospitalization from A(H3N2)—the predominantly circulating influenza strain—by nearly 50% (9). A strong recommendation from a trusted health care professional can be the deciding factor in a person’s choice to get vaccinated. Even if a patient has already declined vaccination, this season’s increased flu activity may have changed their opinion about getting vaccinated. Flu vaccine should be given as soon as possible in pregnancy; there is no need to wait for a specific trimester to get vaccinated. Be a champion for vaccination this year and every year, and encourage your staff, coworkers, and patients to receive a flu vaccine to protect themselves and others. For more information and resources, see the Maternal Immunization Task Force Resource Page. *** References Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Weekly U.S. influenza surveillance report. CDC; 2022. Accessed November 18, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/index.htm Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Flu, Tdap, and COVID-19 vaccination coverage among pregnant women – United States, April 2022. CDC; 2022. Accessed November 18, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/fluvaxview/pregnant-women-apr2022.htm Håberg SE, Trogstad L, Gunnes N, Wilcox AJ, Gjessing HK, Samuelsen SO, et al. Risk of fetal death after pandemic influenza virus infection or vaccination. N Engl J Med 2013;368:333-40. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1207210 https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1207210 Richards JL, Hansen C, Bredfeldt C, Bednarczyk RA, Steinhoff MC, Adjaye-Gbewonyo D, et al. Neonatal outcomes after antenatal influenza immunization during the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic: impact on preterm birth, birth weight, and small for gestational age birth. Clin Infect Dis 2013;56:1216-22. DOI: 10.1093/cid/cit045 https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/56/9/1216/294242 Pierce M, Kurinczuk JJ, Spark P, Brocklehurst P, Knight M. Perinatal outcomes after maternal 2009/H1N1 infection: national cohort study. UKOSS. BMJ 2011;342:d3214. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.d3214 https://www.bmj.com/content/342/bmj.d3214.long Oluyomi-Obi T, Avery L, Schneider C, Kumar A, Lapinsky S, Menticoglou S, et al. Perinatal and maternal outcomes in critically ill obstetrics patients with pandemic H1N1 Influenza A. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2010;32:443-7. DOI: 10.1016/S1701-2163(16)34497-8 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1701216316344978 Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, Rasmussen SA, Williams JL, Swerdlow DL, Biggerstaff MS, et al. H1N1 2009 influenza virus infection during pregnancy in the USA. Novel Influenza A (H1N1) Pregnancy Working Group. Lancet 2009;374:451-8. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61304-0 https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(09)61304-0/fulltext Nunes MC, Madhi SA. Prevention of influenza-related illness in young infants by maternal vaccination during pregnancy. F1000Res 2018;7:122. DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.12473.1https://f1000research.com/articles/7-122/v1 Olivares Barraza MF, Fasce RA, Nogareda F, Marcenac P, Vergara Mallegas N, Bustos Alister P, et al. Influenza incidence and vaccine effectiveness during the southern hemisphere influenza season - Chile, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2022;71:1353-8. DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7143a1 https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/wr/mm7143a1.htm This publication was supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) as part of a financial assistance award totaling $500,000 with 100 percent funded by CDC/HHS. The contents are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of, nor an endorsement, by CDC/HHS, or the U.S. Government. *** About American Academy of Family Physicians Founded in 1947, the AAFP represents 130,000 physicians and medical students nationwide. It is the largest medical society devoted solely to primary care. Family physicians conduct approximately one in five office visits — that’s 192 million visits annually or 48 percent more than the next most visited medical specialty. Today, family physicians provide more care for America’s underserved and rural populations than any other medical specialty. Family medicine’s cornerstone is an ongoing, personal patient-physician relationship focused on integrated care. To learn more about the specialty of family medicine and the AAFP's positions on issues and clinical care, visit www.aafp.org. For information about health care, health conditions and wellness, please visit the AAFP’s consumer website, www.familydoctor.org. Copyright © 2024 American Academy of Family Physicians. All Rights Reserved.Post-marketing surveillance study on influenza vaccine in South Korea using a nationwide spontaneous reporting database with multiple data mining methods | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Post-marketing surveillance study on influenza vaccine in South Korea using a nationwide spontaneous reporting database with multiple data mining methods Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 24 November 2022 Post-marketing surveillance study on influenza vaccine in South Korea using a nationwide spontaneous reporting database with multiple data mining methods Hyesung Lee1,2 na1, Bin Hong1 na1, SangHee Kim1, Ju Hwan Kim1 nAff8, Nam-Kyong Choi3,4, Sun-Young Jung ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2032-112X5,6 & …Ju-Young Shin ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1010-75251,2,7 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 12, Article number: 20256 (2022) Cite this article 1896 Accesses 1 Citations 3 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusVaccines AbstractSafety profiles of the influenza vaccine and its subtypes are still limited. We aimed to address this knowledge gap using multiple data mining methods and calculated performance measurements to evaluate the precision of different detection methods. We conducted a post-marketing surveillance study between 2005 and 2019 using the Korea Adverse Event Reporting System database. Three data mining methods were applied: (a) proportional reporting ratio, (b) information component, and (c) tree-based scan statistics. We evaluated the performance of each method in comparison with the known adverse events (AEs) described in the labeling information. Compared to other vaccines, we identified 36 safety signals for the influenza vaccine, and 7 safety signals were unlabeled. In subtype-stratified analyses, application site disorders were reported more frequently with quadrivalent and cell-based vaccines, while a wide range of AEs were noted for trivalent and egg-based vaccines. Tree-based scan statistics showed well-balanced performance. Among the detected signals of influenza vaccines, narcolepsy requires special attention. A wider range of AEs were detected as signals for trivalent and egg-based vaccines. Although tree-based scan statistics showed balanced performance, complementary use of other techniques would be beneficial when large noise due to false positives is expected. Similar content being viewed by others Active surveillance for adverse events of influenza vaccine safety in elderly cancer patients using self-controlled tree-temporal scan statistic analysis Article Open access 16 August 2023 Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the spontaneous reporting and signal detection of adverse drug events Article Open access 01 November 2023 Comparability of clinical trials and spontaneous reporting data regarding COVID-19 vaccine safety Article Open access 29 June 2022 IntroductionInfluenza is an infectious disease associated with high morbidity and mortality globally1,2, and vaccination is the most effective means of eradication3. In Korea, influenza vaccines have been provided as part of the National Immunization Program (NIP), and eligible groups have continuously expanded since their introduction in 1997. Accordingly, the number of adverse events (AEs) following immunization for influenza has been steadily increasing according to the Korea Adverse Event Reporting System (KAERS)4. Safety profiles are a collection of adverse events5, including the information identified from clinical trials or a post-marketing phase and unidentified to date. Especially, unidentified information or safety signal represents “reported information on a possible causal relationship between an AE and a vaccine or drug, of which the relationship is unknown or incompletely evaluated previously”6. In particular, concerns regarding serious AEs of influenza vaccination have been continuously highlighted, including Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), febrile seizure, anaphylaxis, narcolepsy, and Bell’s palsy7,8,9,10,11,12. However, only a few studies on AEs associated with influenza vaccines have been conducted in Korea7,8. Therefore, it is necessary to re-evaluate the safety information of influenza vaccines using the latest and widely collected Korean databases.Influenza vaccines can be classified into two types in terms of the type of production method or virus immunization: (a) egg-based vaccines and cell-based vaccines for the former, and (b) trivalent influenza vaccines (TIVs) and quadrivalent influenza vaccines (QIVs) for the latter. Several studies have reported that the safety of influenza vaccines may vary according to subtypes13,14,15, but most of the evidence is dependent on the results of randomized clinical trials (RCTs) with a limited population and study period. Therefore, an additional study with a large-scale database is needed to establish safety profiles by subtype.There are two types of methods to detect safety signals (quantitative and qualitative method), and a variety of quantitative data mining methods are available for post-marketing safety monitoring. Typically, disproportionality-based methods are widely used to detect safety signals based on an imbalance between the reporting rate of specific AEs for a specific drug and that of specific AEs for other drugs. The proportional reporting ratio (PRR), reporting odds ratio (ROR), and information component (IC) are the most common measurements in disproportionality-based methods16. Recently, tree-based scan statistics (TSS) have been applied in the signal detection of vaccines17,18, which were proposed to analyze a database with a hierarchical tree structure with adjustment for multiple comparisons19. Although various data mining methods have been developed and widely used for detecting signals, inconsistent results have been reported using different methods17,18, implying that the use of multiple data mining methods should be considered simultaneously.Given the limited safety profiles on influenza vaccine and inconsistent results by different data mining methods, we conducted a nationwide, post-marketing surveillance study to detect adverse events following influenza vaccination using three different data mining methods. Firstly, we identified unexpected AEs which are potentially related to influenza vaccination, particularly focusing on five serious AEs of special interest (GBS, febrile seizure, anaphylaxis, narcolepsy, and Bell’s palsy). Secondly, we aimed to provide comparative safety profiles by the subtype of influenza vaccine (type of production method: egg-based vs. cell-based; type of virus immunization: QIVs vs. TIVs). Lastly, we compared the results of signal detection from each data mining methods to evaluate their performance on predicting safety signals.ResultsGeneral characteristicsThe basic characteristics of influenza vaccine-related AEs compared with those of other vaccines are provided in Table 1. More AEs were reported in females than in males for both influenza vaccines and all other vaccines, accounting for 68.77% and 57.30%, respectively. The proportion of children below 24 months in the influenza vaccine group was higher than that of other vaccines, while that of individuals 19 years or older in the influenza vaccine group was lower than that of other vaccines. When stratified by route of administration, most of the characteristics between the influenza vaccine and other vaccines were similar, except for the origin and year of the report: most came from a pharmaceutical company for all other vaccines (74.71%), while pharmaceutical companies with regional pharmacovigilance centers (RPVC) for influenza vaccines (52.84% and 42.57%, respectively) and the proportion of serious influenza vaccine-related AEs (5.18%) were less than that of other vaccines (8.06%).Table 1 Characteristics of adverse event reports following influenza vaccination and all other vaccines between 2005 and 2019.Full size tableSignal detectionCompared to all other vaccines, we identified 36 AEs as safety signals of influenza vaccines detected by any data mining method at least once (see Supplementary Material S2 online). Among them, seven AEs (injection site inflammation, muscle weakness, quadriplegia, paraplegia, hyperventilation, cachexia, and narcolepsy) were not included in the labeling information and were detected by all data mining methods, except for paraplegia (not in TSS). For serious AEs of special interest, anaphylaxis, neuritis (a preferred term [PT] of GBS), and narcolepsy were detected as signals compared to all other vaccines by all data mining methods, and paralysis (a PT of Bell’s palsy) was detected by IC and TSS (Table 2). Additionally, each method detected a similar number of safety signals (PRR, 29; IC, 30; TSS, 27).Table 2 Unlabeled and adverse events of special interest among signal detection results of influenza vaccination using disproportionality methods and tree-based scan statistics from 2005 to 2019.Full size tableDifferent findings have been reported for influenza vaccine subtypes using various methods. When using TIV as a comparator, 13 AEs were detected as safety signals by any data mining method at least once for QIV, and among them (see Supplementary Material S3 online), two safety signals (injection site bruising and cachexia) were not included in the labeling (Table 3). Moreover, each method generated a similar number of safety signals: 13 signals for PRR and TSS and 12 signals for IC. In contrast, we detected 59 AEs as safety signals at least once for TIV when compared to QIV; 26 safety signals were not included in labeling, but only 5 of these were overlapped by the three methods.Table 3 Unlabeled signals among signal detection results of quadrivalent and trivalent influenza vaccines using disproportionality methods and tree-based scan statistics from 2005 to 2019.Full size tableCompared to the egg-based vaccine, we identified 13 AEs as safety signals of cell-based vaccines using at least one data mining method (see Supplementary Material S4 online). Among them, four safety signals (injection site bruising, pneumonitis, encephalopathy, and tachycardia) were not included in the labeling, but only injection site bruising was detected by all three methods (Table 4). PRR, IC, and TSS detected 9, 13, and 6 safety signals, respectively. When using cell-based vaccines as a comparator, 30 AEs were detected as safety signals by any data mining method at least once for egg-based vaccines, 4 of which (leg pain, tremor, injection site mass, and cachexia) were not included in the labeling. PRR, IC, and TSS detected 20, 2, and 23 safety signals, respectively.Table 4 Unlabeled signals among signal detection results of cell-based and egg-based influenza vaccines using disproportionality methods and tree-based scan statistics from 2005 to 2019.Full size tablePerformance evaluationWe measured the performance indicators of each data mining method based on the confusion matrix, where all detected signals were categorized into true positive (TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN), or false negative (FN) based on the reference standard. Overall, TSS demonstrated well balance. TSS showed the highest sensitivity (77.8%), positive predictive value (PPV, 77.8%), accuracy (72.1%), and area under the curve (AUC, 70.1%) and the lowest specificity (62.5%). In contrast, IC showed the highest specificity (94.7%) and negative predictive value (NPV, 64.3%). In addition, except for specificity, all PRR measurements were the lowest (Fig. 1).Figure 1Bar chart of performance measurements for signal detection algorithms about influenza vaccine. Abbreviations: IC, information component; PRR, proportional reporting ratio; TSS, tree-based scan statistic; PPV, positive predictive value; NPV, negative predictive value; AUC, area under the curve.Full size imageDiscussionWe conducted a safety surveillance study on influenza vaccines and their subtypes using a nationwide spontaneous reporting database with three different data mining methods. The total number of signals detected by disproportionality-based analysis and TSS for the influenza vaccine compared to other vaccines were similar, and few unexpected AEs for the overall influenza vaccine were observed. Additional signal detection according to subtype was also conducted, where we noted that a wider range of AEs were detected as signals for TIVs and egg-based vaccines. Regarding the evaluation for signal detection, TSS showed better performance than the other data mining methods, with the optimal balance among all performance measurements.From the results of the signal detection for the overall influenza vaccine, we identified that most signals were known AEs, such as application site disorders, body as a whole-general disorder, and musculoskeletal system disorders. All five serious AEs of special interest for influenza vaccine were detected as signals, except for febrile seizure. Similar findings were reported in two recent studies, both of which used two disproportionality-based methods (PRR and IC) for safety signal detection of influenza vaccines using the U.S. Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), where GBS and paralysis were detected as signals by all three methods, respectively20,21. Among the seven detected signals not listed in the labeling in South Korea, injection-site inflammation and muscle weakness are reflected in the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (US-FDA) labeling. Accordingly, injection site inflammation and muscle weakness should be updated after signal evaluation. Of the remaining five unlabeled signals in both the U.S. and South Korea, narcolepsy seems to require urgent assessment. As mentioned earlier, narcolepsy cases grew rapidly following the 2009–2010 H1N1 vaccination in Finland and five other European countries (see Supplementary Material S5 online). Subsequent studies have shown that the AS03-adjuvanted pandemic vaccine Pandemrix (GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Wavre, Belgium), which was widely used in these countries during that period, contains a protein structurally similar to the orexin receptor, which is likely to induce an autoimmune response that destroys orexin cells in the brain and causes narcolepsy22. The H1N1 vaccine adjuvanted with AS03 was not used in Korea, but we identified narcolepsy as a safety signal for the influenza vaccine compared with other vaccines in this study, although there were only 11 reported cases. Therefore, signal validation through an in-depth evaluation of these cases is required.Furthermore, we noted that the distribution of AEs differed between QIVs and TIVs. Local reactions at the injection site were more frequently reported in QIVs than in TIVs in our studies, which is consistent with previous studies. A meta-analysis of 5 RCTs reported that the incidence of injection site pain was higher with QIVs than TIVs with a pooled risk ratio of 1.18 (95% confidence interval: 1.03–1.35)23. In addition, a wider range of AEs were detected as signals for TIVs in our study, which showed inconsistent results with a previous RCT24 that demonstrated that QIVs and TIVs showed similar profiles. This may be attributed to the different distribution of age groups between QIVs and TIVs, with the proportion of the older group (65 years and above) being 0.47% and 10.1%, respectively. The aged population is vulnerable to adverse drug reactions due to age-related physiological changes25.Moreover, we detected a wider range of AEs as signals with egg-based vaccines compared with cell-based vaccines, suggesting that safety profiles among these two subtypes may differ, which is inconsistent with the results of previous studies. Two RCTs demonstrated that cell-based and egg-based TIVs had comparable safety profiles in children and adolescents < 18 years of age26,27. We believe that this situation may be due to the following reasons. First, compared with cell-based vaccines, an inherent drawback of egg-based vaccines is that impurities or exogenous contamination may cause AEs28. In addition, Korea approved the first cell-based influenza vaccine in 2014, and egg-based influenza vaccines still dominate the majority of the market share29. In our database, cell-based vaccines only accounted for 15% of all cases; therefore, it is possible that some AEs of cell-based vaccines have not yet been revealed. Therefore, it is necessary to collect additional information.In this study, TSS had the highest accuracy (72.1%), AUC (70.1%), PPV (77.8%), and sensitivity (77.8%). TSS allows the simultaneous evaluation of a large number of individual AE terms and related AE groups, thereby resolving multiple testing problems of disproportionality-based methods30. Two previous studies of the BCG vaccine and pneumococcal vaccine using the KAERS database also showed balanced performance in TSS17,18. However, we found that the sensitivity of TSS in this study was much higher than that in the BCG and pneumococcal vaccine studies (35.3% and 31.7%, respectively). There are two possible explanations for this observation. First, safety profiles are relatively well-established in the influenza vaccine, which targets the entire population as more extensive AEs have been reported and studied, compared to BCG and pneumococcal vaccines, both of which have limited recipients. Furthermore, the ability to detect signals through data mining techniques is largely influenced by the size of the dataset, which differs significantly between influenza and other vaccines (current study, 17,378 AE reports; BCG, 833 AE reports; pneumococcal vaccine, 1135 AE reports).This study had several limitations. First, quantitative signal detection using passive surveillance systems, such as the KAERS database, has the inherent limitations of missing information, inconsistent quality of individual case safety reports, duplicated reporting, and under-reporting due to lack of awareness31. Therefore, our results do not reflect a causal relationship between vaccines and AEs, and further signal validation and assessment are needed. Second, in this study, the reference standard was established based on Ministry of Food and Drug Safety of South Korea (MFDS)-approved labeling for performance evaluation; thus, the results could be largely affected by the reference standard32. However, we believe that the labeling included all related AEs since influenza vaccines have been used for a long time. Third, our findings should not be overstated that TSS is the best-balanced method to detect safety signals in other vaccines or even in drugs as individual vaccine or drugs has different medical or clinical context. Therefore, further studies should be conducted to confirm our finding on the performance TSS across different vaccines and drugs. Lastly, although TSS showed the well-balanced performance compared to other data mining methods, TSS did not show the best values in all performance measurements, particularly in specificity. This result could be explained by the inverse relationship between sensitivity and specificity when considering the highest sensitivity in TSS, which were about threefold higher compared with the other methods (TSS: 77.8%, PRR: 21.1%, IC: 25.5%). This result suggests that the utilization of multiple data mining methods is reasonable choice to detect safety signals conservatively. In addition, the low values of accuracy and AUC were observed across all methods (TSS: 72.1%, 70.1%; PRR: 63.2%, 57.1%; IC: 66.1%, 60.1%). These results might be influenced by the reference standard that was used for constructing a confusion matrix for performance measurement. However, as the bias from reference standard could affect the performance of all methods, we believe that this bias is unlikely to distort the results of performance. Another possibility is that these methods are not precise or advanced to detect safety signals appropriately. Recently, machine learning algorithms have been utilized in the pharmacovigilance field with relatively high performance, compared with the traditional data mining methods33. However, we did not utilize this method in this study. Therefore, further research involving a variety of new methods such as machine learning is needed.ConclusionsIn this post-marketing surveillance study, we identify 7 new safety signals for influenza vaccine including narcolepsy as a serious AE, and observed TIVs and egg-based influenza vaccine showed a wide range of new safety signals when compared to QIVs and cell-based influenza vaccine, respectively. Further studies are needed to confirm the potential relationship between influenza vaccine and new safety signals, and meanwhile, healthcare providers should evaluate whether vaccinees are susceptible to experiencing these safety signals by an in-depth review of comorbidities or AE-related history to prevent an avoidable risk. In addition, although TSS showed balanced performance in this study, there is still discrepancy in the identified safety signals among different methods, and some measurements were lower than the others. This result suggests that the complementary use of multiple data mining methods should be utilized to detect new safety signals conservatively.MethodsData sourceWe used the Korea Institute of Drug Safety and Risk Management-Korea Adverse Event Reporting System Database (KIDS-KAERS database)34 from 2005 to 2019. This database includes all spontaneous AE reports in South Korea and detailed information on demographics, vaccination, AEs, causality assessment, and clinical information. Information on the vaccine product was also provided. All drugs and AEs are coded according to the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification (ATC) system and the World Health Organization-Adverse Reaction Terminology (WHO-ART) dictionary35,36, respectively. WHO-ART is established as a tree structure, including system organ class (SOC), high-level terms (HLT), PTs, and included terms (IT) from top to bottom, and the signals were determined at the PT levels in this study.The need for informed consent was waived, as this study was conducted using a spontaneous reporting database which does not include personal information. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Chung-Ang University in South Korea (1041078-202008-ZZ-209-01). The Institutional Review Board of Chung-Ang University has waived informed consent for this study. All methods were carried out in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.Study vaccineAll vaccines available in Korea were included. The study vaccine was an influenza vaccine, and all other vaccines were used as comparators for signal detection. Nineteen influenza vaccine products have been approved and used in Korea, with 2 cell-based vaccines, 17 egg-based vaccines, 8 TIVs, and 11 QIVs. A full list of influenza vaccine products used in our study is given in Supplementary Material S1 online.Selection of AE reportsFrom all AEs following vaccination collected in our database from 2005 to 2019, we excluded the following: (1) those that were reported as a concomitant vaccine, not a suspected vaccine; (2) those that were not final reports; (3) those that were invalid reports (missing or unspecified drugs or AE codes), and (4) those with report errors (logical error).From a total of 42,211 reports in our database, we identified 38,221 reports after vaccination. Among these, 17,378 (45.5%) were reported for the influenza vaccine. We identified 17,280 reports, of which 7639 (44.2%) were reported for QIV, 9641 (55.8%) for TIV, 2744 (15.9%) for cell-based influenza vaccine, and 14,536 (84.1%) for egg-based influenza vaccine. A flowchart of the study is presented in Fig. 2.Figure 2Flowchart of selection for spontaneous reports of adverse event. Abbreviations: KIDS-KAERS, Korea Institute of Drug Safety and Risk Management-Korea Adverse Event Reporting System Database; QIV, quadrivalent influenza vaccine; TIV, trivalent influenza vaccine. AE, adverse event.Full size imageSelection of five AEs of special interestBased on literature REVIEWS, we selected the following five possible serious and important AEs observed after influenza vaccination: GBS, febrile conversion, anaphylaxis, narcolepsy, and Bell’s palsy. Detailed information is provided in Supplementary Material S5 online.Statistical analysesDescriptive analysesWe calculated the frequency and proportion of baseline demographic characteristics (e.g., sex and age group) and reports (e.g., report type, source, reporter, seriousness, and causality assessment). Chi-squared tests were performed to compare the distribution of baseline characteristics between the influenza vaccine and all other vaccines or among individual subtypes of influenza vaccine (TIVs vs. QIVs and egg-based vs. cell-based vaccines). Algorithms for signal detectionTo detect the signals, three signal detection algorithms were used in this study, including PRR, IC, and TSS.Disproportionality-based analysisIn this study, we used PRR and IC to generate signal scores for all AE pairs for the influenza vaccine versus all other vaccines, QIVs versus TIVs, and cell-based versus egg-based influenza vaccine. The Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in the United Kingdom and the WHO use PRR and IC, respectively37. The thresholds of signals for each algorithm were defined as follows: PRR ≥ 2, chi-squared test ≥ 4, number of reported AEs ≥ 3, IC with a lower limit of 95% confidence interval ≥ 0.Tree-based scan statistic (TSS)TSS is based on log-likelihood ratio (LLR) statistics and is suitable for analyzing a hierarchical structure variable. In this study, a diagnosis tree defined by the WHO-ART hierarchical structure was constructed, and the signals were determined at the PT level to compare them with the signals detected by the other algorithms. The unconditional Bernoulli model was selected to compare the number of AE reports between the two drugs. The expected and observed counts at each leaf were generated under the null hypothesis of an independent relationship between the vaccine and AE. AEs were defined as signals when the p-value of LLR was lower than 0.05, and p-values were generated using a Monte Carlo simulation. The analysis was performed using TreeScan Software38.Performance evaluation of signal detection algorithmsThe performance of disproportionality analysis (PRR, IC) and TSS was evaluated based on performance indicators such as sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, accuracy, and AUC to identify which algorithm was more appropriate for detecting safety signals for influenza vaccines. To evaluate the performance indicators, a reference standard was established based on the MFDS-approved package inserts downloaded on September 13, 2020, from the NeDRUG website of the MFDS39. Data availability The data underlying this study are from the KAERS which has been transferred to the KIDS. The Korean government prohibits the release of the spontaneous reporting dataset to the public domain. Interested researchers can obtain the data through formal application to the KIDS. Korea Institute of Drug Safety & Risk Management (Ministry of Food and Drug Safety), Korean (https://open.drugsafe.or.kr/original/invitation.jsp). ReferencesIuliano, A. D. et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: A modelling study. Lancet 391, 1285–1300 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar Simonsen, L. et al. Global mortality estimates for the 2009 Influenza pandemic from the GLaMOR project: A modeling study. PLoS Med. 10(11), e1001558 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Osterholm, M. T., Kelley, N. S., Sommer, A. & Belongia, E. A. Efficacy and effectiveness of influenza vaccines: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect. Dis. 12(1), 36–44 (2012).Article PubMed Google Scholar Yoon, D., Kim, J. H., Lee, H. & Shin, J. Y. Updates on vaccine safety and post-licensure surveillance for adverse events following immunization in South Korea, 2005–2017. Yonsei Med. J. 61, 623–630 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Aronson, J. Safety. BMJ 351, h3521 (2015).Article Google Scholar Edwards, I. R. & Aronson, J. K. Adverse drug reactions: Definitions, diagnosis, and management. Lancet 356, 1255–1259 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kim, C. et al. Pandemic influenza A vaccination and incidence of Guillain-Barré syndrome in Korea. Vaccine 33, 1815–1823 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar Kim, J. H. et al. Adverse events following immunization (AEFI) with the novel influenza a (H1N1) 2009 vaccine: findings from the national registry of all vaccine recipients and AEFI and the passive surveillance system in South Korea. Jpn. J. Infect. Dis. 65, 99–104 (2012).Article PubMed Google Scholar Leroy, Z., Broder, K., Menschik, D., Shimabukuro, T. & Martin, D. Febrile seizures after 2010–2011 influenza vaccine in young children, United States: a vaccine safety signal from the vaccine adverse event reporting system. Vaccine 30, 2020–2023 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mutsch, M. et al. Use of the inactivated intranasal influenza vaccine and the risk of Bell’s palsy in Switzerland. N. Engl. J. Med. 350, 896–903 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nohynek, H. et al. AS03 adjuvanted AH1N1 vaccine associated with an abrupt increase in the incidence of childhood narcolepsy in Finland. PLoS ONE 7, e33536 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhou, W. et al. A potential signal of Bell’s palsy after parenteral inactivated influenza vaccines: Reports to the vaccine adverse event reporting system (VAERS)–United States, 1991–2001. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 13, 505–510 (2004).Article PubMed Google Scholar Baxter, R. et al. Evaluation of the safety, reactogenicity and immunogenicity of FluBlok® trivalent recombinant baculovirus-expressed hemagglutinin influenza vaccine administered intramuscularly to healthy adults 50–64 years of age. Vaccine 29, 2272–2278 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar King, J. C. Jr. et al. Evaluation of the safety, reactogenicity and immunogenicity of FluBlok trivalent recombinant baculovirus-expressed hemagglutinin influenza vaccine administered intramuscularly to healthy children aged 6–59 months. Vaccine 27, 6589–6594 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Szymczakiewicz-Multanowska, A. et al. Safety and immunogenicity of a novel influenza subunit vaccine produced in mammalian cell culture. J. Infect. Dis. 200, 841–848 (2009).Article PubMed Google Scholar Duggirala, H. J. et al. Use of data mining at the food and drug administration. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 23, 428–434 (2016).Article PubMed Google Scholar Kim, J. H., Lee, H. & Shin, J. Y. Bacillus calmette-guerin (BCG) vaccine safety surveillance in the Korea adverse event reporting system using the tree-based scan statistic and conventional disproportionality-based algorithms. Vaccine 38, 3702–3710 (2020).Article PubMed Google Scholar Lee, H., Kim, J. H., Choe, Y. J. & Shin, J. Y. Safety surveillance of pneumococcal vaccine using three algorithms: Disproportionality methods, empirical bayes geometric mean, and tree-based scan statistic. Vaccines 8, 242 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kulldorff, M., Fang, Z. & Walsh, S. J. A tree-based scan statistic for database disease surveillance. Biometrics 59, 323–331 (2003).Article MathSciNet PubMed MATH Google Scholar Kamath, A., Maity, N. & Nayak, M. A. Facial paralysis following influenza vaccination: A disproportionality analysis using the vaccine adverse event reporting system database. Clin. Drug. Investig. 40, 883–889 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, H., Kim, H. J., Choe, Y. J. & Shin, J. Y. Signals and trends of Guillain-Barré syndrome after the introduction of live-attenuated vaccines for influenza in the US and South Korean adverse event reporting systems. Vaccine 38, 5464–5473 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ahmed, S. S. et al. Antibodies to influenza nucleoprotein cross-react with human hypocretin receptor 2. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 294ra105 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar Moa, A. M., Chughtai, A. A., Muscatello, D. J., Turner, R. M. & MacIntyre, C. R. Immunogenicity and safety of inactivated quadrivalent influenza vaccine in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Vaccine 34, 4092–4102 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Treanor, J. T. et al. Immunogenicity and safety of a quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine compared with two trivalent inactivated influenza vaccines containing alternate B strains in adults: A phase 3, randomized noninferiority study. Vaccine 35, 1856–1864 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Carroll, C. & Hassanin, A. Polypharmacy in the elderly-when good drugs lead to bad outcomes: A teachable moment. JAMA Intern. Med. 177, 871 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Diez-Domingo, J. et al. Safety and tolerability of cell culture-derived and egg-derived trivalent influenza vaccines in 3 to <18-year-old children and adolescents at risk of influenza-related complications. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 49, 171–178 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Oh, C. E. et al. A randomized, double-blind, active-controlled clinical trial of a cell culture-derived inactivated trivalent influenza vaccine (NBP607) in healthy children 6 months through 18 years of age. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 37, 605–611 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar Pandey, A., Singh, N., Sambhara, S. & Mittal, S. K. Egg-independent vaccine strategies for highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza viruses. Hum. Vaccin. 6, 178–188 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pérez Rubio, A. & Eiros, J. M. Cell culture-derived flu vaccine present and future. Hum. Vaccin. Immunother. 14, 1874–1882 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kulldorff, M. et al. Drug safety data mining with a tree-based scan statistic. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 22, 517–523 (2013).Article PubMed Google Scholar Rosenthal, S. & Chen, R. The reporting sensitivities of two passive surveillance systems for vaccine adverse events. Am. J. Public Health. 85, 1706–1709 (1995).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Whiting, P. et al. Development and validation of methods for assessing the quality of diagnostic accuracy studies. Health Technol. Assess. 8, 1–234 (2004).Article ADS Google Scholar Bae, J. H. et al. Machine learning for detection of safety signals from spontaneous reporting system data: Example of nivolumab and docetaxel. Front. Pharmacol. 11, 602365 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Korea Institute of Drug Safety & Risk Management . Introduction of KAERS (Korea Adverse Event Reporting System) https://www.drugsafe.or.kr/iwt/ds/eneport/WhatIsKAERS.do (2022).World Heatlth Organization. Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) Classification https://www.who.intools/atc-ddd-toolkit/atc-classification (2022).World Heatlth Organization. WHO-adverse reaction terminology (WHO-ART) in Dictionary of Pharmaceutical Medicine 192–193 (Springer, 2009).Sakaeda, T., Tamon, A., Kadoyama, K. & Okuno, Y. Data mining of the public version of the FDA adverse event reporting system. Int. J. Med. Sci. 10, 796–803 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar TreeScan. TreeScan User Guide https://www.treescan.orgechdoc.html (2022).Ministry of Food and Drug Safety. Integrated System for Safety Information of Drug https:/edrug.mfds.go.kr/index (2022).Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by a grant (21153MFDS607) from the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety of South Korea in 2021-2025 (to J-YS), and a grant (20200509312-00) from the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety of South Korea in 2020 (to S-YJ). Moreover, this work was supported by the Bio Industry Technology Development Program (No. 20015086) By the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE, Korea) and Government-wide R&D Fund project for infectious disease research (GFID), Republic of Korea (grant No HG18C0068) (to J-YS)﻿. The funders had no role in the study design, data collection and analysis, interpretation of data, writing of the report, or decision to submit the article for publication. The authors thank the Korea Institute of Drug Safety and Risk Management (KIDS) for their cooperation in providing access to the Korea Adverse Event Reporting System database. We would like to thank Editage (www.editage.co.kr) for English language editing.Author informationAuthor notesJu Hwan KimPresent address: Department of Biohealth Regulatory Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South KoreaThese authors contributed equally: Hyesung Lee and Bin Hong.Authors and AffiliationsSchool of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066 Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do, 16419, South KoreaHyesung Lee, Bin Hong, SangHee Kim, Ju Hwan Kim & Ju-Young ShinDepartment of Biohealth Regulatory Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South KoreaHyesung Lee & Ju-Young ShinDepartment of Health Convergence, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South KoreaNam-Kyong ChoiGraduate School of Industrial Pharmaceutical Science, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, KoreaNam-Kyong ChoiCollege of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Republic of KoreaSun-Young JungDepartment of Global Innovative Drugs, Graduate School of Chung-Ang University, College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, 84 Heukseok-ro, Dongjak-gu, Seoul, 06974, South KoreaSun-Young JungDepartment of Clinical Research Design & Evaluation, Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences & Technology (SAIHST), Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South KoreaJu-Young ShinAuthorsHyesung LeeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBin HongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSangHee KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJu Hwan KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNam-Kyong ChoiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSun-Young JungView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJu-Young ShinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsH.L., B.H., S.-Y.J., and J.-Y.S. were responsible for the study concept and design. S.-H.K. and J.-H.K. were responsible for the literature search. S.-Y.J. and J.-H.K. were responsible for acquisition of data. J.-H.K. and B.H. were responsible for analysis and interpretation of data. H.L. and B.H. were responsible for drafting of the manuscript. N.-K.C., S.-Y.J., and J.-Y.S. were responsible for critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. The corresponding authors attests that all listed authors meet authorship criteria and that no others meeting the criteria have been omitted.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Sun-Young Jung or Ju-Young Shin.Ethics declarations Competing interests J-YS received grants from the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety, the Ministry of Health and Welfare, the National Research Foundation of Korea, and pharmaceutical companies, including Daiichi Sankyo, GSK, and Pfizer, outside the submitted work. S-YJ received grants from the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety, the Ministry of Health and Welfare, the National Research Foundation of Korea. All other authors have no conflicts of interest to report. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleLee, H., Hong, B., Kim, S. et al. Post-marketing surveillance study on influenza vaccine in South Korea using a nationwide spontaneous reporting database with multiple data mining methods. Sci Rep 12, 20256 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-21986-8Download citationReceived: 28 June 2022Accepted: 07 October 2022Published: 24 November 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-21986-8Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyExperts remind poultry flock owners that avian flu risk remains | Penn State UniversityPenn StateAgricultural SciencesExperts remind poultry flock owners that avian flu risk remainsTurkeys, like these at Penn State's Poultry Education and Research Center, are still at risk for highly pathogenic avian influenza, which in 2022 has caused the loss of more than 50 million chickens and turkeys in 46 states, including about 4.4 million birds in Pennsylvania. Credit: Penn State College of Agricultural Sciences. All Rights Reserved.ExpandNovember 22, 2022UNIVERSITY PARK, Pa. — Outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza, which struck Pennsylvania in early 2022, have continued into the fall. And that has prompted poultry experts in Penn State’s College of Agricultural Sciences to emphasize, once again, the importance of sound biosecurity measures for owners of backyard and commercial flocks. The U.S. Department of Agriculture reports that as of Nov. 21, avian influenza in 2022 has caused the death of about 50.4 million birds nationally, either directly from the disease or from the culling of flocks to prevent additional spread of the virus. The avian flu-related loss of layers and turkeys has caused supply issues that — combined with general inflation, rising costs for labor, feed and transportation, and the war in Ukraine — have driven up egg and turkey prices ahead of this year’s Thanksgiving holiday. In Pennsylvania this year, avian flu outbreaks have impacted 25 commercial poultry flocks and nine backyard flocks, causing the loss of an estimated 4.4 million birds, with the latest detection reported Nov. 10 in Lehigh County. Containing avian influenza is critical for Pennsylvania’s $7.1 billion poultry industry. The Keystone State ranks fourth nationally in egg production, eighth in turkey production and 12th in broiler production. The primary natural reservoir for avian influenza is wild waterfowl and shore birds, which often do not become ill, said Gino Lorenzoni, assistant professor of poultry science and avian health. During these wild birds’ migratory seasons in the spring and fall, infected individuals shed the virus in fecal matter and respiratory secretions wherever they go. He noted that the virus currently circulating — a Eurasian strain of H5N1 avian flu — originated in Europe and was detected in Canada in late 2021. The first detection in wild birds in the United States occurred in January 2022 in South Carolina, and Pennsylvania’s first detection came in March. To date, USDA has reported 59 detections in wild birds in the state. “That number reflects only those birds that have been sampled,” Lorenzoni said. “If we’ve had 59 sampled birds test positive for highly pathogenic avian flu, we can expect that there likely are thousands more infected with the virus out there in the wild.” Because this virus is still circulating in nature — and may be for some time — all flock owners should have biosecurity precautions in place, according to John Boney, assistant professor of poultry science and leader of Penn State Extension's poultry team. “Historical data suggests that the fall migration presents greater opportunity for infection — we’ve had higher numbers of avian influenza outbreaks in past falls when the virus has been present in the environment,” Boney said. “If you don't have a biosecurity plan, it’s never too late to start one. Preventing the introduction and spread of this devastating disease is essential." Phillip Clauer, associate teaching professor of poultry science and 4-H youth poultry program coordinator for Penn State Extension, explained that biosecurity refers to the preventive measures taken to reduce the risk of introducing infectious agents, such as bacteria, parasites, viruses and other pathogens, into your poultry operation. “The goal is to keep infectious agents that are outside out and those that are inside in,” Clauer said. “These principles can be applied to any size operation.” He offered the following recommendations: — Maintain a line of separation around your flock, such as the walls of a barn or coop or a fence. Keep the area enclosed if possible. Consider risks from anything that can cross over that line, including other birds/animals, people, dust and equipment. — Prevent contact between your flock and wild birds and their feces. If possible, keep birds inside, especially during outbreaks. Consider adding netting or a tarp over outdoor areas. — Discourage wild birds from congregating near your flock. Clean up feed spills immediately and minimize habitats for wild birds, such as standing water and overgrown weeds/vegetation. — To reduce the risk of carrying avian influenza back to your flock, avoid places where wild birds/waterfowl may congregate, such as streams, ponds, pastures, golf courses and parks. Assume such places may be contaminated with avian flu virus. Change shoes and clothes that you wear when hunting or fishing before going near your poultry. — Have dedicated clothes/coveralls and footwear for use only when working with your flock. Sanitize boots, hands and tools before entering your flock premises. — Limit visitors to only those essential for business, and keep extra coveralls/boots for visitors. — Don’t visit other flocks, and limit visits to feed and farm supply stores. After such visits, shower and change clothes before returning to your flock. “Although we’re in a time of elevated risk for avian influenza, there is never a time when there’s no risk,” Clauer said. “These biosecurity practices will help limit the risk of many diseases, not just avian flu.” More information about avian influenza, its symptoms in poultry, biosecurity recommendations and instructions for reporting suspected cases is available on the Penn State Extension website. Last Updated November 22, 2022ContactChuck Gillcdg5@psu.eduCell Phone: 814-863-2713@agscienceshttp://agsci.psu.eduTagsImpactNationalPennsylvaniaVisitors and NeighborsFaculty and StaffBusiness and IndustryAlumniUniversity ParkAgricultural SciencesDepartment of Animal SciencePenn State ExtensionGet the news by emailSubscribeFacebookTwitterLinkedinInstagramGet News By EmailDiscover NewsExploreNewsCareersFacts and RankingsCollegesCampusesHealth CareResearchImpactResourcesProspective StudentsCurrent StudentsInternational StudentsBusiness and IndustryVeterans and MilitaryVisitorsFaculty and StaffAlumniMediaCOVID-19 InformationPopular LinksMapsDirectoryLibrariesAcademic CalendarLionPATHStay ConnectedEmails / HeadlinesEmergency NotificationsPenn State GoStrategic CommunicationsReport MisconductPolice201 Old Main, University Park, PA 16802814-865-4700Contact UsNon DiscriminationEqual OpportunityAccessibilityLegal StatementsThe Pennsylvania State UniversityThe Pennsylvania State University © 2024What Covid taught us about flu, symptoms and how the virus spreadsIE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.BREAKING: Trump picks Rep. Mike Waltz to serve as his national security adviserSkip to ContentNBC News Logo2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsShare & Save —My NewsManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearchSearchProfile My NewsSign Out Sign InCreate your free profileSectionsU.S. NewsDecision 2024PoliticsWorldLocalBusinessSportsInvestigationsCulture & TrendsHealthScienceTech & MediaWeatherVideo FeaturesPhotosNBC SelectNBC Asian AmericaNBC BLKNBC LatinoNBC OUTtvTodayNightly NewsMSNBCMeet the PressDatelineFeaturedNBC News NowNightly FilmsStay TunedSpecial FeaturesNewslettersPodcastsListen NowMore From NBCCNBCNBC.COMNBCU AcademyPeacockNEXT STEPS FOR VETSNBC News Site MapHelpFollow NBC News news AlertsThere are no new alerts at this timeSearchSearchFacebookTwitterEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardPinterestLinkedinLatest Stories2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsCoronavirusWhat Covid taught scientists and the public about the flu For nearly three years, the medical and scientific world scrutinized Covid. That research helped experts gain a new understanding of a much older virus: the flu.The intense focus on Covid has shifted the way that some scientists think about the flu. Eleni Kalorkoti for NBC NewsNov. 21, 2022, 7:54 PM UTCBy Caroline HopkinsOn March 3, 2020, the head of the World Health Organization began a daily press briefing exhorting countries around the world to do more to stop the spread of Covid.Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus’ plea had become a common refrain in the preceding weeks: If aggressive measures were taken, the virus could be contained.That possibility, he said, was one of the key differences between Covid and the flu. “We don’t even talk about containment for seasonal flu. It’s just not possible,” he said. Full coverage of the Covid-19 pandemicJust over a week later, the United Nations health agency declared Covid a pandemic. The novel coronavirus would go on to spread to virtually every country on Earth. But then something surprising happened: Flu transmission ground to a halt. The influenza virus, it turned out, could be contained. This revelation wouldn’t be the only time in the past three years that Covid helped scientists gain a new understanding about the flu. The eagle-eye focus on Covid has shifted how researchers — and the public — think about the seasonal flu.Flu transmission can be stoppedThe 2020-2021 flu season — the first full flu season of the Covid pandemic — defied Tedros’ message. For the first time since 1997, when WHO launched its global influenza tracking website FluNet, cases were virtually absent that winter.“It was shocking how flu went to zero that year,” said Linsey Marr, a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Virginia Tech. “We’ve learned that it is possible to stop the flu.”Researchers, to some extent, disagree on the exact reason for the unprecedented drop in the flu that season. Pandemic-related mitigation measures — including the use of masks, avoiding travel and indoor gatherings, and more frequent hand-washing — likely played a role. Others credit the fact that Covid was the dominant virus that winter. “When you get exposed to a respiratory virus like flu or Covid, it induces an initial immune response that is nonspecific,” explained Dr. Matthew Memoli, director of the Laboratory of Infectious Diseases’ clinical studies unit at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. He said that later on, the body develops the virus-specific antibodies, but at that initial point, nonspecific antiviral response can reduce flu risk, too. “If you’re being exposed on a regular basis to a Covid virus, that’s going to have your viral response really turned on … and you’re not susceptible to another respiratory virus like flu at that moment,” he said.Whether it was Covid’s dominance or behavioral changes that contributed most to the nonexistent 2020-2021 flu season — and many credit both — the newfound knowledge that flu transmission can in fact, be stopped, is here to stay. ‘Nonpharmaceutical interventions’ work Before Covid, experts put limited stock in so-called nonpharmaceutical — that is, nonvaccination — strategies for preventing flu transmission. While behaviors such as hand-washing, wearing masks and air filtration were considered good ideas, they weren’t believed to move the needle significantly in stopping the spread. “Prior to the pandemic, we were very focused on promoting vaccination as the primary way to decrease transmission of flu,” said Seema Lakdawala, an associate professor of microbiology and immunology at Emory University in Atlanta. “Now what we realize is that, yes, vaccinations are really important, but additional measures can really bring down the public health burden of influenza.”Before 2020, she said there had been a handful of studies attempting to measure how well these interventions work, but they were inconclusive. “Coming out of the Covid-19 pandemic, we now have conclusive evidence that mitigation strategies like masking, social distancing and staying home when you are ill can drastically impact the transmission of influenza viruses,” she said.Fairly consistent influenza vaccination rates further support this newfound appreciation for nonpharmaceutical interventions. “I don’t think the amount of vaccine uptake was drastically higher,” Lakdawala said of the 2020-2021 flu season. She said it was always around 40% to 60%, adding that she didn’t think the drop in flu transmission was primarily driven by vaccine immunity.Sure enough, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 52.1% of people in the United States had received their seasonal flu vaccines by the end of the 2020-2021 season, just a small uptick from 51.8% in the 2019-2020 season. Flu can spread via aerosolsIn the early days of the pandemic, how Covid spreads from person to person was one of the most hotly debated topics among scientists. Initially thought to spread through respiratory droplets expelled when people cough, sneeze or talk, scientists now understand it can also spread through even smaller particles called aerosols that can drift through the air. Marr said she and her colleagues don’t have a clear answer as to which mode of transmission is dominant, but her work has shown that the flu, like Covid, can also spread via aerosols. To be sure, many flu researchers recognized this before the pandemic, but the evidence was mostly limited to a 1979 case study in which an airplane was grounded for three hours due to engine failure. With no air filtration, 72 % of passengers developed flu symptoms, and nearly all who tested — including the original passenger who’d boarded the flight sick — were positive for the flu.“It was almost surely airborne transmission in that case,” Marr said. Although the airline case study taught the research community about airborne flu transmission, she said the general public’s appreciation for these risks has increased because of Covid. Throughout the pandemic, research into effective ways to limit aerosol transmission has also bolstered support for HEPA and UV air filters, and humidity control in indoor spaces. According to Marr’s research, these lessons can apply to the flu, too. ‘Long flu’ may be a riskThe prevalence of long Covid — that is, lingering, and sometimes debilitating, symptoms that persist long after the initial infection — has shifted how researchers think about flu risks, said Akiko Iwasaki, a professor of immunobiology at Yale University. “Covid is definitely not alone in having these long-term consequences, even after a mild infection,” she said. After the flu, it’s not unheard of to experience symptoms, especially lingering fatigue and brain fog. According to Iwasaki, seasonal flu is less likely to cause lasting symptoms than pandemic flu strains like the 2009 H1N1 virus, but more research is needed to say for sure. She said that for the 2009 pandemic flu and “even the 1918 flu, there are a lot of stories about people developing psychosis or neurological diseases over a long period.” One 2015 study in the journal Vaccine showed that, across Norway, people who’d been infected with the 2009 H1N1 flu developed chronic fatigue more than twice as often as those who’d been vaccinated that flu season.A recent study in the journal Cell suggested that even mild Covid could lead to chronic brain damage. In that study, the researchers compared mild Covid infections with mild flu infections in mice and humans and found that the brain effects were similar around seven days post-infection. Then, after a longer follow-up, the Covid infections led to longer-term damage than the flu viruses, which mostly subsided after seven weeks. These types of studies, spurred by the Covid pandemic, have already begun to help explain how the flu behaves in the body, Iwasaki said.Asymptomatic flu infections may be underappreciatedThe Covid pandemic put a spotlight on the extent and risk of asymptomatic infections. With much of the population swabbing their nostrils daily, or weekly, then reporting these results to their jobs and doctors, health officials were able to gather a wealth of data on how many people tested positive for Covid without symptoms and how long these infections persisted.“The reason we found asymptomatic cases so clearly for Covid was that everybody was testing repeatedly to be able to go to work,” Lakdawala, of Emory University, said. “We got repeat testing on the same population every week, but we’ve never done that for influenza.” Because people seldom test for the flu unless they feel lousy, Lakdawala said the extent of asymptomatic flu infections is difficult to measure, let alone estimate. Scientists do know that asymptomatic flu cases are possible, and that there’s a 24-hour period where people shed virus before they start to feel sick. But given the value of repeat testing, Lakdawala and Marr both said that widespread, cheap flu tests should be readily available. People want to test — and they’re good at itIn Lakdawala’s view, the most valuable flu takeaway from Covid is the knowledge that people are not only eager to know if they’ve been infected with a virus, but are also capable of carrying out the test protocols for accurate results. “Before, when widespread at-home testing would come up, there was always a question of whether someone would know how to swab themselves accurately, or if they could get a sample that was good enough,” she said. “Now, we’ve proven that people are willing to swab their noses really well.”The implications for the flu, and for other viruses including respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, are clear: if given the option of affordable, at-home flu tests, people would readily swab themselves. “People are engaged at a level that we never appreciated,” Lakdawala said. “They want to know, so we should give them the tools to know, and then collect that data.”Follow NBC HEALTH on Twitter & Facebook.Caroline HopkinsNBC News contributor Caroline Hopkins is a health and science journalist who covers cancer treatment for Precision Oncology News. She is a graduate of the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. AboutContactHelpCareersAd ChoicesPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023)NBC News SitemapClosed CaptioningAdvertiseSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday LogoNation’s Health Care Organizations Urge COVID-19 and Influenza Vaccination and Treatment Skip to nav Skip to content IDWeek Journals IDSA Foundation Membership IDSA Academy MyIDSA News Multimedia COVID-19 HIVMA Science Speaks Join IDSA Login Search Search Search Search Guidelines Practice Guidelines Featured Guidelines Clostridioides difficile COVID-19: Treatment and Management Practice Guidelines App Alphabetical Guidelines List Guideline Development Process Purchase Guideline Reprints Public Health Avian Influenza A(H5N1) COVID-19 Mpox Facts About ID Patient Stories Climate Change Antimicrobial Resistance Opioid Epidemic Ebola Hurricane Resources Hepatitis C Lyme Disease Immunization Influenza Measles Zika Clinical Practice Blood Culture Bottle Shortage Antimicrobial Stewardship Centers of Excellence Program ID Physician Compensation Coding and Payment Quality Measurement & Improvement Telehealth EIN (Emerging Infections Network) Research G.E.R.M. Medical Students Grant LEAP Fellowship Research & Funding Opportunities Research & Infrastructure Professional Development ID Workforce IDSA Academy IDWeek Leadership Institute iDMentorship365 IDea Incubator ID Support, Train, Educate and Prepare Program Microbial Pathogenesis in Alzheimer’s Disease Research Grant Program Grants For Emerging Researchers/Clinicians Mentorship Program Events Career Center Career Paths in ID CE Opportunities Maintenance of Certification Fellows-In-Training Career & Education Center ID Match Medical Education Community of Practice Policy & Advocacy COVID-19 Advocacy Take Action Bio-Preparedness Workforce Pilot Member Advocacy Program National PrEP Program Access & Reimbursement Antimicrobial Resistance Diagnostics Emerging Infections and Biothreat Funding Policy Global Health Immunization & Vaccination Infection Prevention & Control Research & Infrastructure Workforce Policy About Us Mission & Values History Strategic Plan Governance Board of Directors IDSA Committees Industry Relations Volunteer Opportunities IDSA and HIVMA 2024 Elections Become a Member Inclusion, Diversity, Access & Equity Value of ID IDSA StaffLock Work at IDSA Committees Volunteer Year in Review State and Regional Societies Society Awards Past Award Lecturers Contact IDSA IDWeek Journals IDSA Foundation Membership IDSA Academy MyIDSA News Multimedia COVID-19 HIVMA Science Speaks MyIDSA Login News Releases and Statements 2022 Nation’s Health Care Organizations Urge COVID-19 and Influenza Vaccination and Treatment 11/21/2022 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Nation’s Health Care Organizations Urge COVID-19 and Influenza Vaccination and Treatment Statement from: American Academy of Family Physicians, American Association of Nurse Practitioners, American Academy of Physician Associates, American College of Emergency Physicians, American College of Physicians, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Geriatrics Society, American Medical Association, American Osteopathic Association, Council of Medical Specialty Societies, Infectious Diseases Society of America, and AMDA – The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine WASHINGTON November 21, 2022 – Given the anticipated increase in COVID-19 and influenza cases this fall and winter, America’s healthcare professional organizations are coming together to remind the public of the importance of vaccinations and early treatment. A strong recommendation from a trusted clinician is one of the most effective strategies to increase vaccine uptake. We encourage our members to use every interaction with patients as an opportunity to make strong vaccine recommendations, educate and answer questions about prevention and treatment options, encourage vaccination, and where feasible provide vaccination. We strongly recommend that everyone who is eligible, especially those at higher risk, urgently receive their updated COVID-19 booster (or COVID-19 primary series if not yet vaccinated) and influenza vaccine. We expect that the updated COVID-19 vaccine will help reduce severe illness, hospitalizations and death for our most vulnerable patients, including older adults, those who are pregnant and recently pregnant, and those from historically minoritized communities. We urgently ask all clinicians to be vigilant and prioritize vaccination in the coming months. To maximize uptake of vaccines after counseling, our organizations will continue to advocate for access to vaccines and evidence-based treatments for everyone. Given the higher morbidity and mortality among older people, those who are pregnant and recently pregnant, and immunocompromised people, we strongly recommend that healthcare professionals increase their timely use of effective treatments. While newer variants may not respond to some existing treatments, healthcare professionals must be ready and able to prescribe life-saving oral antiviral treatments for COVID-19 and influenza, to those at highest risk. It is critical that everyone, especially those at risk for serious illness, understand the importance of testing and early communication with their clinicians to seek treatment as soon as they test positive. We commit to continue working with federal partners to provide usable and consistent information and emerging evidence-based tools that we can rapidly push to our members. The time to act is now, and the nation’s organizations of healthcare professionals are ready and willing to do all we can to encourage vaccination and use of evidence-based treatments in the critical months ahead. *** About American Academy of Family Physicians: Founded in 1947, the AAFP represents 127,600 physicians and medical students nationwide. It is the largest medical society devoted solely to primary care. Family physicians conduct approximately one in five office visits -- that’s 192 million visits annually or 48 percent more than the next most visited medical specialty. Today, family physicians provide more care for America’s underserved and rural populations than any other medical specialty. Family medicine’s cornerstone is an ongoing, personal patient-physician relationship focused on integrated care. To learn more about the specialty of family medicine and the AAFP's positions on issues and clinical care, visit www.aafp.org. For information about health care, health conditions and wellness, please visit the AAFP’s consumer website, www.familydoctor.org. About American Association of Nurse Practitioners: The American Association of Nurse Practitioners® (AANP) is the largest professional membership organization for nurse practitioners (NPs) of all specialties. It represents the interests of the more than 355,000 licensed NPs in the U.S. AANP provides legislative leadership at the local, state and national levels, advancing health policy; promoting excellence in practice, education and research; and establishing standards that best serve NPs' patients and other health care consumers. To locate an NP in your community, visit npfinder.com. For more information about NPs, visit aanp.org. About the American Academy of Physician Associates (AAPA): AAPA is the national membership organization for all PAs (physician associates/physician assistants). PAs are licensed clinicians who practice medicine in every specialty and setting. Trusted, rigorously educated and trained healthcare professionals, PAs are dedicated to expanding access to care and transforming health and wellness through patient-centered, team-based medical practice. PA has been named one of the best jobs overall and one of the best healthcare jobs for the fifth year in a row by U.S. News & World Report. The PA profession ranked number three this year in Best STEM jobs. Learn more about the profession at aapa.org and engage through Facebook, LinkedIn, Instagram, and Twitter. About the American College of Emergency Physicians: The American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) is the national medical society representing emergency medicine. Through continuing education, research, public education, and advocacy, ACEP advances emergency care on behalf of its 40,000 emergency physician members, and the more than 150 million people they treat on an annual basis. For more information, visit www.acep.org and www.emergencyphysicians.org. About the American College of Physicians: The American College of Physicians is the largest medical specialty organization in the United States with members in more than 145 countries worldwide. ACP membership includes 160,000 internal medicine physicians, related subspecialists, and medical students. Internal medicine physicians are specialists who apply scientific knowledge and clinical expertise to the diagnosis, treatment, and compassionate care of adults across the spectrum from health to complex illness. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) is the nation’s leading group of physicians providing health care for women. As a private, voluntary, nonprofit membership organization of 60,000 members, ACOG strongly advocates for quality health care for women, maintains the highest standards of clinical practice and continuing education of its members, promotes patient education, and increases awareness among its members and the public of the changing issues facing women’s health care. www.acog.org. About the American Geriatrics Society: Founded in 1942, the American Geriatrics Society (AGS) is a nationwide, not-for-profit society of geriatrics healthcare professionals dedicated to improving the health, independence, and quality of life of older people. Our 6,000+ members include geriatricians, geriatrics nurse practitioners, social workers, family practitioners, physician assistants, pharmacists, and internists who are pioneers in advanced-illness care for older individuals, with a focus on championing interprofessional teams, eliciting personal care goals, and treating older people as whole persons. AGS believes in a just society, one where we all are supported by and able to contribute to communities where ageism, ableism, classism, homophobia, racism, sexism, xenophobia, and other forms of bias and discrimination no longer impact healthcare access, quality, and outcomes for older adults and their caregivers. AGS advocates for policies and programs that support the health, independence, and quality of life of all of us as we age. https://www.americangeriatrics.org/. About the American Medical Association: The American Medical Association is the physicians’ powerful ally in patient care. As the only medical association that convenes 190+ state and specialty medical societies and other critical stakeholders, the AMA represents physicians with a unified voice to all key players in health care. The AMA leverages its strength by removing the obstacles that interfere with patient care, leading the charge to prevent chronic disease and confront public health crises, and driving the future of medicine to tackle the biggest challenges in health care. About the American Osteopathic Association: The American Osteopathic Association (AOA) represents more than 178,000 osteopathic physicians (DOs) and osteopathic medical students; promotes public health; encourages and funds scientific research; serves as the primary certifying body for DOs; and is the accrediting agency for colleges of osteopathic medicine. To learn more about DOs and the osteopathic philosophy of medicine, visit www.osteopathic.org. About the Council of Medical Specialty Societies: The Council of Medical Specialty Societies (CMSS) is a coalition of 50 specialty societies representing more than 800,000 physicians across the house of medicine. As the national organization of specialty societies, CMSS provides a proactive platform to assess and address emerging issues across specialties that influence the future of healthcare and the patients we serve. About the Infectious Diseases Society of America: The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) is a community of over 12,000 physicians, scientists, and public health experts who specialize in infectious diseases. Its purpose is to improve the health of individuals, communities, and society by promoting excellence in patient care, education, research, public health, and prevention relating to infectious diseases. Learn more at https://www.idsociety.org/. About AMDA – The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine: AMDA – The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine is the only medical specialty society representing the community of over 50,000 medical directors, physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and other practitioners working in the various post-acute and long-term care (PALTC) settings. Dedicated to defining and improving quality, we advance our mission through timely professional development, evidence-based clinical guidance, and tireless advocacy on behalf of members, patients, families, and staff. Visit www.paltc.org for more information. Contact idsa@MessagePartnersPR.com Public Health Patient Stories Facts About ID Guidelines Practice Guidelines Search Practice Guidelines App Clinical Practice Antimicrobial Stewardship Center of Excellence Compensation Professional Development Career Center Career Paths in ID EIN Events Fellows-in-Training Career and Education Center Policy & Advocacy Access Reimbursement Antimicrobial Resistance Diagnostics Research LEAP Fellowship Research & Funding Opportunities About Us History Governance Strategic Plan Careers Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Policy 4040 Wilson Boulevard Suite 300 Arlington, VA 22203 Phone: (703) 299-0200 Facebook Linkedin Twitter Instagram © Copyright IDSA 2024 This website uses cookies We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. Cookies facilitate the functioning of this site including a member login and personalized experience. Cookies are also used to generate analytics to improve this site as well as enable social media functionality. OkNew mRNA vaccine targeting all known flu strains shows early promise | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore New mRNA vaccine targeting all known flu strains shows early promise | CBC News LoadedHealth·AnalysisNew mRNA vaccine targeting all known flu strains shows early promiseA new mRNA vaccine targeting all known flu strains in a single shot is showing early promise in animal studies and is opening the door to a wide range of possibilities with the vaccine technology — including potentially preventing the next influenza pandemic. Research still in animal trials, but it lifts potential of mRNA technology to new heightsAdam Miller · CBC News · Posted: Nov 24, 2022 2:00 PM EST | Last Updated: November 24, 2022A new has study found a new mRNA flu vaccine produced high levels of antibody protection in mice and ferrets against all flu strains, which could one day help pave the way for a universal flu shot. (Matt Rourke/The Associated Press)Social SharingA new mRNA vaccine targeting all known flu strains in a single shot is showing early promise in animal studies and is opening the door to a wide range of possibilities with the vaccine technology — including potentially preventing the next influenza pandemic. University of Pennsylvania researchers published their findings in the journal Science Thursday, showing the vaccine produced high levels of antibody protection in mice and ferrets against all flu strains, which could one day help pave the way for a universal flu shot.The research rapidly lifts mRNA technology to new heights and builds off the progress made in the COVID-19 pandemic in accelerating the development of the new vaccine platform, which has already been effectively used in billions of people worldwide. How does an mRNA vaccine actually work?"Our approach was to make a vaccine that encoded every influenza subtype and lineage that we know about," said Scott Hensley, an immunologist at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia and one of the lead authors of the study."The goal was to establish a baseline level of immune memory that could then be recalled when a new pandemic strain emerges."Unlike seasonal flu shots that protect against existing circulating strains each year but offer little protection against strains that can spill over from animals and spark pandemics, like H1N1 in 2009, this shot could theoretically provide immunity against all new flu strains. In DepthHow COVID-19 mRNA vaccines were created in under a year and what it means for the future of disease"We're still in preclinical testing at this phase, we are planning a Phase 1 human study, but so far from animal models it does look like this vaccine achieved our goal of inducing immune memory in a broad way," Hensley said. "Imagine if the population was primed with this vaccine, what we might see is not necessarily protection from infection with new pandemic strains but a reduction in hospitalizations and severe disease — and that's really our main goal."While a potential vaccine could be years away since it still needs to successfully undergo human trials, developing a flu shot that can target all 20 known influenza A and B strains is an astonishing scientific feat.Q&AMeet the Canadian scientist who paved the way for groundbreaking mRNA COVID vaccines"It really shows that we can use mRNA vaccines in ways that we really hadn't thought of before," said Alyson Kelvin, a virologist at the University of Saskatchewan's Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization who co-wrote an independent perspective on the study in Science."This is just the beginning of where we can take mRNA-based vaccines." A registered nurse delivers a Pfizer COVID-19 vaccination to a front-line worker at Vancouver General Hospital in Vancouver in March 2021. The mRNA technology used in COVID vaccines has significant potential for other forms of illness. (Ben Nelms/CBC)'Sky's the limit' with mRNA technologyThe research opens up a world of new possibilities with mRNA vaccine technology.And it also brings hope of one day preventing hundreds of thousands of hospitalizations and deaths from the flu globally each year — if it passes clinical trials and regulatory approval."This is a way to cover a huge family of viruses that causes a large burden of disease each year around the world," Kelvin said. "As well, there's continual threats of a new influenza virus spilling over. So it could not only cover what we're currently dealing with, but what we don't know."There are still key unanswered questions about the research and development of the vaccine to ensure it's safe and effective in clinical trials, Kelvin said, but the fact that animals were able to elicit strong and distinct immune responses to each strain is very promising. Canada is seeing an early rise in flu cases. Is a 'tidal wave' of infection coming?"It really puts this strategy more than a foot in the door — I'd say completely through the door — of clinical application," said Gary Kobinger, the director of the Galveston National Laboratory at the University of Texas who helped develop a Canadian-led Ebola vaccine. "It's one of those times where you see a scientific paper in animals and you know that this could be in humans in what would be a short-to-mid-term timeline," he added. "So let's see if this works. We all hope it will."The vaccine uses lipid nanoparticles, a successful delivery system for mRNA vaccines developed by Canadian scientist Pieter Cullis and researchers at the University of British Columbia, to target all known flu strains that perpetually circulate and infect us each year. WATCH | Harnessing mRNA vaccine potential:The possibilities of mRNA vaccines beyond COVID-194 years agoDuration 5:18The ground-breaking technology used to create the Pfizer and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines, mRNA, could also be used to produce vaccines for other diseases including HIV, the flu and even cancer."The vaccine induces broad immunity in mice and ferrets who had never seen the virus before. That mimics how this vaccine might perform in young children," Hensley said."But we found that the vaccine can also induce these broad responses in animals who had already experienced and recovered from a flu infection." That means if the vaccine were proven to be safe and effective in humans and successfully approved, it wouldn't just be limited in use among children who have never before had a flu infection. It could also be used widely in the general population — including in seniors who are often at a higher risk of serious complications. Why COVID-19 and flu could be in a 'tug of war' in the years ahead"I think we can expect to see vaccine developers going in all sorts of directions," Kelvin said. "I can't predict what those will be, but the sky's the limit of what will be done in the next couple of years."Hensley said the researchers were unsure if the platform would even work in animals, given that potential issues can arise with what are called immunodominance hierarchies — where our immune systems react to certain strains more efficiently than others. "We didn't find that, we found that this vaccine elicited antibodies at fairly equal levels to all of the antigens encoded," he said. "So that was an important finding." When the next pandemic hits, scientists aim to have a vaccine already. Here's howThe fact that strong antibody immune responses were shown against all 20 different flu strains is very encouraging, Kelvin said, because even if the strains don't all circulate at once, there is potential for flu strains to spill over from animals and drive a pandemic at any time. "We know that there will be another spillover of an influenza virus with pandemic potential," she said. "Do we keep this vaccine on the shelf ready to go? Or is this something that we want to consider licensing for more seasonal approaches?"However, there are major regulatory hurdles in approving a vaccine this complex and wide-ranging — even if it does pass clinical trials. The DoseHow the technology used to make COVID-19 vaccines could improve flu shots"The biggest question is, how do we get this into people? Because what's incorporated in the vaccine are targets for viruses that aren't currently circulating in people," Kelvin said."So when regulatory agencies look at how they're going to evaluate a vaccine and approve it in human use, they want to make sure that it's safe and effective. Well, what is the effectiveness that we're going to say for this vaccine?"And while traditional flu vaccines are already effective at preventing severe illness and death in the most vulnerable when successfully matched against circulating strains — widespread uptake of the flu shot remains a major challenge. WATCH | Flu and an overburdened health-care system:Concerns grow over triple threat of surging respiratory illnesses2 years agoDuration 2:50The Ontario Medical Association is urging people to wear masks indoors and get their flu and COVID-19 shots as concern builds that a spike in flu cases could overwhelm a health-care system already seeing an influx of RSV and COVID patients.Less than 40 per cent of Canadians opted to get a flu shot in 2020, according to the most recent federal data, despite being recommended and available for everyone older than six months old. In the U.S., that number is somewhat higher at more than 50 per cent. And just one in five Canadians have gotten a COVID booster or completed an initial vaccine series in the last six months, while just over 10 per cent of Americans have opted for a bivalent booster dose targeting the dominant circulating Omicron BA.5 subvariant. "This is the reality," Kobinger said. "You can have the best vaccine on the planet, but if nobody wants it or takes it then it's useless."ABOUT THE AUTHORAdam MillerSenior Health WriterAdam Miller is a former senior health writer with CBC News. He covered health and medical science news extensively in Canada for over a decade, in addition to several years reporting on crime, politics and current affairs throughout Asia.Subscribe to CBC Health's Second Opinion newsletterCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories How does an mRNA vaccine actually work?In Depth How COVID-19 mRNA vaccines were created in under a year and what it means for the future of diseaseQ&A Meet the Canadian scientist who paved the way for groundbreaking mRNA COVID vaccinesAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowCOVID, flu, RSV – how this triple threat of respiratory viruses could collide this winter Skip to main content Back to main site ENFR Main navigation - Vaccineswork About COVID-19 Stories News History Emerging Threats Opinions Search Vaccineswork - Search Search Main navigation - Vaccineswork About COVID-19 Stories News History Emerging Threats Opinions Search Emerging threats Cross-postsCOVID-19InfluenzaRSV COVID, flu, RSV – how this triple threat of respiratory viruses could collide this winter Outbreaks of seasonal diseases like flu and RSV, along with a further COVID-19 wave, could lead to another public health disaster, warn experts. 22 November 2022 5 min read by World Economic Forum Woman coughing or sneezing. Credit: Andrea Piacquadio / Pexels As the days get shorter and the weather colder in the northern hemisphere, health officials have warned of a perfect storm of infectious respiratory diseases over the winter months. Outbreaks of seasonal diseases like influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) are already putting pressure on the overburdened NHS. If surges of these illnesses collide with another large COVID wave, we could be facing a public health disaster. Some have called this threat a "tripledemic". But how can we realistically expect the winter to play out? To try to answer this question, we can look at the recent and current trends of some of the most common winter infections in the UK. 1. COVID-19 Let's start with the most obvious one, SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19). The UK has so far been through multiple COVID waves, fuelled by a combination of behavioural changes, emerging variants and waning immunity. The trajectory of COVID cases in England over the past year. Image: Conversation In contrast to the large epidemic last winter, more recent waves have been relatively small. And despite initial concerns about a significant winter surge this year, the number of COVID cases is currently decreasing. But the pandemic isn't over yet, and what will happen next is highly uncertain. So far, there's mixed evidence as to whether COVID is worse in cold weather. But during winter, people tend to stay indoors more and reduce ventilation, giving viruses more opportunity to spread. In an optimistic scenario, small-scale outbreaks might continue into the winter as COVID becomes "endemic". Previous COVID waves have largely been driven by single dominant variants – alpha and delta in 2020-21 and omicron in 2021-22. This time, the many "descendants" of omicron are multiplying worldwide, and the current spread is instead caused by a mixture of variants peaking in different countries at different times. Have you read? COVID-19 survivors are still at greater risk of heart attacks a year after infection Is it wise to get a COVID-19 booster and a flu vaccine at the same time? Does a faint line on a COVID-19 test mean I’m no longer infectious? But it is possible that if a highly transmissible variant emerges this winter, it might cause another large wave of infections. 2. Influenza Seasonal influenza is a respiratory infection caused by four types of viruses, two of which (A and B) are common and can cause severe illness, hospitalisation and death, particularly in vulnerable people. Flu is highly seasonal in climates like in the UK, partly because people spend more time indoors. The virus itself also appears to favour low temperatures and low humidity. Not unlike COVID, factors including waning immunity and the evolution of influenza viruses also drive repeated outbreaks. Influenza infections in England over recent years, compared with the current season. Image: Conversation Flu seasons usually start in November, with cases peaking from December to March. In some years, the outbreaks are particularly severe, as in the UK in 2018. Flu responded the same way COVID did to non-pharmaceutical interventions, including lockdown restrictions and mask-wearing. The number of cases in the 2020-21 winter was very low. It came back the following season later in the year, but was still limited. There is concern that the long period during which our bodies were not exposed to the flu might have created an "immunity gap" making us particularly vulnerable this year. Australia saw the worst seasonal flu outbreak in five years during its recent winter, coinciding with a large COVID surge. While it's still early to see what the 2022-23 winter will bring in the northern hemisphere, the current outbreak in England is early and large compared with pre-pandemic years. 3. RSV RSV is a common winter virus which usually causes mild coughs and colds but occasionally results in serious infections like bronchiolitis and pneumonia, particularly in young children. Weekly hospital admissions for RSV in England over recent years, compared with the current season. Image: Conversation In pre-pandemic years it followed a seasonal pattern, with most cases occurring in early winter. After a hiatus in 2020-21, many cases were registered out of season in the summer of 2021. This unusual pattern is again suspected to result from a loss of immunity. The seasonal pattern seems to be returning, but this autumn has already seen high hospitalisation numbers. 4. Common cold viruses Common colds are caused by a variety of pathogens, including rhinoviruses, enteroviruses, and other coronaviruses. Like flu, the onset of the more benign coronaviruses generally occurs in November, with the peak between January and March. Rhinoviruses and enteroviruses tend to peak in autumn rather than in winter. Rhinovirus infections in England over recent years, compared with the current season. Image: Conversation The 2021-22 rhinovirus season was similar to pre-pandemic trends, but we're seeing higher numbers so far this year. The infection is usually mild, and most people quickly recover, but severe cases in vulnerable people can add to the pressure on hospitals. Protecting ourselves This winter, the UK will probably face high pressure from respiratory viruses. Cases of seasonal diseases are possibly higher due to the lack of exposure during the lockdowns. In addition, some research suggests COVID infections might affect people's immunity, putting them at higher risk of infection with other viruses. To reduce the spread of respiratory viruses, we can continue with measures like ventilation, mask-wearing and hand-washing. We can also strengthen our immune systems, for example with proper nutrition and exercise. And although we don't have vaccines available for RSV or common cold viruses, COVID and flu vaccines are an important tool to prevent severe illness this winter. Written by Adam Kleczkowski Professor of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Strathclyde Website This article was originally published by the World Economic Forum on 21 November 2022. Original article More from World Economic Forum View all The world is in the grip of a record dengue fever outbreak. What's causing it and how can it be stopped? 8 Nov 2024 5 min read verified Cross-postsDengue What are neglected tropical diseases – and what are we doing about them? 28 Oct 2024 4 min read verified Cross-posts Why we need a comprehensive approach to eliminate cervical cancer 7 Oct 2024 5 min read verified Cross-postsHPVSpotlight on HPV How to close global healthcare gaps using place-based change and collaborative action 26 Sep 2024 5 min read verified Cross-postsGlobal health agenda Recommended for you Syria’s mental health crisis deepens as funds dry up 11 Nov 2024 5 min read verified Pneumonia: a VaccinesWork guide 11 Nov 2024 4 min read verified Why smaller vials of vaccine might help Zambia expand measles coverage 8 Nov 2024 5 min read verified How the West lost its grip on measles (and what we can do about it) 8 Nov 2024 10 min read verified The world is in the grip of a record dengue fever outbreak. What's causing it and how can it be stopped? 8 Nov 2024 5 min read verified 24 million Nigerian kids to be vaccinated against measles in major campaign 7 Nov 2024 5 min read verified Get the latest VaccinesWork newsSubscribe to Global Health Notes, our weekly LinkedIn newsletter, to get the latest VaccinesWork news and features.Subscribe Feedback Website User Experience SurveyGaviThank you for visiting our website. Your input and time is valuable in helping us improve your experience. Please take less than a minute to provide feedback on your visit. Start Now Website User Experience SurveyThank you for visiting our website. Your input is important in helping us improve your experience. Please take a moment to answer a few questions about your visit. 1. Where did you come from before visiting our website? Search engine (e.g., Google) Social media platform Referral from another website Direct link or bookmark Other... Enter other... 2. Was your visit to our website satisfactory in terms of finding what you needed and discovering interesting content? Yes No 3. How easy was it for you to navigate and find the information you needed? 4. If you did not find what you were looking for, please briefly describe what you were trying to find or any issues you encountered: 5. Do you have any suggestions or comments on how we can improve our website to better meet your needs? © VaccinesWork. All rights reserved.Will Thanksgiving make a bad season of respiratory illness even worse? : Shots - Health News : NPR Accessibility links Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts for audio player Open Navigation Menu Newsletters NPR Shop Close Navigation Menu Home News Expand/collapse submenu for News Election 2024 National World Politics Business Health Science Climate Race Culture Expand/collapse submenu for Culture Books Movies Television Pop Culture Food Art & Design Performing Arts Life Kit Gaming Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music All Songs Considered Music Features Tiny Desk Live Sessions Podcasts & Shows Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows Daily Morning Edition Weekend Edition Saturday Weekend Edition Sunday All Things Considered Fresh Air Up First Featured The NPR Politics Podcast Throughline Trump's Trials Wild Card with Rachel Martin More Podcasts & Shows Search Newsletters NPR Shop All Songs Considered Music Features Tiny Desk Live Sessions About NPR Diversity Support Careers Press Ethics Will Thanksgiving make a bad season of respiratory illness even worse? : Shots - Health News As the holiday approaches, infectious disease specialists are bracing for the possibility that big family get-togethers and travel will propel the spread of RSV, flu and COVID-19. Shots Health News From NPR Your Health Treatments & Tests Health Inc. Policy-ish Public Health Twitter Public Health Experts are concerned Thanksgiving gatherings could accelerate a 'tripledemic' November 22, 202211:07 AM ET Heard on All Things Considered Rob Stein Experts are concerned Thanksgiving gatherings could accelerate a 'tripledemic' Listen · 3:52 3:52 Toggle more options Download Embed Embed <iframe src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/1137649962/1138728411" width="100%" height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player"> Transcript Enlarge this image From left: 1) Colored scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a human cell infected with H3N2 flu virus (gold filamentous particles). 2) Scanning electron micrograph of human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) virions (colorized blue) that are shedding from the surface of human lung epithelial cells. 3) Transmission electron micrograph of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron virus particles (gold). Science Source/ NIAID hide caption toggle caption Science Source/ NIAID From left: 1) Colored scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a human cell infected with H3N2 flu virus (gold filamentous particles). 2) Scanning electron micrograph of human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) virions (colorized blue) that are shedding from the surface of human lung epithelial cells. 3) Transmission electron micrograph of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron virus particles (gold). Science Source/ NIAID For each of the last two years, Thanksgiving helped usher in some very unwelcome guests: Devastating waves of COVID-19. No one thinks this year will be anything like the last two dark pandemic winters, at least when it comes to COVID-19. But the country is now dealing with a different kind of threat — an unpredictable confluence of old and new respiratory pathogens. "We're facing an onslaught of three viruses — COVID, RSV and influenza. All simultaneously," says Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University. "We're calling this a tripledemic." Flu and RSV are back, big time The respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) began surging unseasonably early this year, infecting babies and young children who had little or no immunity to that virus, which wasn't circulating all that much over the past two years, in part, because of COVID-19 precautions. Sponsor Message The RSV resurgence is still flooding pediatric emergency rooms and intensive care units across the country. Some parents are being forced to wait more than eight hours in emergency rooms for treatment for their very sick kids. "Intensive care units are at or above capacity in every children's hospital in the United States right now," says Amy Knight, president of the Children's Hospital Association. "It's very, very scary for parents." At the same time, an unusually early and severe flu season is surging, dominated by the H3N2 strain, which often strikes kids and older people especially hard. "Influenza has hit the southeastern United States. It's moved into the Southwest. It's going up the East Coast and into the Midwest with some ferocity," Schaffner says. From coast to coast, hospitalizations for the flu are at the highest level for this time of year in a decade, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "Flu activity is high right now and continuing to increase," says Lynnette Brammer, an epidemiologist in the CDC's influenza division. "The good news is, the vaccines this year are well-matched to the viruses that are currently circulating, and there is still time to get vaccinated." Sponsor Message But now comes another Thanksgiving. "These holiday celebrations with all their travel and their close contact usually function as virus accelerators," Schaffner says. "We're spending a lot of time with each other. We're laughing and breathing deeply. And that's an ideal environment for these respiratory viruses to spread to others." What will COVID do this time? Shots - Health News How monoclonal antibodies lost the fight with new COVID variants Of course, COVID-19 is still sickening tens of thousands and killing hundreds of people every day. And new, even more contagious omicron subvariants that are especially adept at infecting people — even if they've been vaccinated or previously infected — are taking over. "There's a lot of moving parts here," says Dr. David Rubin, who's been tracking the pandemic at the PolicyLab at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. "What is this all going to mean for COVID? Are we going to see a January/February resurgence of COVID that's going to be fairly significant? That may yet be coming." Many infectious disease specialists say the immunity people have from vaccinations and infections should keep any new surge of COVID-19 infections from causing a big increase in hospitalizations and deaths. "I'm hopeful, given where we are with COVID, that we're not looking at something like last winter. But at the end of the day, Mother Nature gets the final word on these things," Dr. Ashish Jha, the White House COVID-19 Coordinator, told NPR. "We're in new territory here" with three viruses all circulating at high levels simutaneously, he says. "I think it's a really worrisome situation looking to the weeks coming ahead," says Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist who runs the Pandemic Center at Brown University. Nuzzo's worried because an exhausted nation has abandoned many of the precautions people were taking to protect themselves and others. Flu vaccination rates are down by about 10% to 15% from previous years. Only about 11% of those eligible for the new bivalent omicron boosters have gotten boosted. Sponsor Message "We can't just resign ourselves to assuming that it's going to happen no matter what," she says. "We can very much take action to prevent a rise in hospitalizations and deaths." Nuzzo and others experts say Americans can get vaccinated and boosted, especially if they are at high risk because of their age or other health problems. People should consider Zooming for Thanksgiving if they're sick, testing for COVID-19 before gatherings (especially those involving older friends and relatives and other vulnerable people), and even consider putting that mask back on as much as possible. "If you're not eating or drinking it's probably a smart idea to protect the immunocompromised, the infants, as well as the older individuals in the household," says Dr. Tina Tan, an infectious disease specialist at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. There are hints that RSV may already be peaking, and the flu could also peak early, before any new COVID-19 surge emerges. That would help relieve at least some of the pressure on hospitals. There's even a theoretical possibility that the flu and RSV could blunt any new COVID-19 surge in the same way the coronavirus crowded out those viruses the last two years. One possibility is a phenomenon known as "viral interference," which involves the presence of one virus reducing the risk of catching another. "COVID could be outcompeted, which is potentially good news," Rubin says. Shots - Health News Omicron keeps finding new evolutionary tricks to outsmart our immunity National Prison powwows in Washington state restart after a 2-year break because of COVID intensive care tripledemic viral interference RSV COVID-19 pandemic influenza flu Thanksgiving Infectious Disease Facebook Flipboard Email Read & Listen Home News Culture Music Podcasts & Shows Connect Newsletters Facebook Instagram Press Public Editor Corrections Contact & Help About NPR Overview Diversity NPR Network Accessibility Ethics Finances Get Involved Support Public Radio Sponsor NPR NPR Careers NPR Shop NPR Events NPR Extra Terms of Use Privacy Your Privacy Choices Text Only Sponsor MessageBecome an NPR sponsorThousands of wild birds dead across Oregon: bird-flu outbreak blamed - oregonlive.com Skip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseQuick Look-Change your current location »Current -Mostly SunnyTonightLow -Mostly SunnyTomorrowHigh -Mostly SunnyView full weather reportSubscribeNewsThousands of wild birds dead across Oregon: bird-flu outbreak blamedUpdated: Nov. 24, 2022, 7:52 a.m.|Published: Nov. 23, 2022, 5:25 p.m.Snow geese flock by the thousands at Summer Lake in southern Oregon. An outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza in both wild birds and backyard flocks has killed thousands of wild and domesticated birds throughout the state, including some migrating snow geese. Terry Richard/The OregonianBy Gosia Wozniacka | The Oregonian/OregonLiveAn outbreak of highly pathogenic avian flu in both wild birds and backyard flocks has killed thousands of birds throughout the state, Oregon wildlife and agriculture officials say.The disease, typically known as bird flu, has been detected in almost every county in Oregon. Its current strain is especially deadly for wild birds, which are dying in larger numbers than during previous outbreaks.The number of backyard flocks – which include chickens, ducks and other domesticated birds – that have been impacted also has been much larger than in recent outbreaks. While turkeys are especially susceptible to the disease, only a handful have died locally since Oregon isn’t a turkey producing state, officials said.Sick birds act like they are drunk. They’re uncoordinated and lethargic; they shake, swim in circles and fly into the sides of houses. Those that show symptoms usually die within 72 hours.“It’s definitely serious,” said Ryan Scholz, state veterinarian with the Oregon Department of Agriculture.Bird-flu viruses occur naturally in the environment, and avian influenza doesn’t always cause mortality or even illness in birds. Some birds, like mallard ducks, have developed immunity to the disease, even its highly pathogenic strains. They suffer no symptoms, but they spread the disease, most commonly through feces.The virus typically arrives to the U.S. from Europe or Eurasia, carried by the waterfowl that fly thousands of miles. The birds spread the disease each time they touch down to rest.Deadlier strains of bird flu have been on the rise in recent years. Highly pathogenic avian influenza has devastated wild birds and the poultry industry across the globe. The virus is now endemic in Europe and Asia.This year may prove even deadlier than usual. The virus typically peters out with dry and hot weather, as low pathogenic strains of the disease naturally outcompete it. That happened in 2014-15, the last major outbreak in the U.S. in domestic birds.But birds did not stop getting sick this summer in the Pacific Northwest. They continued to die during the hottest months and well into the fall – an anomaly to how the virus usually operates.In recent weeks, wild birds have been getting sick and dying from the Fernhill Wetlands in Forest Grove to the Tualatin River Wildlife Refuge to the Willamette Valley Wildlife Refuges. It’s impossible to know exactly how many wild birds have been impacted, said Colin Gillin, State Wildlife Veterinarian.“If I said it was in the thousands, it would be an under-estimate,” Gillin said.About 17 percent of waterfowl that’s been tested have registered positive for the disease, which is “a substantial number,” Gillin said. The species currently most affected is cackling geese, but the disease is also killing numerous bald eagles, hawks, owls and herons.Songbirds and wild turkeys have not been impacted, Gillin said, because they don’t typically interact with waterfowl and aren’t a scavenger species.There’s also concern for snow geese after nearly 400 sick or dead geese were found at Wiser Lake in western Washington state a few days ago and several tested positive for avian flu. Many of the dead birds were snow geese. Those birds are just starting to arrive in Oregon, so many more could die in coming weeks in our state, Gillin said.In other states, avian influenza also has been detected in mammals such as skunks, foxes and coyotes -- usually in younger animals.The disease does not pose a high risk to humans, though some have been infected with bird flu viruses. Still, it’s a mutating disease, officials said, so hunters should wear protective gear like masks and gloves to safely handle wild birds, and they should change clothes when they get home. Hunters should not kill birds that look sick. They also should minimize dogs’ interactions with waterfowl.Some hunters worry whether the die-offs will impact duck- and goose-hunting seasons, which are now open.“I’m seeing quite a few dead geese on Sauvie Island and quite a few sick ones as well,” local hunter Eric Strand said via email.But Brandon Reishus, Oregon’s migratory bird coordinator, said it’s too early to predict. “We have no plans to close hunting down. But it’s an evolving situation.”The Oregon Department of Agriculture said 16 cases have been confirmed this year in smaller flocks of domesticated birds. That’s a significant increase from the two confirmed cases in 2014-2015 outbreak, said Scholz, the Department of Agriculture veterinarian. More flocks are being tested after an uptick in calls over the past week.About two thousand domesticated birds have been euthanized or died of avian flu in Oregon this year in reported cases, said Scholz. Some backyard flock owners only use birds or their eggs for home consumption, while others have hundreds of birds and sell their products to the public. The state has imposed several avian flu quarantines this summer and fall to prevent the sale of meat or eggs from virus-impacted areas.There have been no cases reported in commercial farms – farms with much larger flocks that often are raised in large barns -- likely because they have strict biosecurity measures, Scholz said.The sick flocks have ranged from 4 to 500 in size. The bigger the flocks, the more birds die quickly – so the risk of the disease to larger farms is significant. In the case of one large backyard farm with about 400 chickens, Scholz said, the birds started dying on Saturday and by Monday there were “barrels of dead birds.” Agricultural officials had to euthanize the rest.And it’s not just a chicken problem. In addition to hundreds of dead chickens, the outbreak this year has claimed domestic ducks, quail, pheasants, even a couple of emus.With colder weather and wild-bird migration hitting the high point in coming weeks, the environment is ripe for transmission, Scholz said.“This kind of weather… it’s a setup for a perfect storm,” he said.Wildlife officials say it’s OK to double-bag and dispose of one to two dead wild birds in the trash. People can also shallowly bury birds or just leave them where they’re found in the wild. Officials said people should be careful about handling the birds and should never transport them.As for domestic birds, responsible owners can help prevent their flocks’ exposure to wild waterfowl by fencing off access to farm ponds or grassy fields, Scholz said.Domestic flock owners should call the Department of Agriculture if more than one bird in their flock dies in rapid succession, officials said. Reported cases are reviewed by a veterinarian and samples are collected for testing. If the disease is confirmed, all birds are euthanized, said Scholz.“Avian influenza is 100 percent fatal” for domestic birds, which have not developed the immunity that some wild birds have, he added. “All the birds are going to die from the disease. We would much rather humanely euthanize them then wait for them to get sick and die.”– Gosia Wozniacka; gwozniacka@oregonian.com; @gosiawozniackaOur journalism needs your support. Please become a subscriber today at OregonLive.com/subscribe/If you purchase a product or register for an account through a link on our site, we may receive compensation. By using this site, you consent to our User Agreement and agree that your clicks, interactions, and personal information may be collected, recorded, and/or stored by us and social media and other third-party partners in accordance with our Privacy Policy.Footer NavigationAbout UsOur JournalistsAbout OregonLive.comContact The NewsroomTechnical SupportSearch Our ArchivesAdvertise With UsSubscribe to The OregonianSubscriber ServicesDigital Subscription FAQDelivery OpportunitiesAccessibility StatementSubscriptionsThe OregonianeNewspaperEmail NewslettersAlready a SubscriberManage your SubscriptionPlace a Vacation HoldMake a PaymentDelivery FeedbackRead More Top NewsToday's Top NewsPoliticsCrimeBusinessCommutingWeatherEducationHomes & GardensLetters to the EditorVideoEnvironmentTom HallmanSpecial SectionsHere is OregonSportsHigh School SportsDucksBeaversTrail BlazersTimbersThornsRecruiting NewsEntertainmentTravelTV & MoviesEat, Drink, CookComicsArchivesYour Regional News PagesPortlandWashington CountyClackamas CountyClark CountyPacific NorthwestFollow UsEmail NewslettersNews on Alexa or Google HomeYouTubeTwitterFacebookInstagramRSSMobileiPhone, Android appsTablet appsMore on OregonLive.comPlace an AdAutosJobsSponsor ContentPost a JobCookie Settings|Privacy Policy|User Agreement|Ad ChoicesDisclaimerUse of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement, (updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights (updated 7/1/2024).© 2024 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.Ad ChoicesWhat the Triple Threat of COVID, RSV and Flu Means for Children | Scientific American Skip to main contentScientific AmericanNovember 23, 20225 min readWhat the Triple Threat of COVID, RSV and Flu Means for ChildrenTwo epidemiologists explain how three viral illnesses are straining health care systemsBy Rebecca S.B. Fischer, Annette Regan & The Conversation US Picture taken by Sebastian Rose/Getty Images The following essay is reprinted with permission from The Conversation, an online publication covering the latest research.Every fall and winter, viral respiratory illnesses like the common cold and seasonal flu keep kids out of school and social activities. But this year, more children than usual are ending up at emergency departments and hospitals.On supporting science journalismIf you're enjoying this article, consider supporting our award-winning journalism by subscribing. By purchasing a subscription you are helping to ensure the future of impactful stories about the discoveries and ideas shaping our world today.In California, the Orange County health department declared a state of emergency in early November 2022 due to record numbers of pediatric hospitalizations for respiratory infections. In Maryland, emergency rooms have run out of beds because of the unusually high number of severe respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, infections. So emergency departments there are having to refer patients across state lines for care.In the U.S., the winter respiratory virus season started earlier than usual this year. Since peak infections usually occur in late December or January, this uncharacteristic early wave suggests that the situation could get much worse for people of all ages, particularly children.We are epidemiologists with expertise in epidemic analysis for emerging disease threats, including respiratory infections. We watch patterns in these infections closely, and we pay particular attention when the patterns are unusual. We’ve grown increasingly concerned about the amount of pediatric hospitalizations over the last few months and the pattern that is emerging.The ‘triple threat’In early November, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a health advisory about increased activity in respiratory infections – especially among children. The CDC and other health experts are warning of the so-called “triple threat” of respiratory illness from RSV, influenza – or the seasonal flu – and COVID-19.The underlying reasons for the convergence of these viruses and the increase in infections so early in the season are not yet clear. But health experts have some clues about contributing factors and what it could mean for the coming months.When it comes to COVID-19, 2022 is expected to usher in another winter wave of infections, similar to patterns seen in 2020 and 2021. Previous winter surges stemmed from a combination of factors, including the emergence and spread of new viral variants, more people gathering indoors rather than distanced outside, and people coming together for the holidays.But unlike previous pandemic winters, most COVID-19 precautions – such as using masks in public areas or avoiding group activities – are more relaxed than ever. Together with the looming threat of new variants, it is difficult to predict how big the next COVID-19 wave could be.And while the seasonal flu has proved somewhat unpredictable during the COVID-19 pandemic, it nearly always hits during late October. Flu season also arrived about a month early and in greater numbers than in recent history. By our read of the data, pediatric flu hospitalizations are nearing 10 times what has been seen for this time of year for more than a decade.RSV infections tend to follow a similar seasonal pattern as the flu, peaking in winter months. But this year, there was an unexpected summer wave, well before the start of the typical fall respiratory virus season.In typical years, RSV garners little media attention. It’s incredibly common and usually causes only mild illness. In fact, most children encounter the virus before age 2.But RSV can be a formidable respiratory infection with serious consequences for children under 5, especially infants. It is the most common cause of lower respiratory infections in young children, and more severe illnesses can lead to pneumonia and other complications, often requiring hospitalization.Why children are particularly at riskChildren, especially young children, tend to get sicker from flu and RSV than other age groups. But infants younger than 6 months old stand to suffer the most, with nearly double the risk of RSV-related death compared to other children younger than 5. COVID-19 hospitalization rates are also four to five times higher for infants than older children.One reason the youngest children are at greater risk is that their immune systems are not yet fully developed and don’t produce the robust immune response seen in most adults. What’s more, infants younger than 6 months – who are most at risk of severe disease – are still too young to be vaccinated against influenza or COVID-19.These viruses present challenges on their own, but their co-circulation and coinciding surges in infections create a perfect storm for multiple viruses to infect the same person at once. Viruses might even act together to evade immunity and cause damage to the respiratory tract.Such co-infections are typically uncommon. However, the likelihood of co-infection is substantially higher for children than adults. Co-infections can be difficult to diagnose and treat, and can ultimately lead to greater disease severity, complications, hospitalization and death.Factors behind the triple threatThere are a few reasons why the U.S. may be seeing a surge in pediatric respiratory infections. First, COVID-19 protection strategies actually help prevent the transmission of other respiratory pathogens. School and daycare closures likely also minimized exposures children normally have to various respiratory viruses.These and other efforts to prevent the spread of COVID-19 seem to have suppressed the broad circulation of other viruses, including influenza and RSV. As a result, the U.S. saw an overall drop in non-COVID respiratory infections – and an almost nonexistent flu season in the winter of 2020.The decreased viral activity means that children missed out on some exposures to viruses and other pathogens that typically help build immunity, particularly during the first few years of life. The resulting so-called “immunity debt” may contribute to an excess of pediatric respiratory infections as we continue into this season.To further complicate the picture, the changing nature of viruses, including theemergence of new COVID-19 variants and the natural evolution of seasonal influenza viruses, means that we could be seeing a unique combination of particularly transmissible strains or strains that cause more severe illness.Proactive steps people can takeThe early surge in respiratory infections with high rates of hospitalization highlights the importance of prevention. The best tool we have for prevention is vaccination. Vaccines that protect against COVID-19 and influenza are available and recommended for everyone over 6 months of age. They have been shown to be safe and effective, and they can and do save lives.In particular, most recent data on the newly updated bivalent COVID-19 booster vaccine suggests that it produces a more rigorous antibody response against the current circulating omicron variants than the original COVID-19 vaccines.The best way to protect infants younger than 6 months old against flu and COVID-19 is by vaccination during pregnancy. When a pregnant mother is vaccinated, maternal antibodies cross the placenta to the baby, reducing the risk of COVID-19 hospitalization in young infants by 61%. Vaccination of other caregivers, family and friends can also help protect infants.Other preventive measures, like hand-washing, covering sneezes and coughs, staying at home and isolating when sick, can help to protect the community from these viruses and others. Paying attention to local public health advisers can also help people to have the most up-to-date information and make informed decisions to keep themselves and others – of all ages – safe.This article was originally published on The Conversation. Read the original article.Rebecca S.B. Fischer is an assistant professor of epidemiology at Texas A&M University.More by Rebecca S.B. FischerAnnette Regan is an assistant professor of epidemiology at the University of San Francisco.More by Annette ReganCurated by professional editors, The Conversation offers informed commentary and debate on the issues affecting our world.More by The Conversation USExpand Your World with ScienceLearn and share the most exciting discoveries, innovations and ideas shaping our world today.SubscribeSign up for our newslettersSee the latest storiesRead the latest issueGive a Gift SubscriptionFollow Us:Return & Refund PolicyAboutPress RoomFAQsContact UsInternational EditionsAdvertiseAccessibility StatementTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyCalifornia Consumer Privacy StatementUse of cookies/Do not sell my dataScientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.© 2024 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, A DIVISION OF SPRINGER NATURE AMERICA, INC.ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.Bird flu: UK is seeing its largest ever outbreak – which may prove particularly deadly for wild birds Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair Bird flu: UK is seeing its largest ever outbreak – which may prove particularly deadly for wild birds Published: November 22, 2022 5.07pm GMT Alastair Ward, University of Leeds Author Alastair Ward Associate Professor of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Management, University of Leeds Disclosure statement Alastair Ward receives funding from the BBSRC and Defra. Partners University of Leeds provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK. View all partners In the UK, more than 150 cases of bird flu have been reported between September and November of this year alone. Mark Agnor/ Shutterstock Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger The outbreak of avian influenza which has hit the UK since the autumn of 2021 is the largest the country has ever seen. And the picture is the same across Europe and the US, which are reporting a similar picture. To date, this outbreak has led to the death of nearly 100 million poultry birds around the world. But the disease doesn’t only threaten poultry and egg production – it also threatens wild bird populations in a way that it never has before. While drastic action has been taken to control the spread of avian flu in domestic birds, these efforts may be insufficient alone to mitigate the impact on wild bird populations. Typically, western Europe’s avian flu season starts in the autumn, when millions of migratory birds from colder climates – such as geese, ducks and swans – arrive for the winter. If these wild birds come into contact with domestic poultry, any pathogens they’re carrying can spread to these populations. It’s a time that poultry farmers and other bird keepers dread, as certain strains of bird flu (in particular highly pathogenic avian influenza, also known as HPAI) can be extremely deadly. Come springtime, when wild migratory birds return to their summer breeding grounds in eastern Europe and Asia, avian flu wanes with their departure. Or, at least, that was the pattern in recent decades. But, since the autumn of 2020, this has changed. Previous outbreaks of HPAI among UK poultry have been relatively rare. But between November 2020 to March 2021, 24 cases of HPAI were reported. This situation has only worsened since then, with more than 150 confirmed cases of HPAI between September 5 and November 17 of this year alone. Similarly, between 2017 and 2019, only 40 UK wild birds tested after their death were found to be positive for HPAI. But this rose to 317 in 2020-2021 and 1,468 since October 1 this year. Usually, HPAI causes mass mortality among poultry while the majority of wild birds seem less affected. This is one feature that makes the current avian flu outbreak so unique. To date, 15 species of seabirds have tested positive for HPAI for the first time, and die-offs in some species, such as great skuas, are worrying due to their magnitude and potential to threaten the species’ persistence in the UK. Moreover, the seasonal downturn in cases of avian flu didn’t happen during the spring as confirmed outbreaks continued among poultry and wild birds over the summer. Avian flu virus Bird flu is caused primarily by an influenza A virus, which is closely related to other influenza viruses. These mutate rapidly and can combine genetic material from other influenza viruses into their genomes in order to produce new variants. New strains of avian flu are typically imported during each bird migration season. But we are increasingly witnessing new strains emerging within the UK and other European countries over winter. The current H5N1 strain of HPAI, seems to be more infectious and more fatal to poultry, and more persistent in wild bird populations. It’s also able to affect a greater diversity of species than previous strains. And, with a greater number of wild birds infected, this is likely to mean that there have been more opportunities for infected or contaminated wild birds to come into contact with poultry. This may also have contributed to the current high number of cases. Great skuas have been particularly affected. Gestur Gislason/ Shutterstock There are still many things that we don’t know about the current outbreak of avian flu, which is why the government has set up a task force to investigate. One factor this task force is looking into is whether the current strain can survive in the environment outside an animal host (a phenomenon known as environmental persistence). If this is possible, it may help explain why so many wild birds are being infected by the current strain of HPAI – and why outbreaks continued over the summer. Containing the virus The UK government has introduced a range of measures to contain avian flu. All British poultry farms are required to implement stringent biosecurity practices to help prevent their flocks from catching the virus, including housing free-range birds to prevent contact with wild birds, and regularly cleaning and disinfecting housing. Dead wild birds and poultry suspected of having avian flu are also being tested for the virus. If a single bird in a poultry flock is found with avian flu, the entire flock must be culled to prevent the disease from spreading. Birds are not the only species that can become infected with avian flu. In the past, some strains have made the jump to mammals, including humans. There were 883 reported human cases of a H5N6 strain (which is not currently present in Europe) worldwide between 2017 and 2020. But this tended to manifest itself primarily among people working very closely with birds. There has only been one human case of H5N1 reported during the current UK outbreak, so risks to people are thought likely remain very low. The disease can also be effectively controlled with a course of antiviral medication if it does develop. While measures to control avian flu help mitigate risks to poultry and people, they do little to help wild birds. This could be a problem both for the persistence of the current outbreak and the conservation of some threatened species, which are already under pressure due to human-induced changes to the environment. The immediate future for HPAI looks rather bleak for the UK which can expect ongoing outbreaks among poultry and die-offs among wild birds continuing into next autumn and winter. The government’s task force will publish its findings next year, and will answer many questions about the current HPAI strain. But many more questions may need to be answered before we know how best to get the current outbreak under control. Avian flu H5N1 Avian flu Bird flu Influenza virus Wildlife rehabilitation Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationFlu-turistic: Scientists create super-influenza vaccine that can fight 20 strains | Daily Mail Online Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Best Buys Discounts Black Friday My Profile Logout Login Strep A Covid-19 Cancer NHS Cold Flu Dementia Fertility UTI Diabetes Weight Loss Diet My Profile Logout Login Privacy Policy Feedback Tuesday, Nov 12th 2024 Advertisement Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC looks to reboot the flagship show: Former England ace Alex Scott among the front-runners… and there some VERY leftfield options Founder of world's oldest breastfeeding charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of transgender women - saying it has become 'a travesty' that 'indulges the fantasies of adults' Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' The Church of England's most prolific abuser John Smyth beat scores of boys till they bled. GUY ADAMS asks... why did no one in authority tell the police about the abuse by top barrister who exchanged Christmas cards with Justin Welby for years? Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more serious condition which affects up to two in three women The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make a difference, these are the ones that do Here are the number of sit-ups experts say you should be able to do for your age Plane passenger sparks fierce debate after sitting in between couple on three-hour flight I didn't think there was ANY problem carrying suitcases from Mexico for two guys I barely knew... they said it was just $250,000 in cash. I'm STUNNED it was actually £15m of cocaine - it's unfair I face 60 years in US jail, says British beautician How having cancer could REDUCE your risk of dementia later in life: The surprising truth about why surviving one of the world's biggest killers can actually have a protective effect RICHARD LITTLEJOHN: U.S. millionaires fleeing the 'Trump terror' for Starmer's basketcase Britain must be mad Premier League footballer probed over rape claims after previously being arrested in February last year Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having intimate meal with family Yorkshire's Strongest Man contestant was filmed lifting a Ford Transit van with his bare hands while claiming a car crash had left him unable to carry shopping bags in 'blatantly dishonest' insurance claim Pressuring someone to end their lives is set to be a crime punishable by up to 14 years in prison under new Assisted dying bill Apple quietly discontinuing flagship device due to lackluster sales Cher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty. 'Do you want to come to my place?' he asked. I was 15... Keir Starmer throws down the gauntlet to Donald Trump and urges him to 'show leadership' on climate change - as he arrives in Azerbaijan for COP29 climate summit BBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Christine after their break-up Why Cadbury's Chocolate Fingers are changing hands in France for more than TWENTY times their retail price? How the Christmas pudding - a tradition that dates back to the 14th Century - is going out of fashion Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly after suffering miscarriage Scientist claims to have cured her stage 3 cancer with viruses she grew in a lab - after refusing to go through hell of chemo again Madonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris Previous Next Fluturistic: Scientists create super-influenza vaccine that can fight 20 strains and uses Covid mRNA technologyThe vaccine stimulates the body to make antibodies for the 20 known flu typesIt could 'significantly reduce the chances of ever getting a severe flu infection'The shot has shown promising results in ferrets, with humans to be tested nextBy CAITLIN TILLEY, HEALTH REPORTER FOR DAILYMAIL.COM Published: 22:48 GMT, 24 November 2022 | Updated: 15:21 GMT, 25 November 2022 e-mail 122 shares 499 View comments Scientists have created a super-vaccine that can fight every known strain of flu and uses the same technology used in Covid shots.The experimental vaccine - which hasn't been tested on people yet - offered broad protection against 20 influenza A and B subtypes in animal tests.But Professor John Oxford, a virologist at Queen Mary University in London, said the new vaccine developed at the University of Pennsylvania represented a 'huge breakthrough'.Given in two shots, it uses the mRNA technology that was pioneered during the pandemic in Moderna and Pfizer's Covid vaccines.It works by delivering instructions that teach cells to create replicas of proteins that appear on all influenza virus surfaces. This trains the body to remember how to recognize and fight any foreign invaders carrying this protein in future. The hope is that the universal vaccine would give people a baseline level of immunity that would reduce hospitalizations and deaths each year.It would also take away the guesswork that goes into developing annual shots months ahead of flu season each year.Currently, the vaccine is decided based on: which flu viruses are making people ill before the upcoming flu season; how much those viruses are spreading; and how well equipped the body is to deal with those flu viruses based on the previous season's shot. It comes amid the biggest flu outbreak in the US in over a decade that is overwhelming hospitals and shutting schools across the country. The H3N2 strain is currently wreaking havoc and tends to hit the elderly and very young the hardest.As of yet, there is no vaccine for H3N2 infection. Scientists have made some moves to start developing a vaccine, but there is no consensus to mass produce one, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The vaccine contains genetic coding instructions for the 20 known flu subtypes. When injected into the body, cells will make replicas of proteins which appear on each flu type. These prompt an immune response where the body creates and remembers antibodies for each flu subtype. The immune response can be recalled if the body encounters flu in the futureWhile the new vaccine could halt future flu pandemics, it would not be a silver bullet, because it would reduce severe illness and deaths but not totally prevent infections.Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania school of medicine have only tested the vaccine in mice and ferrets, but are designing human trials at the moment and the first sets of data could come within the next six months. They found that antibody levels induced by the vaccine remained unchanged for at least four months in the animals tested, the researchers found.Professor Oxford said: 'I cannot emphasize enough what a breakthrough this paper is.'He added there was a 'very good chance' the jab would work in humans. Thousands of lives could be saved by the shot, he said. 'The potential is huge, and I think sometimes we underestimate these big respiratory viruses.' RELATED ARTICLES Previous 1 Next Majority of Covid deaths are among vaccinated Americans for... 'I've never seen anything like this': Doctors warn America... Get vaccinated before 11am, have a snooze afterwards and... Moderna's CEO admits only the vulnerable need a COVID... Share this article Share 122 shares 'I've never seen anything like this': Doctors warn America is running out of FOUR child antibiotics and flu drugs as kids bear brunt of 'tripledemic' America is running short on four key antibiotics and respiratory drugs for children, as seasonal bugs come back with a bang after being suppressed during lockdowns.Health officials have declared a shortage of amoxicillin, a vital antibiotic used to treat bacterial infections such as pneumonia, respiratory infections and strep throat.But doctors on the ground are also reporting dwindling stocks of Augmentin - a antibiotic drug that uses amoxicillin alongside clavulanic acid - Tamiflu, the most commonly used flu medication in US hospitals, and albuterol, an inhaler for asthma and to relieve other lung symptoms.Desperate parents report spending hours going from pharmacy-to-pharmacy to track down the drugs for their children.The shortages are being driven by surging demand. Several children's hospitals have already hit 100 per cent capacity as rates of RSV and flu - both of which are deadly for youngsters - surge to their highest level in a decade for this time of year.Advertisement Study senior author Dr Scott Hensley, a professor of microbiology at the university said: 'The idea here is to have a vaccine that will give people a baseline level of immune memory to diverse flu strains, so that there will be far less disease and death when the next flu pandemic occurs.'He added: 'We think this vaccine could significantly reduce the chances of ever getting a severe flu infection.'The new jab uses part of a genetic code called mRNA, gives instructions for cells allow them to create replicas of so-called hemagglutinin proteins that appear on influenza virus surfaces. These stimulate an immune response where the body makes and remembers antibodies for each flu virus. Current flu jabs cannot do this, because they rely on a tiny physical piece of the weakened flu strain. The shot is not expected to completely stop infections of flu, but it will reduce the chances of serious illness and death from new variants of the virus. And it means people will effectively be immunized against 20 types of flu in one go. The Moderna and the Pfizer-BioNTech Covid vaccines are both mRNA shots - a little used technology before its introduction to the mainstream during the pandemic.Víctor Jiménez Cid, Professor of the department of microbiology and parasitology, faculty of pharmacy, Complutense University of Madrid, said: 'This is the first high-impact publication to present a successful strategy for a "universal" mRNA-based vaccine against influenza.'He added: 'This type of vaccine would therefore prevent, in addition to seasonal influenza... possible new emerging pandemic viruses.'The study was published in the journal Science.ModernaPfizerFlu Share or comment on this article: Flu-turistic: Scientists create super-influenza vaccine that can fight 20 strains e-mail 122 shares Most watched News videos Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach 91-year-old woman pushed down subway stairs by 'immigrant' robber Princess Kate observes Remembrance Sunday parade at Whitehall Jill Biden sits next to Kamala Harris at Arlington National Cemetery 2019: Tom Homan takes on AOC in heated exchange Narinder Kaur apologises for 'stupid' tweet about Kate Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach Moment Donald Trump snubs Ivanka for Elon in family portrait CCTV captures final moments before woman is mauled to death Joe Biden appears to wipe away tears at Arlington National Cemetery Moment King Charles lay a wreath and salutes on Remembrance Sunday Shocking moment girl wearing headphones is hit and run over by train Comments 459 Share what you think Newest Oldest Best rated Worst rated View all The comments below have not been moderated. View all The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline. We are no longer accepting comments on this article. Bing Site Web Enter search term: Search DON'T MISS Gary Lineker 'will QUIT Match of the Day at the end of the season' after 26 years presenting the show Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly as she debuts bump She's expecting I'm A Celeb's Coleen Rooney reveals vast list of instructions to look after her four children on two HUGE boards during her jungle stint EXCLUSIVECher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty. 'Do you want to come to my place?' he asked. I was 15... I'm A Celebrity 2024 lineup is CONFIRMED! Coleen Rooney and ab-flashing Tulisa get a jungle makeover in first look snaps Laundry legend or sock-shrinking disaster? Share this quiz with your loved ones so they can identify their bad household habits - and change them for good! Ad Feature Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having a meal with family EXCLUSIVETHE DUCHESS OF YORK: I'm on a mission to rid nappies of plastic - with my fifth grandchild on the way Britney Spears reunites with son Jayden, 18, after years of estrangement and move to Hawaii Reestablishing their bond EXCLUSIVESuper soft hair in three easy steps: Simple routine provides up to 7x* more moisture for up to 72 hours** Ad Feature EXCLUSIVEMelvin Odoom is the SEVENTH star to land in Brisbane ahead of I'm A Celeb - as jungle-bound DJ shares first impression of Australian weather Coleen Nolan's son Jake Roche, 32, reveals he's going to be a dad in days as singer is forced to reschedule upcoming shows Chris Pratt and wife Katherine Schwarzenegger welcome their third child together and name has nod to JFK Khloe Kardashian shows off her 27inch waistline in see-through nude lingerie as she announces new brand Trim physique Find your inner glow: We asked one beauty writer to trial a new range of gentle skincare - here's how she got on Ad Feature EDEN CONFIDENTIAL: What made Harry Styles flee chef Jamie Oliver's £15m home? Bizarre Nicole Scherzinger pictured wearing Kamala Harris shirt before 'coming out as a Trump supporter' Awkward Machine Gun Kelly's turbulent dating history laid bare as he prepares to welcome first child with Megan Fox Checkered past Who left the Big Brother house? Baked Potato is brutally sent home through the back door just days ahead of final How understanding your glucose levels can help you feel less tired after meals Ad Feature Queen Camilla appears emotional as she speaks to domestic violence survivor in new documentary Powerful topic Coleen Rooney insists small food portions won't bother her on I'm A Celeb as she often 'misses a meal' and 'never gets hangry' Sting says Diddy allegations don't 'taint' Every Breath You Take - after disgraced rapper sampled song Nonplussed The inventive way Megan Fox hid her baby bump at Halloween bash before pregnancy reveal with MGK Secret Looking to refresh your space before winter? Transform your home and interiors with these 10 top must-know brands Ad Feature Jane Moore shares the poignant reason she finally decided to say yes to I'm A Celebrity - and reveals her TWO big phobias The REAL reason Chris Martin kisses the tarmac before he flies after Coldplay frontman was seen planting his lips to the ground Leonardo DiCaprio rings in 50th birthday with Vittoria Ceretti, 26, at second star-studded dinner party Night out Cast of iconic kids' TV show send fans wild with 'nostalgia overload' as they reunite 25 years after first episode Legendary Damaged hair? Don't despair! With 1 billion bonds packed in every bottle, the NEW bond-building wonder product is here to help Ad Feature Queen Camilla praised for 'moving' and 'powerful' ITV documentary on domestic abuse Positive response EXCLUSIVEBrian Austin Green's surprising reaction to ex-wife Megan Fox's pregnancy with Machine Gun Kelly Unexpected Leggy Millie Mackintosh stuns in a black chic minidress as she joins husband Hugo Taylor at book launch As stylish as always Line Of Duty star Adrian Dunbar 'CONFIRMS' show's return: 'When they announce it, it's going to burn up the internet!' Riviera glamour, Ibiza nightlife and the most stylish ships at sea: Why THIS is the ultimate cruise for your adults-only Mediterranean escape Ad Feature EXCLUSIVEWhat's really going with Euphoria? Cancelation rumors spark after Zendaya is cast in Christopher Nolan film Megan Fox and Machine Gun Kelly's ROLLERCOASTER romance timeline: From pregnancy to drinking each other's blood LL Cool J 'chased Monty Don to ask for a selfie as rapper reveals himself to be a VERY unlikely fan of the BBC horticulturist' GK Barry spills the beans on Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly's awkward Instagram gaffe - as she prepares for I'm A Celeb Struggling to maintain your weight during menopause? You're not alone - here's why this happens and what you can do about it Ad Feature Cat Deeley is criticised by viewers after unfortunate gaffe during Remembrance Day segment on This Morning I'm A Celebrity's Tulisa admits she 'doesn't want to draw attention' in jungle by recreating Myleene Klass' bikini moment EXCLUSIVEThe real reason Ben Affleck always looks 'miserable' The actor always manages to look downcast Emily Watson catches the eye in a graphic gown as she joins chic co-star Olivia Williams at VIP screening of DUNE: Prophecy BUSTED! The career-myths that are holding you back from success Advertising Megan Fox and MGK fans react to pregnancy reveal eight months after pair ENDED engagement Delighted How England Lioness Chloe Kelly went from goofy teen to glamorous red carpet regular - and the £350 beauty treatment she swears by Travis Kelce and Taylor Swift joined by surprise sports superstar in Chiefs VIP suite as new images emerge EXCLUSIVEColeen Rooney to be greeted by her four sons on the I'm A Celebrity bridge after husband Wayne is forced to stay behind EXCLUSIVEGive the gift of curiosity! Discover why the What on Earth! Magazine is the ultimate Christmas present for kids who love learning (and we have an offer) SHOPPING Jessica Simpson hints Eric Johnson marriage is OVER as she admits she 'put up' with things she 'did not deserve' Lizzie Cundy, 56, puts on a leggy display as she follows in Jennifer Lopez's footsteps and undergoes a HydraFacial EXCLUSIVEBBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Stephen Fry and Sophie Winkleman join host of celebs sending letter to Sadiq Khan demanding he change Tube's 5G advertising Luann de Lesseps, 59, reveals which A-List actor she made out with and how she is a member of the Mile High Club I'm A Celeb star Oti Mabuse reveals she is taking part on the gruelling ITV show to 'catch up on sleep' after giving birth to her first child last year Timothee Chalamet reveals the feature he was told would prevent him from succeeding in Hollywood Huge star The View panel fiercely defend Nicole Scherzinger over Russell Brand's election hat Speaking out Queen Silvia of Sweden stuns in deep purple ensemble as she joins King Carl XVI Gustaf for award ceremony in Stockholm Coleen Rooney gives a subtle nod to her Wagatha Christie trial against Rebekah Vardy as she prepares for I'm A Celebrity Strictly sends viewers wild as it reveals comedian ie FIRST confirmed for festive special as he jokes he's about to 'ruin Christmas' EXCLUSIVEColeen's one last night with Wayne! Rooney insisted on taking the last possible flight to Australia ahead of her I'm A Celeb stint Travis Kelce's ex Kayla Nicole makes wild accusation against Taylor Swift Nicole dated Kelce on and off for five years before his romance with Swift James McAvoy is seen for the first time on the Glasgow set of his new film California Schemin' about hoax rappers Silibil N' Brains EXCLUSIVEMadonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris It looks like Madonna is no longer crazy for her recent toyboy Demi Moore, 62, shows off her bikini body as she wishes 2lb dog Pilaf a happy birthday Kevin Costner breaks silence on Yellowstone's John Dutton being killed off in Season 5 part two premiere Cash-strapped Diddy is renting out his private jet for $432k-a-flight as sex trial looms Troubled rapper is trying to generate cash Benny Blanco dishes on VERY romantic mornings with Selena Gomez as he makes People's Sexiest Man Alive issue Katy Perry brutally trolled after sharing her pick for the year's best film Got more than she bargained for Prince Harry pens heartfelt message of 'admiration and appreciation' for his 'fellow veterans' on Remembrance Day Charles grins as he welcomes King of Bahrain to Windsor Castle with a warm hug Charles is hosting Hamad Bin Isa Al Khalifa As Philip Schofield lays his 'extraordinary loyal' mother Pat to rest, friends tell how she became his rock after his TV downfall, reveals KATIE HIND BBC drops first trailer for Return to Paradise and finally confirms release date for Death in Paradise spin-off series Coming soon The Wheel fans blast mortified Helen Flanagan for getting 'very simple' question wrong - but do you know the answer? Dexys Midnight Runners original member dead: Andy Leek passes away aged 66 following long battle with Parkinson's disease just days after tying the knot Shirtless Romeo Beckham shows off his ripped physique as he enjoys getaway with pals - after confirming romance with Gray Sorrenti Cher: The night I took a drunken John Lennon to the Playboy mansion - and he stripped stark naked in front of me in the infamous secret Grotto Barry McGuigan is the SIXTH star to touch down in Australia ahead of his I'm A Celeb stint and jokes he's 'there to sign his next big fighter' Ex Big Brother star Narinder Kaur faces furious backlash for saying Kate Middleton has 'aged so much' as princess returns to royal duties Gary Barlow is dwarfed by best friend musician Eliot Kennedy as the pair share a boozy bath on the Take That star's wine tour series Eamonn Holmes takes shocking swipe at GB News co-star's appearance as sexism debate takes personal turn - and she warns 'back off!' Laverne Cox breaks silence on whether she'll leave US after Trump's election win Opened up about the possibility of leaving Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker transform into Morticia and Gomez Addams for new Halloween posts Getting into character Damian Lewis is criticised for his conduct during Wolf Hall interview after he confessed the role has 'worn him down' Mission Impossible 8 FIRST LOOK: Tom Cruise's Ethan Hunt dangles from a glider in trailer as title for long-delayed conclusion is finally revealed Cruz Beckham, 19, and girlfriend Jackie Apostel, 29, enjoy another public display of affection as they share a passionate kiss Netflix fans rave over 'gripping' crime thriller based on true story 'full of twists and turns' - praising 'excellent acting and an unpredictable ending' Gladiator II review: This sequel falls short of its masterpiece predecessor but is still heaps of farfetched and ferocious fun Deal Or No Deal fans blast ITV bosses for 'killing' the show with big change to Stephen Mulhern's reboot Not happy Chappell Roan has shock four word response to report about her split from management Speaking out EXCLUSIVEPregnant Charlotte Dawson details how she's learning to forgive fiancé Matthew Sarsfield's sexting scandal as she insists that it would have been 'easier to walk away' Kristin Cavallari's ex Mark Estes 'proposes' to Love Island star after hanging out with former girlfriend Marriage plans Chris Evans continues to wow with bookish new look as he promotes Red One in NYC Looking good Yellowstone fans confused after Kevin Costner appears in credits for season five part two despite departure Melissa Suffield jiggles around in a pink bikini as she hits back at cruel trolls and urges to acknowledge the 'reality of everyday bodies' Kyle Richards gives BFF Teddi Mellencamp divorce advice amid Edwin Arroyave split At different stages in their divorces Paul Mescal reveals his 'heartbeat is going through the f***ing roof' as he arrives at the Gladiator II premiere in his hometown Dublin with his family Jennifer Meyer, 47, flashes her $500K diamond engagement ring from billionaire Geoffrey Ogunlesi, 33 Pricey Moment Laurence Fox rescued his fiancee's dog Rocky after pet Jack Russell got trapped in hole underground EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celebrity contestants are set to be battered by freak storms and torrential rain as bad weather threatens to 'ruin' the series Katie Price appears to reignite bitter feud with Emily Atack as she makes snide 'fishy' dig AGAIN in front of huge audience at The Clapham Grand The Day Of The Jackal star Ursula Corbero star sends fans wild with her racy social media snaps after revealing she was 'confused' by her 'weak' role Livid Loose Women fans urge James Martin to 'move with the times' after 'daft, money-wasting' cooking confession on ITV show Moment country star SCREAMS as she falls and takes out her guitarist mid-show Performing in Helotes, Texas on Friday Diana Vickers sets pulses racing in a skimpy gold bikini as she soaks up the sun on lavish Ibiza getaway Sofia Richie is 17 years YOUNGER than sister Nicole Richie but they look the same age in rare photo Raye and LL Cool J look all partied out as they leave Manchester after MTV EMAs - where the British singer was named Best UK & Ireland artist Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright enjoy Majorca getaway with Olly Murs after admitting they're in the 'boring phase of their relationship' Taylor Swift fans furious over savage Jeopardy! clue about Travis Kelce On the program's official Instagram account Iskra Lawrence is praised for sharing footage of her homebirth after welcoming baby daughter 'P. P' Wolf Hall leaves viewers 'traumatised' with 'brutal' execution scene just minutes into BBC premiere as they beg 'please don't show that again!' Rebekah Vardy sets tongues wagging as she packs for mystery trip abroad and posts a teasing emoji - as nemesis WAG Coleen Rooney jets off to Australia for I'm A Celeb Antiques Roadshow guest gasps 'I could cry!' as he learns staggering value of sculpture he bought for just £50 and was using as a DOORSTOP How Alison Hammond's turbulent love life influenced her debut novel, from cheating scandals to surprise encounters at a massage parlour Coleen Rooney jets to Australia ahead of I'm A Celeb stint and reveals nod to her family - as she prepares to join the five celebs who have already landed Brooklyn Beckham reveals his tattoo tribute to Quincy Jones and says he 'misses him more than he can imagine' after the legendary producer's death aged 91 Has Leonardo DiCaprio finally found love with Vittoria Ceretti and ditched his golden rule? A look at the star's relationships as he turns 50 The truth about how accurate that shocking Wolf Hall scene showing Anne Boleyn's execution really was Idina Menzel and Taye Diggs' son, 15, is nearly as tall as his mother as mother-son duo attend Wicked premiere Legendary Chicago singer-songwriter Ella Jenkins dead at 100 Mariah Carey will be 'quizzed under oath' over claims estranged brother sold drugs despite star still reeling from losing mom and sister on the same day Quincy Jones is laid to rest at private family funeral in Los Angeles a week after his death at age 91 Netflix fans furious as three whole episodes of blockbuster series are uploaded with no sound in 'crippling' blunder - raging 'I thought I was going mad!' Linda Lusardi gets £3.8k non-surgical face lift and says she feels '10 years younger' - after becoming 'depressed about her jowls' James Norton reveals he has put off having children 'because it wouldn't be fair to have them right now' as he details split from fiancée Imogen Poots Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson finally addresses on set behavior controversy including 'peeing in bottles' Charli XCX leads the nominees at the Rolling Stone UK Awards with three nods as Raye and Dua Lipa are also honoured Movie director Cameron Crowe, 67, welcomes his 3rd child with publicist Anais Smith, 40 Liam Payne's 'drug dealer' speaks for first time: Argentinian waiter probed over One Direction star's death tells how singer took cocaine with him Robbie Williams announces three huge UK stadium shows as part of mammoth Live 25 tour Damian Lewis slams Donald Trump by comparing him to his Wolf Hall alter-ego Henry VIII as he claims he's become 'disillusioned to the people around him' Tulisa unveils club-themed home makeover complete with huge dressing room, home gym, a bridge that leads to nowhere Gayle King fans warn her to be 'careful' after CBS host admits 'stepping out' of her comfort zone with Shaboozey Yellowstone star Cole Hauser says it would be a 'shame to stop' telling the Dutton family story Ellie Goulding shares a rare snap of son Arthur, 4, and kisses him on the cheek as they adorably dress in matching Spider-Man costumes Sunday Brunch viewers bombard show with complaints just minutes into episode - sinking claws into 'boring and unfunny' Channel 4 scenes Ben Affleck is only 'one errant remark' away from being cancelled and believes the 'phone could stop ringing' despite his success Eddie Redmayne and Úrsula Corberó put on a steamy display as husband and wife in scenes from Sky TV's The Day Of The Jackal Jamie Oliver enjoys Coldplay concert with a female friend in Sydney - after he pulled his children's book from the shelves Mike Tyson has ditched veganism, is on a sex and cannabis ban and training six hours a day to prepare to fight 27-year-old Jake Paul Your turn next? Fans go wild for adorable photo of 'auntie' Taylor Swift posing with fellow Chiefs WAG's baby 'I thought to myself, what if it had been my daughter?' Queen Camilla praises mother of woman killed by her ex - and admits she wouldn't be as 'dignified' in the same position Friends fans complain of 'plot hole' in well-known episode which still 'drives them wild' 26 years later Strictly's Nancy Xu says she is 'gutted' that she and Shayne Ward will miss out on Blackpool and that she finds it 'unfair' that he was 'criticised' Geri Horner pulls series of animated facial expressions as she wraps up warm in stylish white outfit for autumn walk Ant McPartlin looks exhausted as he works up a sweat during gruelling workout ahead of I'm A Celebrity Ali Larter, 48, came to fame for her whipped cream bikini in Varsity Blues - see her now The truth behind Ben Shephard's This Morning absence revealed as ITV star fronts new project worlds away from daytime hit James Norton's surprising health battle - fans shocked to learn newly single Happy Valley hunk lives with deadly illness Lauren Pope kicks off festive season a little too early putting up her Christmas tree as she reveals she had anxiety about last year due to being a single mother Radio 1 DJ Dean McCullough is the FOURTH star to arrive in Australia ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! How Sophie has become Kate's closest ally: 'Maternal' Duchess is a huge support to Princess of Wales - and it's come about because of void left by Meghan Furious Autumnwatch fans rage 'it's appalling and an insult to viewers!' as they skewer BBC for 'dumbing down' beloved nature show with complete overhaul Coleen Rooney reveals the secret to making her marriage with Wayne work as she confesses there were times she thought they wouldn't make it Emily Atack claims her party trick is 'worse than a one night stand' as she recalls the 'embarrassing' and 'horrendous' drunken night out Liam Payne larks about with close pal Rita Ora in unearthed video of them as the heartbroken singer pays tribute at the MTV EMAs Lorde shares a photo of a table littered with drugs and alcohol after celebrating her birthday Partied hard after celebrating with friends Keely Hodgkinson sparks concern as she displays her very sunburnt chest while posing in a tiny crop top during lavish holiday in Hawaii Tulisa reveals she'll QUIT showbusiness in the next two years despite wanting to relaunch solo career after I'm A Celebrity stint Major EastEnders 'Christmas spoiler REVEALED as actress accidentally leaves top secret script on train' Nightmare MTV VMAs worst dressed: Flamboyant outfits that fell flat as A-listers swarmed the red carpet in Manchester Olivia Rodrigo announced as fourth headliner for BST Hyde Park - as her support act is confirmed Kate's meaningful messages: How Princess of Wales used her outfits to pay tribute to Diana, the late Queen and her great-grandmother during Remembrance events BBC Breakfast in ANOTHER hosting shake-up as Jon Kay disappears from show without explanation The Penguin fans hail season one ending as 'the best thing DC has made' as Colin Farrell gives six-word response to calls for a second series Dancing On Ice's Vanessa Bauer says the show's new 24-hour bullying hotline is 'very necessary' ahead of its return in 2025 Viewers defend Boots' 'fabulous' Christmas advert starring Bridgerton's Adjoa Andoh after 'snowflake' critics blasted 'woke' plot Leomie Anderson ditches her gown for a VERY skimpy nude co-ord as she joins Love Island's Indiyah Polack and Maya Jama at MTV EMAs after party Shirtless Mark Wahlberg, 53, orders a trolley full of ice on room service as he continues his wacky health regime Sophie's been supportive from the start! Duchess helped an 11-year-old Princess Beatrice as she fainted on the balcony on Remembrance Sunday Listen as Katie Price performs her 2017 song I Got U at The Clapham Grand - so do you think her vocals make the cut? Strictly fans are left FUMING as they accuse Shirley Ballas of being 'biased' for sending home Shayne Ward in nail biting dance off Rita Ora breaks down in tears as she pays moving tribute to close friend Liam Payne at the MTV EMAs Emotional moment Kristina Rihanoff poses for incontinence pad campaign after she and husband Ben Cohen put their £1.75m home up for sale amid financial woes James Argent shares passionate kiss with new girlfriend Nicoline Artursson as besotted couple pack on the PDA for romantic Bonfire Night date Victoria Beckham displays incredibly toned figure as she poses for a mirror selfie - after husband David gave her new beauty product rave reviews Ice Spice flashes her abs in a cropped varsity top and low-rise pleated skirt as she steps out for dinner in Paris after performing her Y2K! World Tour Rita Ora leads the red carpet glamour in a pink feathered gown as she joins glamorous Maya Jama, Vick Hope and Raye at the MTV EMAs Bonnie Blue issues defiant message after her Australian visa was torn up - but there's a glaring problem with her new X-rated plan EXCLUSIVEKate Middleton's Remembrance Day pain: Emotional Princess of Wales appeared 'sad but regal' at Cenotaph, says body language expert Paddy McGuinness reveals he got 'choked up' over the huge support he's had for his 300 mile charity cycle challenge after feeling 'down and dejected' Rita Ora flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in ELEVEN incredible looks as she makes history as host of the MTV EMAs Raye leaves fans speechless with her vocals as she takes to the stage alongside Tyla and Shawn Mendes at the MTV EMAs Charli XCX is snubbed at MTV EMAs despite five nominations while Chappell Roan also leaves empty handed Ben Affleck looks miserable as 'spectacular' Jennifer Lopez shows him what he's missing on red carpet Sabrina Carpenter fan urinates all over the concert floor in San Francisco Ben Affleck treats his son Samuel, 12, to courtside seats at star-studded Lakers vs. Raptors game in LA Ariana Grande and Cynthia Erivo offer apologies for crying so much during Wicked promotion Kate wears Diana's ring in public for the first time since Christmas: Sapphire engagement ring is back after Princess opted to wear eternity bands during treatment Art Garfunkel recalls recent tearful reunion with Paul Simon after 'not seeing each other' for many years Margot Robbie shows off her midriff in a crop top less than a month after giving birth as she steps out in LA SPOILER ALERT: The real reason Yellowstone bosses sealed Kevin Costner's fate in first 30 seconds of bombshell season return Wolf Hall: The Mirror And The Light review: Cromwell's so menacing his glare could split a skull, writes CHRISTOPHER STEVENS MTV EMAs WINNERS FULL LIST: Taylor Swift dominates with FOUR gongs including Best Artist... while Raye and Tyla also win The White Lotus season 3 teaser shows first look at Blackpink's Lisa as hospitality host Keith Urban scrapes $600K Rolls Royce after dropping nepo baby Sunday Rose off at Billie Eilish concert Gavin Rossdale looks loved up with his Gwen Stefani lookalike girlfriend Xhoana X at MTV EMAs Happy Monday's star Bez causes CHAOS as he REFUSES to let go of the mic from Rita Ora in hilarious moment at MTV EMAs Nicola Peltz Beckham says her 'heart is shattered' in emotional tribute to Quincy Jones as she promises to look after his daughter Camila Mendes debuts bold new look as she gears up to film live-action remake of Masters Of The Universe Emmerdale's James Moore reveals future family plans after marrying partner Sophie Edwards as bride recalls their first date N-Dubz singer Tulisa Contostavlos is the third star to arrive in Brisbane ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! Coleen Rooney will NOT be reunited with Wayne after her I'm A Celeb ordeal' as football fixtures leave him grounded EXCLUSIVEColdplay frontman Chris Martin's bizarre act before boarding a plane out of Australia bound for New Zealand Who left Strictly Come Dancing? Shayne Ward's dancing journey is over after receiving the lowest results and landing in the dance-off against Wynne Evans Strictly Come Dancing RECAP as Shayne Ward is eliminated in week eight after losing dance off to Wynne Evans Nicole Kidman looks elegant in a black coat and dress as she heads out in New York City s EXCLUSIVEViewers insist star of Lidl's Christmas advert is the 'double' of Princess Charlotte - so, who is the royal lookalike? Felicity Jones cuts a chic figure in a black blazer and jeans as she addresses the audience at a screening for her new film The Brutalist Shawn Mendes dons smart suit at MTV EMAs in first red carpet appearance since addressing sexuality Zoe Saldana and Kerry Washington glow in silky tops as they lead the stars at ACLU Bill of Rights Awards Christina Ricci oozes business chic in blazer dress at book signing in LA for her new tarot deck and guidebook Fans inundate Bruce Willis's wife with messages of support after she shares 'heartbreaking' video Right behind her Pregnant Gisele Bundchen puts on a leggy display in tiny shorts as she leaves her old house in Miami Beach with a large box Bradley Cooper's unrecognizable face in snap with Gigi Hadid sparks social media confusion: 'Is that AI Bradley?' Advertisement Today's headlines Most Read Nutritionist gives damning verdict on 'healthy' cooking oils and reveals the fats you SHOULD be cooking with Row erupts as doctors call to BAN Lemsip because 'it doesn't work' - but some insist it's the ONLY thing... Ban Lemsip because 'it doesn't work', say experts after US health chiefs propose pulling cold and flu... The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make... Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more... DON'T kiss the baby - doctors reveal terrifying reason why you should never kiss a newborn (unless they're... Revealed: What you need to say to a pharmacist to get antibiotics for your sore throat Diet expert Tim Spector issues warning over store-cupboard favourite SOUP that contains 'chemicals' James Norton's surprising health battle - fans shocked to learn newly single Happy Valley hunk lives with... Should I wear a mask to filter out pollution while I'm cycling? DR MARTIN SCURR has the answer Top doctor reveals vital colon cancer self-check as cases rise in under 50s - his advice has ALREADY saved a... Brain cell transplants might be key to beating Alzheimer's, doctors claim A 5-minute cholesterol check could spot if dementia will strike in 6 years time, experts find Why you should never ignore hip pain: The feeling hit me like a lightning bolt but I brushed it off because... Scientists probe whether RED WINE could be key for fighting off cancer that's hitting ever-more under 50s MORE HEADLINES Nutritionist gives damning verdict on 'healthy' cooking oils and reveals the fats you SHOULD be cooking with Top doctor reveals vital colon cancer self-check as cases rise in under 50s - his advice has ALREADY saved a life Diet expert Tim Spector issues warning over store-cupboard favourite SOUP that contains 'chemicals' Scientist reverses her stage 3 cancer with viruses she grew in a lab - after refusing to go through hell of chemo again Here are the number of sit-ups experts say you should be able to do for your age I brushed aside persistent headaches as eye strain from a new job. Then a devastating diagnosis turned my life upside down Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more serious condition which affects up to two in three women James Norton's surprising health battle - fans shocked to learn newly single Happy Valley hunk lives with deadly illness The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make a difference, these are the ones that do Hospice nurse reveals grim reality of what happens to human body minutes, hours and days after death Row erupts as doctors call to BAN Lemsip because 'it doesn't work' - but some insist it's the ONLY thing that eases a blocked nose Revealed: What you need to say to a pharmacist to get antibiotics for your sore throat Go to bed and wake up looking younger: Beauty guru HANNAH BETTS reveals the treatments that really work DON'T kiss the baby - doctors reveal terrifying reason why you should never kiss a newborn (unless they're your own) A 5-minute cholesterol check could spot if dementia will strike in 6 years time, experts find MOST READ IN DETAIL Follow DailyMail Subscribe Daily Mail Follow @dailymail Follow DailyMail Follow MailOnline Follow Daily Mail MORE DON'T MISS SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone femme fatale Sarah Atwood's involvement in John Dutton's brutal death is revealed in Season 5 Part 2 premiere Joker 2 star says it is the 'worst film ever made' and that he and his co-stars knew it was 'going to bomb' while filming Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright show off VERY lavish Christmas lights and decorations at £3.5m Essex mansion Georgia Toffolo stuns in a sheer gown as she celebrates 30th birthday and proposal from James Watt with personalised beer Kim Kardashian embraces on-screen mother Glenn Close as they film Ryan Murpjy's new Hulu series All's Fair Ariana Grande fans point out NSFW error on Mattel's Wicked doll packaging - as collection risks mass recall Surfing royals: How Princess Diana sparked her sons' love for the ocean after Prince Harry recently rode waves in California and Prince William surfed chilly Scottish waters Rihanna looks totally at ease as she sits in front of her own Fenty Beauty ad at a bus stop in humorous post Halsey and fiancé Avan Jogia look loved-up at Lakers vs. Raptors NBA game in LA Prince Edward remembers 'all who have made the ultimate sacrifice' as he lays Remembrance Sunday wreath Big Brother viewers SLAM show's 'totally unfair' final twist just days ahead of grand finale: 'Sack whoever came up with this idea!' ROBERT HARDMAN: Courage of the Princess of Wales on parade - in a sign of what matters MOST to the royals Big target Khloe Kardashian throws niece Dream a soccer-themed 8th birthday bash No expense spared Jedward put on a VERY animated display in matching sequinned suits as they lark about on the red carpet at the MTV EMAs Rita Ora's proud mum Vera, 60, wears a chic black suit as she supports her daughter on the MTV EMAs red carpet Halsey and new fiancé Avan Jogia look loved up while enjoying a romantic lunch in NYC Yellowstone's surprising connection to Australia... and it's not actress Jacki Weaver Amelia Gray Hamlin puts on an edgy Y2K display in low-waisted jeans and busty tank top in Milan Elon Musk slams Dana Carvey's impression of him on post-election SNL and says show's been 'dying for years' Air Bud's Kevin DiCicco says he's homeless and dealing with major health problems James Bond fans have revealed the very unlikely Aussie who should play the next 007 Interesting choice Tulisa Contostavlos 'set to use I'm A Celebrity as launchpad for new solo career' as N-Dubz singer becomes third star to arrive EXCLUSIVEShe's the seductive 60s TV actress who was called the 'feline devil' by an iconic vigilante superhero - can you guess who? Bella Hadid flashes her incredible abs in tiny bikinis in racy photo dump from her recent trip to Dubai Looking good Adam Brody and Kristen Bell show off undeniable chemistry as they support Netflix's Nobody Wants This in LA Sam Thompson says he 'might get another bridge reunion' with Pete Wicks if he gets the axe from Strictly Come Dancing Kim Kardashian sports edgy black trench coat as she visits skin care clinic in Beverly Hills Jodie Turner-Smith sets pulses racing as she swaps her regal red carpet gown for skintight black PVC dress at the MTV EMAs Jada Pinkett Smith sparks health concern following rare date night with husband Will Smith The future's orange! Lorraine Kelly takes her adorable granddaughter to her first Dundee United game Proud granny Make breakfast TV great again! Eammon Holmes looks unrecognisable as he transforms into perma-tanned Donald Trump What Kate said to Sophie: Lip reader reveals conversation between Princess of Wales and Duchess of Edinburgh at Cenotaph Katherine Ryan, 41, puts on a busty display as she makes rare red carpet appearance with daughter Violet, 15, at the MTV EMAs Maya Jama channels Elizabeth Hurley as she slips into THAT career-making Versace safety pin gown to attend the MTV European Music Awards Lioness Chloe Kelly looks incredible in a cropped bandeau top and thigh-high boots on the red carpet at MTV EMAS What Taylor Swift told security guard: Pop star's cutting remark to her entourage during wild arrival to watch Travis Kelce Rita Ora shares a red carpet kiss with husband Taika Waititi ahead of her history-making THIRD hosting gig at the MTV EMAs Mariah Carey and son Moroccan dress up as Alvin and the Chipmunks for Halloween in rare family snap Venom 3 stays strong at the box office for third week in a row but new holiday film emerges to challenge it Gemma Atkinson turns heads in a busty leather dress as she poses on the MTV European Music Awards red carpet Travis Kelce sends girlfriend Taylor Swift wild as breaks Kansas City Chiefs history with another touchdown Jodie Turner-Smith puts on a show-stopping display in royal blue gown with a train and fascinator at the 2024 MTV EMAs SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone fans furious over fate of Kevin Costner's John Dutton in Season 5 part two premiere Jeremy Clarkson WILL join protesting farmers at rally in Westminster this week after fears of 'police ban' Pregnant Charlotte Crosby shows off her baby bump alongside fiancé Jake Ankers at MTV EMAs in Manchester Mabel, 28, rocks a quirky checked dress as she joins her chic mum Neneh Cherry, 60, at the MTV European Music Awards Brooklyn Beckham goes for a spin in his classic Mustang in Los Angeles after adding another car to his impressive collection Emily Ratajkowski flashes leg in glam red coat as she walks her dog in New York City She looked super chic as she stepped out Vick Hope puts on a VERY leggy display in a racy thigh-high split skirt and sculpted bodice at the star-studded MTV EMAs James Norton admits split from ex-fiancée Imogen Poots was not his decision as he reveals heartbreaking reason they broke up Katie McGlynn puts on a VERY leggy display in a skimpy silver mini dress as she joins busty Liberty Poole at the MTV EMAs Aaron Taylor-Johnson cuts a debonair figure in a burgundy suit as he graces the red carpet at 2024 MTV EMAs Holly Hagan puts on a VERY busty display in a plunging gown as she cosies up to pregnant co-star Charlotte Crosby at MTV EMAs Tony Hinchcliffe breaks his silence on Trump election win after calling Puerto Rico a 'floating island of garbage' How to watch Yellowstone Season 5 Part 2 premiere in Australia as show begins new frontier without Kevin Costner . Brianna Chickenfry reveals why she won't get Zach Bryan lyric tattoo removed amid ugly split Interview Britney Spears claims was censored in 2016 is finally published Discussing her conservatorship EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb welcomes its first arrival! McFly star Danny Jones touches down at Brisbane Airport Taylor Swift's entourage get into heated altercation as she arrives to watch Travis Kelce and Chiefs Drama Leomie Anderson flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in a VERY skimpy tasselled gown as she poses up a storm on the MTV EMAs red carpet Netflix fans gripped by 'best show they've ever watched' - raving that crime thriller 'had them hooked just a few minutes in' EXCLUSIVEKelly Brook and her husband Jeremy Parisi land major ITV show deal after winning over viewers on BBC's Race Across the World Mel B shares a glimpse of her VERY organised shoe collection - after branding fellow Spice Girls 'd***heads' Raye puts on a very animated display as she stuns in a quirky bejewelled gown ahead of her performance at the MTV EMA's Pamela Anderson's secrets to embracing her natural beauty at 57: From sunrise walks to her no makeup rule and the one thing she avoids 'at all costs' Georgia Kousoulou shows off her bump in skintight dress as she celebrates her daughter's birth with 'dream baby shower' Gigi Hadid and Bradley Cooper enjoy date night as they watch Alyssa Milano performing on Broadway Molly Marsh dazzles as she shows off her enviable figure in sparkly burgundy dress at the MTV European Music Awards Katie Price jumps on stage during London drag competition and belts out her 2017 track I Got U - as she reignites celebrity feud Coleen Rooney suffers major blow ahead of I'm A Celebrity appearance as the first stars touch down in Australia EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb's Sam Thompson reveals he made emotional phone call to best pal Pete Wicks during thunderstorm-hit flight to Australia Chappell Roan 'parts ways' with her management team amid skyrocketing career Split Susan Sarandon admits she'll never work in Hollywood again and reflects on being dropped by her agent after Palestine remarks Pregnant Lottie Tomlinson cradles her bump in a stunning white dress as she celebrates her baby shower with twin sisters Phoebe and Daisy Noel Gallagher is 'working on a new album' with 'six tracks already in the bag' - but brother Liam is yet to contribute I was on The Undateables - the amount we actually got paid and how long it took to film a single date left me completely stunned . The Duchess of Edinburgh, 59, stepped into 'maternal' role at Cenotaph to help 'stoic' Kate Middleton - offering a supportive touch, says body language expert Leonardo DiCaprio ditches the models to party with his peers as he celebrates 50th birthday with Brad Pitt, 60, Paris Hilton, 43, Katy Perry, 40 and his long-time buddies Emmerdale's James Moore ties the knot with partner Sophie Edwards in emotional lakeside ceremony as bride reveals the soap star's heartfelt speech Kaia Gerber oozes glamour in Marc Jacobs gowns and opens up about her intellect being underestimated as she graces Vogue's December cover VERY dramatic exits! From Olivia Rodrigo disappearing through a hole to Gemma Collins' viral mishap - on-stage tumbles that will make you wince English acting legend is approached to be face of Marks & Spencer as bosses keen to sign 'chic, high calibre and sophisticated' star to evolve brand GMA host looks just like his famous father as he shares romantic proposal photos Will Reeve has made a made a big step in his life EXCLUSIVEZara McDermott will NOT be joining boyfriend Sam Thompson in Australia as he films I'm A Celebrity spin-off show Paddy McGuinness breaks down live on Radio 2 as he prepares for 300 mile cycle challenge for Children In Need SNL fans slam 'not funny' cold open reacting to Donald Trump's election win before sketch takes a drastic turn Forget nepo babies, it's all about nepo dating! How the children of the rich and famous have turned to each other for love Brave Kate Middleton watches on as dutiful Prince William and King Charles lay wreathes at emotional Remembrance Sunday memorial service EXCLUSIVEI quit Hollyoaks for Hollywood but ended up repairing phone screens for a living Corrie legend Alan Halsall is the second I'm A Celeb campmate to arrive in Australia as he fights through pain of recurring knee injury to make it to the jungle Coldplay frontman Chris Martin stops show in Sydney to save young boy in heartwarming gesture Liam Payne's £30k Rolex watch still missing nearly a month after his death as police launch hunt for designer timepiece EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb stars face dramatic introduction to Australia as a raging thunderstorm causes flight chaos and leaves them unable to land Furious Strictly Come Dancing fans insist there is a 'fix' as dance-off results are LEAKED again Tamara Ecclestone says she thinks £25m burglary at her home was an 'inside job' and reveals her fury that some of those responsible will 'never face justice in Britain' Think Chappell Roan is bad! The biggest celebrity diva moments of all time - from Will Smith's Oscars slap to Mariah Carey's 2017 New Year's Eve debacle Michael Fassbender and Alicia Vikander put on a rare loved-up display as they enjoy cosy date night in London The new A-list chic way to split? Amicably of course! How celebrity couples like Chris Martin and Gwyneth Paltrow are staying best friends after splitting up Fans go wild as Ariana Grande and boyfriend Ethan Slater share sweet moment before Wicked premiere EXCLUSIVEHow Wicked bosses covered up Ariana Grande and Ethan Slater's romance over fears it could harm film - but fans of the musical are still unhappy Queen Camilla's heartbreak after being forced to forgo Remembrance Sunday memorial service due to chest infection Jennifer Lopez bares washboard abs in racy flesh-flashing gown as she poses solo at Wicked premiere Katy Perry catches up with Miranda Kerr at Baby2Baby Gala after gushing about her friendship with Orlando Bloom's ex wife Kate Middleton's touching tribute to the Queen and Princess Diana: Emotional Princess of Wales wears pearl diamond earrings Prince William's 'hardest year' ever: How future king's annus horribilis has seen him faced with his wife and father's cancer battles - and his ongoing feud with Harry Award winning BBC star reveals she got caught having sex in the Blue Peter garden during a boozy night out Strictly fans RAGING over scores once again as they claim judges are 'over marking' one of the couples EXCLUSIVEDonny Osmond's nephew Jared slams RHOSLC for giving him a bad edit: 'Got thrown under the bus' ty' messages from fans. Kate Middleton cuts an elegant figure in military style coat and fascinator as she joins Duchess of Edinburgh on balcony for Remembrance Sunday EXCLUSIVEPictured: The £2m Absolutely Fabulous Dartmoor mansion at the centre of Jennifer Saunders' and Adrian Edmondson's planning row Vinnie Jones reveals new girlfriend Emma Ford 'promised his late wife Tanya she would look after him' as star insists she wouldn't want him to be alone Heartwarming moment Prince William and Kate Middleton get emotional as hymn from their wedding is played at Festival of Remembrance Coleen Rooney's 'battle to be Queen of the Jungle shower: WAG hits the gym to match Maura Higgins on I'm A Celebrity' BRIAN HOEY reveals the reason why Princess Kate wears three poppies on Remembrance Sunday EXCLUSIVEGeorge Clooney taking step back from politics after being made a 'scapegoat' for Kamala Harris defeat Princess of Wales picks jewels with deep family connection for Festival of Remembrance - including Princess Diana's sapphire ring EXCLUSIVEKate and William 'can't keep their hands off each other' with 'almost endless PDAs' as they offer 'mutual affection', body language expert reveals EXCLUSIVEAnt McPartlin touches down in Australia one week before I'm A Celebrity premiere Strictly's Nadiya Bychkova 'is being comforted by celeb partner Tom Dean following her split from Kai Widdrington' Actress Cush Jumbo faces bankruptcy battle over unpaid bills... after being forced to cancel Macbeth performances last week Strictly's Chris McCausland reveals why his daughter, 11, was wary about him taking part in the dancing show Strictly's Carlos Gu breaks his silence on shock fall out with co-star Nancy Xu amid claims they're 'refusing to speak backstage' Ariana Grande dazzles in pink gingham while Cynthia Erivo stuns in green latex gown at Wicked premiere in LA Crown actor Josh O'Connor 'is dating Saltburn star Alison Oliver' as the couple are seen together in Italy EXCLUSIVEBaroness Brady parades stunning weight loss - as she insists her trim figure has nothing to do with Ozempic Princess Andre, 17, cuts a stylish figure in a green velvet gown as she joins her dad Peter and his wife Emily for a family night out at Arora's Charity Ball Ariana Grande's boyfriend Ethan Slater poses solo at Wicked premiere after breaking silence on romance The boy who inspired Steve McQueen's Blitz: Picture of black evacuee leaving London in 1940 ahead of Hitler's deadly bombing captivated director - so where is he now? Charlize Theron, Jessica Alba, Katy Perry and Heidi Klum lead the star parade at Baby2Baby gala Kate Winslet has surprise reunion with Titanic co-star - 27 years after film's release Miranda Kerr shows off slender postpartum figure at Baby2Baby gala with husband Evan Spiegel Is Meghan Markle's obsession with Gwyneth Paltrow's Goop the inspiration for her upcoming lifestyle brand? Strictly's Pete Wicks leaves viewers in tears as he pays tribute to his nan with emotional dance after saying her death was the 'hardest time' of his life HBO confirms whether or not Euphoria will return for third season amid cancelation rumors Celebrity chef Jamie Oliver pulls children's book from shelves after criticism for 'stereotyping' Indigenous Australians Eamonn Holmes, 64, shares gratitude after a 'tough year' of health woes as he attends first event with girlfriend Katie Alexander Paris Hilton gets kiss from husband Carter Reum at star-studded Baby2Baby gala Wicked alums Idina Menzel and Kristin Chenoweth join film's stars Ariana Grande and Cynthia Erivo at premiere Michelle Yeoh, 62, debuts bold new look as she arrives at starry Wicked premiere in LA Joe Lycett issues update on fatherhood after 'crying wolf' as baby continues to spark 'prank' theories SNL cast members unveil new 'hot jacked Trump' character in MAGA-friendly cold open Jeff Goldblum, 72, shows off flare for fashion in green suit as wife Emilie Livingston, 41, stuns in black dress Sofia Richie commands attention in a chic black gown with a bow accent at Baby2Baby gala in LA Saturday Night Live pays touching tribute to Quincy Jones after musical icon dies aged 91 Zendaya beams while snapping photos of boyfriend Tom Holland walking her dog in Boston Kate's courage for the fallen: Princess of Wales set to make second public appearance in two days to honour the war dead at Cenotaph Rebel Wilson celebrates daughter Royce's 2nd birthday with lavish Disney-themed bash Jennifer Garner enjoys autumn with her mother and sister in her West Virginia hometown No dowdy duchess here! Sophie's 10 best outfits - as she cultivates a more sophisticated style after her royal promotion The explosive kiss from a young guitarist that helped convince Cher it was all over for her and Sonny, as revealed in the megastar's breathtakingly candid new memoir James Argent shares 'hopes to marry and start a family with new girlfriend Nicoline Artursson' after battling addictions and learning to love himself Strictly bosses 'make decision on whether Giovanni Pernice can ever return to the show after Amanda Abbington bullying row' Rebecca Loos shares health update as she recovers from keyhole surgery and says she 'can't wait to bounce back strong again' Touching moment emotional Kate and William lead applause for the families of fallen soldiers as Princess of Wales makes first public appearance since completing chemo Pregnant Jennifer Lawrence bundles up for lunch with her son Cy, two, in LA Cara Delevingne enjoys girls' night at Mariah Carey's Hollywood Bowl concert in LA TALK OF THE TOWN: Sherlock star Benedict and the mystery of his empty £8m estate Prince William hopes Kate can join him on foreign trips next year after cancer treatment - as he outlines plans to put a 'smaller R in royal' Newly single Channing Tatum spends quality time with daughter after split from Zoe Kravitz Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson shares emotional moment with young aspiring actor Gal Gadot shares rare family portrait in celebration of daughter's bat mitzvah Wolf Hall's Claire Foy gets to grips with a huge HAWK for her latest acting job Ruth Langsford's divorce lawyers 'are compiling forensic timeline of Eamonn Holmes' new romance' Prince William puts a comforting arm around Kate Middleton as they arrive for her first public appearance since finishing chemotherapy Kim Kardashian shares 'sad part about motherhood' amid claims Kanye West is 'not around very much' for kids Tom Holland cut from Anne Boleyn beheading as BBC disguises nine-year wait for Wolf Hall sequel Adele in talks 'to play HUGE UK stadium shows' after her Las Vegas and Munich residencies EXCLUSIVEPrincess Diana's former chauffeur breaks 30-year silence about Royal service... to tell how his life was ruined Victoria Beckham names her latest handbag, the £1,250 croc-embossed Dorian, after her favourite Notting Hill restaurant Louise Redknapp puts on a leggy display in fishnet stockings and mini dress while leaving her star-studded 50th birthday party with boyfriend Drew Michael Strictly's Chris McCausland stuns fans with poignant blackout moment during his 'fearless' Couple's Choice as blind comic is branded 'an inspiration' Kate Middleton's touching nod to Princess Diana is spotted by sharp-eyed royal fans as she joins William for Festival of Remembrance EXCLUSIVEDeclan Donnelly and wife Ali Astall struggle with Aussie jet lag after moving into £1k-per-night penthouse for I'm A Celebrity Kate Middleton shines at Festival of Remembrance: Princess makes her first high-profile appearance since finishing chemo Cindy Crawford, 58, looks flawless in makeup-free selfie from her bed Tamara Ecclestone says motherhood makes women 'so cruel to each other', admits her mind 'boggles' at the thought of how her father Bernie became a dad again at 89 Strictly Come Dancing open show with a sweet tribute to Amy Dowden after dancer was forced to pull out due to a foot injury Best of Rivals! Stars of TV bonkbuster show they are just as naughty off-screen Malcolm In The Middle star Frankie Muniz hurt in nasty NASCAR truck crash NEW ARTICLESHomeTop Share Back to top Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Sitemap Archive Video Archive Authors Topics Index Mobile Apps Screensaver RSS Text-based site Reader Prints Our Papers Top of page Daily Mail Mail on Sunday This is Money Metro Jobsite Mail Travel Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group dmg media Contact us How to complain Leadership Team Advertise with us Contributors Terms Subscription Terms & Conditions Do not sell or share my personal information About MailOnline Privacy Settings Privacy policy & cookies Advertisement AdvertisementUniversal flu vaccine may be available within two years, says scientist | Vaccines and immunisation | The Guardian Skip to main contentSkip to navigationClose dialogue1/1Next imagePrevious imageToggle captionSkip to navigationPrint subscriptionsSearch jobs Sign inIntInternational editionUK editionUS editionAustralia editionEurope editionThe Guardian - Back to homeThe GuardianNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleShow moreHide expanded menuNewsView all NewsWorld newsUS elections 2024UK newsClimate crisisUkraineEnvironmentScienceGlobal developmentFootballTechBusinessObituariesOpinionView all OpinionThe Guardian viewColumnistsCartoonsOpinion videosLettersSportView all SportFootballCricketRugby unionTennisCyclingF1GolfUS sportsCultureView all CultureBooksMusicTV & radioArt & designFilmGamesClassicalStageLifestyleView all LifestyleFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneySearch input google-search SearchSupport usPrint subscriptionsSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsThe Guardian appVideoPodcastsPicturesNewslettersToday's paperInside the GuardianThe ObserverGuardian WeeklyCrosswordsWordiplyCorrectionsSearch input google-search SearchSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsUKUK politicsEducationMediaSocietyLawScotlandWalesNorthern Ireland The new vaccine is designed to prime the immune system against all 20 subtypes of influenza A and B, potentially arming the body to tackle any flu virus that arises. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PAView image in fullscreenThe new vaccine is designed to prime the immune system against all 20 subtypes of influenza A and B, potentially arming the body to tackle any flu virus that arises. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PAVaccines and immunisation This article is more than 1 year oldUniversal flu vaccine may be available within two years, says scientistThis article is more than 1 year oldVaccine against all strains of virus hailed as major step in protecting against potentially devastating flu pandemicIan Sample Science editorFri 25 Nov 2022 11.05 GMTLast modified on Fri 25 Nov 2022 19.44 GMTShareA universal flu vaccine that protects against all strains of the virus could be available in the next two years, according to a leading scientist.An experimental vaccine based on the same mRNA technology used in the highly successful Covid jabs was found to protect mice and ferrets against severe influenza, paving the way for clinical trials in humans.Prof John Oxford, a virologist at Queen Mary University in London, who was not involved in the work, said the vaccine developed at the University of Pennsylvania could be ready for use the winter after next.“I cannot emphasise enough what a breakthrough this paper is,” Oxford told the BBC’s Radio 4 Today programme. “The potential is huge, and I think sometimes we underestimate these big respiratory viruses.”Researchers have been working on universal flu vaccines for more than a decade, but the latest breakthrough, published in Science, is seen as a major step towards a jab that could help protect humans from a potentially devastating flu pandemic.Seasonal flu vaccines, which protect against up to four strains of the virus, are updated every year to ensure they are a good match for flu viruses in circulation. The new vaccine is designed to prime the immune system against all 20 subtypes of influenza A and B, potentially arming the body to tackle any flu virus that arises.The world last experienced a flu pandemic in 2009 when a virus that jumped from pigs to humans spread around the world. While that outbreak was far less lethal than health officials feared, the 1918 flu pandemic demonstrated how dangerous new strains could kill tens of millions of people.Giving people a “baseline” level of immunity against the full range of flu strains could lead to far less illness and fewer deaths when the next flu pandemic happens, said Dr Scott Hensley, a researcher on the team in Pennsylvania. Experiments in mice and ferrets found that the mRNA flu vaccine provoked high levels of antibodies that were stable for several months and protective against the virus.While the results from the animal tests are promising, clinical trials are needed to see whether the vaccine protects humans in the same way without causing problematic side-effects. The vaccine raises questions for regulators around whether to approve a shot that could protect against viruses with pandemic potential, but which have not yet actually emerged.“This vaccine has only been tested in animals to date and it will be important to investigate its safety and efficacy in humans,” said Dr Andrew Freedman, a reader in infectious diseases at Cardiff University. “It does seem a very promising approach to the goal of producing a universal flu vaccine as well as vaccines that protect against multiple members of other viral families such as rhino- and corona-viruses.”Adolfo García-Sastre, the director of the Institute for Global Health and Emerging Pathogens at Mount Sinai hospital in New York, said current influenza vaccines did not protect against influenza viruses with pandemic potential. “This vaccine, if it works well in people, would achieve this.”“The studies are preclinical, in experimental models,” he added. “They are very promising and, although they suggest a protective capacity against all subtypes of influenza viruses, we cannot be sure until clinical trials in volunteers are done.”Explore more on these topicsVaccines and immunisationFluHealthFlu pandemicnewsShareReuse this contentMore on this storyMore on this story‘Long flu’: study finds flu patients at higher risk of longer-term illness14 Dec 2023UK detects its first human case of swine flu strain 27 Nov 2023Respiratory infection clusters in China not caused by novel virus, says health ministry26 Nov 2023England to deny Covid and flu jabs to under-65s despite fears for NHS this winter8 Aug 2023Flu and pneumonia deaths a quarter higher than usual in England and Wales20 Jan 2023Flu season in England is worst for a decade, says health secretary9 Jan 2023Ambulance staff reportedly urged to conserve oxygen amid ‘twindemic’30 Dec 2022Flu continues to spread in England with number of hospital patients up 79%30 Dec 2022Most viewedMost viewedUKUK politicsEducationMediaSocietyLawScotlandWalesNorthern IrelandNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleOriginal reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morningSign up for our emailHelpComplaints & correctionsSecureDropWork for us Privacy policyCookie policyTerms & conditionsContact usAll topicsAll writersDigital newspaper archiveTax strategyFacebookYouTubeInstagramLinkedInXNewslettersAdvertise with usSearch UK jobsBack to top© 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)Covid and Flu | Mirage News NationalWorldCanadaNew ZealandUKLocalAustraliaGovernmentLocal CouncilPolice NewsBusinessTechnologyScienceEducationLifeHealthSocialTravelSportUniversity NewsTimeline Menu ☰ Latest CLP Government Backs Beetaloo As Economic Powerhouse Agriculture Lending On Rise Film & TV Misogyny: Child-Free Women Dehumanized SA Donation Laws Flawed, Won't Boost Trust OAS Pays Tribute To Journalists Murdered In Americas Singapore Jets Conclude Drills in Western Australia Consumer Confidence Highest Since January 2023 Fetal Monitoring Vital in Labor, Choices Often Unclear Regulator Enforces Quarry Rehabilitation GOV.UK One Login Simplifies Apprenticeship Access Mirage News Mirage News Mirage News Health 23 Nov 2022 4:33 am AEDT Date Time Share Covid and Flu This article was originally published July 31, 2020 and has been updated by the author. The COVID-19 pandemic has created monumental imbalance to our accepted way of life, removed the illusion of host dominance and thrown a glaring spotlight on some of the tiniest members of society-viruses. During the 2020-2021 flu season, the cumulative rate of laboratory-confirmed influenza-associated hospitalizations was the lowest on record since influenza data collection began in 2005. But as time dutifully marches on, many are once again considering the risks associated with a circulating, pandemic respiratory virus clashing with the next impending flu season. In order to predict how these 2 heavy-hitting viruses might interact with one another this year, let's take a look at what we know about each virus and the diseases they inflict. To learn more, check out our COVID-19 and Influenza Resource pages. Virology Comparison of influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 virus properties. Source: American Society for Microbiology GenomeCoronaviruses and influenza viruses are both enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses, and both are encapsidated by nucleoprotein. However, the genomes of these 2 viruses differ in polarity and segmentation. Influenza virus is comprised of 8 single-stranded, negative-sense, viral RNA segments. SARS-CoV-2 has single-stranded, non-segmented, positive-sense, viral RNA. Surface ProteinsBoth viruses possess distinguishing surface proteins that serve as important virulence factors for infection. SARS-CoV-2 is covered in spike (S) proteins that facilitate invasion of host cells. S proteins bind to the host cell receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), which regulates blood pressure and fluid-salt balances and is expressed by multiple organ systems throughout the body, including the lungs, heart, kidneys, liver, intestines, brain and adipose tissues. Upon binding, SARS-CoV-2 injects its RNA into the infected cell and uses host cell machinery to replicate its genome. Newly synthesized virus particles are then released to infect additional host cells. Influenza viruses rely on the collaborative functions of 2 viral surface proteins, haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) to enter and exit host cells. The host cell receptor for influenza viruses is sialic acid, a sugar chain that is fairly ubiquitous and attached to surface lipids and proteins of most host cells, as well as soluble proteins. HA preferentially binds to sialic acid on the surface of respiratory epithelial cells, and mediates entry of the virus to host cells. Once inside, influenza virus also releases its RNA to be copied and synthesized into new virus particles. However, as long as HA remains bound to sialic acid on cell surfaces, newly synthesized virus particles are unable to exit the infected cells. NA cleaves sialic acid from the cell surface, which releases HA and allows progeny viruses to exit infected cells and continue spreading.Viral Protein FunctionInfluenzaSAR-CoV-2 Entry into host cellsHAS Exit from host cellsNANot applicable Strains and SubtypesAnother important difference between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza is that there are multiple variants of SARS-CoV-2 and 4 different strains (A, B, C and D), and many different subtypes, of influenza virus. SARS-CoV-2 variants are classified as variants under monitoring (VUM) variants of interest (VOI) and variants of concern (VOC). In Oct. 2021, the highly transmissible Delta variant became the dominant circulating variant in the U.S., and by Feb. 2022, Omicron had outcompeted Delta, accounting for >98% of all viral sequences shared on GISAID. Previously circulating VOCs such as Alpha, Beta and Gamma are either no longer detected or are circulating at such low levels that they do not pose a significant, imminent threat to public health. The 2 most important strains of influenza virus, when it comes to human disease, are influenza A and influenza B, which both cause annual seasonal flu outbreaks. Influenza A virus is further divided into subtypes based on its HA and NA surface proteins. There are 18 possible HA subtypes and 11 NA subtypes, which means 198 combinations are possible. However, only 131 subtypes have been detected in nature, to date.Viral Evolution and Pandemic ProbabilitySARS-CoV-2 is a novel virus, which means that we had no available treatments or immunity to the pathogen when it emerged in late 2019. Because of this, the virus was able to spread, unrestrained from host to host, and it didn't take long for the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak to become a pandemic. Although we have since developed vaccines that are remarkably effective at preventing severe disease and hospitalization from SARS-CoV-2 infection, studies have demonstrated that the spike proteins of seasonal (endemic) human coronaviruses undergo adaptive evolution that is consistent with selection for antibody escape. It is therefore not surprising that SARS-CoV-2 continues to mutate, and the emergence of new variants with S protein mutations that cause increased transmissibility and/or pathogenesis suggest that the novel coronavirus is undergoing selective evolution at the population level. Importantly, vaccines remain protective against even the most transmissible SARS-CoV-2 variants, including Omicron. However, increasing vaccination while simultaneously decreasing case numbers is the one-two punch that will ultimately be required to slow the spread of this virus, and diligent monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 mutations is key to informing mitigation strategies. Even though the flu is not a new pathogen, influenza virus is constantly evolving and experiencing varying levels of antigenic drift (and shift) that can make it less recognizable to our immune systems. This has made the development of a universally effective flu vaccine particularly challenging and explains the constant underlying threat that new zoonotic influenza strains might emerge and become pandemic. All cases of pandemic flu in the U.S. have been caused by zoonotic subtypes of influenza A, including the Flu of 1918 (H1N1), the 2005 Avian flu (H5N1) and the 2009 Swine flu (H1N1). Coinfection DynamicsWe know that coinfection with multiple respiratory viruses is possible. More specifically, coinfection has been reported for SARS-CoV-2 and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), rhinovirus, other Coronaviridae and the flu. A study published in the Journal of Medical Virology showed that coinfection of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus was common during the initial COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, China, and patients who experienced coinfection had a higher risk of poor health outcomes. However, the reported incidence of seasonal influenza was uncharacteristically low in both the northern and southern hemispheres during the 2020-2021 Flu season. From September 28, 2020-May 22, 2021 in the U.S., only 1,675 (0.2%) of 818,939 laboratory tested respiratory specimens were positive for influenza virus. Early reports from the southern hemisphere hinted that the season had kicked off mildly. As of July 20, 2020, no region had reported more than 10% test positivity, and several regions, including Southeast Asia and parts of South America and Africa reported 0 cases of the flu. In contrast, in July 2019, most regions in the southern hemisphere were reporting greater than 10% test positivity for seasonal influenza, with the most heavily hit areas reporting greater than 30% test positivity, and an estimated 39-56 million cases of influenza occurred in the U.S. between Oct. 1, 2019-April 4, 2020. In the U.S., the 2021-2022 influenza season was also mild and occurred in 2 waves, with a higher number of hospitalizations in the second wave. From October 2021-May 2022, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated 9 million flu-associated illnesses, 4 million medical visits, 10,000 hospitalizations and 5,000 deaths. A number of factors likely contributed to the reduction in flu cases during the early years of the pandemic. Non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs), such as social distancing, international travel bans, masking and improved hand hygiene, were all used to slow transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Undoubtedly, these NPIs reduced influenza transmission as well, and the fact that, despite these mitigation strategies, COVID-19 continued to spread more prevalently than the flu indicated that SARS-CoV-2 is more contagious than influenza virus. Additionally, according to the CDC, a record number of people elected to receive the flu vaccine during the 2020-2021 flu season. As of Feb. 26, 2021, 193.8 million doses had been distributed in the U.S. It is also possible that insufficient testing and reporting resulting from supply and personnel shortages, as well as pandemic preoccupation, caused case numbers to appear lower than was fully representative of true prevalence. Overall, it is not completely certain which of these factors had the greatest impact, or how the very low numbers will impact this year's flu season. Some scientists have postulated that lack of exposure to the flu in recent years could decrease herd immunity and increase host susceptibility to the virus. In fact, from April-Oct. 2022, Australia reported the worst flu season it has seen in 5 years, and many are speculating that the increase in flu in the southern hemisphere will be a harbinger of similar trends in the northern hemisphere in the coming months. In the event that these 2 viruses do come in contact with one another simultaneously in the same host, it is of great interest whether either pathogen causes viral interference (competitively suppresses replication of the other virus). Because SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus both infect cells of the respiratory tract, they might have to compete for resources (including cells to infect) during coinfection. As previously noted, the host cell receptors are unique for each of these viruses. Sialic acid is more prevalent than ACE2, but the binding affinity of S protein to ACE2 is remarkably strong. It is possible, but remains uncertain, whether either of these factors contributes a competitive advantage. The host immune response presents another variable worth considering. Does a host's immune response to one virus make it more difficult for the other to cause infection? Or is an already immunocompromised host left more vulnerable to secondary infection? Only time and experience will tell. But taking a closer look at disease characteristics can help inform diagnosis and treatment plans as we move forward. Comparison of COVID-19 and the flu case numbers. Updated Oct. 7, 2021. Source: American Society for Microbiology TransmissionThe flu and COVID-19 are both primarily spread via small, virus-laced particles called respiratory droplets that are released when an infected person coughs, sneezes, talks or simply exhales. Someone who is nearby may inhale these droplets or become infected through physical contact, like handshaking or hugging, followed by touching their own nose or mouth. Importantly, individuals do not need to exhibit symptoms to be contagious. Both COVID-19 and the flu can be transmitted by presymptomatic, asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic individuals. Influenza virus can remain infectious on surfaces outside of the body for up to 48 hours, which means that it's possible to get sick by touching an object or surface that has recently been coughed on, sneezed on or touched by someone who has the flu. There is evidence suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 RNA may remain present on objects and surfaces for extended periods of time, but how long the virus remains infectious outside of the body has yet to be definitively determined. Vulnerable populations and age groups are more susceptible to both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus, but COVID-19 has shown more superspreading activity than the flu (defined as an instance in which an individual has at least 8 transmissions of the disease to other people). Flu season occurs in the fall and winter. In the U.S., that means October-March, and in the southern hemisphere, June-September. Although the reason for this seasonality is not entirely understood, influenza virus has been shown to survive longer at low temperatures and low humidity. Other suggested explanations include weakened host immunity, due to decreased sunlight and vitamin D, and increased exposure to the virus, due to indoor cohabitation in the winter. It is still not entirely clear to what extent SARS-CoV-2 exhibits flu-like seasonality and temperature sensitivity. But the persistence of COVID-19 cases throughout the summer has reminded us that these are, indeed, 2 separate viruses. Fortunately, both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus are sensitive to alcohol-based sanitizers and soap, and good hand hygiene is an effective way to reduce transmission.IncubationThe incubation period for the flu is typically 1-4 days after infection, but the incubation period for COVID-19 is considerably more variable. Most people develop symptoms within 5 days of exposure, however incubation periods of as little as 2 days and up to 14 days or more have been reported. Symptoms Respiratory viruses primarily infect cells of the lungs and respiratory tract. As a result, symptoms and modes of transmission are tightly linked to respiration processes. Both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza cause fever, cough, shortness of breath, fatigue, sore throat, runny nose, body aches, vomiting and diarrhea. SARS-CoV-2 also causes loss of taste or smell, and additional, less common, COVID-19 symptoms and complications are continuing to be observed, reported and evaluated. In serious cases, both the flu and COVID-19 cause pneumonia, respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, heart attack or stroke, multiple organ failure, severe inflammation and even death. While most respiratory viruses, including RSV, adenovirus and parainfluenzavirus, exhibit some symptom overlap, that does not mean that the disease progression, severity or pathogenesis of each virus is the same. Symptoms of the flu typically resolve within 5-7 days of onset, but it takes longer to recover from COVID-19 (about 2 weeks for mild cases and up to 6 weeks or more for severe cases).DiagnosisBecause COVID-19 and the flu present very similarly, they are nearly impossible to differentiate based on symptoms alone. Accurate diagnosis requires laboratory testing to identify genetic or molecular components of the infecting virus. There are a number of Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved diagnostic tests available for the flu, including viral culture, serology, rapid antigen testing, molecular tests and immunofluorescence assays. And the FDA has issued Emergency Use Authorizations (EUAs) for molecular tests, serology assays and rapid antigen testing to diagnose COVID-19 (note that EUAs do not confer FDA approval). Treatment & PreventionRemdesivir (VEKLURY®), an antiviral drug that targets RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, the enzyme responsible for replicating the SARS-CoV-2 genome, has received FDA approval for the treatment of COVID-19. Merek's oral antiviral LAGEVRIO (molnupiravir) and Pfizer's oral antiviral PAXLOVID have both received EUA for the treatment of mild-to-moderate COVID-19 in adults (molnupiravir) and adults and children 12+ years of age and weighing at least 88 lbs (PAXLOVID). Other candidate drugs are being tested and developed, but the most effective way to prevent severe COVID-19 remains through vaccination. Finally, supportive care continues to be a critical component of disease management. A number of antiviral medications may be prescribed to treat influenza, including NA inhibitors such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu), zanamivir (Relenza) or peramivir (Rapivab), and a polymerase acidic endonuclease inhibitor, baloxavir (Xofluza). All of these medications inhibit, but do not completely eliminate, influenza virus. An annual seasonal flu vaccine is the best way to protect against the flu. As we move through the winter, the best things we can do to prepare for the coinciding flu season and global COVID-19 pandemic are get vaccinated against COVID-19 and the flu and practice good hand hygiene and social distancing measures. Find Flu Vaccines Near You /Public Release. This material from the originating organization/author(s) might be of the point-in-time nature, and edited for clarity, style and length. Mirage.News does not take institutional positions or sides, and all views, positions, and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the author(s).View in full here. Why? Well, unlike many news organisations, we have no sponsors, no corporate or ideological interests. We don't put up a paywall – we believe in free access to information of public interest. Media ownership in Australia is one of the most concentrated in the world (Learn more). Since the trend of consolidation is and has historically been upward, fewer and fewer individuals or organizations control increasing shares of the mass media in our country. According to independent assessment, about 98% of the media sector is held by three conglomerates. This tendency is not only totally unacceptable, but also to a degree frightening). Learn more here We endeavour to provide the community with real-time access to true unfiltered news firsthand from primary sources. It is a bumpy road with all sorties of difficulties. We can only achieve this goal together. Our website is open to any citizen journalists and organizations who want to contribute, publish high-quality insights or send media releases to improve public access to impartial information. You and we have the right to know, learn, read, hear what and how we deem appropriate. Your support is greatly appreciated. All donations are kept completely private and confidential. Thank you in advance! Tags: Australia , Asia , China , america , american , Africa , Administration , FDA , CDC , Pfizer , South America , Alpha , American Society for Microbiology , immune response , social distancing , herd immunity You might also like Hidden World of Fungi: Nature's Unseen Powerhouses Psychology of Decision: How to Make Better Choices Pleasure Vs. Happiness: Neuroscience Behind Our Choices Rewilding: Restoring Ecosystems to Their Natural State The Art of Feng Shui: How to Harmonize Your Home Cosmic Web: Understanding Scale of the Universe Timeline CLP Government Backs Beetaloo As Economic Powerhouse 12 Nov 2024 11:52 am AEDT Agriculture Lending On Rise 12 Nov 2024 11:50 am AEDT Film & TV Misogyny: Child-Free Women Dehumanized 12 Nov 2024 11:50 am AEDT SA Donation Laws Flawed, Won't Boost Trust 12 Nov 2024 11:46 am AEDT OAS Pays Tribute To Journalists Murdered In Americas 12 Nov 2024 11:40 am AEDT Singapore Jets Conclude Drills in Western Australia 12 Nov 2024 11:30 am AEDT Consumer Confidence Highest Since January 2023 12 Nov 2024 11:26 am AEDT Fetal Monitoring Vital in Labor, Choices Often Unclear 12 Nov 2024 11:24 am AEDT Regulator Enforces Quarry Rehabilitation 12 Nov 2024 11:20 am AEDT GOV.UK One Login Simplifies Apprenticeship Access 12 Nov 2024 11:18 am AEDT Fire Restrictions Announced In Northeast And Northwest 12 Nov 2024 11:18 am AEDT Lights Deter Great White Sharks: New Research 12 Nov 2024 11:10 am AEDT Water Reforms Eye Sports and Quality in Bathing Areas 12 Nov 2024 11:08 am AEDT Gaps Identified In Disease Surveillance 12 Nov 2024 11:07 am AEDT Why Some Athletes Always Stay One Step Ahead 12 Nov 2024 11:07 am AEDT 2,140 New Fee-Free TAFE Courses for WA Construction 12 Nov 2024 11:06 am AEDT New Knox Council Sworn In 12 Nov 2024 11:06 am AEDT 'Pioneering' Ecological Park Takes Out National Award 12 Nov 2024 11:06 am AEDT Nurse Practitioners Week 2024 12 Nov 2024 11:00 am AEDT National Diabetes Feet Day 12 Nov 2024 11:00 am AEDT Foreign Firm Fined $187K for Missing Financial Reports 12 Nov 2024 11:00 am AEDT Community Initiatives Recognised In Tidy Towns Awards 12 Nov 2024 10:48 am AEDT $1M Grant Boosts Motor Neurone Disease Fight 12 Nov 2024 10:42 am AEDT NSW New $500,000 For Upgrades At Wyong Hospital 12 Nov 2024 10:42 am AEDT IMAS Scientist: Keep It Nice, Put It On Ice 12 Nov 2024 10:36 am AEDT Council Set To Rezone Land In Monash Drive 12 Nov 2024 10:36 am AEDT APEC Officials Pledge Resilient, Inclusive Growth 12 Nov 2024 10:34 am AEDT AI Detects Neurologic Changes in NICU Babies via Video 12 Nov 2024 10:32 am AEDT More News Popular Topics AustraliaGovernmentuniversitycommunitypoliceAustralianresearchNSWVictoriaProfessorhealthenvironmentMinisterQueenslandbusinesscouncilUKcovid-19local councilNew South WalesinfrastructureInvestmenteducationtechnologyindustryinvestigationAusPolUnited StatesprojectcrimeEmergencysustainableNew ZealandUK GovernmentQLDScientistsfutureSydneyPresidentclimate changeamericaImpactcourtInternetincident Latest News UpdatesPrivacy PolicyDisclaimerCode of EthicsContact UsAbout UsComplaints Mirage.News real-time media portal. We acknowledge the traditional owners of country throughout Australia. All timestamps on this site are AEST/AEDT and all times in the articles are local times unless indicated otherwise.All trademarks and rights are owned by their respective owners. All content is used for news reporting purposes. For news reporting purposes, we rely on fair use (fair dealing) [1] [2]for textual and media content to keep the public informed on the developments. If you are a person mentioned in the story or you are a copyright holder and believe that any content should be removed, revised or taken down, please contact us. See our disclaimer page. × Search NowAvian flu likely cause of 400 Wiser Lake bird deaths | Cascadia Daily News Menu Facebook X-twitter Instagram Tiktok Nov. 8 Print Replica Newsletters Log in Search Search Close this search box. News Close News Open News News Local State Northwest Nation & World Business Elections Special Reports News Obituaries Local State Northwest Nation & World Business Elections Special Reports News Obituaries Opinion Close Opinion Open Opinion Opinion Columns Ron Judd The Hammer Citizens Agenda Guest Commentaries Letters Submit a Letter Columns Ron Judd The Hammer Citizens Agenda Guest Commentaries Letters Submit a Letter Sports & Rec Close Sports & Rec Open Sports & Rec Sports & Rec Prep College Professional Travel Outdoors Recreation Sports calendar Prep College Professional Travel Outdoors Recreation Sports calendar Living Close Living Open Living Living Arts & Entertainment Food & Drink Profiles Community The A-List The Beat Goes On Music Calendar Horoscopes Arts & Entertainment Food & Drink Profiles Community The A-List The Beat Goes On Music Calendar Horoscopes Photos Events About Subscribe All Sections Close All Sections Open All Sections News Local State Northwest Nation & World Business Elections Special Reports News Obituaries Local State Northwest Nation & World Business Elections Special Reports News Obituaries Opinion Columns Ron Judd The Hammer Citizens Agenda Guest Commentaries Letters Submit a Letter Columns Ron Judd The Hammer Citizens Agenda Guest Commentaries Letters Submit a Letter Sports & Rec Prep College Professional Travel Outdoors Recreation Sports calendar Prep College Professional Travel Outdoors Recreation Sports calendar Living Arts & Entertainment Food & Drink Profiles Community The A-List The Beat Goes On Music Calendar Horoscopes Arts & Entertainment Food & Drink Profiles Community The A-List The Beat Goes On Music Calendar Horoscopes About Who we are Contact Us Meet the news staff Meet the business team Media coverage Awards and recognition CDN jobs FAQ Who we are Contact Us Meet the news staff Meet the business team Media coverage Awards and recognition CDN jobs FAQ Community Weekly Watchdog Events Photo Galleries Where to buy the print newspaper Our Commitment to Our Community Weekly Watchdog Events Photo Galleries Where to buy the print newspaper Our Commitment to Our Community Advertise Advertise with us Ad Policy Obituaries Submit a Legal Notice Advertise with us Ad Policy Obituaries Submit a Legal Notice Subscriptions Log in My Account Subscribe Cascadia One Pass membership Donate E-Edition Customer support Log in My Account Subscribe Cascadia One Pass membership Donate E-Edition Customer support Connect Email newsletters Facebook X Instagram Email newsletters Facebook X Instagram Get unlimited local news and information that matters to you. Subscribe Today News | Local | Environment Environment Avian flu likely cause of 400 Wiser Lake bird deaths 'Highly infectious' disease is spreading Nov. 22, 2022 3:08 p.m. Daniel Zimmerman, right, a biologist at the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, has spent several days hauling dead birds out of the waters at Wiser Lake in Lynden, placing them in heavy-duty trash bags for transport. (Julia Lerner/Cascadia Daily News) By Julia Lerner Staff Reporter LYNDEN — Heavy-duty black trash bags lined the shore at the Wiser Lake Public Boat Launch on Tuesday afternoon, as Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife employees hauled dozens of dead geese out of the water. In the last week, more than 400 have been reported dead or sick in the waters along the lake. The geese, which began showing up en masse last week, are likely infected with H5N1: Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI). Biologists and technicians from the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife have spent several days retrieving as many dead geese from the waters of Lake Wiser as they can – sometimes as many as 75. (Julia Lerner/Cascadia Daily News) “We are seeing an outbreak of avian influenza in the area,” said Staci Lehman at the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). “Over several days, we’ve had several reports of geese that have been found sick or dead.” Between Monday and Tuesday afternoon, the number of dead birds was updated from 100 to more than 400. “That number is growing,” Lehman said. “It’s fluctuating.” The die-off began last week, and since then, WDFW employees have been at the lake recovering dozens of geese carcasses, hoping to prevent further spread. The virus, spread through animal droppings and secretions, spreads easily this time of year, Lehman said. “With the weather getting cooler and some areas not having as much water coming out of the summer, the geese will flock together in an area to feed,” she said Tuesday. “With all the geese together, they just pass it to each other.” Zimmerman ties up a bag of dead birds at Wiser Lake on Nov. 22. (Julia Lerner/Cascadia Daily News) HPAI has plagued Washington flocks this year, with dozens of reported cases and even more deaths throughout the summer. According to a recent update from the Washington Department of Agriculture, more than 2,400 birds have been impacted by the outbreak. “It’s not the first time we’ve seen something like this,” Lehman said of the Wiser Lake die-off. “We had a similar case in the Tri-Cities last spring, where it was a lot of goslings that died.” The Tri-Cities, composed of Kennewick, Pasco and Richland, saw small pockets of the avian flu in goslings around the Columbia Park Pond. Lehman said the virus this year seems to be a little bit different than in past years, impacting more species of birds. It also seems to spread faster, though is less lethal. The Washington State Avian Influenza Outbreak Map does not show an active outbreak in Whatcom County, though that may change as the state conducts additional testing of carcasses from Wiser Lake. Testing the carcasses for HPAI can be rigorous, requiring several rounds of confirmation testing. First, a sample of birds must be sent to a lab at Washington State University. If a bird tests positive at WSU, it must be sent to federal labs for additional testing. It’s highly unlikely the H5N1 virus will spread to humans, though it has happened before. “We have seen it spread to humans, but it’s mostly people who worked closely with birds, like in the poultry industry — you know, someone touching a lot of birds on a daily basis,” Lehman said. WDFW will issue additional safety precautions for people in close contact with birds, particularly those frequently handling dead birds, Lehman said. Though the public health risk remains low, a large bird die-off like the one at Wiser can be troubling, and can pose a significant threat to animals both domestic and wild. “One-hundred birds or more is concerning, but more for the concern that we’ve got all these potentially dead birds laying around, and if they don’t get cleaned up right away, raptors that scavenge on things can pick it up and carry it to other populations, further spreading the virus,” Lehman said. It’s not just birds that are at risk: Any animal that comes in contact with a bird infected with H5N1 could become a carrier and become sick. “We’re more concerned about domestic animals like people’s dogs and cats,” Lehman said. Wiser Lake, a popular fishing and recreation area in Whatcom, is relatively residential, with homes and businesses around the edge of the lake. If an ill bird wanders too close to a home, it could easily spread the virus to an unsuspecting pet. Guidance from the WDFW says pet owners should plan to keep their pets inside, and if a bird dies on the property, homeowners should double- or triple-bag it before burying it in the trash can to prevent scavengers like raccoons from easily getting to it. Daniel Zimmerman, right, a biologist at the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, has spent several days hauling dead birds out of the waters at Wiser Lake in Lynden, placing them in heavy-duty trash bags for transport. (Julia Lerner/Cascadia Daily News) Earlier this month, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported record numbers of avian influenza outbreaks across the country. “Since early 2022, more than 49 million birds in 46 states have either died as a result of bird flu virus infection or have been culled (killed) due to exposure to infected birds,” according to a Nov. 3 press release. “This number is nearing 50.5 million birds in 21 states that were affected by the largest bird flu outbreak that occurred in 2015.” At this point, Lehman said, the state will not euthanize healthy birds to prevent spread, though they may kill already-infected animals. “If we find geese that are sick, they are generally euthanized to prevent the spread,” she said. “At this point, we haven’t been doing any culling across the state.” Sick birds may appear lethargic and may have diarrhea and other secretions coming from them. To report a concern about a sick or dead bird, contact the Washington State Department of Agriculture at 360-902-2936, or fill out the online form. Latest stories Community ‘Putting the country first’: Community celebrates Veterans Day in Bellingham Musicians and speakers mark the day at American Legion Post 7 Nov. 11, 2024 3:26 p.m. WTD? What’s the Deal With: The owls at ‘East 90’? Sharp bend in the road provides premier birding opportunity Nov. 11, 2024 1:00 p.m. Elections Free from CDN Elected commissioners will convene in January to review Whatcom County charter Group of 15 will review how the county is governed, elected officials' powers, and how elections work Nov. 11, 2024 11:30 a.m. Have a news tip? Email newstips@cascadiadaily.com or Call/Text 360-922-3092 Read the Print Replica Subscribe to our free newsletters About Who we are Contact Us Meet the news staff Meet the business team Media coverage Awards and recognition CDN jobs FAQ Who we are Contact Us Meet the news staff Meet the business team Media coverage Awards and recognition CDN jobs FAQ Community Weekly Watchdog Events Photo Galleries Where to buy the print newspaper Our Commitment to Our Community Weekly Watchdog Events Photo Galleries Where to buy the print newspaper Our Commitment to Our Community Advertise Advertise with us Ad Policy Obituaries Submit a Legal Notice Advertise with us Ad Policy Obituaries Submit a Legal Notice Subscriptions Log in My Account Subscribe Cascadia One Pass membership Donate E-Edition Customer support Log in My Account Subscribe Cascadia One Pass membership Donate E-Edition Customer support Connect Email newsletters Facebook X Instagram Email newsletters Facebook X Instagram Copyright © 2024 Cascadia Daily News Privacy Policy Ad Policy Terms of Service Facebook Brands-x-twitter Instagram Tiktok News News Local State Northwest Nation & World Business Elections Special Reports News Obituaries Opinion Opinion Citizens Agenda Columns Letters Ron Judd The Hammer Guest Commentaries Submissions Sports Sports Prep College Professional Travel Outdoors Recreation Sports Calendar Living Living Arts & Entertainment Profiles Community The A-List The Beat Goes On Music Calendar Horoscopes Photos Events About Who we are Contact us FAQ CDN jobs Community Weekly Watchdog Events Calendar Photo Galleries Where to buy the print newspaper Advertise Advertise with us Ad policy Obituaries Submit a Legal Notice Subscriptions My Account Subscribe Donate E-Edition Customer support Connect Sign up for our free email newsletters Facebook X Instagram Log in My Account SubscribeScientists Get A Step Closer To A Universal Flu Vaccine | IFLScienceCLOSEThank you!We have emailed you a PDF version of the article you requested.Can't find the email? Please check your spam or junk folder You can also addnewsletters@iflscience.comto your safe senders list to ensure you never miss a message from us.CLOSEIFLScience HomeScientists Get A Step Closer To A Universal Flu VaccineComplete the form below and we will email you a PDF version66394EmailCountryPlease ChooseAustraliaCanadaUnited KingdomUnited StatesAfghanistanAlbaniaAlgeriaAmerican SamoaAndorraAngolaAnguillaAntarcticaAntigua and BarbudaArgentinaArmeniaArubaAustriaAzerbaijanBahamasBahrainBangladeshBarbadosBelarusBelgiumBelizeBeninBermudaBhutanBoliviaBosnia and HerzegovinaBotswanaBouvet IslandBrazilBritish Indian Ocean TerritoryBruneiBulgariaBurkina FasoBurundiCambodiaCameroonCape VerdeCayman IslandsCentral African RepublicChadChileChinaChristmas IslandCocos (Keeling) IslandsColombiaComorosCongoCook IslandsCosta RicaCroatiaCubaCyprusCzech RepublicDenmarkDjiboutiDominicaDominican RepublicEast TimorEcuadorEgyptEl SalvadorEquatorial GuineaEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFalkland IslandsFaroe IslandsFiji IslandsFinlandFranceFrench GuianaFrench PolynesiaFrench Southern territoriesGabonGambiaGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGibraltarGreeceGreenlandGrenadaGuadeloupeGuamGuatemalaGuernseyGuineaGuinea-BissauGuyanaHaitiHeard Island and McDonald IslandsHoly See (Vatican City State)HondurasHong KongHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqIrelandIsle of ManIsraelItalyIvory CoastJamaicaJapanJerseyJordanKazakhstanKenyaKiribatiKuwaitKyrgyzstanLaosLatviaLebanonLesothoLiberiaLibyan Arab JamahiriyaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMacaoNorth MacedoniaMadagascarMalawiMalaysiaMaldivesMaliMaltaMarshall IslandsMartiniqueMauritaniaMauritiusMayotteMexicoMicronesia, Federated States ofMoldovaMonacoMongoliaMontenegroMontserratMoroccoMozambiqueMyanmarNamibiaNauruNepalNetherlandsNetherlands AntillesNew CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaraguaNigerNigeriaNiueNorfolk IslandNorth KoreaNorthern IrelandNorthern Mariana IslandsNorwayOmanPakistanPalauPalestinePanamaPapua New GuineaParaguayPeruPhilippinesPitcairnPolandPortugalPuerto RicoQatarReunionRomaniaRussian FederationRwandaSaint HelenaSaint Kitts and NevisSaint LuciaSaint Pierre and MiquelonSaint Vincent and the GrenadinesSamoaSan MarinoSao Tome and PrincipeSaudi ArabiaSenegalSerbiaSeychellesSierra LeoneSingaporeSlovakiaSloveniaSolomon IslandsSomaliaSouth AfricaSouth Georgia and the South Sandwich IslandsSouth KoreaSouth SudanSpainSri LankaSudanSurinameSvalbard and Jan MayenSwazilandSwedenSwitzerlandSyriaTajikistanTanzaniaThailandThe Democratic Republic of CongoTimor-LesteTogoTokelauTongaTrinidad and TobagoTunisiaTurkeyTurkmenistanTurks and Caicos IslandsTuvaluUgandaUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited States Minor Outlying IslandsUruguayUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuelaVietnamVirgin Islands, BritishVirgin Islands, U.S.Wallis and FutunaWestern SaharaYemenZambiaZimbabweReady to spark your curiosity? Get our newsletter full of awesome, inspiring, and strange science.You can unsubscribe at any time. View ourprivacy policy and terms below.Please ChooseYesNoGET PDFCancel and go backIFLScience needs the contact information you provide to us to contact you about our products and services. You may unsubscribe from these communications at any time.For information on how to unsubscribe, as well as our privacy practices and commitment to protecting your privacy, check out ourPrivacy PolicyCLOSEIFLScience HomeScientists Get A Step Closer To A Universal Flu VaccineComplete the form below to listen to the audio version of this article66394EmailCountryPlease ChooseAustraliaCanadaUnited KingdomUnited StatesAfghanistanAlbaniaAlgeriaAmerican SamoaAndorraAngolaAnguillaAntarcticaAntigua and BarbudaArgentinaArmeniaArubaAustriaAzerbaijanBahamasBahrainBangladeshBarbadosBelarusBelgiumBelizeBeninBermudaBhutanBoliviaBosnia and HerzegovinaBotswanaBouvet IslandBrazilBritish Indian Ocean TerritoryBruneiBulgariaBurkina FasoBurundiCambodiaCameroonCape VerdeCayman IslandsCentral African RepublicChadChileChinaChristmas IslandCocos (Keeling) IslandsColombiaComorosCongoCook IslandsCosta RicaCroatiaCubaCyprusCzech RepublicDenmarkDjiboutiDominicaDominican RepublicEast TimorEcuadorEgyptEl SalvadorEquatorial GuineaEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFalkland IslandsFaroe IslandsFiji IslandsFinlandFranceFrench GuianaFrench PolynesiaFrench Southern territoriesGabonGambiaGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGibraltarGreeceGreenlandGrenadaGuadeloupeGuamGuatemalaGuernseyGuineaGuinea-BissauGuyanaHaitiHeard Island and McDonald IslandsHoly See (Vatican City State)HondurasHong KongHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqIrelandIsle of ManIsraelItalyIvory CoastJamaicaJapanJerseyJordanKazakhstanKenyaKiribatiKuwaitKyrgyzstanLaosLatviaLebanonLesothoLiberiaLibyan Arab JamahiriyaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMacaoNorth MacedoniaMadagascarMalawiMalaysiaMaldivesMaliMaltaMarshall IslandsMartiniqueMauritaniaMauritiusMayotteMexicoMicronesia, Federated States ofMoldovaMonacoMongoliaMontenegroMontserratMoroccoMozambiqueMyanmarNamibiaNauruNepalNetherlandsNetherlands AntillesNew CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaraguaNigerNigeriaNiueNorfolk IslandNorth KoreaNorthern IrelandNorthern Mariana IslandsNorwayOmanPakistanPalauPalestinePanamaPapua New GuineaParaguayPeruPhilippinesPitcairnPolandPortugalPuerto RicoQatarReunionRomaniaRussian FederationRwandaSaint HelenaSaint Kitts and NevisSaint LuciaSaint Pierre and MiquelonSaint Vincent and the GrenadinesSamoaSan MarinoSao Tome and PrincipeSaudi ArabiaSenegalSerbiaSeychellesSierra LeoneSingaporeSlovakiaSloveniaSolomon IslandsSomaliaSouth AfricaSouth Georgia and the South Sandwich IslandsSouth KoreaSouth SudanSpainSri LankaSudanSurinameSvalbard and Jan MayenSwazilandSwedenSwitzerlandSyriaTajikistanTanzaniaThailandThe Democratic Republic of CongoTimor-LesteTogoTokelauTongaTrinidad and TobagoTunisiaTurkeyTurkmenistanTurks and Caicos IslandsTuvaluUgandaUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited States Minor Outlying IslandsUruguayUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuelaVietnamVirgin Islands, BritishVirgin Islands, U.S.Wallis and FutunaWestern SaharaYemenZambiaZimbabweReady to spark your curiosity? Get our newsletter full of awesome, inspiring, and strange science.You can unsubscribe at any time. View ourprivacy policy and terms below.Please ChooseYesNoListenCancel and go backIFLScience needs the contact information you provide to us to contact you about our products and services. You may unsubscribe from these communications at any time.For information on how to unsubscribe, as well as our privacy practices and commitment to protecting your privacy, check out ourPrivacy PolicyAdvertisementIFLScience HomeSearchTopicsHumansHealth & MedicineNatureSpace & PhysicsTechnologyCulture & SocietyLatestTrendingVideoPodcastsEventsNewsLetters MagazineMoreFeatureseBooksAbout Us TrendingLatestTopicsHumansHealth & MedicineNatureSpace & PhysicsTechnologyCulture & SocietyFeaturesVideoPodcastsEventsNewsLetters MagazineMoreeBooksAbout UsSubscribe today for our Weekly Newsletter in your inbox!Subscribe TodayYouTubeYoutubeSubscribe today for our Weekly Newsletter in your inbox!Subscribe TodayYouTubeYoutubeHealth and MedicinehealthPUBLISHEDScientists Get A Step Closer To A Universal Flu VaccineInitial tests with animals appear very promising in creating a vaccine against all strains of flu.Dr. Alfredo CarpinetiDr. Alfredo CarpinetiSenior Staff Writer & Space CorrespondentlinkedinemailAlfredo (he/him) has a PhD in Astrophysics on galaxy evolution and a Master's in Quantum Fields and Fundamental Forces.BookView full profileBookRead IFLScience Editorial PolicySenior Staff Writer & Space CorrespondentlinkedinemailDOWNLOAD PDF VERSION1.3kSharesThe vaccine might signficantly reduce symptoms and deadlyness of the flu. Image Credit: Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock.comDOWNLOAD PDF VERSIONAn mRNA vaccine against all 20 known influenza virus subtypes has been developed. Initial tests conducted in animals show that the vaccine reduced signs of illness and protected them from death, even when the animals were exposed to flu viruses unrelated to the one used to make the vaccine.The work suggests that the vaccine could offer broad protection against all strains of flu, including the lethal ones. Given the risk of flu pandemics and the deaths caused by seasonal flu, this could be an incredible tool in our medical arsenal.Advertisement“The idea here is to have a vaccine that will give people a baseline level of immune memory to diverse flu strains, so that there will be far less disease and death when the next flu pandemic occurs,” study senior author Dr Scott Hensley, a professor in of Microbiology at in the Perelman School of Medicine, said in a statement.The vaccine uses the same mRNA technology successfully demonstrated in COVID-19 vaccines. It uses immunogens: antigens that stimulate an immune response. The RNA has the code of a key (but harmless) flu protein shared among the 18 types of Influenza A viruses and the two types of Influenza B. Once injected, cells in the area produce the protein and the immune system believes it is under attack, producing specific antibodies.So, the next time a flu virus enters the organism, the immune system will be able to react more quickly. The vaccine is not a sterilizing one – it doesn’t stop you from catching the flu ever again. Instead, it primes your body so that if you do catch the flu, it would be a lot less severe.“It would be comparable to first-generation SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccines, which were targeted to the original Wuhan strain of the coronavirus,” Hensley said. “Against later variants such as Omicron, these original vaccines did not fully block viral infections, but they continue to provide durable protection against severe disease and death.”AdvertisementThe team is keen to put this to the test in humans. They are now designing human clinical trials to see how the vaccine behaves for us. If successful this vaccine could be employed to curb the spread and the danger of flu in all age groups, from children to old people.“We think this vaccine could significantly reduce the chances of ever getting a severe flu infection,” Hensley added.The findings are published in the journal Science. Discuss (0 CommentS)ARTICLE POSTED INHealth and Medicinehealthvaccines,mrna,Influenza,health,antigens,mrna vaccineEmail AppEnvelopeDiscuss (0 CommentS)FOLLOW ONNEWSMore Health and Medicine Storieslink to articleShin Splints: What They Are And What To Do About ThemArticlehealthShin Splints: What They Are And What To Do About Them2 days ago219link to articleThis Is Why Papercuts Hurt So Goddamn MuchArticleHealth and MedicineThis Is Why Papercuts Hurt So Goddamn Much4 days ago49link to articleIt’s Safe To Get Your COVID-19 And Flu Shots Together, Concludes New StudyArticlehealthIt’s Safe To Get Your COVID-19 And Flu Shots Together, Concludes New Study4 days ago2220AdvertisementAdvertisementAdvertisementMultimedialink to articleA Murder Solved From The Grave, Chernobyl Frogs, And Cat PhysicsA Murder Solved From The Grave, Chernobyl Frogs, And Cat Physicslink to articleThe Oldest Text In The WorldThe Oldest Text In The Worldlink to articleQuantum Cats, Drunk Monkeys, And Happy Birthday GodzillaQuantum Cats, Drunk Monkeys, And Happy Birthday GodzillaMore MultimediaIFLScience HomeYouTubeYoutubeTheIFLScience HomeNewsletterSign up today to get weekly science coverage direct to your inboxSubscribe TodayNavigation HomeTeamAboutCareersSubscribeContact ContactWrite For UsSubmit NewsAdvertise With UsReport Website IssuesEditorial Editorial MissionCorrection PolicyComment PolicyTransparency PolicyFact-Checking PolicyLegal Terms of useCookie PolicyPrivacy PolicyAdvertising PolicyCorporate Social ResponsibilityChange Cookie SettingsDo Not Sell© 2024 IFLScience. All Rights Reserved. RSSWhy don't Americans have at-home flu tests? Skip to Main Content Election 2024 FDA Congress Newsletters Log In My Account Subscribe Now My Account Settings Billing Log Out Reporting from the frontiers of health and medicine Newsletters Log In My Account Subscribe Now BiotechPharmaPublic HealthHealth TechPolicyScienceFirst OpinionSTAT+STAT Events Search Log In Try STAT+ My Account Home News Latest Business Biotech Pharma Health Tech Health Insurance Hospitals Medical Devices Washington Policy FDA CDC NIH Science CRISPR Gene Therapy Research Neuroscience Public Health H5N1 Bird Flu Addiction Covid-19 Abortion Health Disparities Infectious Disease Mental Health Disease Cancer Cardiovascular Disease Chronic Disease Diabetes Alzheimer's Obesity Features Coercive Care The Obesity Revolution The War on Recovery Newsletters Opinion Columns Adam Feuerstein Matthew Herper Ed Silverman Reports E-books Podcasts Tools & Trackers CRISPR Tracker Breakthrough Device Tracker Generative AI Tracker Obesity Drug Tracker Events Upcoming Events Summits 2025 Breakthrough East 2025 Breakthrough West Community STAT Wunderkinds '24 STAT Madness Video Advertise STAT Brand Studio Don't miss out Subscribe to STAT+ today, for the best life sciences journalism in the industry Learn more HealthWhy doesn’t the U.S. have at-home flu tests? By Brittany Trang Nov. 22, 2022 Reprints NIAID Flu season is underway. RSV is putting record numbers of children in hospitals. And health professionals are gearing up for another Covid winter. With so many potential viruses in play, it would be helpful if Americans had a way to distinguish between different ailments at home. And when it comes to the flu in particular, at-home testing could help telehealth doctors decide when it makes sense to prescribe treatments like Tamiflu, which need to be started within two days of onset of symptoms.advertisement “Home flu testing would ensure that those who do need and receive antiviral medication for influenza are the ones who need it the most,” said Christina Yen, an infectious diseases doctor at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, as well as ensure “that we are making our treatment decisions based on data.” Yet no at-home flu tests are available for purchase in the U.S. That’s not for lack of technology — the rapid antigen flu tests at the doctor’s office are “virtually identical” to the Covid tests already in people’s homes, according to Zoë McLaren, associate professor of public policy at the University of Maryland Baltimore County who studies health policies for infectious disease epidemics. Rather, the issue comes down to historical hangups — and the need to find digital fixes to address them.advertisement “It’s really rare, and it’s really new, that people are allowed to know about what’s happening inside their body without a physician in the middle,” said Michael Mina, a former assistant professor of epidemiology at Harvard. The Food and Drug Administration has been historically slow to approve over-the-counter tests, Mina said, citing pregnancy tests as an example. Although a 26-year-old female product designer made a prototype of an at-home version of a lab pregnancy test in 1967, at-home pregnancy tests were not approved in the U.S. until 1977. “The general thinking was, ‘How could a woman possibly know what to do if she found out she was pregnant on her own without a doctor in the room?’ That is a ridiculous concern because women have been doing that for millions of years,” said Mina. The FDA was similarly cautious with respect to at-home testing for HIV, which became the only over-the-counter test for an infectious disease when it received approval in 2012. A 2016 FDA advisory panel, meanwhile, was split on whether the benefits of over-the-counter influenza tests outweighed the risks. Meeting transcripts show that as experts debated whether at-home tests would actually be effective at keeping people at home if they knew they or their children had the flu, one panelist joked that daycare centers might make the decision for parents if over-the-counter tests were available. “The woman is going to want to go to work, and she wants to drop her kids off at daycare,” the panelist said. “The daycare, when they sign their contract, [could say] ‘If your kid has symptoms, we’re going to test him,’” and send the child home if they tested positive. The room laughed at the idea. This scenario is not so laughable in the wake of the pandemic. During the height of the Omicron wave, nearly 1 in 4 symptomatic people were testing themselves at home. Many Americans have clearly gotten accustomed to the idea of at-home testing, and to the fact that they may have to adjust their plans if they get a positive result. Related: The scientist behind Pfizer’s Covid vaccine says a flu pandemic is only a matter of time But regulators and clinicians still have concerns. At-home tests can be less accurate than tests administered by a health care worker because people may not obtain enough sample to get a valid result, or might have trouble reading the result correctly. And whereas home users generally take a positive or negative result at face value, clinicians have more context with which to interpret false positives or false negatives. They might order a more sensitive test, act with more caution for people they know are high-risk, or decide to treat a patient anyway because they suspect a false negative. There’s also a historical concern about rapid influenza tests having low accuracy and varying in sensitivity from year to year. Before 2009, measuring viruses by cell culture was the decades-old standard — but cell culture numbers could vary widely depending on how good the lab was at cultivating cells. During the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, nucleic acid amplification tests such as PCR — which were much more consistent — became the new standard. When compared against PCR methods, rapid-antigen flu tests now seemed much less reliable than they had been when their cell-culture-based trials were first approved. Based on outcry from the medical community against rapid flu tests so inaccurate that some were only able to detect H1N1 in 11% of samples, the FDA in 2017 reclassified antigen influenza tests from Class I devices to Class II, which are considered to present more risk. The FDA began requiring manufacturers to certify their tests against eight influenza strains, which change from year to year depending on circulating variants. These year-to-year fluctuations can become a concern if people keep flu tests in their medicine cabinets and pull them out months or years later. There may be ways to address concerns about patients inaccurately administering and interpreting at-home tests. eMed, where Mina is currently chief scientific officer, is trying to address such issues by having a telehealth professional proctor each at-home test the company sells. But while the eMed tests are marketed as at-home flu and Covid tests, the kits only contain a FlowFlex rapid Covid test. Because there isn’t an approved at-home flu test, clinicians can’t ask the patient to test for flu like they would if they were in person. Instead, they follow the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance for diagnosing flu through telehealth. If the patient is Covid-negative during flu season, for example, they probably have the flu, and clinicians might then decide to prescribe Tamiflu. But this set-up can prompt telehealth clinicians to over-prescribe antivirals, as Yen at UT Southwestern pointed out. This situation is particularly frustrating because there are rapid flu tests that are Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments-waived, meaning they are approved for use in point-of-care testing sites like pharmacies and health clinics—just not at home. “It’s kind of like [the FDA] still lives in a world where the internet and telehealth doesn’t exist,” said Mina. “There are ways to get people testing at home that don’t require the person to be in charge of interpreting the results all on their own.” He imagines a scenario in which the FDA could broaden access to diagnostic tests by making telehealth appointments a CLIA-waived setting, so that patients could swab their own noses under the guidance of a health-care provider. Newsletters Sign up for Morning Rounds Your daily dose of news in health and medicine. Please enter a valid email address. Privacy Policy Whether the FDA would support that kind of change is unclear, though a senior FDA official said that the agency is currently trying to find a better way to bridge point-of-care and at-home approvals. The senior official also said that the administration “strongly supports” at-home tests for respiratory viruses and has since before the pandemic. But companies developing these tests have gotten a different impression from their interactions with the FDA. “I’m glad to hear they said that,” said Wade Stevenson, a senior vice president of marketing at rapid-PCR test manufacturer Visby Medical. Stevenson acknowledged that the FDA has a hard job — they’re trying to safeguard the products available to the American medical system without stifling innovation. “When you put a new idea in front of the FDA, generally, they’re excited about it,” said Stevenson. “They like to see new ideas. And they do not want to play the role of, ‘No, this is never going to work.’ They want to encourage development and people pushing boundaries.” But manufacturers are frustrated about what they say is a lack of clarity surrounding the pathways to approval for over-the-counter tests and constantly shifting goalposts. One obstacle manufacturers like Visby face is the question of what the FDA is looking for in the at-home tests. The FDA has strongly emphasized they want test manufacturers to engage with them by submitting pre-submissions for feedback. But Stevenson said that the FDA’s guidance for their pre-submissions came back too late to be useful for developing their clinical trials. Clinical trials take a long time to complete because the prevalence of flu, especially low-incidence influenza B, has been so fickle the last few years. Stevenson thinks a Visby at-home PCR test is “a long ways away,” partially because the latest suggestions the company received from the FDA specified that the administration would like public health reporting to be built into at-home tests. This would help address the problem facing Covid tests today, where the reported case counts don’t include unreported at-home tests. But including this feature is “not trivial” because each state has its own reporting standards and different ways they collect that data. “The FDA saying ‘Think about this’ is nice and has good intentions,” said Stevenson, “but the reality is coming up with one product that does that today in an at-home setting? I don’t know how to do that.” Beyond getting tests approved, it’s hard for test makers to transition into the at-home market because insurance reimbursements don’t typically cover at-home tests, whereas lab diagnostics are usually covered. In 2020, Congress required insurers to cover Covid tests at no cost, but that stipulation only lasts while the national public health emergency is in place. And while at-home tests are ostensibly meant to help lower barriers to access medical care, CDC research shows that the people most likely to use an at-home Covid test are highly educated, in higher income brackets, and white — meaning that if and when at-home flu tests are approved, there’s more work to be done in ensuring they actually reach all populations. Currently, the only test available for differentiating flu, Covid, and RSV at home is the Labcorp Pixel test, where users swab themselves at home and send the sample in for lab testing. However, this test’s turnaround time of one to two days wouldn’t be able to compete with an at-home test that gave results in 15-30 minutes. Some Covid test manufacturers are now pivoting to include flu in their analytes. Cue Health and Lucira Health have both filed emergency use authorizations for their Covid and flu at-home tests, both of which are molecular-based amplification tests and thus might sidestep some of the sensitivity concerns of antigen tests. Both companies also have a companion app that can help connect patients to treatment options like Paxlovid or, if approved for flu, Tamiflu. However, neither have yet been approved by the FDA. Lucira’s test, which has been authorized in Canada and Europe, was submitted for authorization in May, while Cue Health’s request was submitted at the end of September. “We are in constant communication with the FDA,” said Debkishore Mitra, founder and CTO of Lucira. “We are really hoping that we can make some impact in this current flu season.” About the Author Reprints Brittany Trang Health Tech Reporter Brittany Trang, Ph.D., is a health tech reporter at STAT. Follow her on Threads, Mastodon, and Bluesky. [email protected] @brittanytrang linkedin.com/in/brittanytrang/ Tags infectious disease patients public health Telehealth To submit a correction request, please visit our Contact Us page. Trending Compounding group sues FDA for removing Lilly’s obesity drug… Compounding group sues FDA for removing Lilly’s obesity drug from its shortages list White House should declare national emergency over IV fluid… White House should declare national emergency over IV fluid shortages caused by Helene, says hospital group With boost from RFK Jr. and Tucker Carlson, two… With boost from RFK Jr. and Tucker Carlson, two chronic disease entrepreneurs vault into Trump’s orbit Recommended A STAT Investigation: Pain, loss, and coercive care A STAT Investigation: Pain, loss, and coercive care Cardiovascular health disparities persist in puzzling ways, studies find Cardiovascular health disparities persist in puzzling ways, studies find What the Trump administration could mean for the health… What the Trump administration could mean for the health care industry, from hospitals to pharma Recommended Stories Pharmalot Ed Silverman STAT Plus: Pharmalittle: We’re reading about GSK leaving BIO, an AbbVie schizophrenia drug failing, and more Biotech Elaine Chen STAT Plus: Schizophrenia drug AbbVie picked up in $9 billion acquisition fails in key trials advertisement Who to Know Isabella Cueto STAT Plus: ‘MAHA’ is moving into Trump’s White House. Here’s who RFK Jr. could bring along for the ride Politics Lizzy Lawrence STAT Plus: What letting RFK Jr. ‘go wild’ might mean for Trump’s FDA Matt's Take Matthew Herper STAT Plus: How will Trump’s election change the FDA? History yields some clues Reporting from the frontiers of health and medicine Back to top Company About Our Team Contact Us Careers Diversity & Inclusion Our Awards Advertise With Us STAT Brand Studio Supporters Licensing Stories Account STAT+ Group Subscriptions FAQ My Account Log In Subscribe More Events Newsletters Reports App Podcasts Community Privacy Comment Policy Terms Do Not Sell My Data ©2024 STATMap: Where flu is spiking the most in the U.S. Skip to content All Sections Subscribe Now 60°F Monday, November 11th 2024 Today's e-Edition Home Page Close MenuNews News Latest Headlines Crime and Public Safety California News National News World News Politics Education Environment Science Health Mr. Roadshow Transportation Weather Local Local News Map Bay Area San Jose Santa Clara County Peninsula San Mateo County Alameda County Santa Cruz County Sal Pizarro Obituaries Obituaries News Obituaries Place an Obituary Opinion Opinion Editorials Opinion Columnists Letters to the Editor Commentary Cartoons Election Endorsements Sports Sports San Francisco 49ers San Francisco Giants Golden State Warriors Raiders Oakland Athletics San Jose Sharks San Jose Earthquakes Bay FC College Sports Wilner Hotline High School Sports Other Sports Sports Columnists Sports Blogs Golden State Valkyries Things To Do Entertainment Things To Do Restaurants, Food and Drink Celebrities TV Streaming Movies Music Theater Lifestyle Cannabis Advice Travel Pets and Animals Comics Puzzles and Games Horoscopes Event Calendar Business Business Housing Economy Technology Best Reviews SiliconValley.com Real Estate Marketplace Marketplace Partners Content BayArea.com Subscribe Advertise Log In Logout Close Menu Get Morning Report and other email newsletters Sign Up Health | Map: Where flu is spiking the most in the U.S. Share this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to print (Opens in new window)Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Subscribe Log In Account Settings Contact Us Log Out Spoof a user Get Morning Report and other email newsletters Sign Up Subscribe Log In Search 60°F Monday, November 11th 2024 Today's e-Edition Health Latest News Crime Politics Environment Science Education Health Transportation California Nation Trending: Health | Live rain map Health | 49ers report card Health | Bay Area election results ❎ Health | Map: Congressional races Health | CCS playoff schedule Health | California gas prices NewsHealthNewsNews Based on facts, either observed and verified directly by the reporter, or reported and verified from knowledgeable sources. Health | Map: Where flu is spiking the most in the U.S. Share this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to print (Opens in new window)Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Weekly flu map (CDC). By Pueng Vongs | pvongs@bayareanewsgroup.com | Bay Area News GroupUPDATED: November 23, 2022 at 5:46 AM PSTIf you are traveling for Thanksgiving, it may be too late for an influenza shot, but it may be wise to check flu activity where you are headed.The flu season is off to an early start, and the CDC has a map that tracks hot spots in the U.S. Southern and Southeastern states have the highest number of flu cases right now, but the number of cases in California is also considered high.A closer look at the Bay Area shows that flu activity is still moderate, but health department officials expect cases to surge in the coming weeks. This is on top of already high levels of the respiratory virus RSV sending many children to hospitals in the region.Santa Clara County health officials recently announced a new data dashboard to help residents track flu risk in local wastewater. Data is collected from samples in Gilroy, Palo Alto, San Jose, and Sunnyvale.Related Articles Health | Will COVID, flu, RSV be an uninvited guest at your Thanksgiving table? Health | RSV has caused “acute surge” of pediatric patients, as flu also spreading in Santa Clara County Health | California hospitals erect tents to cope with rise in flu If you see influenza spiking in your city, the CDC advises these methods to help prevent catching the flu:– Clean your hands frequently.– Avoid touching your eyes, nose or mouth.– Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces at home, work or school, especially when someone is sick. – Get plenty of sleep, be physically active, manage your stress, drink plenty of fluids, and eat nutritious food. Originally Published: November 21, 2022 at 9:43 AM PSTShare this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to print (Opens in new window)Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Report an error Policies and Standards Contact Us Most PopularMost PopularDear Abby: I have a new baby, and I want to cut off my spoiled stepdaughterDear Abby: I have a new baby, and I want to cut off my spoiled stepdaughterMiss Manners: What could I do about the loud child in the restaurant?Miss Manners: What could I do about the loud child in the restaurant?Asking Eric: Don’t call us cute just because we’re getting marriedAsking Eric: Don't call us cute just because we're getting marriedDear Abby: Why do vegetarians think the rule doesn’t apply to them?Dear Abby: Why do vegetarians think the rule doesn't apply to them?Dear Abby: I saw her on my security camera, and now there’s all this dramaDear Abby: I saw her on my security camera, and now there's all this dramaMiss Manners: My wife says I embarrassed her at the musicalMiss Manners: My wife says I embarrassed her at the musicalKimberly Guilfoyle ‘blindsided’ by Donald Trump Jr.’s ‘dalliance’ with Palm Beach socialite: reportKimberly Guilfoyle 'blindsided' by Donald Trump Jr.'s 'dalliance' with Palm Beach socialite: reportJake Moody, Deebo Samuel explain their 49ers sideline dustupJake Moody, Deebo Samuel explain their 49ers sideline dustupPath is clear for Gov. Gavin Newsom to run for president, insiders sayPath is clear for Gov. Gavin Newsom to run for president, insiders sayThey didn’t create the homeless encampment. But one California couple just realized it’s on them to clean up.They didn’t create the homeless encampment. But one California couple just realized it’s on them to clean up. Trending Nationally Marijuana and abortion amendments failed in Florida, even with majorities. Blame pregnant pigsThese employees work 32 hours a week and get paid for 40. This is how they do it.Column: Taylor Swift’s Eras Tour just played its last US concert in Indy. Here are 5 ways it will change concert tours forever.Elon Musk, not Melania or Kimberly Guilfoyle, appears in curious new Trump family photoA bigfoot ‘sighting’ report was logged in Connecticut. Here’s what it says. More in Health Health | Dentists are pulling ‘healthy’ and treatable teeth to profit from implants, experts warn National Politics | How RFK Jr.’s health proposals would stack up in practice SUBSCRIBER ONLY Transportation | Biden put billions into transportation. Trump could roll back that historic momentum. SUBSCRIBER ONLY Economy | California gas prices could rise with toughened climate regulations 2022 November 21 News Alerts Email Newsletters Today’s e-Edition Mobile Apps Site Map Marketplace Place an Obituary Place a Real Estate Ad Lottery Contact Us Digital Access FAQ Join our Team Special Sections Sponsor a Group Get Sponsored Access Privacy Policy Accessibility Advertise With Us Network Advertising Daily Ads Place a Legal Notice Public Notices Monster.com Subscribe Member Services Manage Subscriptions The Mercury News Store Archive Search Reprints Subscribe Now Terms of Use Cookie Policy Cookie Preferences California Notice at Collection Notice of Financial Incentive Do Not Sell/Share My Personal Information Arbitration Powered by WordPress.com VIP Copyright © 2024 MediaNews Group BAY AREA'S HOME PAGE CloseManitoba parents urged to get flu shots for kids, whose vaccination rates are lowest among all age groups | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Manitoba parents urged to get flu shots for kids, whose vaccination rates are lowest among all age groups | CBC News LoadedManitobaManitoba parents urged to get flu shots for kids, whose vaccination rates are lowest among all age groupsAmid a spike in influenza cases that has prompted calls for children to get immunized, fewer Manitoba kids have been vaccinated against the seasonal virus than any other age group.Incoming vice-president of Manitoba Pediatric Society says he's seeing slower uptake than in past years.Alana Cole · CBC News · Posted: Nov 25, 2022 6:00 AM EST | Last Updated: November 25, 2022Pediatrician Dr. William Li said right now, he offers the flu shot to eligible patients at every appointment. (Gary Solilak/ CBC)Social SharingAmid a spike in influenza cases that has prompted calls for children to get immunized, the number of Manitoba kids vaccinated against the seasonal virus remains low. Dr. William Li, a pediatrician and the incoming vice-president of the Manitoba Pediatric Society, said he's been seeing slower uptake on the flu shot at his own practice."Across the board, specifically from a pediatrics perspective, it's been a little bit slower than what we've typically seen in the past," he said."I think it's important for us to get out there and make sure that we're making the public aware that we are seeing flu and we're seeing severe outcomes with flu."The emergency department at Winnipeg's Children's Hospital has seen three times as many kids testing positive for influenza than normal for this time of year, the hospital's medical director and section head of pediatric emergency medicine said Tuesday. Influenza and RSV, or respiratory syncytial virus, are among the viruses that have led to what's been described as unprecedented numbers of sick kids at the children's ER in recent weeks.Unprecedented volume of kids showing up in Winnipeg emergency department with flu, RSVThis Manitoba mom's baby was hospitalized with RSV. Now she's warning of the risk from the virusThe Manitoba Pediatric Society is encouraging families to make sure all eligible kids six months old and up get the flu shot, which Li said is one of the best ways to protect children.Dr. Joss Reimer, the chief medical officer for the Winnipeg Regional Health Authority, also urged families to get kids vaccinated during a news conference on wait times Thursday."A lot of parents don't take their kids in for an influenza vaccine and right now we really encourage you to do that," she said, adding some pharmacies can offer vaccines to kids down to the age of two.But so far, the number of young Manitobans who have been vaccinated is low.According to data provided by the province showing seasonal influenza vaccination coverage by age group, 6.1 per cent of Manitoba children aged four and under had been immunized for the flu as of Nov. 16. For kids age five to 14, that number was 6.6 per cent. Updated numbers released Friday in the province's weekly COVID-19 and influenza surveillance report have a slightly different age breakdown. That report said as of Nov.19, flu shot uptake for children age four and under was 8.7 per cent. For kids age five to 17, it was 8.5 per cent. Li said he's already had patients land in hospital due to the flu this season. He's recommending all eligible children get the flu shot. (Gary Solilak/CBC)Li suggests one reason for the slow uptake may be because so much of the recent focus has been on COVID-19."I think a lot of it is fuelled from the fact that we haven't seen a lot of flu and so it hasn't been really a very high topic of discussion in the last couple of years."Data from the two full flu seasons leading up to the pandemic shows a considerably higher rate of vaccinations for children under the age of 15 than had been reported so far this year, up to Nov. 16.It should be noted, however, there's still time for people to get the flu shot this season.The Manitoba government's provincial flu shot campaign runs from mid-October until early December, according to a provincial spokesperson. This year's ad campaign includes "billboards, digital ads, social media ads, print, radio and poster boards in City of Winnipeg facilities," they said. But some health experts say there is more the province could do to increase uptake. Dr. Philippe Lagacé-Wiens is a medical microbiologist and physician at St. Boniface Hospital (Submitted by Philippe R. S. Lagacé-Wiens)Dr. Philippe Lagacé-Wiens, a medical microbiologist and physician at St. Boniface Hospital, said he'd like to see the province ramp up its messaging about why it's important for kids to get vaccinated. There's often a perception that the flu isn't serious, he said. "It can certainly be quite severe," said Lagacé-Wiens. "It can knock out kids and young adolescents just like it can knock out older people for days with high fever and cough." "It's not a mild illness, it's not a cold, and I think that messaging needs to go out. Especially with younger kids too, it can be worse than COVID, and we had no trouble, you know, making sure our kids got vaccinated for COVID." Absenteeism rate soars to 20% in Winnipeg's largest school division as viruses take toll on studentsHe said there can also be a perception that the flu vaccines don't work. Lagacé-Wiens explained while there are years when the shot isn't a good match for the virus circulating, data he's seen so far suggests that's not the case this year. Even when it doesn't reduce infections, it helps reduce the severity of illness, he said. Souradet Shaw is an epidemiologist and assistant professor at the University of Manitoba. (Shelley Shaw)Epidemiologist Souradet Shaw said he believes public health is likely already taking steps toward more targeted interventions.But he'd like to see "more concerted efforts to bring the flu vaccine to the community, coupled with campaigns advertising the availability of the flu vaccine in community settings" sooner than later, he said by email.Shaw, who is also an assistant professor at the University of Manitoba, said in addition to "obvious things like in-school clinics," he'd like to see drop-in clinics at shopping malls "and other family-friendly settings, such as community centres" considered.Shaw added he'd especially like to see those measures taken in areas with historically low uptake, or where there might be more people vulnerable to the flu. He points to community-led clinics held during the COVID-19 pandemic and vaccines being offered at shopping malls during H1N1 as examples. "In a nutshell, make it easy for people to get their flu vaccines by bringing it to them."Manitoba parents urged to get flu shots for kids2 years agoDuration 2:29The Manitoba Pediatric Society encourages families to make sure all eligible children six months of age and up get the flu shot. According to provincial data, only 6.1 per cent of Manitoba children under four have been immunized for the flu, as of last Wednesday.ABOUT THE AUTHORAlana ColeReporter, CBC ManitobaAlana Cole is a reporter at CBC Manitoba. Email: alana.cole@cbc.caCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowEffects of vaccine hesitancy News All NewsPNP CornerAAP NewsMediaAround the PracticeCure ConnectionsExpert InterviewsInsightsMedical World NewsPeer ExchangePeers & PerspectivesPodcastsWebinarsPuzzlerPublicationsContemporary Pediatrics JournalSupplements And Featured PublicationsCME/CEResourcesHandoutsJob BoardSponsoredConferencesConference CoverageConference ListingPartnershipsSubscribeEditorialEditorial Advisory BoardWriter’s GuidelinesReference GuidelinesMeet the EditorsChoose SpecialtyAllergy, Immunology, and ENTAllergy, Immunology, and ENTAllergy, Immunology, and ENTCardiologyCardiologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyEmergency MedicineEndocrinologyEndocrinologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyOB/GYNOB/GYNPainPharmacologyPharmacologyPractice ImprovementPractice ImprovementRespiratoryRespiratoryRespiratoryRheumatologyChoose SpecialtyAllergy, Immunology, and ENTAllergy, Immunology, and ENTAllergy, Immunology, and ENTCardiologyCardiologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyEmergency MedicineEndocrinologyEndocrinologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesInfectious DiseasesMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthMental, Behavioral and Development HealthNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyOB/GYNOB/GYNPainPharmacologyPharmacologyPractice ImprovementPractice ImprovementRespiratoryRespiratoryRespiratoryRheumatologyNews AAP NewsMediaPuzzlerPublicationsCME/CEResourcesConferencesPartnershipsSubscribeEditorialAdvertisementEffects of vaccine hesitancyNovember 24, 2022By Celeste Krewson, Assistant EditorArticle Bradley Warady, MD, pediatric nephrologist and researcher at Children’s Mercy Kansas City, discusses the causes of vaccine hesitancy and the effects of vaccine hesitancy on public health. In a Q&A, Bradley Warady, MD, pediatric nephrologist and researcher at Children’s Mercy Kansas City, discussed the rise in parental hesitancy toward vaccines, along with the effects this will have on public health.Q: How has vaccine hesitancy affected vaccination rates in the past 2 years? What health outcomes will this lead to?A: In 2019, the World Health Organization listed vaccine hesitancy as one of the top 10 threats to global health. Vaccine hesitancy has always been a concern, but it has become increasingly prevalent and has continued to rise across the United States, especially with the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemicsparked conversation about vaccine hesitancy in general, and the low vaccination rates across the country reflect a highly visible increase in vaccine hesitancy. Research has shown that parents who reported hesitancy to other general childhood vaccines or influenza vaccines were also less likely to vaccinate their child against COVID-19. Information from a phone survey conducted in May 2022 showed that 33% of parents reported that they would not give their child the COVID-19 vaccine.Vaccine hesitancy as it relates to childhood vaccines has been linked to significant outbreaks, so it is a public health priority to increase trust in vaccines. Failure to vaccinate places children at risk for otherwise preventable infections, and a variety of associated complications. Vaccine hesitancy and refusal is of particular concern for immunocompromised children, such as transplant recipients or those with cancer, who are at an increased risk for serious infection because of the medications they must receive. Q: How has social media contributed to the increase in vaccine hesitancy?A: Social media facilitates the rapid spread of information. While it allows for the dissemination of useful and accurate information, it also allows for widespread misinformation regarding vaccine efficacy and safety, which has likely contributed to growing vaccine hesitancy and opposition. Thus, while there is overwhelming evidence that the COVID-19 vaccine is safe and effective, vaccine hesitancy persists.Q: How has parents’ hesitance toward the COVID-19 vaccine affected their willingness to have their children vaccinated against other diseases, such as influenza?A: There is strong evidence that COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy has affected parents’ decisions about other childhood vaccines. For example, data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found that between 2020 and 2021, there was a decrease in influenza vaccine rates for children. This is particularly relevant today with the exceptionally high numbers of children that are currently being seen with influenza.Q: How can healthcare providers help reduce parents’ vaccine hesitancy?A: The main reasons behind parents’ vaccine hesitancy are concerns about vaccine safety, variation in recommendations provided by healthcare professionals, and the need for more information. In turn, health care providers should make every effort to share consistent, clear, and pertinent information about the COVID-19 vaccine with their patients and parents. Health care providers should also use all medical encounters as an opportunity to provide vaccine-related education and answer vaccine related questions. At the same time, the medical community can work together to further explore and identify barriers to vaccination so that those barrierscan be addressed in a thoughtful and effective manner.Recent VideosRelated Content MenACWY program associated with reduced invasive meningococcal disease among adolescentsJoshua Fitch, Senior Editor November 7th 2024ArticleThe study outcomes were estimated IMD cases and deaths averted by MenACWY vaccination in adolescents and adults aged 11 to 23 years. What's going on with polio, monkeypox, and COVID-19Miranda HesterAugust 19th 2022PodcastThe news is full of stories about monkeypox, the recent changes to COVID-19 guidance, and the return of polio cases. What do clinicians need to know?Office preparation for fall vaccine administration: Are you ready?Donna Hallas, PhD, PPCNP-BC, CPNP, PMHS, FAANP, FAAN October 24th 2024ArticleDonna Hallas, PPCNP-BC, CPNP, PMHS, FAANP, FAAN, highlights key takeaways from our October Vaccine issue of Contemporary Pediatrics. What Omicron could mean for the pandemic Miranda HesterJanuary 7th 2022PodcastContemporary Pediatrics sat down with Tina Q. Tan, MD, FAAP, FIDSA, FPIDS, to discuss what's known about the variant. She also discusses the latest on the vaccine for children aged younger than 5 years.Study shows dengue vaccine is safe and effectiveLaura Massaro October 11th 2024ArticleOverall, 2 doses of TAK-003 successfully induced the production of neutralizing antibodies against all 4 dengue serotypes in at least 90% of adults, children, and adolescents, regardless of whether they were seronegative or seropositive at baseline.ACIP recommends ≥1 updated COVID-19 vaccine booster for all children, adolescentsKevin KunzmannSeptember 11th 2024ArticleThe CDC committee has set new recommendations based on children's age, vaccination status, and overall immunity health, for the 2024 - 2025 period.Related Content MenACWY program associated with reduced invasive meningococcal disease among adolescentsJoshua Fitch, Senior Editor November 7th 2024ArticleThe study outcomes were estimated IMD cases and deaths averted by MenACWY vaccination in adolescents and adults aged 11 to 23 years. What's going on with polio, monkeypox, and COVID-19Miranda HesterAugust 19th 2022PodcastThe news is full of stories about monkeypox, the recent changes to COVID-19 guidance, and the return of polio cases. What do clinicians need to know?Office preparation for fall vaccine administration: Are you ready?Donna Hallas, PhD, PPCNP-BC, CPNP, PMHS, FAANP, FAAN October 24th 2024ArticleDonna Hallas, PPCNP-BC, CPNP, PMHS, FAANP, FAAN, highlights key takeaways from our October Vaccine issue of Contemporary Pediatrics. What Omicron could mean for the pandemic Miranda HesterJanuary 7th 2022PodcastContemporary Pediatrics sat down with Tina Q. Tan, MD, FAAP, FIDSA, FPIDS, to discuss what's known about the variant. She also discusses the latest on the vaccine for children aged younger than 5 years.Study shows dengue vaccine is safe and effectiveLaura Massaro October 11th 2024ArticleOverall, 2 doses of TAK-003 successfully induced the production of neutralizing antibodies against all 4 dengue serotypes in at least 90% of adults, children, and adolescents, regardless of whether they were seronegative or seropositive at baseline.ACIP recommends ≥1 updated COVID-19 vaccine booster for all children, adolescentsKevin KunzmannSeptember 11th 2024ArticleThe CDC committee has set new recommendations based on children's age, vaccination status, and overall immunity health, for the 2024 - 2025 period.About UsAdvertiseContact UsEditorialJob BoardTerms and ConditionsPrivacyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationContact Info2 Commerce Drive Cranbury, NJ 08512609-716-7777© 2024 MJH Life Sciences All rights reserved.Flu rising sharply in Canada, Dr. Theresa Tam says | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Flu rising sharply in Canada, Dr. Theresa Tam says | CBC News LoadedHealthFlu rising sharply in Canada, Dr. Theresa Tam saysFlu is rising sharply in Canada as another respiratory virus that was hitting young children starts to decline, Canada's chief public health officer says.Imports of children's pain- and fever-reducing medications starting to arrive in pharmaciesAmina Zafar · CBC News · Posted: Nov 25, 2022 1:11 PM EST | Last Updated: November 25, 2022Sharp rise in flu cases sending more kids to hospital2 years agoDuration 2:00Hospitals in Canada are reporting a sharp rise in the number of children being admitted for the flu as the supply of children's pain and fever medication remains spotty.Social SharingFlu is rising sharply in Canada as another respiratory virus that was hitting young children starts to decline, Canada's chief public health officer says.Dr. Theresa Tam told a briefing in Ottawa on Friday that since last week's update, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity has levelled off somewhat and is likely to stay elevated for weeks."At present, influenza is showing a steep rise in activity with most surveillance indicators increasing and all trending above expected levels for this time of the year," Tam said.Both RSV and flu are thought to be more prevalent after more than two years of precautions, such as physical distancing and masking during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, were lifted."We actually had very few reports of influenza in the last two-plus years, so I think that's partly the driver," Tam said. Flu is increasing faster than "what we've seen in most of any past season that I'm aware of."Children's medication on the wayHealth Minister Jean-Yves Duclos also said on Friday that an extra 500,000 units of kids' pain relievers imported from Australia is expected over the next few weeks for hospital pharmacies.That's on top of a previously announced one million bottles of acetaminophen, sold under the brand name Tylenol, and ibuprofen, sold as Advil and Motrin, arriving now on the shelves of community pharmacies, he said.WATCH | Experimental universal flu shot harnesses mRNA technology: New mNRA vaccine shows promise for universal flu protection2 years agoDuration 2:02A new mRNA vaccine that targets all known flu strains is showing promise in early animal trials, opening the door to the possibility of a universal shot that could theoretically protect against future strains of influenza."In some places, the shelves already show those units received," Duclos told reporters. "We expect that in the next week the availability of those doses will be quite clear in shelves across community pharmacies across the country."Domestic production of pain relievers for young children is also up to meet increased demand, Duclos said.Shelita Dattani, vice-president of pharmacy affairs for the Neighbourhood Pharmacy Association of Canada, said pharmacies are starting to receive liquid acetaminophen. AnalysisKids are getting hit hard by respiratory viruses. Here's what scientists know — and what they don'tWhy 'stay home when sick' matters so much right now"Pharmacies across the country are starting to receive it depending on the chain or banner," Dattani said in an email.Most pharmacies are keeping the products behind the counter with purchase limits, she said."Don't ask for more than what you need," Dattani recommended. Northwest Territories Chief Public Health Officer Dr. Kami Kandola received her annual flu vaccine at the Yellowknife vaccine clinic in October. Influenza has arrived early and has increased sharply this year in Canada, officials say. (Jenna Dulewich/CBC)Rimon El-Serafi, a pharmacist in Toronto, said he has about seven bottles of liquid Children's Advil for those aged two to 12, which he expects will be sold quickly.El-Serafi said more adults of all ages are also coming in for flu immunizations, saying they want to protect family and friends. "We are getting quite a bit of interest on a daily basis."Children's hospitals overwhelmedChildren's hospitals across the country have been slammed with admissions from a mix of RSV, influenza and COVID-19, which is also contributing to staffing shortages, long waits in emergency departments and for beds, and the cancellation of scheduled surgeries in some places.As families make holiday plans, Tam reminded people that flu vaccines are available across the country for those six months and older.Dr. Brian Conway, medical director of the Vancouver Infectious Diseases Centre, said children are at significant risk for flu since the community-based immunity that would have occurred in the previous couple of years does not exist."I think the respiratory virus season will be the most challenging since before the pandemic," Conway said.What should I know about this flu season?Habits such as handwashing, covering coughs and sneezes, and wearing a mask reduce the likelihood of getting a respiratory virus such as flu, RSV and the virus that causes COVID-19. Health officials say this is particularly important given the extremely stretched health system, including pediatric hospitals.On Friday, Quebec announced it will expand free flu vaccines for all. Until now, it was the only Canadian province that did not regularly offer the vaccine free of charge to all its residents.With files from CBC's Lauren PelleyCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated StoriesAnalysis Kids are getting hit hard by respiratory viruses. Here's what scientists know — and what they don't Why 'stay home when sick' matters so much right now What should I know about this flu season? Flu shot to be free for all Quebecers starting today Manitoba parents urged to get flu shots for kids, whose vaccination rates are lowest among all age groupsAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowSnow geese may have bird flu in Morgan County – Julesburg Advocate Skip to content All Sections Subscribe Now 51°F Monday, November 11th 2024 Daily e-Edition Home Page Close Menue-Edition News News Crime & Public Safety Weather Sports Business Business Best Reviews Lifestyles Local Events Opinion Obituaries Obituaries Place an Obituary Marketplace Classifieds Real Estate Jobs Special Sections Advertise With Us Submit Sponsored Content Public Notices Close Menu Snow geese may have bird flu in Morgan County Share this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) Subscribe Account Settings Contact Us Log Out Spoof a user Subscribe Search 51°F Monday, November 11th 2024 Daily e-Edition News Sports Business Lifestyles Obituaries Opinion Marketplace Local Events Local News Snow geese may have bird flu in Morgan County CPW reports one presumptive positive test result has been receivedShare this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) Snow Geese in migration near Ashland, Oregon, Fall 2022. (Pepper Trail/Courtesy photo) By Brian Porter | bporter@prairiemountainmedia.com | The Fort Morgan Times, Sterling Journal-AdvocateUPDATED: November 23, 2022 at 4:47 PM MSTSeveral snow geese in Morgan County may have been infected with highly pathogenic avian influenza, according to reports received by Colorado Parks & Wildlife officers.As a result of an investigation into the reports and through testing with the CPW’s Wildlife Health Lab in Fort Collins, a presumptive positive test result has been received, the CPW reported in a press release.The affected birds are believed to be located in or near the towns of Brush and Fort Morgan.“Now that we’ve had a presumptive positive test, we’re asking members of the public who find dead snow geese in Morgan County to presume it’s highly pathogenic avian influenza,” said CPW Wildlife Pathologist Karen Fox. “CPW and the Colorado Department of Agriculture are asking the public not to touch any dead birds they find.”The CPW and Colorado Department of Agriculture are continuing to investigate to determine the severity of the HPAI outbreak.Residents observing sick birds may call the Avian Health Hotline at Colorado State University at 970-297-4008. Dead birds should be reported to the CSU Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory in Fort Collins for HPAI Testing at 970-297-4008 or 970-297-1281. In the case of multiple domestic sick birds or multiple abnormal domestic bird deaths, call the Colorado State Veterinarian’s Office at 303-869-9130 or the USDA-Veterinary Services Colorado Office at 303-231-5385.If you find three or more dead wild birds in a specific area within a two-week period or if you see live birds showing clinical signs of disease, contact your local Colorado Parks and Wildlife office. During the holiday or after hours, contact Colorado State Patrol at 719-544-2424 for the on-call wildlife officer.“Some of the snow geese in Morgan County have shown signs of HPAI that include being too comfortable around humans, stumbling when trying to walk, and shaking,” said CPW Area Wildlife Manager Todd Schmidt. “But birds can be infected and not show any signs at all.” Most wild birds that are infected with avian influenza viruses do not show signs of disease, the press release reads. However, HPAI strains can occasionally cause disease in some wildlife species including swans, diving ducks, gulls, geese, grebes, raptors, vultures, cranes and terns. In these birds, typical symptoms include swimming in circles, head tilt and lack of coordination.Game bird species such as turkeys, grouse, and quail may also be susceptible to HPAI with signs more similar to poultry such as swelling of the head, diarrhea, moving slowly, ruffled feathers, respiratory signs, and not eating. Some affected wild birds are found dead.For backyard or commercial poultry, HPAI is a very contagious, fatal animal disease that can decimate a flock in less than 48 hours, the press release reads. Domestic flock owners should protect their birds through good biosecurity practices, monitor flocks for signs of illness, and report suspicious disease or mortality events to the State Veterinarian’s Office at 303-869-9130.Waterfowl hunters should take steps to minimize the risk of spreading the virus, such as not handling or eating sick game, field dressing the game, and wearing personal protective equipment while handling and cleaning game, the CPW press release reads. When finished handling game, wash hands thoroughly with soap or disinfectant, and clean knives, equipment, and surfaces that come in contact with game. Do not eat, drink, or smoke while handling animals. All game should be thoroughly cooked to an internal temperature of 165 degrees Fahrenheit before being consumed.In rare cases, avian influenza can pass to humans, especially those exposed to sick birds, the CPW press release reads. Hunters are advised to monitor their health for any signs of flu-like symptoms within a week of handling birds. Anyone who feels ill, should visit their health care provider. Originally Published: November 23, 2022 at 4:41 PM MSTShare this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) Most PopularMost PopularOver 300 youth leaders ‘Fight the Funk’ at student-led summitOver 300 youth leaders ‘Fight the Funk’ at student-led summitSports betting can be a gamble for your financial healthSports betting can be a gamble for your financial healthWhich laminator should I get?Which laminator should I get?Student housing costs are rising. Here’s how to lower your billStudent housing costs are rising. Here’s how to lower your billUS health officials identify more E. coli cases linked to McDonald’s and inspect an onion grower in WashingtonUS health officials identify more E. coli cases linked to McDonald’s and inspect an onion grower in WashingtonCash or credit card refunds now required if flights are canceled or significantly delayedCash or credit card refunds now required if flights are canceled or significantly delayedOver 300 youth leaders ‘Fight the Funk’ at student-led summitOver 300 youth leaders ‘Fight the Funk’ at student-led summitStudent loan ‘financial hardship’ forgiveness: new details revealedStudent loan ‘financial hardship’ forgiveness: new details revealedWill glucose monitors become the next wellness accessory?Will glucose monitors become the next wellness accessory? Trending Nationally Marijuana and abortion amendments failed in Florida, even with majorities. Blame pregnant pigsThese employees work 32 hours a week and get paid for 40. This is how they do it.Column: Taylor Swift’s Eras Tour just played its last US concert in Indy. Here are 5 ways it will change concert tours forever.Elon Musk, not Melania or Kimberly Guilfoyle, appears in curious new Trump family photoA bigfoot ‘sighting’ report was logged in Connecticut. Here’s what it says. More in News National Politics | Elon Musk’s PAC spent an estimated $200 million to help elect Trump, AP source says South Carolina lab recaptures 5 more escaped monkeys but 13 are still loose Indiana man is found guilty of murder in the 2017 killings of 2 teenage girls Lou Donaldson, jazz saxophonist who blended many influences, dead at 98 2022 November 23 Subscribe Sign Up For Newsletters Submit Weather e-Edition Contact Us Archives Work With Us RSS Feeds About Us Privacy Policy Accessibility Public Notices Sitemap Advertise With Us MNG Network Advertising Adtaxi Solutions Prairie Mountain Media My Town Colorado Fort Morgan Times Sterling Journal-Advocate Akron News-Reporter Brush News-Tribune South Platte Sentinel Greeley Tribune Subscribe Now Terms of Use Cookie Policy Cookie Preferences California Notice at Collection Notice of Financial Incentive Do Not Sell/Share My Personal Information Arbitration MediaNews Group Powered by WordPress.com VIP Copyright © 2024 MediaNews Group CloseMice Given Processed Foods More Susceptible to Flu | Weather.com AdvertisementSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelpThe Weather ChannelType at least three characters to start auto complete. Recently searched locations will be displayed if there is no search query. The first option will be automatically selected. Use up and down arrows to change selection. Use escape to clear.Search City or PostcodeSearchrecentsClear AllYou have no recent locationsGlobeIN°CArrow down°F°CHybridMetric - C / millimeters / km / kmh / millibarsAmericasArrow DownAntigua and Barbuda | EnglishArgentina | EspañolBahamas | EnglishBarbados | EnglishBelize | EnglishBolivia | EspañolBrazil | PortuguêsCanada | EnglishCanada | FrançaisChile | EspañolColombia | EspañolCosta Rica | EspañolDominica | EnglishDominican Republic | EspañolEcuador | EspañolEl Salvador | EspañolGrenada | EnglishGuatemala | EspañolGuyana | EnglishHaiti | FrançaisHonduras | EspañolJamaica | EnglishMexico | EspañolNicaragua | EspañolPanama | EspañolPanama | EnglishParaguay | EspañolPeru | EspañolSt. Kitts and Nevis | EnglishSt. Lucia | EnglishSt. Vincent and the Grenadines | EnglishSuriname | NederlandsTrinidad and Tobago | EnglishUruguay | EspañolUnited States | EnglishUnited States | EspañolVenezuela | EspañolAfricaArrow DownAlgeria | العربيةAlgeria | FrançaisAngola | PortuguêsBenin | FrançaisBurkina Faso | FrançaisBurundi | FrançaisCameroon | FrançaisCameroon | EnglishCape Verde | PortuguêsCentral African Republic | FrançaisChad | FrançaisChad | العربيةComoros | FrançaisComoros | العربيةDemocratic Republic of the Congo | FrançaisRepublic of Congo | FrançaisCôte d'Ivoire | FrançaisDjibouti | FrançaisDjibouti | العربيةEgypt | العربيةEquatorial Guinea | EspañolEritrea | العربيةGabon | FrançaisGambia | EnglishGhana | EnglishGuinea | FrançaisGuinea-Bissau | PortuguêsKenya | EnglishLesotho | EnglishLiberia | EnglishLibya | العربيةMadagascar | FrançaisMali | FrançaisMauritania | العربيةMauritius | EnglishMauritius | FrançaisMorocco | العربيةMorocco | FrançaisMozambique | PortuguêsNamibia | EnglishNiger | FrançaisNigeria | EnglishRwanda | FrançaisRwanda | EnglishSao Tome and Principe | PortuguêsSenegal | FrançaisSierra Leone | EnglishSomalia | العربيةSouth Africa | EnglishSouth Sudan | EnglishSudan | العربيةSwaziland | EnglishTanzania | EnglishTogo | FrançaisTunisia | العربيةUganda | EnglishAsia PacificArrow DownAustralia | EnglishBangladesh | বাংলাBrunei | Bahasa MelayuChina | 中文Hong Kong SAR | 中文East Timor | PortuguêsFiji | EnglishIndia (English) | EnglishIndia (Hindi) | हिन्दीIndonesia | Bahasa IndonesiaJapan | 日本語Kiribati | EnglishSouth Korea | 한국어Kyrgyzstan | РусскийMalaysia | Bahasa MelayuMarshall Islands | EnglishMicronesia | EnglishNew Zealand | EnglishPalau | EnglishPhilippines | EnglishPhilippines | TagalogSamoa | EnglishSingapore | EnglishSingapore | 中文Solomon Islands | EnglishTaiwan | 中文Thailand | ไทยTonga | EnglishTuvalu | EnglishVanuatu | EnglishVanuatu | FrançaisVietnam | Tiếng ViệtEuropeArrow DownAndorra | CatalàAndorra | FrançaisAustria | DeutschBelarus | РусскийBelgium | DutchBelgium | FrançaisBosnia and Herzegovina | HrvatskiCroatia | HrvatskiCyprus | ΕλληνικάCzech Republic | ČeštinaDenmark | DanskEstonia | РусскийEstonia | EestiFinland | SuomiFrance | FrançaisGermany | DeutschGreece | ΕλληνικάHungary | MagyarIreland | EnglishItaly | ItalianoLiechtenstein | DeutschLuxembourg | FrançaisMalta | EnglishMonaco | FrançaisNetherlands | NederlandsNorway | NorskPoland | PolskiPortugal | PortuguêsRomania | RomânăRussia | РусскийSan Marino | ItalianoSlovakia | SlovenčinaSpain | EspañolSpain | CatalàSweden | SvenskaSwitzerland | DeutschTurkey | TurkçeUkraine | УкраїнськаUnited Kingdom | EnglishState of Vatican City (Holy See) | ItalianoMiddle EastArrow DownBahrain | العربيةIran | فارسىIraq | العربيةIsrael | עִבְרִיתJordan | العربيةKuwait | العربيةLebanon | العربيةOman | العربيةPakistan | اردوPakistan | EnglishQatar | العربيةSaudi Arabia | العربيةSyria | العربيةUnited Arab Emirates | العربيةForecastTodayHourly10-dayWeekendMonthlyScienceScienceSpaceMapsMapsEnvironmentBiodiversityClimate ChangePollutionWeather NewsForecasts and NewsMonsoonVideosActivitiesTravel and LifestyleHealthAllergy TrackerCOVID-19 DashboardCOVID-19 NewsAir Quality ForecastHealth NewsPrivacyData RightsPrivacy PolicyArrow LeftArrow RightTodayHourly10 DayWeekendMonthlyRadarVideoVideoMore ForecastsMoreArrow downSpecial ForecastsAllergy TrackerAir Quality ForecastAdvertisementScienceMice On Processed Food Diets Are More Susceptible to Influenza Than Those Given Grain-Based Foods: StudyBy Ashmita Gupta22 November, 2022TWC IndiaRepresentational Image (sacphotography/via Canva)You know how every time you fell sick, your mom would insist on ghar ka khana and prohibit any takeout or processed foods? And we believed it was just an old wives’ tale that eating whole foods cured all illnesses. But now, a new study conducted on mice suggests that our mothers might’ve been onto something!Led by a team from the University of Sydney, this research found that lab mice are more likely to survive a flu infection if fed grain-based foods rather than processed food. As convenient as processed foods are, this comfort comes at a price. In the last few years, the many evils of these food items have come to light. But this study, in particular, serves to shed more light on the role of diet in illness recovery.Some studies have shown, for example, that caloric density and the concentration of nutrients consumed while recovering from an infection can have a major impact on the severity of the infection. Through this study, researchers found evidence suggesting that other characteristics of food can also play a role in illness recovery — at least in mice. The research originally aimed to analyse how mammals like mice fight off influenza infections. During the experiments, the team fed two groups of lab mice food thought to be equivalent in nutritional value (and hence unlikely to have different impacts on disease recovery). However, they didn’t realise that the meals differed in composition, with one group’s diet mainly consisting of grains and the other a highly processed diet. AdvertisementThen, both groups were infected with the influenza virus and were kept on the same diets they had prior to being infected. And to their surprise, they found that all of those fed the highly processed diet died. Further, those fed the processed diet failed to regain the weight lost due to the illness too. On the other hand, the mice on the grain-based diet began regaining weight within ten days of the initial infection, and all of them recovered!It is worth noting that prior studies by the team had shown that mice fed either diet when not battling an infection displayed little difference in health or behaviour. The researchers highlight that the difference in survival was not due to differences in an immune response, and instead had more to do with recovery issues. The mice on the processed food diet wound up taking less nutrients than those given grains. Researchers also found some evidence suggesting IFN-γ, a signalling protein, played a role in the different outcomes. T​he findings of this study have been highlighted in Cell Reports and can be accessed here. **For weather, science, space, and COVID-19 updates on the go, download The Weather Channel App (on Android and iOS store). It's free! The Weather Company’s primary journalistic mission is to report on breaking weather news, the environment and the importance of science to our lives.AdvertisementTop VideoVideoWATCH: Latest India's Weekend Weather Forecast: November 9-10VideoWATCH: When Hunting In Groups, Marlins Change Colours to Coordinate Attacks!VideoWHO Reports Nearly 10,000 COVID-19 Deaths Worldwide and 42% Surge in Hospital AdmissionsVideoArctic Report Card Highlights Unprecedented Warmth, Melting, and Declining Sea IceRead MoreAdvertisementAdvertisementThe Weather ChannelWeather UndergroundFeedbackWeather APINews RoomTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyAccessibility StatementData VendorsGeorgiaeSSENTIAL AccessibilityWe recognise our responsibility to use data and technology for good. We may use or share your data with our data vendors. Take control of your data.Data Rights© The Weather Company, LLC 2024Hidden Weather Icon MasksHidden Weather Icon SymbolsFlu shot: What we know about this year’s vaccine and ‘virulent’ dominant strain - National | Globalnews.ca SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT In the news Remembrance Day Counterfeit Coins University Shooting Cuba Earthquake Global News Home Subscribe Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark Live Search Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark GlobalNews home WatchWorldCanadaLocalPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News Flu shot: What we know about this year’s vaccine and ‘virulent’ dominant strain Click to return to homepage Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Full Menu Search Menu Home Trending Watch Local Menu Menu Close Submit Search Topics WatchWorldCanadaLocalChange locationPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News TV Programs Global NationalWest BlockThe Morning ShowVideo CentreMore… Connect Email alertsAlexaBreaking News Alerts from Global NewsLicense ContentContact Us National Change Close Change Close BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram Go Back Close Local your local region National BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Calendar Close Calendar Close All event types Comedy Festival Food Health Music Sports Theatre Virtual Other Search Close Submit search Quick Search Trending Now Add Global News to Home Screen Close Instructions: Press the share icon on your browser Select Add to Home Screen Press Add Comments Close comments menu Want to discuss? Please read our Commenting Policy first. Video link Headline link Advertisement Close X Click to scroll back to top of the page Backto top Health Flu shot: What we know about this year’s vaccine and ‘virulent’ dominant strain By Teresa Wright Global News Posted November 23, 2022 4:32 pm Updated November 23, 2022 4:47 pm 6 min read If you get Global News from Instagram or Facebook - that will be changing. Find out how you can still connect with us. Hide message bar 5:12 Canada declares flu epidemic WATCH: Canada has entered a flu epidemic, according a recent statement from Canada's national public health agency. – Nov 23, 2022 Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Descrease article font size Increase article font size With flu activity in Canada reaching well above typical levels, infectious diseases experts are concerned about lower uptake of the flu shot, especially since this year’s dominant strain can cause more severe illness. The flu shot can be especially beneficial this season, they say, as this year’s vaccine contains protection against the strain of flu proving most dominant, which is not always the case.As of Friday, the percentage of positive influenza cases rose to 16 per cent from 6.3 per cent the previous week, Canada’s chief medical health officers, Dr. Theresa Tam, said in a briefing last week.This is more than three times the seasonal threshold of five per cent, which prompted the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to declare the beginning of a national influenza “epidemic” last week. Story continues below advertisement The vast majority of flu cases detected and lab tested this year so far have been caused by a strain of the influenza A virus known as H3N2. A very small percentage – just three per cent to date – were the influenza A strain known as H1N1, according to FluWatch data released weekly by PHAC.Both of these strains are included in this year’s flu vaccine, which also includes two isolates of influenza B virus.International experts convened by the World Health Organization before every flu season provide advice, based on evidence from global surveillance, on what types of flu viruses are expected to cause the most illness and therefore should be included in the seasonal flu vaccine. More on Health More videos With B.C. teen sick in hospital with suspected bird flu, what should parents know? Bird flu: What we know about Canada’s 1st human case detected in B.C. From 300 lbs to 100K races: How this mom of 4 took up ultramarathons Mpox cases in Congo’s epicentre may be ‘plateauing’: WHO Setting new holiday rules November fall prevention month H5 avian flu detected in teen Health Matters: Walking pneumonia cases spike in Canada & Mounjaro injections for weight loss That the most dominant strain circulating this year is included in this year’s flu vaccine is both good news and bad news for Canadians this flu season, says Matthew Miller, director of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University.“The good news is that the vaccine is a good match. The bad news is that H3N2 strains tend to cause more severe infections than H1N1 strains,” Miller said.Many Canadian physicians and infectious diseases experts have been bracing for a challenging flu season after observing Australia’s experience with the virus earlier this year. Story continues below advertisement Australia’s flu season is often used by experts to predict what could happen in Canada, and this year that country saw a significant rise in flu cases which peaked earlier than usual after two years of almost no flu cases amid COVID-19 safety measures. Get weekly health news Receive the latest medical news and health information delivered to you every Sunday. Sign up for weekly health newsletter Sign Up By providing your email address, you have read and agree to Global News' Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy. This led to the worst flu season in Australia in five years – a situation exacerbated by the H3N2 strain that is known as being more “risky” for its greater potential to land vulnerable patients in hospital, says Dr. Samir Sinha, director of geriatrics at Sinai Health and the University Health Network in Toronto.That’s why Sinha is urging all Canadians to get their flu shot this year – to protect not only themselves, but also those most likely to experience complications and death. 6:31 Triple threat of illness this winter prompts calls for masking from experts “When the influenza remains the second leading vaccine-preventable cause of death in Canada and it kills thousands of mostly older people every year, there is a real good reason why we’re trying to get our vaccination levels to where the public health agency has set a target for the last decade of at least 80 per cent,” Sinha said. Story continues below advertisement “But we’ve never reached that. We’ve only made it to 70 per cent in our best year among older people.”Health Canada says it will not have estimates of how effective the flu shot was for the 2022-23 season, or how many Canadians received their vaccines, until February or March. Related News Manitoba health officials say more flu shots would help ease strain on health care Nova Scotia NDP calling for free high dose flu shots for seniors The agency did note, however, that last year only 39 per cent of all adults in Canada got a flu shot. This was similar to 2020 which saw just 40 per cent vaccine coverage for influenza among adults in Canada.Anecdotally, some physicians and experts who study vaccine trends say they’re noticing uptake of the flu vaccine is low so far this year.“Yes, this is very concerning,” Miller said.“The public is understandably vaccine-weary, but we need to remember that even if we as individuals are not at high risk, we need to protect the vulnerable.”Children and adolescents are being especially hard hit by the flu this year, Miller noted – a reality that is reflected in FluWatch data gathered by PHAC.Among flu detections for which age information was available last week, 56 per cent of cases were among individuals aged 0-19 years old, the PHAC data shows. Story continues below advertisement Dr. Donald Vinh, an infectious disease specialist and medical microbiologist at the McGill University Health Center in Montreal, says it is surprising to see high numbers of lab-confirmed flu cases among children and youth, because lab testing for influenza is done mainly in hospitals upon admission. In a typical year, seniors are more likely to be admitted to hospital with influenza.“Part of that could be a reflection of the virus, but more importantly, can be also a reflection of human behaviour,” Vinh said.The lifting of COVID public health measures like masking and physical distancing in places like schools and daycares are likely playing a role, especially since young people are generally healthy and often feel “impervious to diseases” and less likely to voluntarily follow the “strong recommendations” being made on masking, Vinh said.“It could also be that adults, especially elderly adults who are typically at risk for severe flu, are vigilant because of COVID to maybe just continue their protective measures,” he said.Given that flu has arrived earlier than usual this year and also that cases of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and COVID-19 are also circulating and infecting large numbers of children, the case has never been stronger for all Canadians to get their flu vaccine, Vinh said. Story continues below advertisement “I’m concerned about this flu season, not exclusively because of the flu, but because of this (mix) of these respiratory viruses,” he said.“When we have a triple threat that’s attacking our health-care system, we really need to take out all the guns to protect our health-care system so that it doesn’t collapse — and that includes things like making sure people are up to date with their COVID vaccine and vaccinated against flu.” 1:49 Children’s Hospital sees huge uptick in young patients early in flu season Sinha agreed, noting that while the majority of cases of flu may be among children and teens now, the natural progression of these illnesses will lead to cases among their parents and grandparents soon.And if a significant number of young people are getting so ill that they require hospitalization from the flu and RSV – which can also cause severe illness among seniors – the impact on vulnerable or immunocompromised seniors could be devastating, Sinha said. Story continues below advertisement “The best thing you can do to protect yourself against the flu is by getting the flu vaccine. And this year it’s a particularly good match, especially when the dominant strain that is circulating is a particularly virulent one as well.”Sinha added that enhanced flu shots are available for older Canadians, which is something they should inquire about when trying to book their vaccine. Related News No mandate means fewer people masking up during flu season in B.C. Saskatchewan’s Chief Medical Health Officer calls for residents to get flu shots Journalistic standards Comment Report an error © 2022 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Sponsored content More from Global News With B.C. teen sick in hospital with suspected bird flu, what should parents know? Mpox cases in Congo’s epicentre may be ‘plateauing’: WHO Advertisement Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Trending RCMP report reveals new details on GTA man and his ‘camel-toe’ fake toonies 42,320 Read How Canadian consumers can spot counterfeit $2 coins 25,849 Read One person is dead and 16 are injured after a shooting at Tuskegee University 10,057 Read Ukraine attacks Moscow with 34 drones, biggest strike on the Russian capital 9,179 Read 6.8 magnitude earthquake shakes Cuba after hurricanes and blackouts 6,747 Read Canada may need to let Trump be ‘senior partner’ in U.S. relations: GOP critic 4,681 Read Top Videos Hope for resolution in B.C. port dispute fades as talks break down 40 Viewed Quebec man who imported 26K fake toonies gets jail time 39 Viewed 26,000+ fake toonies seized in CBSA bust 39 Viewed CRTC takes action to make international roaming fees more affordable 37 Viewed Call of the Wilde: Habs’ losing streak continues 34 Viewed H5 avian influenza: B.C. reports 1st suspected human case of bird flu 25 Viewed More Videos Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Advertisement Report an Error Subscribe here AdChoices Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram AboutPrinciples & PracticesBranded ContentContact usRSSNewslettersNotificationsSmart homeAdvertisers Election RegistryGlobal News Licensing RequestsCookie consent ©2024 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Corus News. All rights reserved. Privacy PolicyCopyrightTerms of UseAdvertiseAdvertising Standards TermsCorus EntertainmentAccessibility AdvertisementThe worst of Alberta's respiratory virus surge could be yet to come, experts warn | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore The worst of Alberta's respiratory virus surge could be yet to come, experts warn | CBC News LoadedCalgaryThe worst of Alberta's respiratory virus surge could be yet to come, experts warnA trio of respiratory illnesses is showing no signs of relenting in Alberta and that's prompting concern about the potential for an even more dramatic surge once people start gathering for the holidays.Immunization and indoor masking urged with risk to kids unusually high this yearJennifer Lee · CBC News · Posted: Nov 23, 2022 4:57 PM EST | Last Updated: November 23, 2022RSV, influenza and COVID-19 are surging at the same time and putting intense pressure on Alberta's pediatric hospitals. According to AHS, the intensive care units at Alberta Children's Hospital and the Stollery Children's Hospital are close to 100 per cent capacity. (Ben Nelms/CBC)Social SharingA trio of respiratory illnesses is showing no signs of relenting in Alberta, and that's prompting concern about the potential for an even more dramatic surge once people start gathering for the holidays.As influenza, RSV and COVID-19 continue to overwhelm pediatric hospitals in the province, health officials are warning the worst could be yet to come."The concern I have right now is that we are not seeing any substantial downturn in … viral spread at the moment," said Craig Jenne, associate professor in the department of microbiology, immunology and infectious diseases at the University of Calgary."Judging by the patterns we've seen in Eastern Canada, it's unlikely we'll see a substantial decrease in viral transmission before the holiday season. And if we continue to gather in large groups and events where there's, for example, no masking indoors, that will further drive viral spread."Data published by the Public Health Agency of Canada show, for the week ending Nov. 12, Alberta had "widespread" flu activity, and it registered higher than any of the other provinces or territories reporting data at the time.1/3 Respiratory Virus Update 🇨🇦: influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity remain above expected levels for this time of year. At the national level, lab test positivity is at near 8% for <a href="https:/witter.com/hashtag/RSV?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#RSV</a> and near 16% for <a href="https:/witter.com/hashtag/influenza?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#influenza</a>. <a href="https:/.co/XcSGV5Nksv">https:/.co/XcSGV5Nksv</a>&mdash;@CPHO_CanadaCanada's chief public health officer, Dr. Theresa Tam, tweeted this week that RSV and influenza are hitting kids particularly hard."Influenza detections among children [and] teenagers are unusually high," said Tam. "As a result, pediatric hospitals are reporting unprecedented levels of viral respiratory ER visits [and] admissions."What has health experts worried right now is the timing."If this doesn't begin to plateau or slow before we get into these holiday seasons where there are more social activities, we have seen in previous winters with COVID that typically the holidays do drive a post-holiday spike. And we need to be careful that we have the capacity to deal with … all three of these respiratory infections," said Jenne. Staff scramble to relieve pressure on Alberta Children's Hospital as families are left waiting Alberta hospitals battle wave of sick children as viral illnesses surge According to Alberta Health Services, the intensive care units at both the Alberta Children's Hospital in Calgary and the Stollery Children's Hospital in Edmonton are operating at close to 100 per cent of their normal capacity."We continue to see an early and steep increase in influenza activity in Alberta, with 355 hospitalizations due to influenza since late August.… Of these hospitalizations, 98 have been in children under nine years of age," spokesperson Kerry Williamson said in a statement provided to CBC News.Craig Jenne is an associate professor in the department of microbiology, immunology and infectious diseases at the University of Calgary. (Colin Hall/CBC)Letter to parentsWith no reprieve in sight, health officials are ramping up their messaging efforts.In a letter sent through school boards Wednesday, Alberta's new interim chief medical officer of health, Dr. Mark Joffe, warned parents about the severe surge in respiratory viruses. The letter was also signed by AHS senior medical officer of health, Dr. Laura McDougall."In the last few weeks, we have seen a large rise in cough and fever type sickness in our schools," it said."We are concerned that this influenza season will be more severe than we have seen in years, and that illness will continue to disrupt school, sports and upcoming holiday gatherings." Alberta school boards urged to mandate masks since the province won't The doctors noted Australia, which can be a predictor of Canada's flu season, had a severe respiratory virus season, with children under the age of 16 accounting for the majority of that country's influenza hospitalizations."While most children who get influenza will recover without complications, some children can get very sick and need treatment in hospital.… H3N2, the common strain of influenza so far in Alberta, is known to cause more severe illness in young children and seniors. The influenza vaccine being used this season provides protection against the H3N2 virus."Calgary-based public health physician Dr. Jia Hu is urging Albertans to get vaccinated, mask up and stay home when sick. (Erin Collins/CBC)Joffe and McDougall pointed to masking as another key precaution parents can take."Using a well-fitting, high-quality mask is encouraged, especially in crowded indoor settings. Wearing a mask can help reduce your risk of becoming sick and help protect others from being exposed. Individuals should be supported regardless of their choice to mask or not."'No-brainer' stepsDr. Jia Hu, Calgary-based public health physician, expects the situation will likely get worse before it gets better."People can take steps … that will blunt the peaks of these things," he said."We don't have a vaccine for RSV, fair enough. But we do for flu and COVID. So make sure you get that. If you feel the slightest desire [or] concern, it's OK to wear a mask in an indoor public place," he said.Hu noted influenza vaccination rates are low and COVID immunization rates, in particular for young children, are also lagging.When it comes to gathering, Hu's key message is to stay home if you're feeling unwell."I would definitely hope that people … do take those steps. They're sort of no-brainer steps, in my mind."ABOUT THE AUTHORJennifer LeeReporterJennifer Lee is a CBC News reporter based in Calgary. She worked at CBC Toronto, Saskatoon and Regina before landing in Calgary in 2002. If you have a health or human interest story to share, let her know. Jennifer.Lee@cbc.caCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories Top stories from CBC Calgary An Alberta paramedic responded to a car crash. She only learned later the dying victim was her daughter Alberta government to remove cap on doctor daily visits Alberta justice minister calls for firing of RCMP Commissioner Brenda LuckiFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowAn AI update from NFU Poultry Board chair – NFUonline Contact us NFU CallFirst Our offices NFU Cymru Media centre Join the NFU Log in About us About us NFU governance Who's who at the NFU Our history NFU Mutual insurance services NFU Cymru National Pig Association Careers Updates and information Updates and information Regions Sectors Cross sectors Events Campaigning Back British Farming Campaign resources NFU Education NFU reports Consultations Communities Services NFU Professional Services NFU CallFirst Business guides NFU planning services NFU Business Directory NFU Employment Service NFU energy solutions NFU Legal Services The NFU Tenants' Service Rewards Member rewards Business essentials NFU magazines Safety and security Training and resources Vehicles and machinery Wellbeing and lifestyle Home Updates and information Avian influenza – supporting members through critical times Avian influenza – supporting members through critical times 22 November 2022 Poultry Avian influenza Text only view James Mottershead NFU Poultry Board chair, Midlands James Mottershead outlines the NFU's activity throughout the ongoing challenges of AI (avian influenza), our four simple asks of government and key meetings we're holding with government officials. As your NFU Poultry Board chair and a fellow poultry producer, I know all too well that the constant onslaught of avian influenza is devastating to us all. I want you, our members, to know that your poultry representatives and NFU experts are doing everything they can to support you and your business. We are working to ensure the government listens to our asks and acts when and where it is needed most. Regrettably the number of AI outbreaks continues to increase with more than 120 cases in poultry and captive birds confirmed since the 1 October 2022 in the UK. At the NFU we are continuously meeting with policymakers, stakeholders and industry leaders to stress the impact of this horrendous disease on both farm businesses and growers themselves. I would urge you to look at our activity tracker which outlines all of the ways we’ve worked on your behalf to date. See: NFUonline | Avian influenza – how the NFU is working to support you Avian influenza – how the NFU is working to support you 13 December 202213 December 2022 The NFU’s action plan On 27 October I attended an AI summit meeting hosted by biosecurity minister Lord Benyon and the farming minister Mark Spencer MP. It was at this meeting members – like you and I - explained the impacts of AI on our businesses and NFU President Minette Batters reiterated concerns about the future of food security. The message was loud and clear: poultry businesses need support now more than ever. Policymakers must understand the escalating situation and the real-time impact this is having on poultry producers. We have: Briefed MPs ahead of parliamentary sessions on AI Created a template letter for growers to write to their MP, highlighting the challenges on farm and what support we need Held meetings with Lord Benyon and the Farming Minister, Mark Spencer MP, to discuss the importance of progress on actions to help poultry producers Appeared on national media including BBC News, Sky News and Times Radio, as well as appearing in print in The Daily Express, Mail Online, Sunday Times and farming press. Our lobbying asks Expand the regional housing measures on a national basis to reflect the increase in the levels of risk across the country Ensure that the government’s compensation protocol and payment scheme for premises which are confirmed with AI is fit for purpose Review the marketing legislation which currently provides a 16-week protection period for the marketing of free-range eggs when government housing measures are imposed Provide support on longer term measures for the government and industry to deal with AI as an annual occurrence – ie, research into vaccination. Housing measures On 7 October I called an extraordinary National Poultry Board meeting where your regional representatives discussed the NFU’s response to the developing situation and the board were unanimous in calling for the government to implement immediate housing measures as a preventative measure across GB. As you will be aware, housing measures were introduced in Norfolk, Suffolk and parts of Essex from 12 October 2022 and were put in place across the rest of England from 7 November 2022. Defra has confirmed, however, that, in the event that the housing measures exceed the 16-week derogation (which permits the labelling of eggs from compulsorily housed birds as “free range” under the relevant legislation), the 16-week derogation period will not be extended. I know that having different 16-week period start dates regionally across GB is far from ideal. As such, we are already in close dialogue with the government and other key stakeholders, including retailers, to highlight the issues that will be faced across the supply chain as consequence of this position. Eggs – market availability issues Availability of British eggs – what's happening and what the NFU is doing 24 November 202224 November 2022 Alongside our support for the industry to navigate the largest AI outbreak on record, the NFU has been warning the government, retailers and food businesses that input cost inflation has been putting enormous pressure on producers in the poultry sector since we started exiting from Covid restrictions in 2021. We further highlighted the additional pressure we saw as a result of the war in Ukraine and we have not stopped lobbying government and industry to adapt and protect domestic supply. I know that for some of you the pressure is building and in some parts of the sector such as eggs, constrained supply and higher demand mean availability is lower than normal in some stores for some retailers. We continue to be in regular dialogue with retailers and major food businesses and have asked the government at the highest level to investigate the market availability issues and fairness in the supply chain in order to better understand the role that AI is playing, alongside other market pressures, in the future profile of UK demand and production. I urge you to read more about ongoing NFU activity to raise these critical issues on your behalf at: NFUonline | Availability of British eggs – what's happening and what the NFU is doing AI member letter template to MPs Use our AI member letter to MPs template to write to your local MP to highlight the challenges being faced on farm and the support needed from the government. AI member letter to MPs Key pages to bookmark Avian influenza – essential information AI case finder – current and lifted cases of avian influenza Avian influenza – how the NFU is working to support you 13 December 202213 December 2022 member exclusive Event: watch again Watch again: AI update - hear from your NFU and government specialists 01 November 2022, 14:00 Availability of British eggs – what's happening and what the NFU is doing 24 November 202224 November 2022 Avian Influenza Ask us a question about this page Once you have submitted your query someone from NFU CallFirst will contact you. If needed, your query will then be passed to the appropriate NFU policy team. Name * Membership number Telephone number * Email address * Enquiry * You have 0 characters remaining. Submit By completing the form with your details on this page, you are agreeing to have this information sent to the NFU for the purposes of contacting you regarding your enquiry. Please take time to read the NFU’s Privacy Policy if you require further information. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. AI case finder – current and lifted cases of avian influenza Avian influenza – essential information Nationwide Avian Influenza Prevention Zone in Great Britain lifted 04 July 202304 July 2023 Avian influenza – how the NFU is working to support you 13 December 202213 December 2022 Availability of British eggs – what's happening and what the NFU is doing 24 November 202224 November 2022 About the NFU About the NFU Advertise with the NFU NFU Careers NFU Membership The NFU 2023 financial statement Media centre More NFU sites More NFU sites Back British Farming British Agriculture Bureau CFE Online Countryside Online Great British Chicken NFU Cymru NFU Sugar Tried and Tested TB Free England UK Turkeys Member services Member services NFU CallFirst NFU Contract Checking Service CT Planning Farm Safety: Risk Management NFU Legal Assistance Scheme (LAS) NFU Employment Service NFU Energy NFU Rural Surveyor Firms The NFU Tenants' Service Follow Us Follow Us The NFU on social media X (Twitter) Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Back British Farming on social media Facebook Instagram TikTok © 2024 – NFUonline NFUonline terms and conditions NFU mobile app terms and conditions Anti‑slavery and human trafficking statement Privacy policy Cookies policy Complaints procedure NFU terms and conditions NFU gender pay gap reports NFU staff pension scheme 112349 Accept essential cookies Accept all cookies Manage preferencesBird flu claims 10 lakh birds in last 8 years in Kerala, 10 lakh birds died as a result of bird flu in last 8 years in Kerala, kerala news, Avian influenza ENGLISH MALAYALAM NEWSPAPER E-Paper Home Latest News Movies Business Games Sports Multimedia Columns Specials Login My account My bookmarks Logout THEME Dark Light EDITION Malayalam English Newspaper Home News Kerala avian influenza News Bird flu claims 10 lakh birds in last 8 years in Kerala 21 November 2022, 10:57 AM IST 1 min read Read later Print Share More More X Photo: Mathrubhumi File Haripad: In the last eight years, around 10 lakh birds have died due to bird flu in Alappuzha, including those killed to stop the spread of Avian influenza. Further, 98 per cent of birds that fell prey to bird flu was ducks. To advertise here, Contact Us Avian influenza was first reported in Alappuzha district in 2014 and returned in 2016, 2021 and 2022. According to Animal Husbandry Department, 10,10,418 birds contracted bird flu and Rs 16,89,37,665 was distributed as compensation to farmers. Get Latest Mathrubhumi Updates in English Follow Channel Since 2014, the compensation has been fixed at Rs 200 for birds above 60 days old and Rs 100 for those below it. However, the government temporarily halted compensation in 2022 after some farmers alleged irregularities in the distribution of compensation. Farmers pointed out that slaughtering and burying flue-infected birds is a costly affair. From 2014 to 2021, Rs 16.91 lakh was spent to bury such birds. The central government's safety standards states that domestic birds within a radius of one kilometre from the epicentre of the disease should be killed and destroyed. According to experts, the flue is transmitted through migratory birds that visit the state, especially the paddy fields of Alappuzha. Officials of the Animal Welfare Department suggest that the spread of the disease can be prevented if the birds suspected of being infected are removed from the flock in the first few days. Share this Article Add Comment View Comments () Related Topics AVIAN INFLUENZA Get daily updates from Mathrubhumi.com Newsletter Youtube Telegram To advertise here, Contact Us RELATED STORIES 1 min Features | Health Archives See All Closely monitoring outbreak of H9N2, clusters of respiratory illness in China: Union Health Ministry Nov 24, 2023 1 min News | Kerala See All Bird flu outbreak: Lakshadweep bans transportation of frozen chicken from Kerala Dec 28, 2022 1 min News | Kerala See All Bird flu outbreak in two panchayats in Kottayam, collector orders mass culling Dec 14, 2022 Disclaimer: Kindly avoid objectionable, derogatory, unlawful and lewd comments, while responding to reports. Such comments are punishable under cyber laws. Please keep away from personal attacks. The opinions expressed here are the personal opinions of readers and not that of Mathrubhumi. IN CASE YOU MISSED IT 2 min News | Kerala See All A life without boundaries: Outgoing CJI Chandrachud's wife reminisces about her childhood in Kerala Nov 10, 2024 1 min News | Kerala See All Kerala suspends N Prasanth for social media outburst, K Gopalakrishnan for WhatsApp group row Nov 11, 2024 2 min News | Kerala See All Not just Munambam, Waqf Board also claiming 600 acres in Thaliparamba town: Union Minister Rijiju Nov 11, 2024 To advertise here, Contact Us More From This Section 1 min Kerala suspends N Prasanth for social media outburst, K Gopalakrishnan ... 1 min Kerala school sports meet wraps up; Thiruvananthapuram crowned champions 1 min Violence breaks out at Kerala Sports Meet after dispute over points allocation 4 min ‘I will come back soon...’: Priyanka Gandhi ends Wayanad bypoll campaign ... To advertise here, Contact Us Most Read News | Kerala See All 2 min A life without boundaries: Outgoing CJI Chandrachud's wife reminisces about ... News | Kerala See All 1 min Kerala suspends N Prasanth for social media outburst, K Gopalakrishnan ... Movies & Music | News See All 2 min I couldn’t digest several films my husband acted in; I share my opinion ... To advertise here, Contact Us English Malayalam Newspaper E-Paper Mathrubhumi News Club FM Seed Media School MBIFL Privacy Policy Terms of Use Subscription Buy Books Magazines Ad Tariff Classifieds Archives BookMyAd About Us Contact Us Complaints © Copyright Mathrubhumi 2024. All rights reserved. MALAYALAM NEWSPAPER E-Paper | Live TV | Subscription | Buy Books | Book Ads | Classifieds Latest News Movies Games Business Sports Multimedia Columns Specials Discover News + - Kerala India World Money Good News Crime Discover NRI Columns + - Shashi Tharoor M G Radhakrishnan SR Suryanarayan Mini Krishnan Hari Kumar G Shaheed Movies-Music + - Movie News Movie Review Music Interview Trivia Sports + - Sports News Badminton Cricket Football Tennis Education + - Admissions Articles Career News Scholarships Features + - Specials Agriculture Books Education Science Technology Lifestyle + - Travel Health Food Gallery + - Videos Photos English Malayalam Newspaper E-Paper Mathrubhumi News Club FM Seed Media School MBIFL Privacy Policy Terms of Use Subscription Buy Books Magazines Ad Tariff Classifieds Archives BookMyAd About Us Contact Us Complaints © Copyright Mathrubhumi 2024. All rights reserved. Click on ‘Get News Alerts’ to get the latest news alerts from Not now Get News AlertsDeyalsingh: Influenza drive exceeded expectations - Trinidad Guardian Trinidad and Tobago Guardian Online JavaScript is disabled in your web browser or browser is too old to support JavaScript. Today almost all web pages contain JavaScript, a scripting programming language that runs on visitor's web browser. It makes web pages functional for specific purposes and if disabled for some reason, the content or the functionality of the web page can be limited or unavailable. Advertise With UsAbout UsListen Watch Login / Subscribe HomeNewsBusinessSportE-PaperFeaturesEnvironmentOpinionTraffic CamerasLifeClassifiedsDeath NoticesCommunityReal EstateAbout UsContact Us HomeNewsSportE-paperBusinessClassifiedsTraffic CamerasOtherEditorial Policies Death Notices Environment Features Opinion Games Subscriptions Real Estate Deyalsingh: Influenza drive exceeded expectationsbyRishard Khan2022112314005120221123 Minister of Health Terrence Deyalsingh looks on as a member of the public, Allison Roderick, who receives her annual influenza vaccine on Wednesday during the South West Regional Health Authority's vaccination drive on Harris Promenade, San Fernando. Photo by Rishard Khan.Min­is­ter of Health, Ter­rence Deyals­ingh, says this year's in­fluen­za vac­ci­na­tion dri­ve has ex­ceed­ed his ex­pec­ta­tions, es­pe­cial­ly com­ing on the heels of the pub­lic's ap­pre­hen­sion over COVID-19 vac­ci­na­tion for the bet­ter part of the last two years. "The dri­ve this year, to me, has ex­ceed­ed my ex­pec­ta­tions. I thought be­cause of COVID and all the talk about COVID vac­cines that the peo­ple would have been vac­cine weary but we have done 17,507 in one month," he said. "Last year, for the en­tire six months, we did 26,000 so it is telling me that peo­ple are not vac­cine weary, that peo­ple are still in­ter­est­ed in pro­tect­ing them­selves for which I am grate­ful." Speak­ing dur­ing the open­ing of the South West Re­gion­al Health Au­thor­i­ty's (SWRHA) vac­ci­na­tion dri­ve on Har­ris Prom­e­nade, San Fer­nan­do on Wednes­day, Deyals­ingh urged the pop­u­la­tion to avail them­selves of the 75,000 dos­es in the coun­try be­fore the in­flux of in­ter­na­tion­al trav­ellers for Christ­mas and Car­ni­val 2023. Al­so at the dri­ve was the Deputy May­or of San Fer­nan­do, Dr Fer­ri Ho­sein who took her in­fluen­za vac­cine. As a med­ical doc­tor, she too ap­pealed to the pub­lic to take the shot. "I am hap­py to have re­ceived my in­fluen­za vac­cine and I re­al­ly want to com­pli­ment South West Re­gion­al Health Re­gion­al Au­thor­i­ty for en­sur­ing they come in­to a high-traf­fic area. For me it was a very easy process, I do this every year as I am a med­ical doc­tor and I want to com­mend them for this ini­tia­tive and I al­so want to en­cour­age oth­ers to get the vac­cine," she said. Click HERE to Login Want FREE access to all our content? Sign up HERE!Tagged in: Related articles Sponsored Weather PORT OF SPAIN WEATHER Sponsored Trending RBC defends its credit card limitsElderly women struggling with illness, hardship seek urgent helpIMF wants Govt to end forex restrictionsThree teens injured in Ariapita Avenue shootingT&T’s Brain DrainOne man gunned down, one injured in Rio ClaroTwo men chopped in bar brawlThree men held for robbing circus in OctoberImbert defends forex restrictions as IMF urges greater flexibilityLow turnout at Memorial Day Parade in Port-of-Spain Today's GuardianViewSubscribePublications A duet by Marvin Smith and Vanessa Bushe.Edison BoodoosinghA duet by Marvin Smith and Vanessa Bushe.Edison BoodoosinghMemorable performances in Versi d’Amore 20241111003511Hundreds of guests enjoy an impressive water, light and fireworks performance of a scene from the Journey to the West book at Huai’an, China. Angelo JedidiahHundreds of guests enjoy an impressive water, light and fireworks performance of a scene from the Journey to the West book at Huai’an, China. Angelo JedidiahTrini in China: Journey to the West—bringing folklore to life 20241111174612Tutor Zaheer Mohammed, left, with trainee Cristiano Benjamin, CCC operations manager Nicole Kistow, VMCOTT CEO Natasha Prince, trainee Jada Belgrave, and CCC programme co-ordinator Lt Curt Jones pose for a photo during the graduation ceremony. Photo courtesy Vanessa Moon Tutor Zaheer Mohammed, left, with trainee Cristiano Benjamin, CCC operations manager Nicole Kistow, VMCOTT CEO Natasha Prince, trainee Jada Belgrave, and CCC programme co-ordinator Lt Curt Jones pose for a photo during the graduation ceremony. Photo courtesy Vanessa Moon 33 auto mechanics graduate from CCC20241103210020Makeda CharlesMakeda CharlesMakeda Charles Using her story to touch survivors of abuse 20241027113816 Created by potrace 1.15, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2017 NewsBusinessSportsLifeOpinionTobago TodayClassifiedsDeath NoticesSubscriptionsReal EstateCategoriesNewsBusinessSportFeaturesOpinionTraffic CamerasDeath NoticesINFORMATIONAbout UsContact UsAdvertise With UsPrivacy PolicySubscriptionsTerms of ServicesDigital MediaThe Big Board Company.Real EstateClassifiedsTELEVISIONCNC3 TelevisionRADIO951 RemixSangeet 106.1 FMSky 99.5FMSlam 100.5 FMVibe CT 105 FMMix 90.1 FM (Guyana)Freedom 106.5 FMAbout Us Guardian Media is the premier provider of multimedia solutions and authoritative insight on news, politics, business, finance, sports, and current affairs. Our brand portfolio includes CNC3, Guardian, TBC Radio Network and The Big Board Company. Contact us Send us an e-mail here or call us at +1-(868)-225-4465 / +1-(868)-235-5668Follow us