HAN Archive - 00482 | Health Alert Network (HAN) Skip directly to site content Skip directly to search EspaÃ±ol | Other Languages An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People Search Submit Emergency Preparedness and Response Interim Guidance for Clinicians to Prioritize Antiviral Treatment of Influenza in the Setting of Reduced Availability of Oseltamivir Print Minus Related Pages Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network December 14, 2022, 4:00 PM ET CDCHAN-00482 Summary Seasonal influenza activity is high across the United States. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that in the 2022-2023 season to date, there have been at least 13 million illnesses, 120,000 hospitalizations, and 7,300 deaths from influenza (Weekly U.S. Influenza Surveillance Report | CDC). While the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not indicated shortages of oseltamivir (generic or Tamiflu) in any of its forms (capsules, oral suspension), CDC has received numerous anecdotal reports of availability issues for generic oseltamivir in some locations [1]. This may continue to occur in some communities as influenza activity continues. This Health Alert Network (HAN) Health Advisory provides clinicians and public health officials with guidance for prioritizing oseltamivir for treatment and information on other influenza antivirals that are recommended for treating influenza in areas where oseltamivir is temporarily unavailable. Background Antiviral treatment of influenza is an important adjunct to influenza vaccination in the prevention and control of influenza and, when given early, reduces the duration of symptoms and may reduce the risk of some complications [2-4]. Influenza viruses typically circulate annually in the United States, most commonly from the late fall through the early spring. Most people recover from influenza without serious complications or sequelae. However, influenza can be associated with serious illnesses, hospitalizations, and deaths, particularly among people at increased risk of complications such as older adults, very young children, pregnant people, and people of all ages with certain chronic medical conditions [2]. Four FDA approved prescription antiviral medications (oseltamivir, baloxavir, zanamivir, and peramivir) are available for use for early treatment of outpatients with influenza. These antivirals have different formulations, routes of administration, dosing, duration of treatment, and recommendations for administration by age group. The clinical benefit of antiviral treatment of influenza is greatest when treatment is started early (within 2 days of illness onset) in people with mild, uncomplicated illness [3-4]. Oseltamivir treatment also is recommended as soon as possible for suspected or confirmed influenza requiring hospitalization, and to help control institutional influenza outbreaks [4]. A wide range of tests for respiratory specimens are available in clinical settings for diagnosing influenza. Use of influenza testing, particularly rapid molecular assays, can inform antiviral treatment decisions, especially when other respiratory viruses are co-circulating in the community. CDC has testing guidance for clinicians when SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses are co-circulating. Of note, because SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus co-infection can occur, a positive influenza test result without SARS-CoV-2 testing does not exclude COVID-19, and a positive SARS-CoV-2 test result without influenza testing does not exclude influenza. CDC recommends annual influenza vaccination of people aged 6 months and older as the first and most important tool to prevent influenza [2]. For people aged 65 years and older, high-dose, recombinant, or adjuvanted influenza vaccines are recommended if available [2]. Healthcare providers should strongly encourage people who have not yet received influenza vaccination this season to get vaccinated as they can still benefit. General Recommendations for Clinicians and Public Health Practitioners Available information suggests that current local antiviral availability issues are due to limited availability of generic oseltamivir, specifically [1]. If available, brand-name oseltamivir (Tamiflu) can be used to treat outpatients and hospitalized patients with influenza. If oseltamivir is unavailable, oral baloxavir, inhaled zanamivir, or intravenous peramivir can be used for early treatment of outpatients at increased risk for complications who present with uncomplicated influenza, depending upon age and contraindications. When there is limited availability of oseltamivir or other antivirals, antiviral treatment should target patients with influenza who are at the highest risk of severe disease and those who are hospitalized. Antiviral treatment of outpatients should be prioritized for persons who test positive for influenza within 2 days of illness onset. When there is limited availability of oseltamivir or other antivirals, patients with clinically mild influenza who are otherwise healthy and not at increased risk of influenza complications can be managed with supportive care without antiviral treatment. Influenza Testing Considerations When antivirals are available, a clinical diagnosis of influenza without influenza testing can be made to support prescribing empiric antiviral treatment in outpatients. However, in settings where oseltamivir is currently unavailable, influenza testing for patients with suspected influenza is highly recommended to guide antiviral treatment. When there are limited supplies of antivirals, treatment of suspected influenza without a positive test result should be limited to those who are being hospitalized with suspected influenza, or patients highly suspected to have influenza (e.g., an ill patient who has a household member with laboratory-confirmed influenza). Clinicians, hospitals, healthcare systems, and public health officials are encouraged to use all available information and their best judgment to prioritize oseltamivir and other antivirals for treating patients with influenza, depending upon their local situation. The following are considerations for antiviral treatment prioritization when antivirals such as oseltamivir are in short supply. Guidance for Prioritization when Antiviral Supplies are Limited Hospitalized Patients Prioritize oseltamivir treatment as soon as possible for hospitalized patients with suspected or laboratory-confirmed influenza. Oseltamivir is the only antiviral that is recommended for treating influenza in hospitalized patients [4]. Because observational studies have shown that early initiation of oseltamivir treatment has significant clinical benefit [5-7], oseltamivir treatment is recommended to be started as soon as possible without waiting for results of influenza testing, such as in the emergency department or in admitted patients with high suspicion for influenza. There are limited data for using inhaled zanamivir, intravenous peramivir, or baloxavir for treating influenza in hospitalized patients. In a recent clinical trial, the addition of baloxavir to a neuraminidase inhibitor (primarily oseltamivir) did not show clinical benefit compared to neuraminidase inhibitor treatment alone in hospitalized patients with influenza aged 12 years and older [8]. Outpatients Among outpatients, prioritize antiviral treatment for patients who test positive for influenza as follows: Patients at increased risk of influenza complications and who test positive for influenza within 2 days of illness onset. People with multiple conditions that place them at increased risk for complications from influenza (e.g., several co-morbidities, age <2 years, and 65 years and older) and those with severe uncontrolled chronic disease might be at highest risk of influenza complications. Patients who have progressive or severe influenza not requiring hospitalization, even if they test positive for influenza more than 2 days from illness onset. Patients who are pregnant, less than 2 weeks postpartum, or immunocompromised. Substantial data from observational studies indicate that oseltamivir treatment of influenza is safe in pregnancy [9]. There are no data on the safety or efficacy of baloxavir in pregnancy and baloxavir is not recommended for pregnant people or those less than 2 weeks postpartum [9]. Treatment with a neuraminidase inhibitor (oseltamivir, zanamivir, or peramivir) is recommended for immunocompromised people with influenza. Baloxavir is not recommended for treating influenza in immunocompromised people because the optimal duration of treatment is unknown and there is concern for emergence of influenza viruses resistant to baloxavir during or after treatment. Children less than 5 years of age. Oseltamivir is the only recommended oral antiviral for treatment of influenza in children less than 5 years of age. If oseltamivir suspension is unavailable for treating influenza in young children, clinicians can request that pharmacists compound a suspension from oseltamivir capsules. In areas where generic oseltamivir is unavailable, baloxavir can be used for early treatment of influenza in otherwise healthy children aged 5 years and older, and for children aged 12 years and older with underlying conditions that increase their risk of influenza complications. Institutional Settings When an influenza outbreak is not occurring, prioritize oseltamivir for early treatment of influenza in residents of congregate settings such as long-term care facilities (LTCFs), who test positive for influenza. In the setting of laboratory confirmed influenza outbreaks in LTCFs: Early empiric antiviral treatment of suspected influenza in residents is recommended [4]. Once an influenza diagnosis is confirmed through testing, post-exposure antiviral chemoprophylaxis of exposed residents is recommended [4]. Because institutional outbreaks can be prolonged, consider using a limited duration treatment dosage (twice daily for 5 days) for post-exposure oseltamivir instead of extended use of oseltamivir chemoprophylaxis (once daily), with ongoing active daily monitoring and influenza testing for all residents with new illness signs and symptoms. If oseltamivir is not available, baloxavir, zanamivir, or peramivir may be used for treatment of influenza. Although baloxavir may be used for treatment, there are no available data on using baloxavir in LTCFs for treatment or post-exposure chemoprophylaxis. Other Considerations In hospitalized patients, oseltamivir can be administered orally or enterically via oro- or nasogastric tube. For hospitalized patients who cannot absorb enterically-administered oseltamivir (e.g., due to gastric stasis, malabsorption, or gastrointestinal bleeding), or when oseltamivir is not available, intravenous peramivir is an option. For children who are not able to swallow prescribed oseltamivir capsules, the prescribed capsules may be opened and mixed with a thick sweetened liquid, such as chocolate syrup, prior to administration. When local generic oseltamivir availability issues are resolved, CDC recommends reverting back to original antiviral recommendations that include clinical diagnosis and empiric antiviral treatment of influenza in outpatients. Healthcare providers should use clinical judgement and all available data when making decisions about prescribing antibiotics to patients presenting with acute respiratory illness For More Information CDC. Information for Clinicians on Influenza Virus Testing. CDC. Influenza Antiviral Medications: Summary for Clinicians. CDC. Interim Guidance for Influenza Outbreak Management in Long-Term Care and Post-Acute Care Facilities. CDC. Testing and Management Considerations for Nursing Home Residents with Acute Respiratory Illness Symptoms when SARS-CoV-2 and Influenza Viruses are Co-circulating. References American Society of Healthcare Pharmacists. Current Drug Shortages. Accessed at: https://www.ashp.org/drug-shortages/current-shortages Grohskopf LA, Blanton LH, Ferdinands JM, et al. Prevention and Control of Seasonal Influenza with Vaccines: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices — United States, 2022–23 Influenza Season. MMWR Recomm Rep 2022;71(No. RR-1):1–28. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr7101a1 Uyeki TM, Hui DS, Zambon M, Wentworth DE, Monto AS. Influenza. Lancet. 2022 Aug 27;400(10353):693-706. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(22)00982-5 Uyeki TM, Bernstein HH, Bradley JS et al. Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America: 2018 Update on Diagnosis, Treatment, Chemoprophylaxis, and Institutional Outbreak Management of Seasonal Influenza. Clin Infect Dis. 2019 Mar 5;68(6):e1-e47. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciz044 Venkatesan S, Myles PR, Bolton KJ et al. Neuraminidase Inhibitors and Hospital Length of Stay: A Meta-analysis of Individual Participant Data to Determine Treatment Effectiveness Among Patients Hospitalized with Nonfatal 2009 Pandemic Influenza A(H1N1) Virus Infection. J Infect Dis. 2020 Jan 14;221(3):356-366. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiz152 Katzen J, Kohn R, Houk JL et al. Early Oseltamivir After Hospital Admission Is Associated with Shortened Hospitalization: A 5-Year Analysis of Oseltamivir Timing and Clinical Outcomes. Clin Infect Dis. 2019 Jun 18;69(1):52-58. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciy860 Walsh PS, Schnadower D, Zhang Y et al. Association of Early Oseltamivir with Improved Outcomes in Hospitalized Children With Influenza, 2007-2020. JAMA Pediatr. 2022 Nov 1;176(11):e223261. DOI: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2022.3261 Kumar D, Ison MG, Mira JP et al. Combining baloxavir marboxil with standard-of-care neuraminidase inhibitor in patients hospitalised with severe influenza (FLAGSTONE): a randomised, parallel-group, double-blind, placebo-controlled, superiority trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2022 May;22(5):718-730. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00469-2 Chow EJ, Beigi RH, Riley LE et al. Clinical Effectiveness and Safety of Antivirals for Influenza in Pregnancy. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2021 Mar 20;8(6):ofab138. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofab138 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) protects people’s health and safety by preventing and controlling diseases and injuries; enhances health decisions by providing credible information on critical health issues; and promotes healthy living through strong partnerships with local, national and international organizations. Department of Health and Human Services HAN Message Types Health Alert: Conveys the highest level of importance about a public health incident. Health Advisory: Provides important information about a public health incident. Health Update: Provides updated information about a public health incident. ### This message was distributed to state and local health officers, state and local epidemiologists, state and local laboratory directors, public information officers, HAN coordinators, and clinician organizations. ### Top of Page Additional Resources HAN Archive By Year HAN Types Sign Up for HAN Email Updates HAN Jurisdictions Last Reviewed: November 4, 2022 Source: Center for Preparedness and Response (CPR) Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate homeHealth Alert Network (HAN) HAN Jurisdictions HAN Message Types Sign Up for HAN Updates HAN Archiveplus icon 2024plus icon HAN00518 HAN00517 HAN00516 HAN00515 HAN00514 HAN00513 HAN00512 HAN00511 HAN00510 HAN00509 HAN00508 HAN00507 HAN00506 HAN00505 HAN00504 2023plus icon HAN00503 HAN00502 HAN00501 HAN00500 HAN00499 HAN00498 HAN00497 HAN00496 HAN00495 HAN00494 HAN00493 HAN00492 HAN00491 HAN00490 HAN00489 HAN00488 HAN00487 HAN00486 HAN00485 2022plus icon HAN00484 HAN00483 HAN00482 HAN00481 HAN00480 HAN00479 HAN00478 HAN00477 HAN00476 HAN00475 HAN00474 HAN00473 HAN00472 HAN00471 HAN00470 HAN00469 HAN00468 HAN00467 HAN00466 HAN00465 HAN00464 HAN00463 HAN00462 About CDC Contact Us 800-232-4636 Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Youtube Pinterest Snapchat CONTACT CDC Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Email Us ABOUT CDC About CDC Jobs Funding POLICIES Accessibility External Links Privacy Policies No Fear Act FOIA OIG Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Public Health Publications CONNECT WITH US Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Youtube Pinterest Snapchat Email LANGUAGES EspaÃ±ol ç¹é«ä¸­æ Tiáº¿ng Viá»t íêµ­ì´ Tagalog Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹ Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ© KreyÃ²l Ayisyen FranÃ§ais Polski PortuguÃªs Italiano Deutsch æ¥æ¬èª ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û English U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Accessibility External Links Privacy Policies No Fear Act FOIA Nondiscrimination OIG Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Public Health Publications USA.gov SAS statsAvian Influenza Detections Lead to Launch of New Service Skip to Main Content Home Go to TN.gov Go to TN.gov Section Go to Agriculture Animals Animal Health Resources State Veterinarian C. E. Kord Animal Health Diagnostic Lab Animal Movement Requirements Veterinary Resources Livestock Resources Livestock Welfare Apiary Market & News Statistics Tennessee Equine Health Advisory Commission Frequently Asked Questions Businesses Ag Enhancement (TAEP) Ag Enterprise Fund AgTrack Program Business Development Hemp Certified Crop Advisers Export Assistance Feed, Fertilizer, Grain and Seed Food Safety Forest Products Fuel Pesticides Plants Produce and Nursery Tobacco Enforcement: Halting Tobacco Sales to Minors Weights and Measures Resilient Food Systems Infrastructure Consumers Agricultural Crime Unit Community Gardens Consumer Affairs Food Safety Fuel Quality Locally Produced Pest Control Protect TN Forests Soil Testing Weights and Measures Farms Ag Enhancement (TAEP) Agricultural Fairs Agritourism Beginning Farmer Resources Boll Weevil Eradication Program Drought Resources Emergency Flood Response Farming Heritage Financial Assistance Grain Indemnity Fund Hay Directory Hemp Growers Hemp Industry Land and Water Stewardship Market News and Statistics Pests and Pesticides Pick Tennessee Products Produce and Nursery Soil Testing Forests About the Division of Forestry Burn Permits Tree Seedlings Landowner Assistance Forest Protection Urban & Community Forestry State Forests Forest Businesses TN Forestry Commission FAQ Forestry Links Staff Directory Forestry Careers Payments, Licenses & Permits Ag Use and Sales Tax Exemption Burn Permits Farm Name Registration Feed, Seed, Fertilizer and Grain Forms Pesticide Forms Plant Certification Forms Secure Online Payments Weights and Measures Forms By Topic Emergency Response & Resources Tennessee Urban Farm and Forest (TUFF) FARM Cost Share Program Beginning Farmer Resources Educational Resources Financial Assistance Food Safety Land and Water Stewardship Pests Plants Suicide Prevention & Resources The Department Commissioner and Staff Staff Directory Administration & Grants Division Forestry Division Consumer & Industry Services Division Business Development Division Newsroom Interactive Data Rural Routes Newsletter Title VI Requirements Your Ideas for Your Government Careers & Internships Ellington Ag Center Print This Page Print This Page Go to Search Hurricane Helene Avian Influenza Detections Lead to Launch of New Service Thursday, December 15, 2022 | 03:08pm NASHVILLE – Following a new detection of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) in Tennessee, the Tennessee Department of Agriculture (TDA) is launching a service to keep bird owners informed of health threats to their flocks. This latest detection in Weakley County affects a backyard flock of chickens that produce eggs. Testing at the C.E. Kord Animal Health Diagnostic Laboratory in Nashville and the National Veterinary Services Laboratory in Ames, Iowa confirmed the presence of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza in samples from sick birds. “We hate to see this illness affecting another farmer in Tennessee,” State Veterinarian Dr. Samantha Beaty said. “As we work with this producer and our partners to contain this outbreak to one facility, we are also considering how best to share information with bird owners. The new email notification system—The Word on Birds—aims to inform bird owners of health threats to backyard poultry flocks and pet birds.” People who have backyard flocks and/or pet birds can sign up to receive email alerts from TDA focused on the health of domesticated birds in Tennessee. Notices may include, but are not limited to, new HPAI detections, changes to movement or sales requirements, and other issues affecting the well-being of domesticated birds. Enroll online at https://stateoftennessee.formstack.com/forms/domesticated_bird_health_notifications. In Weakley County, animal health officials have established a 20 kilometer (12.4 mile) zone surrounding the affected facility. Within the zone, commercial poultry will be tested and monitored for illness and movement of commercial poultry requires permitting until the zone is released. Animal Health staff members are calling backyard poultry owners closest to the site to explain the situation, answer questions, and provide information. If you have concerns about your location, please email Animal.Health@tn.gov or call 615-837-5120 and staff will help determine if your flock is under any restriction. HPAI is a highly transmissible disease known to be deadly for domesticated fowl. Fowl can be exposed to HPAI through human interactions and through contact with wild birds. This year, cases in Tennessee have sickened domesticated chickens, geese, and ducks in Obion, Tipton, Bledsoe, and Davidson Counties. There have also been confirmed cases of HPAI in wild birds, including ducks, geese, and eagles. Although HPAI does not pose a food safety risk, no infected poultry or products from sick birds are allowed to enter the food supply. Poultry and eggs are safe to eat when handled and cooked properly. The risk of human infection with avian influenza during poultry outbreaks is very low. In fact, no transmission to humans was reported during the outbreak that affected commercial poultry farms in Tennessee in 2017. Nationally, sick or dead farm birds can be reported to USDA at 1-866-536-7593 or, in Tennessee, to the State Veterinarian’s office at 615-837-5120. Sick or dead wild birds can be reported to the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency at www.tn.govwra/sick-birds.html. Find more biosecurity tips and HPAI resources online at www.tn.gov/agriculture/animals/animal-health-resources/animal-disease/avian-influenza.html. Social Media facebook twitter youtube instagram linkedin Related Topics USDA USDA APHIS NASS Tennessee Ag Stats UT Extension TSU Extension Programs Ag Enhancement (TAEP) Agricultural Crime Unit Agricultural Fairs Commodity Distribution Specialty Crop Block Grants Beef Promotion Program Grain Indemnity Fund Resources TN Agriculture Interactive Data TN Agriculture Economic Impact Tennessee Agriculture Summary Ag & Forestry Organizations Beginning Farmer Resources Public Records Request Featured Sites Online Pesticide System Burn Safe Pick Tennessee Products Tennessee Agricultural Museum Tennessee State Fair Ag Insider Magazine Rural Routes Newsletter Partners for Pollinators Department of Agriculture Dr. Charlie Hatcher, Commissioner 440 Hogan Road Nashville, TN 37220 (615) 837-5103 TN.Agriculture@tn.gov Chat Help Translate Font Size a- Normal A+ TN.gov Services TN.gov Directory Transparent TN Web Policies About Tennessee Title VI Accessibility Help & Contact Survey CloseClinical and economic burden of physician-diagnosed influenza in adults during the 2017/2018 epidemic season in Spain | BMC Public Health | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search BMC Public Health Home About Articles Submission Guidelines Collections Join the Editorial Board Submit manuscript Clinical and economic burden of physician-diagnosed influenza in adults during the 2017/2018 epidemic season in Spain Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 17 December 2022 Clinical and economic burden of physician-diagnosed influenza in adults during the 2017/2018 epidemic season in Spain Ángel Gil-de-Miguel1, Federico Martinón-Torres ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9023-581X2,3,4, Javier Díez-Domingo5, Raúl Ortiz de Lejarazu Leonardo6, Tomàs Pumarola7, Mafalda Carmo8, Georgina Drago9, Juan Luis López-Belmonte9, Hélène Bricout10, Caroline de Courville10 & …Esther Redondo Margüello11 Show authors BMC Public Health volume 22, Article number: 2369 (2022) Cite this article 1871 Accesses 13 Citations 3 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundInfluenza is an acutely debilitating respiratory infection, contributing significantly to outpatient visits and hospitalizations. Spain lacks comprehensive and updated data on the burden of influenza, particularly in the outpatient setting. Our study aimed to fill this gap by estimating the clinical and economic burden of physician-diagnosed influenza cases in adults from four Spanish regions, stratified by age groups and presence of comorbidities.MethodsA retrospective cost-of-illness study was conducted using data from an electronic medical records database from the National Healthcare Service (NHS) of four Spanish regions for individuals aged ≥ 18 years diagnosed for influenza during the 2017/2018 epidemic season. Health resource utilization and related cost data were collected, including primary care visits, referrals to other specialists, visits to the emergency department, hospitalizations, and prescribed medicines.ResultsThe study reported a total of 28,381 patients aged ≥ 18 years diagnosed with influenza, corresponding to 1,804 cases per 100,000 population. Most patients were aged < 65 years: 60.5% (n = 17,166) aged 18–49 and 26.3% (n = 7,451) 50–64 years. A total of 39.2% (n = 11,132) of patients presented a comorbidity. Cardiovascular diseases were the most common comorbidity reported along with influenza. The mean healthcare cost per case was estimated at €235.1 in population aged 18–49 years, increasing by 1.7 and 4.9 times in those aged 50–64 (€402.0) and ≥ 65 (€1,149.0), respectively. The mean healthcare cost per case was 3.2 times higher in patients with comorbidities. The total healthcare cost of medically attended influenza cases was mainly driven by primary care (45.1%) and hospitalization (42.0%). Patients aged 18–64 years old accounted for 61.9% of the costs of medically attended influenza. Irrespective of age, patients with comorbidities accounted for 67.1% of costs.ConclusionsSeason 2017/2018 was associated with a considerable burden of influenza in Spain, which increased with age and presence of comorbidities. Individuals with comorbidities accounted for most of the costs of influenza. Results suggest that population aged 18–64 years old is generating the highest share of costs to the NHS when all healthcare costs are considered. Preventive strategies targeting subjects with comorbidities, regardless of age, should be warranted. Peer Review reports BackgroundInfluenza is an acutely debilitating viral infection with a global estimated incidence rate of 5–10% in adults [1]. It is one of the most common respiratory infections, leading to a substantial disease burden throughout the world [2]. In Europe, influenza was ranked the infectious disease with the highest impact on disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), displaying simultaneously a high incidence, mortality and morbidity [3]. It is most commonly caused by influenza A or B viruses and occurs as seasonal epidemics, mostly during winter [4, 5]. Minor changes in haemagglutinin antigen of influenza viruses between influenza seasons result in annual epidemics and peaks between November and April months in countries in the Northern Hemisphere (including Spain) [6]. The severity of influenza may vary from mild to severe. While people with mild symptoms may not require any medical attention, some patients are at a greater risk of having severe complications, requiring outpatient medical treatment or even hospitalization [7, 8]. The most frequently analysed influenza complications are either pulmonary [9] or cardiovascular and cerebral stroke/ictus [10,11,12,13].In addition to the clinical burden, influenza seasonal epidemics also generate economic costs to society and cause congestion of healthcare services during seasonal peaks [14]. Therefore, estimating the economic burden—both direct and indirect—is of utmost importance to support public authorities in formulating the most effective prevention strategies to reduce the global disease burden [15]. Nevertheless, the economic burden of seasonal influenza remains poorly understood, especially in at-risk populations and in European Union countries, with emphasis being usually given to the clinical burden [16,17,18].Some studies have been conducted to estimate the economic burden of influenza in Spain; however, these are not updated and there are disparities in the results, depending on the source and used methodology [15, 19,20,21,22,23]. A recent systematic review identified the need to improve the identification of influenza cases and to better understand the current clinical and economic impact in Spain, particularly considering patients’ characteristics [15] and healthcare settings such as primary care and specialized outpatient care—which are not usually considered in economic impact studies.This study aims to fill this knowledge gap by analysing real-world data from an influenza epidemic season regarding the direct healthcare cost of medically attended influenza patients, according to age groups and presence of comorbidities. The direct healthcare cost of medically attended influenza is first assessed as a mean cost per patient in the studied regions, and then extrapolated to the whole country. The study also aims to enable a better understanding of patient’s characteristics and healthcare service consumption in the studied epidemic season.MethodsStudy designThe Burden of Acute Respiratory Infections (BARI) study is a multidimensional real-world evidence study assessing the clinical and economic burden of acute respiratory infections (influenza and respiratory syncytial virus) in Spain and Portugal [24]. We are reporting here the results for a retrospective cost-of-illness analysis conducted using data from a longitudinal electronic medical records database from four Spanish regions to estimate the direct healthcare cost per medically attended influenza case in adult patients during the 2017/2018 epidemic season, from the perspective of the Spanish National Health Service (NHS). This season was analysed as the used database was available only for two civil years (2017 and 2018).DatabaseThis study used an IQVIA database which includes anonymized data extracted from the electronic medical records (EMR) of four Spanish regions. The database includes all visits to these regions’ NHS between January 2017 and December 2018. The specific regions in the database cannot be disclosed due to confidentiality agreements in place. The information collected in the database is provided by the regions themselves. This database includes patients’ characteristics, all their visits to distinct NHS healthcare providers and their diagnosis leading to the healthcare visit as well as related comorbidities or other significant diseases. It enables a traceability of resource consumption per patient across distinct healthcare settings, namely including information from primary care general practitioners and nurses activities, specialized care (outpatient’s consultations), visits to the emergency department, hospitalizations and retail medicines prescribed by physicians. Information on acute and chronic diagnoses with date of diagnostic is available for every inhabitant, thus enabling the identification of individuals who had a potential influenza diagnosis as well as other medical conditions (comorbidities). The database does not include a linkage to influenza laboratory testing.As of 31st December 2018, the database contained longitudinal data of 1.9 million inhabitants from four Spanish regions, of which 1.6 million (82.8%) were aged 18 years or above. Amongst the adult population, 54.1% was aged between 18–49 years old, 23.9% between 50–64 and 22.0% aged 65 or above. The age profile of population included in the database is similar to the one from the overall Spanish population. In January 2019, Spain had 46.9 million inhabitants, of which 82.2% aged 18 years or above. Amongst this adult population, 51.2% was aged between 18–49 years old, 25.2% between 50–64 and 23.6% aged 65 or above [25].Case definitionAt hospital level, all regions used the International Classification of Diseases 9th Revision (ICD-9-MC) or 10th Revision (ICD-10-ES) to code the diagnosis and procedures. In primary care, two regions used the ICD-9-MC or ICD-10-ES classification, and other two used the International Classification of Primary Care version 2 (ICPC-2). These regions represented, respectively, 60.8% and 39.2% of the population covered by the database.The study population included only medically attended cases in individuals aged 18 years old or above with an influenza diagnosis. Influenza episodes were defined as those coded with ICPC-2 R80; ICD-9 487 or 488; or ICD-10 J09, J10, or J11; in any primary or secondary diagnosis field. The selected codes are in accordance with the literature [26, 27]. Patients receiving any of the aforementioned influenza diagnosis codes were defined as a medically attended influenza case. In hospitalizations where influenza ICD code was the secondary diagnosis, cases were not included if the primary diagnosis was due to the following reasons: musculoskeletal, births, alcohol, mental disease, programmed activity [24].The number of medically attended influenza cases were divided by the population in the database for the same age group to compute a rate of cases per 100,000 inhabitants. Cases were stratified by age (18–49, 50–64 or ≥ 65 years old) and by presence or absence of at least one comorbidity.Influenza seasonThe study period included influenza cases and consumed resources observed between September 2017 and June 2018, following the influenza season definition used by the national influenza surveillance system plus a one-month margin.ComorbiditiesActive diagnosis associated to the patients in the EMR during the analysed period (chronic or acute pathologies) were used to identify patients who had at least one medical condition regarded as a risk factor for severe influenza, in any primary or secondary diagnosis field, considering the following conditions: pregnancy, diabetes mellitus, respiratory or lung disease, cardiovascular, immunocompromised, chronic liver disease and chronic kidney disease (Supporting Materials Table S1).Resource utilization estimationAn influenza episode was defined as the day when the index diagnosis was made (index date), in primary care or at the hospital, together with a related period of 14 days before and after that date, using Ehlken et al. (2015) as a reference for the defined index period [28]. The healthcare resource consumption of patients during their influenza episode (index date ± 14 days) was derived from data on primary care (PC) visits, outpatient specialist (OP) consultations (cardiology, pneumology, internal medicine, amongst others), visits to the emergency department (ED), hospitalizations (HO) and retail prescription medicines (PM) prescribed by physicians. For hospitalizations, only stays with influenza coded as the primary or secondary diagnosis were included. Visits performed to different specialists or healthcare settings are individually accounted for, even if they occurred in the same day, as each will have its specific cost. Regarding medicines, the study included only prescribed retail PM which are potentially used for influenza-like illness (ILI) [29].The analysis of resource utilization comprised two steps. First, we assessed how many influenza cases visited at least once each of the healthcare setting during their influenza episode. Then, for those who visited the healthcare setting at least once, mean number of visits to each healthcare setting per influenza case were computed.Cost estimationThe analysis of direct costs was based on resource utilization data combined with the unit cost of each resource. The cost analysis comprised four steps and was stratified by age and/or by presence or absence of at least one comorbidity.Mean healthcare cost per case per settingFirstly, mean healthcare costs per case per setting were computed. At this stage, the previously computed mean number of visits to each healthcare setting of each influenza case during their influenza period were multiplied by the unit cost of each healthcare visit. The mean cost per influenza case per setting were computed for PC, OP, ED, HO and PM. By mean costs per case per setting, we mean, for instance, the mean cost of HO per influenza case amongst influenza cases who were hospitalized during their influenza episode.Mean healthcare cost per caseSecondly, these mean costs per case per setting were multiplied by the percentage of influenza cases in the database visiting each of the healthcare setting. For instance, the mean cost of HO per influenza case was obtained by multiplying the mean cost of HO amongst hospitalized influenza cases with the percentage of influenza cases who were hospitalized. The sum of the mean cost of PC, OP, ED, HO and PM per influenza case results in the mean healthcare cost per influenza case.Total healthcare cost of influenza cases in the databaseThe mean healthcare costs per case per setting were multiplied by the number of influenza cases visiting each healthcare setting in the database.Total extrapolated healthcare cost of medically attended influenza cases in SpainFinally, the healthcare cost of medically attended influenza was extrapolated for the whole country for 2017/2018. The mean healthcare costs of each influenza case were multiplied by the ratio of influenza cases per 100,000 people in the database, for each age group. This was then multiplied by the Spanish population in each age group, using official data published by the INE – Instituto Nacional de Estadística (National Statistics Institute) for resident population as of 1st of January 2019 [30].Unit costs of each resourceUnit cost per visit to each healthcare setting is not specific for influenza, except for hospitalization. Estimates of unit costs per type of healthcare visit were obtained from the eSalud Platform [31], considering official tariffs reported by Spanish regions, when available, and are detailed in Supporting Materials (Table S2). For hospitalizations, the cost of each hospitalization observed in the database is individually estimated. The 3 M™ All Patient Refined Diagnosis Related Groups (APR DRGs) system (version 32) is used to calculate the degree of complexity for each hospitalization episode, considering variables related to the patient and episode. This is used to compute units of hospital production (UHP) for costing purposes [32, 33]. Estimated hospital mean cost per UHP is established for each hospital in the database considering the operating costs incurred by the hospital to carry out its activity to the production incurred by the hospital, measured through UHP. The average cost per UHP is updated annually through the IQVIA (former IASIST) Hospital TOP 20 Program. Unit costs for each prescribed medicine were extracted from retail prices in IQVIA database and reflect the official prices in Spain.ResultsStudied populationBetween September 2017 and June 2018, 28,381 patients aged ≥ 18 years were identified in the database as having a diagnosis of influenza, representing 1.8% of the adult population in the database and corresponding to 1,804 cases per 100,000 people aged ≥ 18 years. The number of cases per 100,000 inhabitants per age group and per healthcare setting is summarized in Table 1. Most diagnosed cases were retrieved from the PC setting (95.0%).Table 1 Influenza cases per 100,000 people, in total and by those visiting each healthcare setting, stratified by age groups, 2017/2018 seasonFull size tableDemographics and clinical characteristicsThe demographic and clinical characteristics of influenza cases are summarized in Table 2. Most patients were aged 18–49 years (60.5%), followed by 50–64 years (26.3%) and ≥ 65 years (13.3%). The age profile of the patients varied across visited healthcare setting, with the population aged ≥ 65 years accounting for most of hospitalized influenza cases (66.3%).Table 2 Percentage of influenza cases, in total and by those visiting each healthcare setting, stratified by age groups and presence of comorbidities, 2017/2018 seasonFull size tableOverall, 39.2% of patients had one or more comorbidities along with influenza (Table 2). Considering only influenza patients who were hospitalized for influenza, the share of patients with at least one comorbidity was higher, at 61.8%, 89.2% and 95.0%, respectively, for population aged 18–49, 50–64 and ≥ 65 years. Cardiovascular diseases were the most frequent comorbidities among all age groups (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Percentage of patients diagnosed for influenza with a relevant comorbidity by age group, 2017/2018 seasonFull size imageResource utilizationInfluenza cases visiting each healthcare setting during their episodeTable 3 details the percentage of influenza cases who visited at least once each healthcare setting during their influenza episode, according to the patients’ age and presence of comorbidities.Table 3 Percentage of influenza cases who visited at least once each healthcare setting during their influenza episode, stratified by age groups and presence of comorbidities, 2017/2018 seasonFull size tableAlmost all influenza cases visited PC during their illness (98.5%). Hospitalization for influenza was observed in 5.0% of cases, ranging from 0.5% in individuals aged 18–49 years old without comorbidities to 32.5% in those aged ≥ 65 years with comorbidities. The ED was visited by 14.0% of cases during their influenza episode, ranging from 8.2% in individuals aged 18–49 years old without comorbidities to 44.7% in those aged ≥ 65 years with comorbidities. Most were prescribed some PM (range: 43.6 to 69.0%).Mean number of visits to each healthcare setting per caseThe estimated number of visits to each healthcare setting per case, amongst those who visited the healthcare setting at least once during their influenza episode, is detailed in Supporting Materials (Table S3). The table also includes the mean length-of-stay (LOS) for those hospitalized, which was the highest in patients aged 50–64 years old (9.9 days).Healthcare costMean healthcare cost per case per settingThe mean healthcare cost of visits to each healthcare setting per influenza case who visited each setting is detailed in Supporting Materials (Table S4) and presented in Fig. 2 for each age group.Fig. 2Mean healthcare cost per influenza case, by age groups, 2017/2018 season. a In patients aged 18–49 years old. b In patients aged 50–64 years old. c In patients aged ≥ 65 years oldFull size imageMean healthcare cost per caseConsidering the frequency of visits to each healthcare setting, the mean healthcare cost per influenza case in the database was estimated at €235.1, €402.0, and €1,149.0, for population aged 18–49, 50–64 and ≥ 65 years, respectively (Fig. 2).Total healthcare cost of influenza cases in the databaseThe 28,381 adults diagnosed with influenza in the four Spanish regions included in the study have generated a total cost to the NHS of €11.4 million, mainly driven by costs associated to PC (45.1%) and HO (42.0%). Patients with comorbidities accounted for 67.1% of the total healthcare costs of medically attended influenza and patients aged 18–64 years old for 61.9% (Fig. 3). The drivers of cost varied based on the age and comorbidities of patients, as can be observed in Table 4. In population aged 18–49 years old, costs were driven by PC, both in patients with and without comorbidities. In population aged 50–64 and ≥ 65 years old, costs were driven by PC in patients without comorbidities and by HO in patients with comorbidities.Fig. 3Total healthcare cost of influenza cases stratified by age groups and presence of comorbidities, 2017/2018 seasonFull size imageTable 4 Contribution of each healthcare setting to the total healthcare cost of influenza cases, stratified by age groups and presence of comorbidities (% of total cost observed in that patient group), 2017/2018 seasonFull size tableThe costs with PM per type of medicine are presented in Supporting Materials Table S5.Total extrapolated healthcare cost of medically attended influenza cases in SpainAge-specific reported cases of influenza per 100,000 population in the database in the 2017/2018 season were 2,016, 1,983 and 1,088, for the population groups aged 18–49, 50–64 and ≥ 65 years old, respectively. Extrapolating these data to the Spanish adult population, would result in an estimate of 690,395 cases of influenza requiring some medical attention, generating costs of €285.0 million during the 2017/2018 season, of which €125.4 million from PC, €9.7 million from OP, €21.8 million from ED, €122.9 million from HO and €5.1 million from PM.DiscussionOur study provides evidence of a high direct healthcare burden of medically attended influenza in adults during season 2017/2018 in Spain. To our knowledge, this is the first study estimating the healthcare cost of medically attended seasonal influenza cases in Spain over the last decade considering both patients’ age and comorbidities across distinct settings of care. To obtain these data we used an EMR based database including all visits to the NHS of the population from four Spanish regions between September 2017 and June 2018.In our study we report incidence rates of medically attended influenza per 100,000 of 1,804 for population aged ≥ 18 years old, 2,006 for those aged 18–64 and 1,088 for those aged ≥ 65 years old, which are close to those reported by the ScVGE – Sistema centinela de Vigilancia de la Gripe en España (National Epidemiology Surveillance Network)—in similar age groups, although ours is slightly lower in population aged ≥ 65 years old [34]. In both cases, incidence rates were higher in younger adults. The percentage of adult influenza cases in our study better resembles published estimates of influenza-related GP visits rates than estimates of influenza attack rates for Europe, as expected since only medically attended influenza cases are captured by our study [35].Our results exemplify the importance of studying influenza beyond the hospital setting to better understand the profile of infected patients seeking medical care. In agreement with a previous study [36], most influenza cases in the database were aged < 65 years (86.7%), a share that decreased to 33.7% in those hospitalized. Regarding the patients’ health status, 60.8% of those diagnosed with influenza did not have a relevant comorbidity. This share decreased to 10.3% in those hospitalized, in coherence with data reported by the ScVGE for this season [34]. Cardiovascular disease, compromised immunity, respiratory lung diseases and diabetes mellitus were the most frequently reported comorbidities, which is in line with evidence from other studies [9, 11, 12].Resource utilization per patient was higher in those with comorbidities, leading to a 3.2 times higher mean healthcare cost per influenza case in patients with comorbidities than in those without them. As expected, age was also associated with higher resource utilization—the mean healthcare cost per influenza case was 4.9 and 1.7 times higher in the ≥ 65 years and 50–64 years age groups (€1,149.0 and €402.0), respectively, when compared to the 18–49 years age group (€235.1). The increased resource utilization associated with age and comorbidities is aligned with previous findings for Spain [19]. Adults aged ≥ 65 years old have more medical comorbidities and a greater age-related reduction in immunity, thus increasing their risk of severe influenza [37].However, when the number of influenza cases was added to the equation, it was the population aged 18–64 years old who accounted for the majority (61.9%) of the costs of medically attended influenza. This evidence supports the importance of vaccination in this age group to strengthen the prevention of influenza transmission within households and communities—and even in younger age groups, as recommended by the Spanish Paediatrics Society [38]. Irrespective of age, patients with comorbidities accounted for 67.1% of costs. The total healthcare cost of medically attended influenza cases was mainly driven by primary care and hospitalization, as also reported by Gil-de-Miguel et al. (2022) [27].We estimated that medically attended influenza cases may have generated costs of €285.0 million to the Spanish NHS during 2017/2018, of which €125.4 million from primary care, €9.7 million from outpatient specialist care, €21.8 million from emergency department, €122.9 million from hospitalizations and €5.1 million from prescribed medicines. These estimates are higher than the ones reported by Gil-de-Miguel et al. (2022) [27]. However, in their study, only primary diagnoses were considered and data from 2015 was used [27], which could explain the differences.As influenza is a seasonal disease, and our study only analysed one season (2017/2018), these data cannot reliably be applied to other seasons, at least for the elderly population which was particularly affected. The analysed season had an overall moderate intensity in Spain, but high in population aged ≥ 65 years old [34]. For this age group, it was the season with the highest cumulative influenza incidence rate since the 2009/10 pandemic [34]. The season displayed a co-predominance of A(H3N2) and B/Yamagata strains in Spain. B/Yamagata strain was not included in the trivalent vaccine used in season 2017/2018 [34] and, for A(H3N2), the vaccine effectiveness was low to moderate in more severe influenza cases and no protective effect was observed in infections confirmed in primary care [34].Our study may underestimate the burden of influenza in Spain during this season, as we report hospitalization rates per 100,000 which are lower than those estimated by the ScVGE based on a sample of 16,810 notifications from 17 autonomous communities in the elderly population [34]. Furthermore, our study did not include visits to the private healthcare setting, out-of-pocket payments, costs with the treatment of influenza complications – such as cardiovascular events—nor indirect costs related to productivity losses. The latter is expected to be particularly important as most influenza patients in the database were aged 18 to 64 years old (86.7%) – thus in active age – and published studies suggest that, in this age group, indirect costs may account for at least 83% of the total economic burden of influenza [18, 39]. Previous studies for Spain have also reported that work absenteeism contributed to an important part of influenza economic burden [19, 40].Regarding medicines prescription, our results suggest that some costs could potentially be avoided, as they may not be required to treat influenza, such as antibiotics, as already documented in other studies [41, 42]. However, further studies would be needed to confirm this hypothesis.Results of this study should be interpreted having in mind its limitations. While access to the longitudinal EMR data of patients allows for a comprehensive characterization of consumed health care resources, the study relies on data from administrative databases which does not include a linkage to influenza laboratory testing. Our influenza definition relies on diagnosis codes used at primary and secondary care level. For hospitalizations, the used algorithm to identify influenza cases in administrative data using ICD classification is supported by literature [26]. In our study, 95.0% of influenza cases were diagnosed at primary care and, in two regions, the diagnosis code used to identify potential medically attended influenza cases in primary care setting was the ICPC-2 R80, which could include ILI cases, potentially leading to an overestimation of influenza. Nevertheless, this does not appear to be the case as, when comparing the incidence rates of influenza per 100,000 in our study with those reported by the national surveillance system for the same season, our rates are actually slightly lower. Furthermore, despite its limitations, the use of R80 code as a diagnosis code for influenza is common as it is the most specific code available when laboratory data is absent [27, 43,44,45]. EMR data is also subject to coding errors or missing information and coding practices may vary according to region, which can affect the interpretation of the study results. This may affect results, for example on presence of comorbidities, if not adequately registered. Additionally, to identify comorbidities, it was necessary that these were registered as active diagnosis during the analysed period of time (September to June), which may lead to an underestimation of the proportion of people with comorbidities; and to the inclusion in the sub-group of people without any comorbidities some that present comorbidities but which were not captured in the study due to the methodology. The resource utilization estimated for PC, OP, ED and PM during the patients’ influenza episodes (index date ± 14 days) followed the time period used by Ehlken et al. [28], and was needed for the healthcare settings (i.e. ED, OP and PM) that did not have a diagnosis associated to the visit. However, it may overestimate the number of visits or PM prescriptions attributed to influenza as it may include visits/prescriptions performed during the influenza period which are not caused by influenza. No control group was used to compare the resource utilization amongst patients with influenza versus patients within the same age group without influenza, as performed by Scholz et al. [36]. Importantly, the database is not aimed to be nationally representative as it includes population from four regions only. The absolute number of cases visiting each healthcare setting is presented in Supporting Materials (Table S6). Costs per visit to each healthcare setting may vary according to the region, affecting the extrapolation of costs at national level.ConclusionsThe BARI study contributed to a better understanding of the burden of influenza beyond hospitalization in Spain. Season 2017/2018 was associated with a considerable burden of influenza in Spain, which increased with age and presence of comorbidities. Individuals with comorbidities accounted for most of the costs of influenza. Results suggest that population aged 18–64 years old generated the highest share of costs to the NHS, when all healthcare costs were considered. Preventive strategies targeting subjects with comorbidities, regardless of age, should be warranted to reduce the burden of influenza. Availability of data and materials The data that support the findings of this study are available from IQVIA, but restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data are however available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of IQVIA. Those wishing to request the data from this study should contact the author Mafalda Carmo. ReferencesVaccines against influenza WHO position paper – November 2012. Releve epidemiologique hebdomadaire 2012, 87(47):461–476.Iuliano AD, Roguski KM, Chang HH, Muscatello DJ, Palekar R, Tempia S, Cohen C, Gran JM, Schanzer D, Cowling BJ, et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. The Lancet. 2018;391(10127):1285–300.Article Google Scholar Cassini A, Colzani E, Pini A, Mangen M-JJ, Plass D, McDonald SA, Maringhini G, van Lier A, Haagsma JA, Havelaar AH, et al. Impact of infectious diseases on population health using incidence-based disability-adjusted life years (DALYs): results from the Burden of communicable diseases in Europe study, European Union and European Economic Area countries, 2009 to 2013. Euro Surveill. 2018;23(16):17–00454.Article Google Scholar Seasonal influenza in adults: Transmission, clinical manifestations, and complications [https://www.uptodate.com/contents/seasonal-influenza-in-adults-transmission-clinical-manifestations-and-complications?search=influenza-&source=search_result&selectedTitle=2~150&usage_type=default&display_rank=2]Paules C, Subbarao K. Influenza. The Lancet. 2017;390(10095):697–708.Article Google Scholar Ghebrehewet S, MacPherson P, Ho A. Influenza BMJ. 2016;355: i6258.Article Google Scholar Szucs T. The socio-economic burden of influenza. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1999;44(suppl_2):11–5.Article CAS Google Scholar [https://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/communicable-diseases/influenza/vaccination]Viasus D, Oteo Revuelta JA, Martínez-Montauti J, Carratalà J. Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09-related pneumonia and other complications. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2012;30:43–8.Article Google Scholar Lichenstein R, Magder LS, King RE, King JC Jr. The relationship between influenza outbreaks and acute ischemic heart disease in Maryland residents over a 7-year period. J Infect Dis. 2012;206(6):821–7.Article Google Scholar Warren-Gash C, Bhaskaran K, Hayward A, Leung GM, Lo S-V, Wong C-M, Ellis J, Pebody R, Smeeth L, Cowling BJ. Circulating influenza virus, climatic factors, and acute myocardial infarction: a time series study in England and Wales and Hong Kong. J Infect Dis. 2011;203(12):1710–8.Article Google Scholar Warren-Gash C, Smeeth L, Hayward AC. Influenza as a trigger for acute myocardial infarction or death from cardiovascular disease: a systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis. 2009;9(10):601–10.Article Google Scholar Macias AE, McElhaney JE, Chaves SS, Nealon J, Nunes MC, Samson SI, Seet BT, Weinke T, Yu H. The disease burden of influenza beyond respiratory illness. Vaccine. 2021;39(Suppl 1):A6–14.Article CAS Google Scholar García A. Ortiz de Lejarazu R, Reina J, Callejo D, Cuervo J, Morano Larragueta R: Cost-effectiveness analysis of quadrivalent influenza vaccine in Spain. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016;12(9):2269–77.Article Google Scholar Alberto Pérez Rubio LPA. José María Eiros Bouza: Seasonal flu in Spain clinical and economic burden and vaccination programs. Clin Med. 2019;153:16–27. Google Scholar de Francisco SN, Donadel M, Jit M, Hutubessy R. A systematic review of the social and economic burden of influenza in low- and middle-income countries. Vaccine. 2015;33(48):6537–44.Article Google Scholar Roguski KM, Rolfes MA, Reich JS, Owens Z, Patel N, Fitzner J, Cozza V, Lafond KE, Azziz-Baumgartner E, Iuliano AD. Variability in published rates of influenza-associated hospitalizations: a systematic review, 2007–2018. J Glob Health. 2020;10(2):020430–020430.Article Google Scholar de Courville C, Cadarette SM, Wissinger E, Alvarez FP: The economic burden of influenza among adults aged 18 to 64: A systematic literature review. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses, n/a(n/a).Badia Llach X, Roset Gamisans M, Francés Tudel JM, Alvarez Sanz C, Rubio Terrés C. Study of flu costs. Aten Primaria. 2006;38(5):260–7.Article Google Scholar Galante M, Garin O, Sicuri E, Cots F, García-Altés A, Ferrer M, Dominguez À, Alonso J. Health services utilization, work absenteeism and costs of pandemic influenza A (H1N1) 2009 in Spain: a multicenter-longitudinal study. PLoS ONE. 2012;7(2): e31696.Article CAS Google Scholar Soto M, Sampietro-Colom L, Vilella A, Pantoja E, Asenjo M, Arjona R, Hurtado JC, Trilla A, Alvarez-Martínez MJ, Mira A, et al. Economic impact of a new rapid PCR assay for detecting influenza virus in an emergency department and hospitalized patients. PLoS ONE. 2016;11(1):e0146620–e0146620.Article Google Scholar Albertí C, Orriols R, Manzanera R, Jardí J. Flu and other acute respiratory infections in the working population. the impact of influenza A (H1N1) epidemic. Arch Bronconeumol. 2010;46(12):634–9.Article Google Scholar San-Román-Montero JM, Gil Prieto R, Gallardo Pino C, Hinojosa Mena J, Zapatero Gaviria A. Gil de Miguel A: Inpatient hospital fatality related to coding (ICD-9-CM) of the influenza diagnosis in Spain (2009–2015). BMC Infect Dis. 2019;19(1):700–700.Article Google Scholar Froes F, Carmo M, Lopes H, Bizouard G, Gomes C, Martins M, Bricout H, de Courville C, de Sousa JC, Rabaçal C, et al. Excess hospitalizations and mortality associated with seasonal influenza in Portugal, 2008–2018. BMC Infect Dis. 2022;22(1):726.Article CAS Google Scholar INE: Población residente por grupo de edad, a 1 enero de cada año, 2008–2019. In.: Instituto Nacional de Estadística; 2020.Hamilton MA, Calzavara A, Emerson SD, Djebli M, Sundaram ME, Chan AK, Kustra R, Baral SD, Mishra S, Kwong JC. Validating International classification of disease 10th revision algorithms for identifying influenza and respiratory syncytial virus hospitalizations. PLoS ONE. 2021;16(1): e0244746.Article CAS Google Scholar Gil de Miguel Á, Eiros Bouza JM, Martínez Alcorta LI, Callejo D, Miñarro C, Vallejo-Aparicio LA, García A, Tafalla M, Cambronero MDR, Rodríguez R et al: Direct Medical Costs of Four Vaccine-Preventable Infectious Diseases in Older Adults in Spain. PharmacoEconomics - open 2022, 6(4):509–518.Ehlken B, Anastassopoulou A, Hain J, Schröder C, Wahle K. Cost for physician-diagnosed influenza and influenza-like illnesses on primary care level in Germany – results of a database analysis from May 2010 to April 2012. BMC Public Health. 2015;15(1):578.Article Google Scholar Vergu E, Grais RF, Sarter H, Fagot J-P, Lambert B, Valleron A-J, Flahault A. Medication sales and syndromic surveillance. France Emerg Infect Dis. 2006;12(3):416–21.Article Google Scholar INE: Resident population in Spain as of 1st of January 2019 In., 2021 edn: Instituto Nacional de Estadística; 2019.eSalud - Información económica del sector sanitario [http://oblikue.com/bddcostes/]García-Eroles L, Illa C, Arias A, Casas M. Los Top 20 2000: objetivos, ventajas y limitaciones del método. Rev Calid Asist. 2001;16(2):107–16.Article Google Scholar Sánchez-Martínez F, Abellán-Perpiñán JM, Martínez-Pérez JE, Puig-Junoy J. Cost accounting and public reimbursement schemes in Spanish hospitals. Health Care Manag Sci. 2006;9(3):225–32.Article Google Scholar III IdSC: Informe de Vigilancia de la Gripe en España, Temporada 2017–2018. In. Edited by España SdVdlGe.Preaud E, Durand L, Macabeo B, Farkas N, Sloesen B, Palache A, Shupo F, Samson SI. Annual public health and economic benefits of seasonal influenza vaccination: a European estimate. BMC Public Health. 2014;14(1):813.Article Google Scholar Scholz S, Damm O, Schneider U, Ultsch B, Wichmann O, Greiner W. Epidemiology and cost of seasonal influenza in Germany - a claims data analysis. BMC Public Health. 2019;19(1):1090.Article Google Scholar Czaja CA, Miller L, Alden N, Wald HL, Cummings CN, Rolfes MA, Anderson EJ, Bennett NM, Billing LM, Chai SJ, et al. Age-related differences in hospitalization rates, clinical presentation, and outcomes among older adults hospitalized with influenza-U.S. influenza hospitalization surveillance network (FluSurv-NET). Open Forum Infect Dis. 2019;6(7):ofz225.Article Google Scholar AEP CAdVdl: Vacunación frente a la gripe estacional en la infancia y la adolescencia. Recomendaciones 2021–2022. In. Edited by [Internet] A; 2021.Molinari N-AM, Ortega-Sanchez IR, Messonnier ML, Thompson WW, Wortley PM, Weintraub E, Bridges CB: The annual impact of seasonal influenza in the US: Measuring disease burden and costs. Vaccine 2007, 25(27):5086–5096.Mariana Galante OG, Elisa Sicuri, Francesc Cots, Anna García-Altés, Montserrat Ferrer, Àngela Dominguez, Jordi Alonso Health Services Utilization, Work Absenteeism and Costs of Pandemic Influenza A (H1N1) 2009 in Spain: A Multicenter-Longitudinal Study PLoS ONE 2012 7Smith ER, Fry AM, Hicks LA, Fleming-Dutra KE, Flannery B, Ferdinands J, Rolfes MA, Martin ET, Monto AS, Zimmerman RK, et al. Reducing antibiotic use in ambulatory care through influenza vaccination. Clin Infect Dis. 2020;71(11):e726–34.Article CAS Google Scholar Klein EY, Schueller E, Tseng KK, Morgan DJ, Laxminarayan, Nandi A. The impact of influenza vaccination on antibiotic use in the United States, 2010–2017. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2020;7(7):ofaa223.Article Google Scholar Páscoa R, Rodrigues AP, Silva S, Nunes B, Martins C. Comparison between influenza coded primary care consultations and national influenza incidence obtained by the General Practitioners Sentinel Network in Portugal from 2012 to 2017. PLoS ONE. 2018;13(2): e0192681.Article Google Scholar Gunnes N, Gjessing HK, Bakken IJ, Ghaderi S, Gran JM, Hungnes O, Magnus P, Samuelsen SO, Skrondal A, Stoltenberg C, et al. Seasonal and pandemic influenza during pregnancy and risk of fetal death: a Norwegian registry-based cohort study. Eur J Epidemiol. 2020;35(4):371–9.Article Google Scholar Ghaderi S, Berg-Hansen P, Bakken IJ, Magnus P, Trogstad L, Håberg SE. Hospitalization following influenza infection and pandemic vaccination in multiple sclerosis patients: a nationwide population-based registry study from Norway. Eur J Epidemiol. 2020;35(4):355–62.Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank all investigators who participated in the BARI study, and José María Guillén for assistance during the project design and results assessment.FundingThe BARI study was funded by Sanofi.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsPublic Health and Medical Specialties Department, Health Sciences Faculty, Juan Carlos University, Madrid, SpainÁngel Gil-de-MiguelGenetics, Vaccines and Paediatric Infectious Diseases Research Group (GENVIP), Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago and Universidad de Santiago de Compostela (USC), Galicia, SpainFederico Martinón-TorresCentro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, SpainFederico Martinón-TorresTranslational Pediatrics and Infectious Diseases, Hospital Clínico Universitario and Universidad de Santiago de Compostela (USC), Galicia, SpainFederico Martinón-TorresVaccine Research Department, FISABIO, Valencia, SpainJavier Díez-DomingoNational Influenza Centre, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, SpainRaúl Ortiz de Lejarazu LeonardoVirology Section, Department of Microbiology, Barcelona Centre for International Health Research (CRESIB, Hospital Clínic – Universitat de Barcelona), Barcelona, SpainTomàs PumarolaIQVIA, Barcelona, SpainMafalda CarmoSanofi, Barcelona, SpainGeorgina Drago & Juan Luis López-BelmonteSanofi, Lyon, FranceHélène Bricout & Caroline de CourvilleInternational Health Centre Madrid Health, City Council of Madrid, Madrid, SpainEsther Redondo MargüelloAuthorsÁngel Gil-de-MiguelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFederico Martinón-TorresView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJavier Díez-DomingoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRaúl Ortiz de Lejarazu LeonardoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTomàs PumarolaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMafalda CarmoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGeorgina DragoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJuan Luis López-BelmonteView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHélène BricoutView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCaroline de CourvilleView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEsther Redondo MargüelloView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsAll authors have contributed to the protocol revision, critical analysis, and discussion of the study results, and collaborated for the redaction and revision of the manuscript. MC has led the technical analysis of the BARI study and the drafting of the outline and manuscript. The author(s) read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Ángel Gil-de-Miguel.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate The study was conducted following the ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and the local regulation, including privacy laws. The protocol of the BARI study was validated by a panel of clinical experts, classified by the Agency of Medicines and Medical Devices (AEMPS) as an observational study and approved by the Ethics Committee of Hospital Clinic de Barcelona (HCB/2020/1132). Informed consent to participate was waived by the same ethics committee that approved the study (Ethics Committee of Hospital Clinic de Barcelona). Consent for publication NA Competing interest Drago G, López-Belmonte JL, de Courville C and Bricout H are Sanofi employees and may hold shares and/or stock options in the company. Carmo M is an IQVIA employee. Gil-de-Miguel A and Díez-Domingo J have received fees from Sanofi. Martinón Torres F received honoraria from GSK group of companies, Pfizer Inc, Sanofi, MSD, Seqirus, and Janssen for taking part in advisory boards and expert meetings and for acting as a speaker in congresses outside the scope of the submitted work. Martinón Torres F has also acted as principal investigator in randomized controlled trials of the above-mentioned companies as well as Ablynx, Gilead, Regeneron, Roche, Abbott, Novavax, and MedImmune, with honoraria paid to his institution. Martinón Torres F receives support for research activities from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (Proyecto de Investigación en Salud, Acción Estratégica en Salud): Fondo de Investigación Sanitaria (FIS; PI070069 / PI1000540 / PI1601569 / PI1901090) del plan nacional de I + D + I and FEDER and Proyectos GaIN Rescata-Covid_IN845D 2020/23 (GAIN, Xunta de Galicia). Ortiz de Lejarazu R received honoraria from AstraZeneca, GSK, MSD, Roche, Sanofi and Seqirus for taking part in advisory boards and expert meetings and for acting as a speaker in congresses outside the scope of the submitted work. Ortiz de Lejarazu R has been until 2019 Director of the National Influenza Centre, Valladolid, Spain without any salary for that position and has participate in regular commitments of Influenza and other respiratory virus surveillance. Pumarola T Received honoraria from Roche, Sanofi, Seegene and Seqirus for taking part in advisory boards and expert meetings and for acting as a speaker in congresses outside the scope of the submitted work. Redondo Margüello E received honoraria from GSK group of companies, Pfizer Inc, Sanofi, and MSD, for taking part in advisory boards and expert meetings and for acting as a speaker in congresses outside the scope of the submitted work. Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationAdditional file 1: Table S1. Diagnostic codes used to identify comorbidities for influenza. Table S2. Unit costs considered for each healthcare visit. (a) eSalud original reference: Consejería de Sanidad y Políticas Sociales (2020). Resolución de 6 de febrero de 2020. Diario Oficial de Extremadura, número 28, 11 de febrero de 2020 [29]. (b) Mean cost computed, using the cost for visit in regular working period of the center and outside of that period. eSalud original reference: Consejería de Salud (2018). Orden de 8 de mayo de 2018. Boletín Oficial de la Junta de Andalucía núm. 92, 15 de mayo de 2018 [29].Original costs were updated to 2020 costs using the yearly change in the consumer price index published by the National Statistics Institute of Spain [43]. (c) Mean cost computed, using the cost for first outpatient visit (consulta externa) from two eSalud original references: 1. Consejería de Sanidad y Políticas Sociales (2020). Resolución de 6 de febrero de 2020. Diario Oficial de Extremadura, número 28, 11 de febrero de 2020; 2. Osakidetza-Servicio Vasco de Salud (2020). Acuerdo del Consejo de Administración de 19 de diciembre de2019. Boletín Oficial del País Vasco, nº 21, 31 de enero de 2020 [29]. Mean cost computed, using the cost for subsequent outpatient visits (consulta externa) from two eSalud original references: 1. Consejeríade Sanidad y Políticas Sociales (2020). Resolución de 6 de febrero de 2020. Diario Oficial de Extremadura, número 28, 11 de febrero de 2020; 2. Osakidetza-Servicio Vasco de Salud (2020). Acuerdo del Consejo de Administración de 19 de diciembre de 2019. Boletín Oficial del País Vasco, nº 21, 31 de enero de 2020 [29]. (d) eSalud original reference: Osakidetza-Servicio Vasco de Salud (2020). Acuerdo del Consejo de Administración de 19 de diciembre de 2019. Boletín Oficial del PaísVasco, nº 21, 31 de enero de 2020 [29].Table S3. Mean number of visits to each healthcare setting per influenza case visiting the healthcare setting at least once during their episode and mean length-of-stay for those hospitalized, stratified by age groups and by presence of comorbidities, 2017/2018 season. ED – Emergency Department; HO – Hospital (Inpatient);LOS – Length-of-stay; OP – Outpatient (specialized care); PC – Primary Care. *Each case (patient) may then visit each service more than once, even in the same day (e.g. visit to general practitioner and visit to nurse in the same primary care centre). Table S4. Mean healthcare costs of visits to each healthcare setting per influenza case who visited each healthcare setting, stratified by age groups and presence of comorbidities (€ per case), 2017/2018 season. ED – Emergency Department; HO – Hospital (Inpatient);OP – Outpatient (specialized care); PC – Primary Care; PM – Prescription Medicines. Table S5. Mean cost of retail prescription medicines per influenza case with at least a prescription, by type of prescription medicine;stratified by age groups, 2017/2018 season. COPD - Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; PM – Prescription Medicines. Table S6. Number of influenza cases visiting each healthcare setting during their influenza episode, stratified by age groups and by presence of comorbidities, 2017/2018 season. ED –Emergency Department; HO – Hospital (Inpatient); OP – Outpatient (specialized care); PC – Primary Care; PM – Prescription Medicines.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleGil-de-Miguel, Á., Martinón-Torres, F., Díez-Domingo, J. et al. Clinical and economic burden of physician-diagnosed influenza in adults during the 2017/2018 epidemic season in Spain. BMC Public Health 22, 2369 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-14732-2Download citationReceived: 03 July 2022Accepted: 25 November 2022Published: 17 December 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-14732-2Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsInfluenzaBurdenEpidemiologySpainHealth resourcesHospitalizationPrimary health careMedical emergency serviceCost analysisOutpatients Download PDF Advertisement BMC Public Health ISSN: 1471-2458 Contact us General enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.The Flu Is Here: Here's How to Get Through It > News > Yale Medicine Skip to Main Content1-877-YALEMDSSearch forSpecialistsFact SheetsDepartmentsClinical TrialsNewsPatient ToolsFor Medical Professionals1-877-YALEMDSFamily HealthThe Flu Is Here: Here's How to Get Through ItBY CARRIE MACMILLAN January 8, 2024Medical experts discuss Tamiflu, distinguishing flu from COVID, and more.[Originally published: Dec. 16, 2022. Updated: Jan. 8, 2024.]These days, a fever, sore throat, and body aches typically mean one of two unwelcome viruses: flu or COVID-19. What's more, both are on the rise, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). In fact, the theoretical “tripledemic,” which describes a combination of flu, COVID-19, and RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) cases occurring at the same time, is more of a “twindemic,” with COVID and flu cases spiking and RSV numbers steadily declining in children. One good piece of news is that it’s not too late to get an annual flu shot or updated COVID-19 vaccine. “It’s important to remember that flu is a disease that kills thousands of people every year,” says Thomas Murray, MD, PhD, a pediatric infectious diseases specialist. “While the flu vaccine might not keep everyone from getting flu, it will help prevent its spread and help keep people out of the hospital. If more people are protected from flu and therefore stay out of the hospital, it frees up resources to better care for anyone who comes in with any problem.” We talked more with Dr. Murray and Matthew Ellman, MD, a Yale Medicine primary care physician and director of Yale Medicine Internal Medicine Associates, about all things flu. Can you tell flu and COVID apart?While the most common flu symptoms remain the same year to year, COVID and its evolving subvariants, including JN.1 (a strain that appears to be highly transmissible), have created more of a puzzle when it comes to differentiating it from other illnesses. For the most part, flu is notable for its rapid onset and symptoms such as a fever of 100 to 104 degrees, muscle pains, and a non-productive cough, he says. “But it’s important to note that older people and those with issues with their immune system might not get a fever,” Dr. Ellman says. Dr. Murray agrees that it can be “very difficult” to differentiate among possible reasons a person is ill, including flu, COVID, and other respiratory illnesses. “Sudden onset of symptoms, in general, is more likely to be flu, but it’s certainly not a guarantee,” he says.Should you get tested for flu and COVID?Since home rapid COVID tests are readily available, it’s a good idea to test for it first when you have any symptoms associated with a virus, doctors say. However, a negative rapid COVID doesn’t mean you’re in the clear, Dr. Murray cautions. That’s because you could have COVID and it’s not yet showing up on the test (rapid tests are not as “sensitive” as PCR tests), or you could have flu or another illness. “Therefore, it’s best to stay home when you have any symptoms that could be flu or COVID. And if you go out in public, wear a mask,” Dr. Murray says. If a test is not easily available or if you know you were exposed to flu and/or COVID, it’s also fine for people who are otherwise in good health to stay home and skip the test. However, if you are considered “high risk” for complications from either illness, you may want a test to confirm it; you may be eligible for antiviral treatments (more on those below). Dr. Murray gives the following example of when a test is unnecessary: “If someone in your house has flu and two days later you have a fever, muscle aches, and chills, I don't think you need a test. You've got flu,” he says. “But if you don’t have a known exposure, or you went to a party, and it’s unclear if people there had COVID, flu, or anything else, then if you really want to know, you should test.”How do you treat flu?For most healthy children and adults, home care is the best way to treat flu. This includes rest, drinking plenty of fluids, and, if needed, taking over-the-counter medications to lower fevers or reduce muscle pain. But for those at risk of severe disease or complications from flu, an antiviral treatment is recommended. And the list of qualifications for risk of significant illness is quite long, notes Dr. Ellman. “This includes anyone over age 65, children under age 2, pregnant women or women who have delivered a baby within two weeks, people in nursing homes and long-term care facilities, and those with chronic asthma, heart conditions, diabetes, cancer, obesity, and more,” he says. The first antiviral treatment recommended for children and adults is typically oseltamivir (brand name: Tamiflu). The medication, which comes in pill and liquid form, is taken twice a day for five days and should be started within 48 hours of symptom onset. It’s important to know that antiviral medications take a little time to work. “They will shorten the course of illness by a couple of days, and the earlier you take it, the better,” Dr. Murray says. There are also other antiviral treatments for children and adults, Dr. Murray notes. The Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC) provides information on them here, as well as a complete list of conditions that make people more susceptible to developing serious complications from the flu. Tamiflu side effects, which include nausea and vomiting, are rare in adults, Dr. Ellman says, but children are more likely to experience gastrointestinal symptoms. In rare cases, some children also experience neuropsychiatric symptoms, Dr. Murray says. These can include delirium, delusions, tremors, and anxiety symptoms, among others, so they must be monitored for changes in behavior while on the drug. “If a child is hospitalized or if they have underlying problems that put them at high risk for being admitted to the hospital or having a serious illness, we would treat them with antivirals because the potential benefits outweigh the adverse effects,” says Dr. Murray. “But with children who are otherwise healthy, parents have to decide if the benefits are worth the side effects that come with antiviral treatment.” The other value of antiviral flu treatments, Dr. Murray says, is that they can be used prophylactically with high-risk close contacts. “If you have a household member who has an immune problem, cancer, or a lung problem and they're at a very high risk for being hospitalized from flu, then you can give these medicines to prevent influenza once they've been exposed to a close contact,” he says.When should you seek medical attention?Most people who get the flu will recover within a few days to about two weeks, but there are risks of complications, including pneumonia. For children, Dr. Murray says parents should look out for breathing trouble and dehydration (low urine output, including few to no wet diapers in babies). “If you have any concerns, call your pediatrician,” he says. “And if a child who has flu starts to feel better and then suddenly gets worse, call your provider right away because sometimes they can have a bacterial infection after influenza.”Is there an amoxicillin shortage?Many bacterial infections require antibiotic treatment. Unfortunately, there continues to be reported shortages of amoxicillin, a common medication. But medical experts stress that while this has been the case on and off, other antibiotics are available that can be used to treat ear infections, pneumonia, and other issues.Can you get flu twice in one season?During flu season, multiple strains—flu A and B—circulate. After infection with one strain, you should have immunity from that strain for the rest of the flu season. However, you could get infected with a different strain, Dr. Murray points out.Should older adults get a different type of flu shot?The CDC recommends that people 65 and older who have not yet gotten their flu vaccine try to find a specially formulated one because they are more at risk for serious illness. There are three types: Fluzone high-dose quadrivalent vaccine, Fluad quadrivalent adjuvanted flu vaccine, and Flublok quadrivalent recombinant flu vaccine. According to the CDC, the recommendation was based on a review of studies suggesting that, for this age group, these vaccines are potentially more effective than standard flu vaccines. Of the three recommended for older adults, Fluzone carries the most evidence of superior efficacy over the standard flu vaccine, according to the CDC. A 2014 study in The New England Journal of Medicine showed Fluzone to be 24% more effective at flu prevention in people 65 and older than the standard vaccine.Read more Yale Medicine newsRelated Fact SheetsInfluenza (Flu)The flu is a common contagious viral infection that attacks the respiratory system. Learn about symptoms and treatment.Related Terms:Influenza (flu)More news from Yale MedicineFamily HealthDoctors & AdviceMore News From Yale MedicineAbout UsContact UsDonateReferring DoctorsClinical Keywords333 Cedar St.New Haven, CT 06510Yale School of MedicineYale UniversityWebsite FeedbackTerms & Privacy PoliciesAccessibility at YSMPatient RightsHIPAA at YaleManage Cookie PreferencesCopyright 2024 Yale Medicine [2419,8006,9736]{"namedChunks":["modules-news-news-details-components-NewsDetails-newsDetails"]}Protect Your Family From Fraudulent Flu Products | FDA Skip to main content Skip to FDA Search Skip to in this section menu Skip to footer links An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know The .gov means it’s official.Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. On Oct. 1, 2024, the FDA began implementing a reorganization impacting many parts of the agency. We are in the process of updating FDA.gov content to reflect these changes. U.S. Food and Drug Administration Search Menu Search FDA Submit search Featured Report a Product Problem Contact FDA FDA Guidance Documents Recalls, Market Withdrawals and Safety Alerts Press Announcements Warning Letters Advisory Committees En Español Products Food Drugs Medical Devices Radiation-Emitting Products Vaccines, Blood, and Biologics Animal and Veterinary Cosmetics Tobacco Products Topics About FDA Combination Products Regulatory Information Safety Emergency Preparedness International Programs News and Events Training and Continuing Education Inspections and Compliance Science and Research Information For Consumers Patients Industry Health Professionals Federal, State and Local Officials In this section: Consumer Updates Consumer Updates Animal & Veterinary Children's Health Cosmetics Dietary Supplements Drugs Food Medical Devices Nutrition Radiation-Emitting Products Tobacco Products Vaccines, Blood & Biologics Artículos para el consumidor en español Home For Consumers Consumer Updates Protect Your Family From Fraudulent Flu Products Consumer Updates Protect Your Family From Fraudulent Flu Products Subscribe to Email Updates Share Post Linkedin Email Print Image Avoid using imported medicines, especially for children. Medications from other countries might not have been evaluated for safety and effectiveness. These products may be addictive or contain other dangerous ingredients. Español The fall and winter flu season may bring out dishonest sellers hawking fraudulent products to unsuspecting consumers. Some of these sellers illegally offer unproven products that claim to prevent, mitigate, treat, or cure the flu – even though they have not been evaluated or approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for safety and effectiveness. These products can be found online, including popular marketplaces, and in retail stores. They may be labeled as dietary supplements, foods, hand sanitizers, nasal sprays, or devices. These products might be dangerous to you and your family. The FDA urges consumers to avoid fraudulent flu products and offers some tips on how to spot them. A Flu Vaccine Is the Best Prevention Flu is a serious disease, caused by influenza viruses, that can lead to hospitalization and even death. Getting a flu vaccine is the best way to prevent this infectious disease and its serious complications. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend that everyone age 6 months and older get vaccinated every year against influenza. This is particularly so for people at an increased risk for serious complications, including young children, adults 65 years and older, and those with chronic medical conditions. For more information on flu vaccine recommendations, visit this CDC page. The FDA has approved numerous vaccines for the prevention of influenza. To find a flu vaccine near you, visit this page. FDA-Approved Antiviral Medications for Flu If you do get the flu, there are FDA-approved antiviral drugs, available by prescription from your health care professional, to treat it. There are several FDA-approved antiviral drugs recommended by the CDC for use against circulating influenza viruses. These drugs work best if started soon after the onset of symptoms (within 48 hours). Flu antiviral medications are used to prevent or treat flu and are available by prescription in the form of pills, liquids, inhalers, and intravenous infusion. The various products are all approved for adolescent and adult use, and they differ in the ages for which they are approved to treat infants and children, ranging from 2-weeks-old to age 12. If you get the flu, antiviral medications can make your illness milder and may make you feel better faster. Antiviral medications work best when started within the first two days of getting sick. If you are exposed to the flu, antiviral medication can help prevent you from becoming sick. Talk to your health care professional if you have been or may be near a person with the flu. If you think you have the flu, talk to your health care professional. There are FDA-approved drugs to help with the flu. Types of Fraudulent Flu Products There are no legally marketed over-the-counter (OTC, or non-prescription) drugs to prevent, treat, or cure the flu. But there are legally marketed OTC drugs to reduce fever and to relieve muscle aches, congestion, and other symptoms typically associated with the flu. Dietary supplements, conventional foods (such as some herbal teas), or devices (such as certain air filters and light therapies) that fraudulently claim to prevent, mitigate, treat, or cure the flu have not been evaluated by the FDA for safety and effectiveness. The FDA is particularly concerned that fraudulent products might cause people to delay, forgo, or stop the medical treatment they need, leading to serious and life-threatening harm. The ingredients in fraudulent products could lead to unexpected side effects and interactions with other medications people may be taking. Protect yourself and your family by looking out for potentially fraudulent flu and antiviral products being sold without a prescription, which may claim to: Reduce the severity and length of flu or other viral infections. Boost your immunity naturally without a flu vaccine. Act as a safe and effective alternative to the flu vaccine. Prevent catching the flu or viral infections. Be an effective treatment for flu or viral infections. Provide faster recovery from the flu or viral infections. Support your body’s natural immune defenses to fight off flu or other viruses. Find Out if Your Online Pharmacy Is Safe Fraudsters take advantage of unsuspecting people through websites appearing to be online pharmacies selling prescription drugs. Legitimate online pharmacies do exist. But so do many websites that look like safe online pharmacies but are actually fraudulent and engaging in illegal activity. These websites may be selling unapproved drugs that may be dangerous. Unsure about an online pharmacy? Visit the FDA’s BeSafeRx campaign to learn how to safely buy prescription medicines online. If you have a question about a treatment or product, talk to your doctor or other health care professional. There Are No FDA-Approved Homeopathic Products At your pharmacy and online, you may see products being sold and advertised as homeopathic. The FDA is not aware of any proven benefits of these products. Homeopathic products are generally labeled as containing very small amounts of highly diluted substances, including ingredients from plants, animal or human sources, bacteria, minerals, and chemicals. The FDA has found that some of these products contain active drug ingredients in levels that far exceed the amount stated on the product’s label and could cause significant harm to children. Therefore, we urge caution if you are thinking about giving homeopathic flu, cough, and cold medicines to children. There are no FDA-approved homeopathic products. Homeopathic products sold in the U.S. have not been approved by the FDA for any use and may not meet modern standards for safety, effectiveness, and quality. Content current as of: 12/13/2022 Regulated Product(s) Biologics Dietary Supplements Drugs Food & Beverages Medical Devices Over-the-Counter Drugs Health Topic(s) Infectious Disease Flu Consumer Updates Animal & Veterinary Children's Health Cosmetics Dietary Supplements Drugs Food Medical Devices Nutrition Radiation-Emitting Products Tobacco Products Vaccines, Blood & Biologics Artículos para el consumidor en español Consumer Updates Email Subscribe to receive Consumer Updates email notifications. Subscribe to Consumer Updates Footer Links FDA Archive About FDA Accessibility Visitor Information Website Policies / Privacy No FEAR Act Vulnerability Disclosure Policy FOIA HHS.gov USA.gov Contact FDA Follow FDA on Facebook Follow FDA on X Follow FDA on Instagram Follow FDA on LinkedIn View FDA videos on YouTube Subscribe to FDA RSS feeds FDA Homepage Contact Number 1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332) Back to TopMonocyte distribution width as a pragmatic screen for SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infection | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Monocyte distribution width as a pragmatic screen for SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infection Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 13 December 2022 Monocyte distribution width as a pragmatic screen for SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infection Oluwakemi Badaki-Makun1,2, Scott Levin2,3,4,5, Arnaud Debraine4,5, Benjamin Hernried3, Alexandra Malinovska3,6, Aria Smith2,3,5, Matthew Toerper2,3,5, Katherine Z. J. Fenstermacher3, Taylor Cottle3, Malgorzata Latallo3, Richard E. Rothman3 & …Jeremiah S. Hinson2,3,4,5 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 12, Article number: 21528 (2022) Cite this article 1875 Accesses 6 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects BiomarkersInfectious diseasesMedical research AbstractMonocyte distribution width (MDW) is a novel marker of monocyte activation, which is known to occur in the immune response to viral pathogens. Our objective was to determine the performance of MDW and other leukocyte parameters as screening tests for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection. This was a prospective cohort analysis of adult patients who underwent complete blood count (CBC) and SARS-CoV-2 or influenza testing in an Emergency Department (ED) between January 2020 and July 2021. The primary outcome was SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infection. Secondary outcomes were measures of severity of illness including inpatient hospitalization, critical care admission, hospital lengths of stay and mortality. Descriptive statistics and test performance measures were evaluated for monocyte percentage, MDW, white blood cell (WBC) count, and neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR). 3,425 ED patient visits were included. SARS-CoV-2 testing was performed during 1,922 visits with a positivity rate of 5.4%; influenza testing was performed during 2,090 with a positivity rate of 2.3%. MDW was elevated in patients with SARS-Cov-2 (median 23.0U; IQR 20.5–25.1) or influenza (median 24.1U; IQR 22.0–26.9) infection, as compared to those without (18.9U; IQR 17.4–20.7 and 19.1U; 17.4–21, respectively, P < 0.001). Monocyte percentage, WBC and NLR values were within normal range in patients testing positive for either virus. MDW identified SARS-CoV-2 and influenza positive patients with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.83 (95% CI 0.79–0.86) and 0.83 (95% CI 0.77–0.88), respectively. At the accepted cut-off value of 20U for MDW, sensitivities were 83.7% (95% CI 76.5–90.8%) for SARS-CoV-2 and 89.6% (95% CI 80.9–98.2%) for influenza, compared to sensitivities below 45% for monocyte percentage, WBC and NLR. MDW negative predictive values were 98.6% (95% CI 98.0–99.3%) and 99.6% (95% CI 99.3–100.0%) respectively for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza. Monocyte Distribution Width (MDW), available as part of a routine complete blood count (CBC) with differential, may be a useful indicator of SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infection. Similar content being viewed by others Understanding the value of monocyte distribution width (MDW) in acutely ill medical patients presenting to the emergency department: a prospective single center evaluation Article Open access 02 July 2024 Monocyte Distribution Width (MDW) as novel inflammatory marker with prognostic significance in COVID-19 patients Article Open access 16 June 2021 DEspRhigh neutrophils are associated with critical illness in COVID-19 Article Open access 17 November 2021 IntroductionMonocyte distribution width (MDW), a measure of variation in monocyte cell volume, is emerging as a novel indicator of sepsis1,2,3. Monocytes are a subpopulation of circulating leukocytes whose activation in response to infectious stimuli is a key part of the host immune response4,5. These mononuclear phagocytes secrete chemokines and cytokines, can differentiate into macrophages and dendritic cells in the presence of appropriate stimuli, and are instrumental in the production of antigen presenting cells4,5. Monocyte recruitment is accompanied by dynamic changes in cell morphology that manifest as increased variability in size across the cell population; these changes make MDW a valuable marker for detection of infection and for estimation of disease severity in sepsis6,7,8. However, monocytes are also known to be differentially activated in the presence of viral pathogens, facilitating inflammation and immune targeting, but also serving as reservoirs and aiding in virus dissemination and propagation9,10,11,12. Thus, MDW may be elevated in viral infections even in the absence of severe disease and may be useful as a screening tool for such infections in the Emergency Department (ED).The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has rapidly become the greatest modern public health emergency with more than 633 million cases and 6.6 million deaths reported worldwide13. By December 2020, COVID-19 had become the third leading cause of death in the United States14,15. Asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic cases contribute significantly to ongoing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID 19) and are key drivers of the pandemic16,17. Yet, patient symptoms are often used as a prerequisite for testing even in the ED, particularly when demand for testing outpaces supply18,19. The complete blood count (CBC) is a frequently ordered laboratory test in the ED and MDW as a component of this has the potential to be used to screen for patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection.While the current pandemic is caused by a coronavirus, the influenza virus has been a more prominent etiology of epidemics and pandemics in recent decades, having caused severe global pandemics in 1918, 1957–58, 1968, and 200920,21. Influenza is endemic and regularly triggers seasonal global outbreaks resulting in critical illness in as many as five million infected patients and causing more than 500,000 deaths annually22. As with SARS-CoV-2, limiting the spread of influenza is key to decreasing morbidity and mortality from seasonal influenza and influenza pandemics, therefore early identification and isolation of minimally symptomatic or asymptomatic patients infected with influenza viruses is also of major importance.We hypothesized that MDW would perform well as a screen for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection. In this study, we measured the sensitivity and specificity of MDW and other leukocyte parameters for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection. In addition, we measured the correlation between MDW levels and illness severity in patients with and without SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection.MethodsStudy design and settingThis prospective study was conducted between January 21st, 2020, and July 14th, 2021, in the ED of a quaternary care hospital in Baltimore, MD. The study was performed under a waiver of informed consent given that samples were analyzed as a part of routine care and was approved by the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Institutional Review Board (IRB). This manuscript follows Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies (STARD) guidelines.Patient populationAll adult patients (aged 18 and over) who had a CBC collected within 6 h of ED arrival as a part of routine clinical care were eligible for the study. Patients were enrolled consecutively during time periods when study team members were present (8–16 h per day). Patients missing a valid MDW (e.g., low sample volume or poor sample quality), patients with MDW sample analyses performed more than 2 h after blood collection, and patients missing other CBC parameters (monocyte percentage, WBC count, NLR) within 6 h of arrival were excluded. A separate analysis was performed in the subgroup of patients who were immunocompromised; these patients were considered to have the highest risk of complications from either infection. Immunocompromise was defined as neutropenia (an absolute neutrophil count of 1.5 × 109/L or lower) on the CBC collected within 6 h of ED arrival and/or the presence of an active immunocompromised state as defined by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)23.MeasurementsDemographics, clinical data (presenting complaints, co-morbidities, vital signs, laboratory), and hospital utilization data were collected from the electronic health record (EHR) system. Presenting complaints were entered from a picklist at ED triage and co-morbidities were mined by grouping diagnostic codes (ICD-10) for active problems available in the EHR at patient presentation23,24,25. MDW was analyzed on a UniCel DxH900 analyzer (Beckman Coulter, Inc), software version 1.0 in potassium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (K2 EDTA) tubes. A value of greater than 20 Units was defined as abnormal using previously established cutoff criteria26. MDW measurement was performed by a study team member blind to patient clinical information. MDW was not reported in the EHR; clinicians were blinded to MDW values while providing care to patients enrolled. Other CBC parameters (monocyte percentage, WBC count and NLR) were measured on a separate hematology analyzer used for routine clinical practice and were available to treating clinicians. An abnormal monocyte percentage was defined as > 10%27, an abnormal WBC count was defined as less than 4 × 109/L or greater than 12 × 109/L28,29 and an abnormal NLR was defined as greater than 1030.OutcomesThe primary outcome was viral infection (SARS-CoV-2 or influenza), detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay. All RT-PCR assays were performed on nasopharyngeal samples obtained within 48 h of MDW sample collection. Influenza infection (influenza A or B) was diagnosed using the Xpert Xpress influenza test (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). For the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2, a variety of RT-PCR platforms were utilized based on availability including the Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2 test (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), the RealStar SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR Kit 1.0 (Altona Diagnostics, Hamburg, Germany), the NeuMoDx SARS-CoV-2 assay (NeuMoDx, Ann Arbor, MI, USA), SARS-CoV-2 reagents for the BD MAX System (Becton Dickinson, Sparks, MD, USA), and the GenMark ePlex SARS-CoV-2 test (GenMark, Carlsbad, CA, USA). All diagnostic orders were placed by emergency clinicians who had EHR-embedded access to a previously validated clinical decision guideline for influenza testing31 and to SARS-CoV2 testing criteria that were regularly updated by our Department of Hospital Epidemiology and Infection Control based on guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention32. Secondary outcomes were hospitalization, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, and in-hospital mortality. Critical care used in secondary analyses was defined as a composite of ICU admission or in-hospital mortality. Data for these outcomes were limited to the index hospital encounter and were collected from the EHR as described above.AnalysisContinuous variables were expressed as median with interquartile range (IQR) and compared using the Mann–Whitney U test. Categorical variables were expressed as number and percentages and were compared using the χ2 test. Test performance was evaluated using binary classification measures. The area under the Receiver Operating Characteristics curve (AUC) was calculated using logistic regression models. MDW and other leukocyte parameters were modeled in isolation as continuous variables. Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values, and likelihood ratios were calculated using previously established laboratory cutoffs with definitions for dichotomization as normal or abnormal. All analyses were performed in Python Version 3.ResultsA total of 3,425 ED visits were included in the final cohort. Diagnostic testing for SARS-CoV-2 was performed on 1,922 visits with 104 (5.4%) testing positive (Fig. 1). In a total of 2090 ED visits testing for influenza was performed, with 48 (2.3%) testing positive. Of the total cohort, 587 visits received diagnostic testing for both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza; no patients tested positive for both viruses.Figure 1Study Flow Diagram. Abbreviations: ED, Emergency Department; MDW, monocyte distribution width; WBC, white blood cell count; NLR, neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.Full size imageStudy cohortCharacteristics of the study cohort grouped by test and positivity may be seen in Table 1. For the group tested for SARS-CoV-2, the median patient age was 54 years, 51.3% were female and 71.0% were African American. The group tested for influenza was similar, with a median age of 53 years, 54.0% were female and 60.8% were African American. Common presenting complaints for both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza positive patients were shortness of breath and fever. However, chest pain was more prevalent in SARS-CoV-2 positive patients. Hypertension, kidney disease, and diabetes were the most common co-morbidities in SARS-CoV-2 positive patients. Hypertension, liver disease, and immunosuppression were most common in the influenza positive group (Table 1). Patients positive for SARS-CoV-2 demonstrated higher severity of illness compared to influenza. In the SARS-CoV-2 positive patient group, 42.3% required hospital admission, 2.9% required ICU admission and 1.0% died in-hospital. In the influenza positive patient group, 22.9% required hospital admission, 6.3% required ICU admission, and none died in-hospital.Table 1 Characteristics of study participants stratified by SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection status.Full size tableAccuracy of MDW, monocyte percentage, WBC and NLR for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infectionMDW levels were significantly higher in patients who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 (median 23.0U, IQR 20.5–25.1U) than in those who tested negative (18.9U, IQR 17.4–20.7U, P < 0.001) as seen in Fig. 2. Findings were similar for influenza, with a median MDW of 24.1U (IQR 22.0–26.9U) observed for influenza positive patients, compared with 19.1U (IQR 17.4–21.6U, P< 0.001) for influenza negative patients. The group of influenza negative patients in this cohort included 50 patients who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. As patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection had elevated MDW values, this may have caused a slight bias towards a higher median MDW value in influenza negative patients. Despite this, the median MDW value in the influenza negative group was still below the cutoff of 20U and the difference between patients who tested positive and those who tested negative for influenza was still significant (P < 0.001). (This did not occur in SARS-CoV-2 negative patients as none of these patients tested positive for influenza.) Median monocyte percentage and WBC demonstrated smaller differences (P< 0.001) in positive versus negative patients for both viruses, however, values for positive and negative patients were within the accepted normal ranges for these parameters. These trends were not seen for NLR, which was similar for groups with and without viral infection (Table 1 and Fig. 2).Figure 2Monocyte Distribution Width (MDW), Monocyte Percentage, White Blood Cell count (WBC), and Neutrophil-to-Lymphocyte ratio in SARS-CoV-2 and Influenza Positive and Negative Patients. The red dotted line represents the normal upper limit for each parameter. Median MDW is above the normal cutoff in patients who tested positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and influenza but below this cutoff in patients who tested negative. Median monocyte percentage, WBC and NLR values were all within the normal range regardless of infection with SARS-CoV-2 or influenza.Full size imageIn immunocompromised patients, MDW values were significantly elevated in patients who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 (median 24.4U, IQR 20.3–25.2U) compared to those who tested negative (median 19.3U, IQR 17.7–21.3U, P< 0.001), and similarly elevated in those who tested positive for influenza (24.2U, IQR 21.7–27.5U) compared to those who tested negative (median 20.1U, IQR 18.0–22.7U). MDW levels were above the normal cutoff of 20U for patients with SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infections and at or below that number for those who tested negative. Of the other parameters evaluated (monocyte percentage, WBC and NLR), all except monocyte percentage had median values below accepted cutoffs regardless of infection with SARS-CoV-2 or influenza. These results indicate that MDW is also differentially elevated in immunocompromised patients with SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infections compared to those without these infections (Supplemental Table 1 and Fig. 3).Figure 3Monocyte Distribution Width (MDW), Monocyte Percentage, White Blood Cell count (WBC), and Neutrophil-to-Lymphocyte ratio in SARS-CoV-2 and Influenza Positive and Negative Immunocompromised Patients. A subgroup analysis was performed to evaluate the performance of each study parameter in immunocompromised patients. The red dotted line represents the normal upper limit for each parameter. Median MDW is above the normal cutoff in patients who tested positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and influenza but at or below this cutoff in patients who tested negative. Median monocyte percentage was above the normal range in immunocompromised patients who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 but not for patients who tested positive for influenza. Median WBC and NLR values were within the normal range regardless of infection with SARS-CoV-2 or influenza.Full size imageOverall accuracy (area under the Receiver Operating Characteristics curve [AUC]) of MDW was 0.83 (95% CI 0.79–0.86) for SARS-CoV-2 infection and 0.83 (95% CI 0.77–0.88) for influenza infection (Table 2). In contrast, the AUC for monocyte percentage, WBC count and NLR were below 0.70 for both viruses. At the established cutoff of 20, MDW sensitivity was 83.7% (95% CI 76.5–90.8) for SARS-CoV-2 and 89.6% (95% CI 80.9–98.2) for influenza, compared with sensitivities below 50% for percent monocyte, WBC, and NLR. MDW negative predictive values were 98.6 (95% CI 98.0–99.3) for SARS-CoV-2 infection and 99.6 (95% CI 99.3–100.0) for influenza. Negative likelihood ratios of 0.24 and 0.17 were achieved for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza, respectively, translating to an approximate four-to-six-fold decrease in odds of having a viral infection with an MDW value below 20U (Table 2).Table 2 Test characteristics of the complete blood count (CBC) parameters evaluated.Full size tableAs shown in Figs. 4 and 5, MDW was elevated for all patients with a viral infection, regardless of illness severity. No significant differences in MDW levels were seen between virally infected patients who were well enough to be discharged home after ED evaluation and those who required hospital ward or critical care admission (SARS-CoV-2, P > 0.05 and influenza, P > 0.05, Figs. 4 and 5). These findings contrast with those observed for uninfected patients, in whom MDW values were correlated with severity of illness. As shown in Figs. 4 and 5, median MDW was below the established cutoff of 20U in uninfected patients who were discharged home after ED visit but was elevated in those with critical illness requiring ICU admission (P < 0.001).Figure 4Monocyte Distribution Width (MDW) in SARS-CoV-2 Positive and Negative Patients Stratified by Illness Severity. The red dotted line represents the normal upper limit for each parameter. Median monocyte distribution width (MDW) is above the normal cutoff in patients who tested positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) regardless of illness severity but below this cutoff in patients who tested negative with the exception of those who required intensive care unit (ICU) admission. MDW increased with increasing illness severity in SARS-CoV-2 negative patients.Full size imageFigure 5Monocyte Distribution Width (MDW) in Influenza Positive and Negative Patients Stratified by Illness Severity. The red dotted line represents the normal upper limit for each parameter. Median monocyte distribution width (MDW) is above the normal cutoff in patients who tested positive for influenza regardless of illness severity but below this cutoff in patients who tested negative with the exception of those who were hospitalized or required intensive care unit (ICU) admission. MDW increased with increasing illness severity in influenza negative patients.Full size imageDiscussionIn this study we found that MDW, a measure of monocyte activation that can be routinely reported on the CBC differential, has potential to be used as an ED-based screening test for respiratory viral infection. Overall accuracy (AUC) of MDW for both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection was very good; high sensitivities and negative predictive values were also achieved for both viruses using the previously established and currently reported cut-off for MDW. The identification of such a measure embedded within a laboratory panel that is routinely ordered in acute care settings is a major advancement33,34. It affords the opportunity for the development and implementation of broad-based screening programs to enable rapid identification and isolation of patients with contagious viral infections, even for cases that are unsuspected. Negative likelihood ratios achieved by MDW also suggest it could be used to preserve more expensive molecular diagnostics under conditions where testing resources are limited, as has been the case for SARS-CoV-218,19. Importantly, the performance of MDW was unique among all leukocyte parameters examined, further substantiating its independent value for decision-making in acute care environments.Multiple recent studies have illustrated that MDW is a useful biomarker for early detection of sepsis, and several have found that MDW levels increase in parallel with sepsis severity1,2,3. This includes a published analysis of the performance of MDW and other WBC parameters for identification of sepsis in our same patient cohort3. In the current study, we found that MDW is also elevated in the setting of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection, and that MDW elevation in this context is independent of illness severity; virally infected patients well enough to be discharged home had MDW values similar to those who required hospitalization or ICU admission. In our cohort, MDW did track linearly with disease severity as reported by others1,2,3, but only in patients without SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infection. These findings suggest that infections with SARS-CoV-2 or influenza may be confounders when MDW is utilized as a screening tool for sepsis; an elevated MDW could be due to a viral infection with a less severe prognosis. In practice, elevated MDW should likely prompt consideration of, or investigation for, SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infection prior to, or in parallel with, activation of protocols for sepsis diagnosis and treatment.While a small number of other studies have investigated the association between MDW and SARS-CoV-2 infection35,36, our study is the largest to compare MDW values in patients with and without SARS-CoV-2 infections. Our findings are supported by the previous reports which suggest that MDW is elevated in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to those not infected with this virus35,36 with mean differences between the two groups ranging from 1.8 to 7.2 U. In a pooled analysis of three available studies, Lippi et al. determined that the weighted mean difference in the MDW for patients with SARS-CoV-2 compared to patients without this virus was 3.95U (95% CI 1.41–6.49 U)36. In our study, this difference was 4.2U. Collectively, these data strongly suggest MDW is a reliable marker of SARS-CoV-2 infection.Our study is also one of very few (and the largest to date) to have investigated MDW for identification of influenza infections. In the only other currently published report on MDW and influenza, Lin et al. evaluated the performance of MDW in 174 ED patients with suspected respiratory infection who were also subjected to molecular viral testing and hospitalized after their ED encounter. Nine patients in this population tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 and 24 for influenza; MDW was differentially elevated in patients with either viral infection. In this small study, discriminatory performance of MDW was moderate for both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza, with reported AUCs of 0.70 and 0.63, respectively35. Our study, performed in a much larger and less selected population, achieved much better performance. The AUC of 0.83 for both SARS-CoV-2 and influenza observed here, along with the binary classification measures shown in Table 2, suggest MDW may be an effective pragmatic, ED population-wide screening test for these viral infections.The performance of MDW as a screen for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infection reported here is comparable to that of many currently approved, more expensive, and less routinely available tests. While RT-PCR is the gold standard for diagnosis of these viral infections, several other platforms play important roles in their management19,37. SARS-CoV-2 antigen-based tests are routinely used in outpatient and urgent care settings and have been proposed as a useful adjunct to RT-PCR in the ED. The sensitivity of MDW for SARS-CoV-2 infection is comparable to that of many of these antigen-based SARS-CoV-2 testing platforms38,39,40. In our study, MDW was also as sensitive for influenza infection as several CLIA-waivered rapid influenza detection tests currently used in outpatient and ED settings41,42. It is important to note, however, that the aforementioned rapid antigen tests are particularly sensitive for contagious cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection. While our study was not designed to evaluate contagion, our finding that such a level of performance can be achieved using a component of the CBC differential, (a panel that is routinely ordered regardless of clinical suspicion for viral infection) is unique and potentially practice changing.LimitationsOur study does have limitations that should be considered. First, while overall performance (AUC) is independent of threshold, other performance parameters (sensitivity, specificity, predictive values, and likelihood ratios) were affected by our decision to employ the previously established cut-off of 20U for MDW. This cutoff was established for early detection of sepsis and was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). However, this may not be the optimal cut-off for viral detection under all scenarios. Clinician leaders may select different cut-offs to achieve optimal sensitivity and specificity for specific contexts, such as periods when isolation of potential viral infections is deemed critically important or when preservation of molecular tests is paramount (see Supplemental Fig. 1 for performance measures over a range of cut-offs). Second, the observational design of this study precluded strict control of diagnostic testing criteria. Many patients were tested for either influenza or SARS-CoV-2 and not both, and it is possible that some patients tested for one viral infection could have had an undetected infection by the other. We expect such cases were rare however, as all isolated influenza testing was performed prior to the first case of SARS-CoV-2 detected in our health system and isolated SARS-CoV-2 testing was guided by surveillance indicating very low burden of circulating influenza. In the subset tested for both viruses, no cases of co-infection were identified. Third, our analysis was limited to SARS-CoV-2 and influenza. While these are two of the most important respiratory infections in modern medicine, we are unable to determine whether MDW is also elevated in the setting of other less common respiratory viral infections using the data analyzed here. Finally, this was a single site study, which may limit its generalizability. However, our sample size was very large with more than 3500 ED visits and 160 viral infections detected. While external validation will be necessary, our findings are in agreement with those of previous, smaller studies.ConclusionsIn conclusion, MDW is differentially elevated in SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections and may be an effective tool for broad-based screening for these infections in healthcare settings, allowing for the identification of patients who may benefit from confirmatory viral testing. Further evaluation of the clinical utility of MDW-based viral infection screening programs is an important future aim. Current programs that employ MDW for early detection of sepsis should consider viral infection in patients with elevated MDW who do not have clear alternative sources of infection or signs of severe disease. Data availability The datasets generated during and analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. ReferencesCrouser, E. D. et al. Monocyte distribution width enhances early sepsis detection in the emergency department beyond SIRS and qSOFA. J. Intensive Care 8, 33 (2020).Article Google Scholar Hausfater, P. et al. Monocyte distribution width (MDW) performance as an early sepsis indicator in the emergency department: Comparison with CRP and procalcitonin in a multicenter international European prospective study. Crit. Care 25, 227 (2021).Article Google Scholar Malinovska, A. et al. Monocyte distribution width as part of a broad pragmatic sepsis screen in the emergency department. J. Am. Coll. Emerg. Phys. Open 3, e12679 (2022). Google Scholar Shi, C. & Pamer, E. G. Monocyte recruitment during infection and inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11, 762–774 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Serbina, N. V., Jia, T., Hohl, T. M. & Pamer, E. G. Monocyte-mediated defense against microbial pathogens. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 26, 421–452 (2008).Article CAS Google Scholar Grage-Griebenow, E., Flad, H. D. & Ernst, M. Heterogeneity of human peripheral blood monocyte subsets. J. Leukoc. Biol. 69, 11–20 (2001).Article CAS Google Scholar Yona, S. & Jung, S. Monocytes: Subsets, origins, fates and functions. Curr. Opin. Hematol. 17, 53–59 (2010).Article Google Scholar Strauss-Ayali, D., Conrad, S. M. & Mosser, D. M. Monocyte subpopulations and their differentiation patterns during infection. J. Leukoc. Biol. 82, 244–252 (2007).Article CAS Google Scholar Hou, W. et al. Viral infection triggers rapid differentiation of human blood monocytes into dendritic cells. Blood 119, 3128–3131 (2012).Article CAS Google Scholar Atkin-Smith, G. K. et al. Monocyte apoptotic bodies are vehicles for influenza A virus propagation. Commun. Biol. 3, 1–14 (2020).Article Google Scholar Leon, J. et al. A virus-specific monocyte inflammatory phenotype is induced by SARS-CoV-2 at the immune–epithelial interface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 119, 585 (2022).Article Google Scholar Min, C.-K. et al. The differentiation of human cytomegalovirus infected-monocytes is required for viral replication. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 10, 368 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar COVID-19 Map. Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.Woolf, S. H., Chapman, D. A. & Lee, J. H. COVID-19 as the leading cause of death in the United States. JAMA 325, 123–124 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Sherry, L. M., Kenneth, D. K., Jiaquan, X. & Elizabeth, A. Mortality in the United States, 2020 (Springer, 2021). https://doi.org/10.15620/cdc:112079.Book Google Scholar Johansson, M. A. et al. SARS-CoV-2 transmission from people without COVID-19 symptoms. JAMA Netw. Open 4, e2035057 (2021).Article Google Scholar Wilmes, P. et al. SARS-CoV-2 transmission risk from asymptomatic carriers: Results from a mass screening programme in Luxembourg. Lancet Reg. Health Eur. 4, 585 (2021). Google Scholar Binnicker, M. J. Challenges and controversies to testing for COVID-19. J. Clin. Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01695-20 (2020).Article Google Scholar Tang, E. W., Bobenchik, A. M. & Lu, S. Testing for SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19): A general review. R. I. Med. J. 2013(103), 20–23 (2020). Google Scholar Past Pandemics |Pandemic Influenza (Flu)| CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/basics/past-pandemics.html (2019).Fineberg, H. V. Pandemic preparedness and response–lessons from the H1N1 influenza of 2009. N. Engl. J. Med. 370, 1335–1342 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Lozano, R. et al. Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet Lond. Engl. 380, 2095–2128 (2012).Article Google Scholar Agency for Healthcare Research in Quality. AHRQ QI ICD-10-CM/PCS Specification Version 7 Patient Safety Indicators Appendices. https://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/Downloads/Modules/PSI/V70/TechSpecs/PSI_Appendix_I.pdf.World Health Organization. Classification of Diseases (ICD). https://www.who.int/standards/classifications/classification-of-diseases.Levin, S. et al. Machine-learning-based electronic triage more accurately differentiates patients with respect to clinical outcomes compared with the emergency severity index. Ann. Emerg. Med. 71, 565-574.e2 (2018).Article Google Scholar Crouser, E. D. et al. Monocyte distribution width, a novel indicator, detects sepsis in high risk patients presenting to the emergency department. In B43. Critical Care: I Still Haven’t Found What I’m Looking for-Identifying and Managing Sepsis A7733–A7733 (American Thoracic Society, 2018). https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm-conference.2018.197.1_MeetingAbstracts.A7733.Territo, M. & Cline, M. J. Macrophages and Their Disorders in Man. In Immunobiology of the Macrophage (ed. Nelson, D. S.) 593–616 (Academic Press, 1976). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-514550-3.50029-3.Chapter Google Scholar Bone, R. C. et al. Definitions for sepsis and organ failure and guidelines for the use of innovative therapies in sepsis. Chest 101, 1644–1655 (1992).Article CAS Google Scholar Levy, M. M. et al. 2001 SCCM/ESICM/ACCP/ATS/SIS international sepsis definitions conference. Intensive Care Med. 29, 530–538 (2003).Article Google Scholar Farkas, J. D. The complete blood count to diagnose septic shock. J. Thorac. Dis. 12, S16–S21 (2020).Article Google Scholar Af, D. et al. Derivation and validation of a clinical decision guideline for influenza testing in 4 US emergency departments. Clini. Infect. Dis. 2, 70 (2020). Google Scholar Hinson, J. S. et al. Targeted rapid testing for SARS-CoV-2 in the emergency department is associated with large reductions in uninfected patient exposure time. J. Hosp. Infect. 107, 35–39 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar George-Gay, B. & Parker, K. Understanding the complete blood count with differential. J. Perianesthesia Nurs. Off. J. Am. Soc. PeriAnesthesia Nurs. 18, 96–114 (2003).Article Google Scholar Tefferi, A., Hanson, C. A. & Inwards, D. J. How to interpret and pursue an abnormal complete blood cell count in adults. Mayo Clin. Proc. 80, 923–936 (2005).Article Google Scholar Lin, H.-A. et al. Clinical impact of monocyte distribution width and neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio for distinguishing COVID-19 and influenza from other upper respiratory tract infections: A pilot study. PLoS ONE 15, e0241262 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Lippi, G., Sanchis-Gomar, F. & Henry, B. M. Pooled analysis of monocyte distribution width in subjects with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Int. J. Lab. Hematol. 43, O161–O163 (2021).Article Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Testing Strategies for SARS-CoV-2. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/labesources/sars-cov2-testing-strategies.html (2020).Peacock, W. F. et al. Utility of COVID-19 antigen testing in the emergency department. J. Am. Coll. Emerg. Phys. Open 3, e12605 (2022). Google Scholar Kahn, M. et al. Performance of antigen testing for diagnosis of COVID-19: A direct comparison of a lateral flow device to nucleic acid amplification based tests. BMC Infect. Dis. 21, 798 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Dinnes, J. et al. Rapid, point-of-care antigen and molecular-based tests for diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 3, CD013705 (2021). Google Scholar Babady, N. E., Dunn, J. J. & Madej, R. CLIA-waived molecular influenza testing in the emergency department and outpatient settings. J. Clin. Virol. Off. Publ. Pan Am. Soc. Clin. Virol. 116, 44–48 (2019).Article Google Scholar Chartrand, C., Leeflang, M. M. G., Minion, J., Brewer, T. & Pai, M. Accuracy of rapid influenza diagnostic tests: A meta-analysis. Ann. Intern. Med. 156, 500–511 (2012).Article Google Scholar Download referencesFundingThis study was funded in part by Beckman Coulter Inc. Authors BH, AD, MT, TK, and SL received support to conduct this study. The sponsor had no role in the design and conduct of the study. Some data infrastructure used for this study was developed under Grant Number R18 HS02664002 from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), U.S (United States). Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). The authors are solely responsible for this document’s contents, findings, and conclusions, which do not necessarily represent the views of AHRQ. Readers should not interpret any statement in this report as an official position of AHRQ or of HHS. Author AM was supported by fellowships from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), the Gottfried and Julia Bangerter-Rhyner-Stiftung, Bern, Switzerland, and the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USAOluwakemi Badaki-MakunMalone Center for Engineering in Healthcare, Johns Hopkins Whiting School of Engineering, 1800 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD, 21287, USAOluwakemi Badaki-Makun, Scott Levin, Aria Smith, Matthew Toerper & Jeremiah S. HinsonDepartment of Emergency Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USAScott Levin, Benjamin Hernried, Alexandra Malinovska, Aria Smith, Matthew Toerper, Katherine Z. J. Fenstermacher, Taylor Cottle, Malgorzata Latallo, Richard E. Rothman & Jeremiah S. HinsonStoCastic, Baltimore, MD, USAScott Levin, Arnaud Debraine & Jeremiah S. HinsonBeckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USAScott Levin, Arnaud Debraine, Aria Smith, Matthew Toerper & Jeremiah S. HinsonDepartment of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USAAlexandra MalinovskaAuthorsOluwakemi Badaki-MakunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarScott LevinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarArnaud DebraineView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBenjamin HernriedView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlexandra MalinovskaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAria SmithView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMatthew ToerperView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKatherine Z. J. FenstermacherView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTaylor CottleView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMalgorzata LatalloView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRichard E. RothmanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeremiah S. HinsonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsAll authors contributed significantly to this study and reviewed and approved the manuscript. O.B.M. wrote the main manuscript text. J.H., S.L., and O.B.M. conceived of the study, designed the analyses, and contributed to writing and editing of the manuscript. S.L. and A.D. performed the statistical analyses and generated the figures and tables. B.H., K.F., T.C., and M.L. assisted with sample collection and analysis as well as editing of the manuscript. A.M. and R.R. contributed to the design of the study and provided critical editing feedback for the manuscript. A.S. and M.T. developed and maintained the databases used for the study.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Oluwakemi Badaki-Makun or Jeremiah S. Hinson.Ethics declarations Competing interests StoCastic (JH, AD, MT, SL) was collaborating with Beckman Coulter on integrating data-driven clinical decision support (CDS) with biomarkers measured by Beckman Coulter devices, including MDW, during the study period. JH, MT, and SL and Johns Hopkins University held equity ownership in Stocastic. During the post-peer review revision process, Stocastic was acquired by Beckman Coulter. While no CDS was directly studied, this research could underpin the development of CDS in the future. These authors and the University are entitled to royalty distributions related to CDS technology that may be created. This arrangement has been reviewed and approved by Johns Hopkins University in accordance with conflict-of-interest policies. No other authors have competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleBadaki-Makun, O., Levin, S., Debraine, A. et al. Monocyte distribution width as a pragmatic screen for SARS-CoV-2 or influenza infection. Sci Rep 12, 21528 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-24978-wDownload citationReceived: 04 March 2022Accepted: 23 November 2022Published: 13 December 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-24978-wShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Monocyte distribution width (MDW) and DECAF: two simple tools to determine the prognosis of severe COPD exacerbation Carlos A. AmadoCristina GhadbanGuido Andretta Internal and Emergency Medicine (2024) Retrospective study on the efficacy of monocyte distribution width (MDW) as a screening test for COVID-19 Kentaro WakamatsuZenzo NagasawaHozumi Yamada European Journal of Medical Research (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Translational Research newsletter — top stories in biotechnology, drug discovery and pharma. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get what matters in translational research, free to your inbox weekly. Sign up for Nature Briefing: Translational ResearchDead brown bear cub shows how avian influenza is lingering in Alaska's environment • Alaska Beacon HOME NEWS Economy & Environment Education Decision 2024 Government & Politics Health Justice Commentary ABOUT SUBSCRIBE DONATE Part of States Newsroom Economy & Environment Education Decision 2024 Government & Politics Health Justice 10:26 News Story Economy & EnvironmentHealth Dead brown bear cub shows how avian influenza is lingering in Alaska’s environment The cub, found on Kodiak Island, is the world’s first documented brown bear victim of a persistent virus that is expected to keep circulating By: Yereth Rosen - December 16, 2022 10:26 am A yearling brown bear cub sits in the brush in the Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge on Jully 23, 2015. On Nov. 26, a local deer hunter found a different cub that was confirmed to be the first brown bear to have died from the highly pathogenic avian influenza that is circulating in wild and domesticated bird flocks. (Photo by Lisa Hupp/U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service) A dead brown bear cub found on Kodiak Island is one of the latest signs that the current strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza behind the deaths of tens of millions of birds is continuing to circulate in wild populations, infecting a variety of species. The cub carcass, discovered on Nov. 26 by a local deer hunter, was the world’s first documented death of a brown bear from the current strain of avian influenza, said Nate Svoboda, the Kodiak area wildlife biologist for the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. The cub’s virus infection, confirmed by a laboratory in the Lower 48, was announced on Wednesday by the department. It was the second such bear death in the United States; the first U.S. bear known to have died from the infection was a black bear cub in Glacier Bay National Park, a case that followed an earlier black bear case in Canada, said Dr. Bob Gerlach, Alaska’s state veterinarian. Expect to keep finding birds and possibly other mammals infected with this strain of influenza, warned Gerlach, who gave a presentation on Wednesday to the Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium’s Local Environmental Observer Network. Unlike past waves, which passed quickly through bird populations before petering out in a matter of months, this strain appears to be extremely persistent, Gerlach said. A dead brown bear cub is seen on the ground in a riparian area on Kodiak Island on Nov. 26. The cub, discovered by local hunter Jeff Woods, was the world’s first brown bear victim of the highly pathogenic avian influenza that is currently criculating among wild and domesticated birds, as well as among some mammals. State officials believe the bear, which was emaciated, had fed on some infected birds. (Photo by Jeff Woods/Provided by Alaska Department of Fish and Game) “The concern is it’s maintaining itself in the wild bird populations,” he said in the webinar. That means state and federal agencies and their partners will have to keep monitoring outbreaks and bracing for more waves of infected wild and domestic birds after migratory species arrive next spring, he said. “What we’re anticipating is this may be here for a while,” he said. Around the world, the virus has damaged several populations of birds, including some rare species. Among the bird populations hard hit by this avian influenza are cranes in Israel, where thousands were found dead about a year ago, and more recently, pelicans and other seabirds in Peru. Several mammals of different species have also succumbed to the virus. In the United States, the list includes red foxes – with some cases found in Alaska – and in the Lower 48, land animals like skunks and raccoons. Some marine mammals have also died from the disease, notably harbor seals in Maine. The brown bear cub discovered on Kodiak Island was likely dead for only two or three days, and there were no signs of damage to the body, Svoboda said. However, he said, it was emaciated, which is unusual for a bear in the fall, the time of year when bears are normally their maximum weight, having packed on fat in preparation for denning. The infected black bears found in Glacier Bay National Park and in Forillon National Park in Canada’s Quebec province were both euthanized. They were found to be extremely ill, having trouble walking, and racked by seizures, state officials said. The Alaska black bear cub was blind and had been abandoned by its mother, they said. Necropsies revealed that both bear cubs had encephalitis, an inflammation of the brain, Alaska and Canadian officials said in statements. The black and brown bear cubs likely picked up the virus after eating infected birds, Gerlach said. There is no evidence that bears can infect other bears with the virus, he said. And there is no evidence that humans are at much risk from this virus, Gerlach said. “This particular strain does not have a high propensity to get into and infect people,” he said in the LEO webinar. That is good news for Alaska bird hunters, he said, though the usual advice about sanitation practices of handwashing, glove-wearing and avoidance of sick birds and animals continues to apply. Dr. Bob Gerlach, Alaska’s state veterinarian, stands outside the Department of Environmental Conservation lab in Anchorage on May 13. (Photo by Yereth Rosen/Alaska Beacon) Since the disease emerged in Alaska birds last spring, about 800 samples from dead animals suspected to have infections have been processed, and there were nearly 100 cases confirmed by Lower 48 labs to have been positive, Gerlach said. The vast majority were from birds, though there were some mammal cases. That is only a small fraction of the cases in the wild populations, Gerlach said. Officials in Alaska are limiting their shipments of samples because the Lower 48 labs doing the testing are backlogged and are placing higher priority on commercial poultry. That has left a lot of birds untested, in Alaska and elsewhere. In the Bering Strait and Yukon-Kuskokwim regions, for example, residents have reported numerous suspected but unconfirmed cases of avian influenza among wild birds. Those included swans and various types of geese that were exhibiting strange and distressed behavior consistent with influenza infection. Meanwhile, there are numerous healthy wild birds that are healthy but infected with the virus – and able to spread it around, Gerlach said. He cited some recent tests by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which found a significant number of Southcentral Alaska birds were carrying the virus but unaffected by it. “They’re still flying around and depositing their droppings everywhere,” he said. Whatever virus is spread by those birds could linger a long time in the environment, Gerlach said, pointing to research led by U.S. Geological Survey wildlife geneticist Andy Ramey that found that avian influenza viruses can remain infectious for more than a year in Alaska’s wetlands environments. “Unfortunately, we do know that the extreme cold up here preserves the virus very well,” he said. “So we do know it’s going to be a problem for us.” YOU MAKE OUR WORK POSSIBLE. SUPPORT XDead brown bear cub shows how avian influenza is lingering in Alaska’s environment by Yereth Rosen, Alaska Beacon December 16, 2022 Dead brown bear cub shows how avian influenza is lingering in Alaska’s environment by Yereth Rosen, Alaska Beacon December 16, 2022 A dead brown bear cub found on Kodiak Island is one of the latest signs that the current strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza behind the deaths of tens of millions of birds is continuing to circulate in wild populations, infecting a variety of species. The cub carcass, discovered on Nov. 26 by a local deer hunter, was the world’s first documented death of a brown bear from the current strain of avian influenza, said Nate Svoboda, the Kodiak area wildlife biologist for the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. The cub’s virus infection, confirmed by a laboratory in the Lower 48, was announced on Wednesday by the department. It was the second such bear death in the United States; the first U.S. bear known to have died from the infection was a black bear cub in Glacier Bay National Park, a case that followed an earlier black bear case in Canada, said Dr. Bob Gerlach, Alaska’s state veterinarian. Expect to keep finding birds and possibly other mammals infected with this strain of influenza, warned Gerlach, who gave a presentation on Wednesday to the Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium’s Local Environmental Observer Network. Unlike past waves, which passed quickly through bird populations before petering out in a matter of months, this strain appears to be extremely persistent, Gerlach said. A dead brown bear cub is seen on the ground in a riparian area on Kodiak Island on Nov. 26. The cub, discovered by local hunter Jeff Woods, was the world’s first brown bear victim of the highly pathogenic avian influenza that is currently criculating among wild and domesticated birds, as well as among some mammals. State officials believe the bear, which was emaciated, had fed on some infected birds. (Photo by Jeff Woods/Provided by Alaska Department of Fish and Game) “The concern is it’s maintaining itself in the wild bird populations,” he said in the webinar. That means state and federal agencies and their partners will have to keep monitoring outbreaks and bracing for more waves of infected wild and domestic birds after migratory species arrive next spring, he said. “What we’re anticipating is this may be here for a while,” he said. Around the world, the virus has damaged several populations of birds, including some rare species. Among the bird populations hard hit by this avian influenza are cranes in Israel, where thousands were found dead about a year ago, and more recently, pelicans and other seabirds in Peru. Several mammals of different species have also succumbed to the virus. In the United States, the list includes red foxes – with some cases found in Alaska – and in the Lower 48, land animals like skunks and raccoons. Some marine mammals have also died from the disease, notably harbor seals in Maine. The brown bear cub discovered on Kodiak Island was likely dead for only two or three days, and there were no signs of damage to the body, Svoboda said. However, he said, it was emaciated, which is unusual for a bear in the fall, the time of year when bears are normally their maximum weight, having packed on fat in preparation for denning. The infected black bears found in Glacier Bay National Park and in Forillon National Park in Canada’s Quebec province were both euthanized. They were found to be extremely ill, having trouble walking, and racked by seizures, state officials said. The Alaska black bear cub was blind and had been abandoned by its mother, they said. Necropsies revealed that both bear cubs had encephalitis, an inflammation of the brain, Alaska and Canadian officials said in statements. The black and brown bear cubs likely picked up the virus after eating infected birds, Gerlach said. There is no evidence that bears can infect other bears with the virus, he said. And there is no evidence that humans are at much risk from this virus, Gerlach said. “This particular strain does not have a high propensity to get into and infect people,” he said in the LEO webinar. That is good news for Alaska bird hunters, he said, though the usual advice about sanitation practices of handwashing, glove-wearing and avoidance of sick birds and animals continues to apply. Dr. Bob Gerlach, Alaska’s state veterinarian, stands outside the Department of Environmental Conservation lab in Anchorage on May 13. (Photo by Yereth Rosen/Alaska Beacon) Since the disease emerged in Alaska birds last spring, about 800 samples from dead animals suspected to have infections have been processed, and there were nearly 100 cases confirmed by Lower 48 labs to have been positive, Gerlach said. The vast majority were from birds, though there were some mammal cases. That is only a small fraction of the cases in the wild populations, Gerlach said. Officials in Alaska are limiting their shipments of samples because the Lower 48 labs doing the testing are backlogged and are placing higher priority on commercial poultry. That has left a lot of birds untested, in Alaska and elsewhere. In the Bering Strait and Yukon-Kuskokwim regions, for example, residents have reported numerous suspected but unconfirmed cases of avian influenza among wild birds. Those included swans and various types of geese that were exhibiting strange and distressed behavior consistent with influenza infection. Meanwhile, there are numerous healthy wild birds that are healthy but infected with the virus – and able to spread it around, Gerlach said. He cited some recent tests by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which found a significant number of Southcentral Alaska birds were carrying the virus but unaffected by it. “They’re still flying around and depositing their droppings everywhere,” he said. Whatever virus is spread by those birds could linger a long time in the environment, Gerlach said, pointing to research led by U.S. Geological Survey wildlife geneticist Andy Ramey that found that avian influenza viruses can remain infectious for more than a year in Alaska’s wetlands environments. “Unfortunately, we do know that the extreme cold up here preserves the virus very well,” he said. “So we do know it’s going to be a problem for us.” YOU MAKE OUR WORK POSSIBLE. SUPPORT Alaska Beacon is part of States Newsroom, a nonprofit news network supported by grants and a coalition of donors as a 501c(3) public charity. Alaska Beacon maintains editorial independence. Contact Editor Andrew Kitchenman for questions: info@alaskabeacon.com. Follow Alaska Beacon on Facebook and X. View Republishing Guidelines Copy to clipboard 1Republish Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. AP and Getty images may not be republished. Please see our republishing guidelines for use of any other photos and graphics. Yereth RosenYereth Rosen came to Alaska in 1987 to work for the Anchorage Times. She has reported for Reuters, for the Alaska Dispatch News, for Arctic Today and for other organizations. She covers environmental issues, energy, climate change, natural resources, economic and business news, health, science and Arctic concerns. In her free time, she likes to ski and watch her son's hockey games.Alaska Beacon is part of States Newsroom, the nation’s largest state-focused nonprofit news organization.MORE FROM AUTHOR Related News Alaskans charged $5.78 billion for hospital stays last year,…by Yereth RosenNovember 1, 2024 Overdose deaths are rising among Black and Indigenousby Tim HendersonOctober 31, 2024 Alaska births and deaths both declined in 2023, and…by Yereth RosenOctober 29, 2024 INDEPENDENT AND ILLUMINATING JOURNALISM Democracy Toolkit // Register to vote | Find your polling place and registration status | How to vote early or by mail | View public notices DEMOCRACY TOOLKIT Register to voteFind your polling place and registration statusHow to vote early or by mailView public notices © Alaska Beacon, 2024 v1.59.8 ABOUT US The Alaska Beacon is an independent, nonpartisan news organization focused on connecting Alaskans to their state government. Our journalists fairly and fearlessly report on the people and interests that determine state policy. We’re part of States Newsroom, the nation’s largest state-focused nonprofit news organization. DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. (See full republishing guidelines.) DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy © Alaska Beacon, 2024 v1.59.8 States Newsroom Fair. Fearless. Free.Vaccines’ real-world effectiveness studied with $12.5 million grant from CDC – WashU Medicine Find a Doctor Admissions Giving Information for Announcements WashU Directories Announcements Updates on campus events, policies, construction and more. East entrance to Central West End MetroLink station closed Oct. 17 – 21, 2024 MD Student White Coat Ceremony Oct. 18, 2024 Biomedical Research Today & Tomorrow Symposium Oct. 18, 2024 HLC Accreditation Review Open Forum Sessions Oct. 29, 2024 WashU Votes election information hub Notice of data security incident close Information for Our Community Whether you are part of our community or are interested in joining us, we welcome you to Washington University School of Medicine. Prospective Students Current Students Faculty Staff Alumni & Friends Administrators Researchers Job Seekers close Search WashU Medicine Home About Education Research Patient Care News Home About Welcome from the Dean Mission & Vision Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Diversity & Inclusion Commitment Facts Leadership About Dean Perlmutter The Medical Campus Campus Construction & Growth Facilities & Services Faculty Recognition History About St. Louis Education Areas of Study Financial Support Traditions MD White Coat Ceremony Match Day Commencement Research Training Programs Tradition of Innovation BJC Investigators Nobel Prize Winners Patient Care Hospital Partners Patient Stories Clinical Trials News Media Contacts Show Me the Science Podcast Announcements Prospective Students Current Students Faculty Staff Alumni & Friends Administrators Researchers Job Seekers Directories A to Z Index Departments & Programs Administrative Offices & Services Maps & Directions Street & Pedestrian Closures Calendar Contact Giving Policies Links to Third-Party Websites Website Privacy Policy Visit the News Hub News ReleaseVaccines’ real-world effectiveness studied with $12.5 million grant from CDCResearchers will investigate vaccine efficacy; immune response to flu, COVID-19by Julia Evangelou Strait•December 15, 2022Getty ImagesA new grant from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will support research at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis to investigate the real-world effectiveness of COVID-19 and influenza vaccines. Researchers at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis have received a grant from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) totaling $12.5 million to investigate the real-world effectiveness of influenza and COVID-19 vaccines and the immune response to infection and vaccination against these two illnesses. Unlike a strictly controlled clinical trial, this research is aimed at understanding how vaccination strategies work for people living and working in the community, where they may not receive vaccines and boosters on a strict schedule, or from a single vaccine maker. “We want to understand how these vaccines work in the real world,” said principal investigator Stacey L. House, MD, PhD, an assistant professor of emergency medicine. “These vaccines have proven to be effective in clinical trials. But we don’t know what it means for the immune response if second doses are delayed, or if boosters are taken at vastly different times, or if people switch vaccine manufacturers for their third or fourth dose, for example. By enrolling large numbers of patients and gathering many data points about them, we hope to understand how effective vaccines are in a diverse community.” The School of Medicine is one of seven sites enrolling patients in this CDC study. The others are the University of Michigan, Baylor Scott & White Health, Kaiser Permanente Washington, the University of Pittsburgh, University Hospitals Cleveland, and Arizona State University. Duke University will serve as the study’s coordinating center. As part of the vaccine effectiveness project, House and her team will seek to enroll at least 5,000 participants in the St. Louis region over the grant’s five years. Patients — adults and children — who come to Barnes-Jewish Hospital, Missouri Baptist Medical Center and St. Louis Children’s Hospital with respiratory tract infections will be tested for influenza and COVID-19 and can choose to participate in the study. House said the investigators will collect data on participants’ vaccine history and general medical history and will follow them over time to collect data on any complications patients may experience from these viral infections. “The abundance of data we will collect on these patients should allow us to see how pre-existing conditions, medications and social determinants of health, such as education and access to health care, may affect vaccine effectiveness and how well patients recover after these infections,” said House, who is also vice chair for clinical research in the Department of Emergency Medicine as well as director of the Emergency Care Research Core. The researchers also will perform subtype analysis and viral genome sequencing on viral samples from patients to identify and track new viral variants that emerge over time. These samples and sequences will be made available for further research through a national repository that is part of the CDC’s U.S. Flu Vaccine Effectiveness Network. A second project will analyze immune responses to various COVID-19 and influenza vaccines. Led by infectious disease specialists Rachel Presti, MD, PhD, an associate professor of medicine, and Jane O’Halloran, MD, PhD, an associate professor of medicine, researchers will collect samples from patients at specific time points before and after receiving a COVID-19 or influenza vaccine. The samples will be used to assess antibody levels as well as the responses of B cells and T cells, key components of the body’s immune system, to vaccination. The study aims to answer key questions about vaccination, including how long and robust the immune response from vaccination is; how broad the antibody response is; and how repeated exposure to different viral variants impacts the length and breadth of B cell and T cell responses to viral respiratory infections. “The CDC has to make vaccine recommendations based on available information, and we don’t have as much data as we would like on the effectiveness of these vaccines outside of clinical trials,” House said. “If we have the kind of detailed data that we hope to gather during this study, the recommendations can start to be a bit more specific for individual patient populations.” Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) About Washington University School of Medicine WashU Medicine is a global leader in academic medicine, including biomedical research, patient care and educational programs with 2,700 faculty. Its National Institutes of Health (NIH) research funding portfolio is the fourth largest among U.S. medical schools, has grown 54% in the last five years, and, together with institutional investment, WashU Medicine commits well over $1 billion annually to basic and clinical research innovation and training. Its faculty practice is consistently within the top five in the country, with more than 1,790 faculty physicians practicing at over 60 locations and who are also the medical staffs of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals of BJC HealthCare. WashU Medicine has a storied history in MD/PhD training, recently dedicated $100 million to scholarships and curriculum renewal for its medical students, and is home to top-notch training programs in every medical subspecialty as well as physical therapy, occupational therapy, and audiology and communications sciences. Media Contact Judy Martin FinchDirector of Media Relationsm: 314-750-4213martinju@wustl.edu Writer Julia Evangelou StraitSenior Sciences Writer314-286-0141straitj@wustl.edu Julia covers medical news in genomics, cancer, cardiology, developmental biology, biochemistry & molecular biophysics, and gut microbiome research. In 2022, she won a gold award for excellence in the Robert G. Fenley Writing Awards competition. Given by the Association of American Medical Colleges, the award recognized her coverage of long COVID-19. Before joining Washington University in 2010, she was a freelance writer covering science and medicine. She has a research background with stints in labs focused on bioceramics, human motor control and tissue-engineered heart valves. She is a past Missouri Health Journalism Fellow and a current member of the National Association of Science Writers. She holds a bachelor's degree in engineering science from Iowa State University and a master's degree in biomedical engineering from the University of Minnesota. Related Editors' Picks October 23, 2024 White Coat Ceremony marks beginning of medical training124 students receive white coats, recite class oath.Medical Campus & Community October 2, 2024 Viruses found hiding in lungs’ immune cells long after initial illnessLingering respiratory viruses set the stage for chronic lung disease, mouse study shows.News Release September 12, 2024 New home for world-class cancer care opens on Medical Campus9-story Siteman Cancer Center building designed for patient comfort, convenience.Medical Campus & Community, News Release Directories Maps & Directions Calendars Contact Giving Follow us on Facebook Follow us on X Follow us on Instagram Subscribe to us on YouTube Follow us on LinkedIn Follow us on TikTok WashU Medicine 660 S. Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO 63110-1010 WashU Medicine is committed to changing the world by helping improve the human condition through research, education and care, leading to the treatment and cures of the most complex diseases affecting the world. We are consistently ranked a top medical school for research, and we treat our patients and train the next generation of leaders in medicine at Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals, both ranked among the nation's best hospitals and recognized for excellence in care. Departments & Programs A to Z Index Announcements Outlook Magazine Report Website Issue Emergency Policies News © 2024 Washington University in St. LouisBirds could be at increased risk on migration and at wintering groundsSkip to main content HomeSportsPackersBrewersBucksBadgersGolden EaglesPanthersPreps PlusOutdoorsSports AwardsMotor Sports Smith: Avian flu outbreak especially worrisome for endangered whooping cranesAs a strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza spreads across North America and other continents, conservationists have a heightened concern about its potential effects on endangered species such as whooping cranes.Paul A. Smith Milwaukee Journal SentinelYou've likely seen news this year of a bird flu that's taking an unprecedented toll on U.S. domestic and wild birds.The H5N1 strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) has killed or caused to be destroyed 53.4 million domestic birds in the U.S., according to U.S. Department of Agriculture figures released Tuesday.That tops the previous high in 2014 and 2015 when a different strain affected 49 million domestic birds and cost $1 billion. The USDA proclaimed that outbreak as "the most costly animal health emergency in U.S. history."This year's economic losses have yet to be tallied.Unfortunately the toll on wild birds from the current strain of HPAI is also greater and by a much wider margin than has been seen in commercial flocks.According to USDA statistics, 5,001 wild birds have been confirmed with the disease across the continent. West Virginia is the lone state without a documented case.In the 2014-15 outbreak only 98 HPAI-positive wild birds were detected, according to the USDA.But the data on wild birds is misleading. Wildlife experts say the vast majority of infected birds are never found or tested in the wild.Reports from the field are a much better indicator of the toll the H5N1 strain is taking of wild birds.In Wisconsin, HPAI ravaged a breeding colony of Caspian terns in Door County and is the suspected cause of extremely low survival of bald eagle chicks this year.In Illinois, the virus is the suspected cause of death of several hundred snow geese found in fields earlier this month, according to the Illinois Department of Natural Resources. In Washington, the disease is linked to 700 birds found dead this month in Skagit Bay.Internationally, HPAI is also hitting wild birds hard. At least 5,200 cranes in the Hula Valley of Israel were found dead last December while on their migration to Africa, according to a summary by The Wildlife Society.Israeli Environmental Protection Minister Tamar Zandberg called the bird flu outbreak “the most serious damage to wildlife in the history of the country.”The virus has been eye-catching to say the least.So consider the potential impact of HPAI on an endangered species with a worldwide population numbering in the hundreds.Take the whooping crane, for example.The staff at the International Crane Foundation in Baraboo has been keenly watching the disease and taking precautions to protect captive birds at its headquarters."We've had our eye on this issue since the early 2000s," said Dr. Barry Hartup, a veterinarian and ICF's director of conservation medicine. "We got especially involved with it in 2005 when there was a massive outbreak on wild birds in China." Cranes are among the most endangered families of birds in the world, with 10 of the 15 species threatened. So a disease outbreak could be devastating to already fragile populations.There are 836 whooping cranes left in the world, according to ICF, including 543 in a flock that migrates from Canada to Texas each year and 76 in the eastern migratory flock centered in Wisconsin.The ICF is concerned about the global re-emergence of avian influenza this winter, its impact on threatened East Asian cranes and the threat to whoopers."The outbreaks are like wildfires," Hartup said. "These are little super-spreader events. They are virtually impossible to predict or prevent in the wild."In addition to the common crane deaths in Israel, the virus has killed hooded, white-naped and possibly red-crowned cranes in Japan this winter, according to the ICF.The disease spreads when infected birds shed the virus in their saliva, nasal secretions and feces, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Susceptible birds become infected when they have contact with the virus as it is shed by infected birds or surfaces contaminated with the virus.Some birds carry the virus without getting sick. In other cases it causes mass mortality events.With HPAI circulating, Hartup said whooping cranes would face additional risk this year during migration at a stopover site in Saskatchewan and at roosting locations in Texas, both spots where they will undoubtedly be in close proximity with waterfowl.So far the good news is that no whooping crane has died from or been detected with the virus. Several wild whooping crane chicks were tested this year in Canada; all were negative, according to Hartup.Whoopers may also be less likely to get the disease because of their standard behaviors. They don't roost in large flocks, for example.But ICF staff is on heightened alert this winter and will remain so through next year."This outbreak is unprecedented," Hartup said. "It's also been extremely persistent. As I look at the impact of this disease on wild birds, not just cranes, it's been hugely significant in terms of the rapidity and spread and number of birds affected. For the sake of all bird species, we're hopeful the coming months will bring better news."Our subscribers make this reporting possible. Please consider supporting local journalism by subscribing to the Journal Sentinel at jsonline.com/deal.DOWNLOAD THE APP: Get the latest news, sports and more Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024Diversified Pastured Poultry Models Can Reduce Risk of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza – Food Tank Log In Account News Sustainable Agriculture Climate Change Food Waste Food Heroes Urban Agriculture Policy and Organizing Food Tank Lists EARTH University Alumni Are Leading on Global Sustainable Development Gillian Tarrant 6 days ago 0 Sustainability Means ‘Freedom to Really Farm How We Should Be Farming’ Emily Payne 2 weeks ago 0 Shaping the Future of Food: Global Experts Convene for Crops that Nourish Elena Seeley 1 month ago 0 Op-Ed | How Can Conscious Transformation Help Food Systems? Thomas Legrand 2 weeks ago 0 Community Food Security And Health Equity Are The Backbones Of Climate Progress Food Tank Editorial Team 1 month ago 0 WWF Introduces Global Performance Standards to Curb Environmental Impacts of Food Production Jessica Levy 1 month ago 0 West Coast Grocery Stores Seeing Drop in Unsold Food Vinita Banthia 5 days ago 0 New Food Waste Legislative Tracker Launched for U.S. Bills Maya Deutchman 3 weeks ago 0 California Bans ‘Sell By’ Dates to Simplify Labels and Cut Food Waste Abigail Buta 4 weeks ago 0 Who is Feeding New York City’s Asylum Seekers? Jessica Levy 1 week ago 0 Cary Fowler and Geoffrey Hawtin Named 2024 World Food Prize Laureates Elena Seeley May 10, 2024 0 Project Black and Blue Is Revolutionizing Support for Food Service Workers in Crisis Clare Shanahan March 4, 2024 0 Empowering Communities: The Cities without Hunger Model Maya Deutchman September 3, 2024 0 Urban American Farmer: Growing Local Food and Relationships in Austin Gillian Tarrant August 15, 2024 0 Sweetwater Farms: Cultivating Knowledge in Houston Presley Konkel August 6, 2024 0 Voting for Change: How the Next U.S. Election Will Shape Our Food Systems Elena Seeley 2 weeks ago 0 New Food Waste Legislative Tracker Launched for U.S. Bills Maya Deutchman 3 weeks ago 0 California Bans ‘Sell By’ Dates to Simplify Labels and Cut Food Waste Abigail Buta 4 weeks ago 0 23 Fall Food and Agriculture Books to Discover Now Abigail Buta 2 months ago 0 Feeding Kids an Understanding of Why Food Matters Danielle Nierenberg August 23, 2024 0 20 Food Systems Reads that Will Inspire You this Summer Maya Deutchman July 2, 2024 0 Working Groups Advisory Academic Working Group CSO Group Refresh Contact About Events Arts Donate Join 0 Home » Animals » Diversified Pastured Poultry Models Can Reduce Risk of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Agriculture Diversified Pastured Poultry Models Can Reduce Risk of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Sycamore May December 14, 2022 0 The Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) outbreak has affected more than 52.4 million domesticated poultry in the United States in 2022, the U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (USDA APHIS) reports. According to experts at the Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future shifting away from industrial models can help to prevent the spread of HPAI. And farmers are seeing that pasture-raised poultry models can help to keep their livestock healthy. The 2022 HPAI outbreak marks the deadliest in U.S. history. Cases reached their peak at 6.15 million in September and dipped in October. The virus saw another uptick in November, with almost 3.7 million cases reported. In response to the HPAI outbreak, the USDA advises flocks with outdoor access, labeled as pasture-raised and free-range, to quarantine as the virus spreads through contact with migratory waterfowl, such as ducks and geese. “Waterfowl have no business anywhere near our chickens,” Reginaldo Haslett-Marroquin, Co-Founder of Regeneration Farms, tells Food Tank. Haslett-Marroquin operates a farm network and nonprofit called The Regenerative Agriculture Alliance, which focuses on scaling up regenerative poultry systems. The Regenerative Agriculture Alliance model utilizes a Tree-Range system in which farmers raise small poultry flocks with native crops such as elderberries and hazelnuts. These Indigenous permaculture methods can prevent water from pooling in areas where the chickens have access, create shelter for chickens, and ensure HPAI-prone waterfowl do not have the opportunity to intermingle with chickens. Haslett-Marroquin tells Food Tank that regenerative, indigenous methods of animal husbandry aren’t too labor-intensive and create ecosystems that prioritize bird health. Farms utilizing a Tree-Range system also follow enhanced biosecurity protocols to have full transparency in case of an outbreak. Domesticated poultry farmed for eggs or meat are always at risk of avian influenza outbreaks, Dr. Jarra Jagne, Associate Professor at Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine and a poultry disease specialist, tells Food Tank. But the severity of outbreaks and virus strains vary. Those designated to be highly pathogenic cause severe disease and high mortality. Mike Badger, Associate Director of the nonprofit American Pastured Poultry Producers Association (APPPA), argues that quarantining poultry during the 2022 HPAI outbreak can create ideal conditions for spreading the virus. Most bird deaths have been from commercial, indoor, densely confined operations, Badger says. Robert Martin, Program Director of Food System Policy at Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, adds that confined poultry systems are dangerous for spreading HPAI because the birds are standing in their waste all day. “In a true pasture-based system, birds are healthier and less likely to come into contact” with HPAI-infected waste. While commercial flocks with large numbers of poultry confined in barns have suffered the highest bird losses, Badger attests that as of the peak of the outbreak no members in the 1000-farm APPPA network had tested positive for HPAI. Almost all APPPA members raise poultry on pasture in mobile coops. In this model, birds are moved to fresh pasture often so that the birds don’t come into contact with waste. While HPAI is highly contagious, Badger and Martin note that poultry deaths during the outbreak are not always due to the virus but to the response itself. The USDA requires farmers to cull or depopulate via slaughter all infected poultry to prevent a future spread. Martin adds, “in an industrial system, the only way to control [HPAI] is through extreme measures.” Badger theorizes that the APPPA model is beneficial in cases of disease outbreaks because the birds are “developing their immune systems in ways that confined birds are not.” In addition, research published in Frontiers in Animal Science finds that environmental enrichment, such as access to mature grasses, can improve the immune functioning of broiler chickens. Similarly, by creating diverse permaculture ecosystems for poultry, Haslett-Marroquin and The Regenerative Agriculture Alliance are achieving more transparent supply chains, healthier chickens, and more resilient farmer enterprises. Martin advocates for long-term policy solutions that include decentralized poultry production models and smaller, pasture-based flocks, noting that “getting away from the industrial model” is the most effective way to reduce future poultry disease outbreaks. Articles like the one you just read are made possible through the generosity of Food Tank members. Can we please count on you to be part of our growing movement? Become a member today by clicking here. Photo courtesy of Thomas Iversen, Unsplash TweetShareShare Tags American Pastured Poultry Producers Association avian influenza challenges decentralizing flocks guess Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza industrial livestock system infected outbreak pasture-raised poultry farmers poultry producers virus Sycamore May Sycamore May completed her BA in Writing, Literature, and Publishing at Emerson College, where she wrote about food and farming. After working on organic farms and developing a deeper interest in agroecology, she went on to complete an MSc in Food Policy from City, University of London. Sycamore writes about food justice, climate action, and regenerative agriculture. Previous ArticleExpanding Halal Options to Meet Student Needs Next ArticleWhat Will Be the Legacy of Today's Young Farmer Advocates? December 14, 2022 Search foodtank.com: Never miss an article: Sign up and join more than 350,000 Food Tank newsletter subscribers: Get InvolvedBecome A Member Upcoming Events + Webinars Write For Us Volunteer Contact Us Related News Livestock World’s First Vaccine for Deadly African Swine Fever Approved for Commercial Use Agriculture New Research Shows Animal Agriculture Is Making UTIs Worse. Factory Farms Could Make Them Untreatable Agriculture Maryland Creates Opportunities for Food Insecure Cities Public Health Nipah Virus Reemerges in India Get To Know UsOur Mission Danielle Nierenberg Partners Board of Directors Advisory Board Media ConnectGet Email Updates Upcoming Events Contact Us Privacy Policy GET INVOLVEDBecome a Member Volunteer Write For Us Jobs with Food Tank Donate #givehealthy About Food Tank Academic Working Group Account Advisory Group Annual Food Tank NYC Summit and Gala Dinner Board of Directors Cart Checkout Chicago Contact CSO Group Danielle Nierenberg Donate Donation Confirmation Donation Failed Donation History Donation Recurring Billing Setup Donor Dashboard Events Events Food Tank Food Tank Food Tank Live Food Tank Live San Diego Food Tank Summits & Live Events Get Email Updates Good Food Org Guide Submission Jobs Join Food Tank Live Stream Email Notifications Login Media Minneapolis My account Newsletter Sign Up Partners Podcast Guests Privacy Policy Refresh Working Group Shop Summit Application – DC Summit Application – NYC Summit Application – San Diego Summit Application – Seattle temp-form Thank You For Donating To Food Tank Thank You For Joining Food Tank Volunteer Waitlist Application WeCameToDance Write For Us Your Food Tank Account © 2013-2024 Food Tank. All rights reserved. News Sustainable Agriculture Climate Change Food Waste Food Heroes Urban Agriculture Policy and Organizing Food Tank Lists Working Groups Advisory Academic Working Group CSO Group Refresh Contact About Events Arts Donate Join SUBSCRIBE! You have Successfully Subscribed! Lost Password Back ⟶ Login Register Get new password Lost Password? Login Registration is disabled.Chart: Flu Hospitalizations Outstrip Covid Admissions | StatistaSkip to main contentStatista LogoStatista Logostatista.comstatista.esstatista.destatista.fr Prices & Access Business Solutions Academia and Government Statistics All IndustriesConsumer Goods & FMCGE-CommerceEconomy & PoliticsEnergy & EnvironmentInternetTechnology & TelecommunicationsTransportation & LogisticsTravel, Tourism & HospitalityMost viewed StatisticsRecent StatisticsPopular StatisticsMost used social networks 2024, by number of usersBig Mac index worldwide 2024Global retail e-commerce sales 2014-2027Car brand market share worldwide 2023Quarterly Netflix subscribers count worldwide 2013-2024TopicsMore TopicsE-commerce worldwide - statistics & factsSocial media - Statistics & FactsTop ReportView ReportIndustry OverviewMost viewed statisticsRecent StatisticsPopular StatisticsGlobal sales of the top performance apparel, accessories, and footwear companies 2023Nike's global revenue 2005-2024Value of the secondhand apparel market worldwide from 2021 to 2028Brand value of the most valuable soft drink brands worldwide 2023Revenue of the leading 10 beauty manufacturers worldwide 2023TopicsTopic overviewGlobal apparel market - statistics & factsCosmetics industry - statistics & factsTop ReportView ReportMost viewed statisticsRecent StatisticsPopular StatisticsE-commerce as share of total retail sales worldwide 2021-2027Biggest online retailers in the U.S. 2023, by market shareRevenue of the e-commerce industry in the U.S. 2019-2029Fastest-growing retail e-commerce countries 2023Retail e-commerce sales growth worldwide 2017-2027TopicsTopic overviewAmazon - statistics & factsE-commerce in the United Kingdom (UK) - statistics & factsTop ReportView ReportMost viewed statisticsRecent StatisticsPopular StatisticsBiggest companies in the world by market value 2023Largest armies in the world by active military personnel 2024U.S. border patrol apprehensions and expulsions FY 1990-2023Gross domestic product (GDP) in India 2029Countries with the highest military spending 2023TopicsTopic overviewInflation worldwide - statistics & factsGlobal GDP - statistics & factsTop ReportView ReportMost viewed statisticsRecent StatisticsPopular StatisticsGlobal household electricity prices 2023, by select countryAnnual global emissions of carbon dioxide 1940-2023Monthly electricity prices in selected EU countries 2020-2024EU-ETS allowance prices in the European Union 2022-2024Renewable energy capacity 2023 by countryTopicsTopic overviewGlobal waste generation - statistics & factsGlobal climate change - statistics & factsTop ReportView ReportMost viewed statisticsRecent StatisticsPopular StatisticsWorldwide digital population 2024Average daily time spent on social media worldwide 2012-2024Facebook: quarterly number of MAU (monthly active users) worldwide 2008-2023Social media: global penetration rate 2024, by regionInstagram accounts with the most followers worldwide 2024TopicsTopic overviewTikTok - statistics & factsSocial media usage in the United Kingdom (UK) - statistics & factsTop ReportView ReportMost viewed statisticsRecent StatisticsPopular StatisticsQuarterly smartphone market share worldwide by vendor 2009-2023Apple's revenue worldwide 2004-2023Global IT spending forecast 2012-2024, by segmentSemiconductor market revenue worldwide 1987-2025Digital transformation spending worldwide 2017-2027TopicsTopic overviewArtificial intelligence (AI) worldwide - statistics & factsSmartphones - statistics & factsTop ReportView ReportMost viewed statisticsRecent StatisticsPopular StatisticsAnnual car sales worldwide 2010-2023, with a forecast for 2024Monthly container freight rate index worldwide 2023-2024Automotive manufacturers' estimated market share in the U.S. 2023Global air traffic - number of flights 2004-2024Electric vehicle sales globally by model 2023TopicsTopic overviewAutomotive industry worldwide - statistics & factsTesla - statistics & factsTop ReportView ReportMost viewed statisticsRecent StatisticsPopular StatisticsGlobal revenue of Starbucks 2003-2023Number of international tourist arrivals worldwide 1950-2023McDonald's global revenue 2005-2023Online travel market size worldwide 2017-2028Brand value of leading global QSR brands 2024TopicsTopic overviewGlobal tourism industry - statistics & factsHotel industry worldwide - statistics & factsTop ReportView Report Reports Report Shop Search our report database Digital & TrendsDigital & Trend reportsOverview and forecasts on trending topicsIndustries & MarketsIndustry & Market reportsIndustry and market insights and forecastsCompanies & ProductsCompanies & Products reportsKey figures and rankings about companies and productsConsumers & BrandsConsumer & Brand reportsConsumer and brand insights and preferences in various industriesPolitics & SocietyPolitics & Society reportsDetailed information about political and social topicsCountries & RegionsCountry & Region reportsAll key figures about countries and regionsFind your information in our database containing over 20,000 reports Insights Market InsightsMarket forecast and expert KPIs for 1000+ markets in 190+ countries & territoriesExplore Market Insights ConsumerDigitalMobilityConsumer InsightsInsights on consumer attitudes and behavior worldwide 2,000,000+ interviews 15,000+ brandsExplore Consumer Insights Company InsightsBusiness information on 100m+ public and private companies 100+ industries 200+ countries and territoriesExplore Company Insights eCommerce InsightsDetailed information for 39,000+ online stores and marketplaces 70+ KPIs per store Revenue analytics and forecastsExplore eCommerce Insights Research AI New Daily Data Services The statistics portalStatista LogoDirectly accessible data for 170 industries from 150+ countries and over 1 Mio. facts.More about StatistaAbout Statista Why trust Statista Success stories First steps and help center Live webinars & recordings ServicesStatista+ offers additional, data-driven services, tailored to your specific needs. As your partner for data-driven success, we combine expertise in research, strategy, and marketing communications to deliver comprehensive solutions. Contact us directly for your individual offer.ResearchFull-service market research and analyticsCustomized market researchData analyticsAd hoc research "askStatista"Statista Q StrategyStrategy and business building for the data-driven economyBuild strategiesCreate data valueRealize business opportunitiesnxt Statista DesignTransforming data into content marketing and designData storytellingCreative assetsDistributionStatista Content & Design Statista R identifies and awards industry leaders, top providers, and exceptional brands through exclusive rankings and top lists in collaboration with renowned media brands worldwide. For more details, visit our website.Prices & AccessBusiness SolutionsAcademia and GovernmentStatisticsPopular StatisticsTopicsMarketsReportsMarket InsightsConsumer InsightsCompany InsightseCommerce InsightsResearch AIDaily DataServicesAbout StatistaStatista+Statista Qask Statistanxt StatistaContent & DesignStatista RDEESFRTopics›Coronavirus (COVID-19) in the UK› Flu Hospitalizations Outstrip Covid Admissions Influenza by Anna Fleck, Dec 16, 2022 Coronavirus (COVID-19) in the UK More people have been admitted to hospital with influenza than Covid for the first time since the coronavirus pandemic began, according to the latest figures by the UK Health Security Agency. The rate of flu hospitalizations hit 6.8 per 100,000 people in the week leading up to December 11, while admissions for Covid patients hit 6.6 per 100,000. Flu hospitalizations rose 40 percent in that period, up from 3.9 per 100,000 people as of the week ending December 4. If these admissions continue to rise, they could be on track to surpass the figures recorded in the winter of 2017/18, which killed some 30,000 people, the Telegraph reports.The over-85s and under-fives are seeing the highest rates of flu hospitalizations, with 23.1 per 100,000 people and 20.7 per 100,000 people, respectively. While the admissions levels for both infectious diseases are rising as we head into winter, the rate of flu hospitalizations is climbing more steeply.This surge hits as an already-overburdened NHS faces long waiting lists and a Strep A outbreak. In light of this, experts are calling for people to get a flu shot as soon as possible. Dr Conall Watson, Consultant Epidemiologist at the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), explains: “The flu vaccine offers the best protection against severe illness and it’s not too late for everyone eligible to get it. Uptake is particularly low in those aged 2 and 3 so if your child is eligible please take up the offer.” Anna Fleck Data Journalist anna.fleck@statista.com Description This chart shows the rate of flu and covid admissions to hospitals in late 2022. Report Download Chart URL to be used as reference link: https://www.statista.com/chart/28977ate-of-flu-and-covid-hospital-admissions/ HTML code to embed chart Can I integrate infographics into my blog or website? Yes, Statista allows the easy integration of many infographics on other websites. Simply copy the HTML code that is shown for the relevant statistic in order to integrate it. Our standard is 660 pixels, but you can customize how the statistic is displayed to suit your site by setting the width and the display size. Please note that the code must be integrated into the HTML code (not only the text) for WordPress pages and other CMS sites. You will find more infographics at StatistaGross domestic product (GDP) growth rate in the United Kingdom 2029Gross domestic product (GDP) per capita United Kingdom 2029 (in U.S. dollars)Gross domestic product (GDP) of the United Kingdom 2029 (in U.S. dollars)Unemployment rate in the United Kingdom 2023National debt of the United Kingdom 2029Main export partners for the United Kingdom 2022 Related Infographics Values Worldwide Value Shift? Nov 7, 2024 2024 Presidential Election Political Polarization Relatively Strong in the U.S. Nov 6, 2024 Air travel Air Travel Keeps Getting Safer Oct 24, 2024 Immigration The Most Common Origins of Immigrants Oct 21, 2024 Nike Nike Under John Donahoe: A Bumpy Run Oct 14, 2024 Ukraine Ukraine's Deficit Grows While Intergovernmental Aid Stagnates Oct 11, 2024 State of education 6 in 10 Brazilians Think Education Is a Major Issue Oct 2, 2024 Food waste Food Waste Isn't Top of Mind for Most? Sep 27, 2024 Foreign land ownership Canada and Europe Dominate U.S. Foreign Land Ownership Sep 23, 2024 Travel and tourism Americans Usually Opt For Hotels When Traveling Sep 18, 2024 50 best The World's Best Hotels in 2024 Sep 18, 2024 world patient safety day Healthcare: How Long Do Patients Have To Wait? Sep 17, 2024 Show more FAQ Who may use the "Chart of the Day"? The Statista "Chart of the Day", made available under the Creative Commons License CC BY-ND 3.0, may be used and displayed without charge by all commercial and non-commercial websites. Use is, however, only permitted with proper attribution to Statista. When publishing one of these graphics, please include a backlink to the respective infographic URL. More Information Which topics are covered by the "Chart of the Day"? The Statista "Chart of the Day" currently focuses on two sectors: "Media and Technology", updated daily and featuring the latest statistics from the media, internet, telecommunications and consumer electronics industries; and "Economy and Society", which current data from the United States and around the world relating to economic and political issues as well as sports and entertainment. Does Statista also create infographics in a customized design? For individual content and infographics in your Corporate Design, please visit our agency website www.statista.design Any more questions? Get in touch with us quickly and easily. We are happy to help! Do you still have questions? Feel free to contact us anytime using our contact form or visit our FAQ page. Your contact to the Infographics Newsroom Felix Richter Data Journalist felix.richter@statista.com +49 (40) 284 841 557 Statista Content & Design Need infographics, animated videos, presentations, data research or social media charts? More Information Home About Statista Career Contact Help & FAQ Report Bug Privacy Cookie settings ImprintHow dangerous is the flu? Symptoms and signs of complications to knowIE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Skip to ContentNBC News Logo2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsShare & Save —My NewsManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearchSearchProfile My NewsSign Out Sign InCreate your free profileSectionsU.S. NewsDecision 2024PoliticsWorldLocalBusinessSportsInvestigationsCulture & TrendsHealthScienceTech & MediaWeatherVideo FeaturesPhotosNBC SelectNBC Asian AmericaNBC BLKNBC LatinoNBC OUTtvTodayNightly NewsMSNBCMeet the PressDatelineFeaturedNBC News NowNightly FilmsStay TunedSpecial FeaturesNewslettersPodcastsListen NowMore From NBCCNBCNBC.COMNBCU AcademyPeacockNEXT STEPS FOR VETSNBC News Site MapHelpFollow NBC News news AlertsThere are no new alerts at this timeSearchSearchFacebookTwitterEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardPinterestLinkedinLatest Stories2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsCoronavirusHow dangerous is the flu? What to know about symptoms and signs of complicationsWhile most people who get the flu will recover in a few days, some can develop life-threatening conditions.Get more newsLiveonDec. 12, 2022, 11:40 PM UTC / Updated Dec. 13, 2022, 6:21 PM UTCBy Akshay Syal, M.D.The U.S. is experiencing the highest number of flu hospitalizations in a decade, and there’s no sign that the virus is going to peak or go away in the coming weeks. With the busy holiday travel season approaching and a comparatively low percentage of adults vaccinated for the flu, that leaves millions at potential risk for severe complications. While most people who get flu will recover in a few days, some can develop life-threatening complications. There have been at least 7,300 deaths from flu, including 21 children, since October, according to the latest data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Approximately 120,000 people have been hospitalized for the flu in the last couple of months, the CDC reported. Nine out of 10 adults hospitalized with flu had at least one underlying medical condition.People most at risk of serious illness from the flu include children under age 5, people over age 65, immunocompromised people and people who are pregnant.People with complications of the flu end up in the hospital most often because the virus develops into pneumonia, said Dr. Peter Chin-Hong, professor of medicine and an infectious disease physician at the University of California, San Francisco. Bacterial pneumonia may develop when the flu virus spreads to the lower respiratory tract, leading to breathing difficulties that may require supplemental oxygen.Warning signs of pneumonia While many of the symptoms of influenza, such as fever and body aches, overlap with pneumonia, there are some clues that may indicate a more serious lung infection may be brewing. A cough with yellow or green sputum, increasing fever, and pain in the chest when taking a deep breath or coughing are warning signs of pneumonia. Some patients with pneumonia may also go on to develop sepsis, a complication that could lead to organ failure and death, especially if not treated promptly. Pneumonia from the flu is not limited to just older people, said Dr. Jonathan Grein, an infectious disease physician and director of hospital epidemiology at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. "Unfortunately, we do sometimes see young healthy people presenting with really severe pneumonia as well," Grein said. "It can occur in anybody."Influenza and pneumonia combined are the ninth leading cause of death in the U.S., killing tens of thousands of people a year, according to the CDC. Flu virus can raise heart attack riskA bout of flu is also associated with increased risk of heart attack, as well as rare cases of inflammation in the brain or muscles.“Flu can cause all of these non-lung problems that people don’t usually think about,” Chin-Hong said.A 2018 study found patients were six times more likely to experience a heart attack the week after influenza infection than they are at any point during the year prior, or the year after the infection.Chin-Hong said he has treated people with flu who developed encephalitis — a dangerous inflammation of the brain that can be triggered by viral infections — or myositis, which causes a painful weakening of the muscles. Being sick with the flu can also aggravate flare-ups of chronic diseases such as diabetes or asthma, Grein said.“The flu triggers an immune response in your body to help fight off that infection, but sometimes that response can be a little overwhelming,” he said. “In a patient with diabetes, their blood sugars increase, or you can see patients with underlying lung disease, if they get infected with influenza, that could make their breathing more difficult.”Pregnant with flu One of the most at-risk groups for flu complications includes pregnant people, in part because of the weakening of immune systems during pregnancy, said infectious diseases expert Dr. Carlos del Rio, an executive associate dean at the Emory University School of Medicine and Grady Health System in Atlanta.Even for a healthy woman, changes to the heart and lung functions during pregnancy can make them more likely to get severely ill from flu. Despite this, many patients remain unvaccinated during their pregnancy. A recent CDC survey found that only half of all pregnant women got their flu vaccines as recommended, leaving many at risk for severe disease from the flu. “The most severe complication is respiratory failure, but there are other complications, such as inflammation of the heart,” del Rio said.He worries most about respiratory failure, which can require intubation in the intensive care unit.More news on the tripledemicIs it Covid, flu or RSV? A chart compares the different symptoms. Symptoms of Covid, flu and RSV in children. They all begin as upper respiratory infections.The intense focus on Covid for nearly three years has shifted the way that some scientists think about influenza. What Covid taught us about the flu. Does your child need more than one flu shot this year?FDA authorizes Covid boosters for kids under 5. And there is a possibility that a harsh flu infection could lead to "long flu." Similar to Covid, there is concern that those infected with the flu may have lingering long-term effects as well. Akiko Iwasaki, professor of immunobiology at Yale University, told NBC News in November that after the flu, it’s not unheard of to experience symptoms, especially lingering fatigue and brain fog. More research is needed to understand the scope of the problem, however. Is it worth it to get a flu shot? While the flu shots are not perfect, getting vaccinated is the best way to help prevent these complications, experts agree. Full protection takes about two weeks, and although it’s still possible to become infected with the flu after getting the shot, you are less likely to get severely ill because of that added protection.While there isn't data yet on how effective this year’s flu vaccine is, it appears to be a “very good match” to circulating strains, Dr. Rochelle Walensky, director of the CDC, said in a briefing last week. Even after having a diagnosed case of the flu, getting the vaccine is still important, because it provides broader protection against different strains of influenza virus. It’s possible to catch flu more than once a season, experts say. The current vaccine protects against four strains: two influenza A strains and two influenza B strains.“It’s not too late to get the flu shot,” Chin-Hong said. “We don’t know when flu season is going to end, and we saw a very long tail into the spring last year.”Akshay Syal, M.D.Dr. Akshay Syal is a board-certified internal medicine physician at UCLA Health and Instructor of Medicine at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. He also is a member of the NBC News Health Unit where he reports for both NBC News Digital and on-air for NBC News NOW and MSNBC. AboutContactHelpCareersAd ChoicesPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023)NBC News SitemapClosed CaptioningAdvertiseSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday LogoRequest unsuccessful. Incapsula incident ID: 945000210069366237-107145982259561799A Malaysian consensus recommendation for the prevention of influenza in older persons | BMC Infectious Diseases | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search BMC Infectious Diseases Home About Articles Submission Guidelines Join the board Collections Submit manuscript A Malaysian consensus recommendation for the prevention of influenza in older persons Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 15 December 2022 A Malaysian consensus recommendation for the prevention of influenza in older persons Maw-Pin Tan1, Zamberi Sekawi2, Roslina Abdul Manap3, Rizah Mazzuin Razali4, Hazlina Mahadzir5, Nordiana Nordin6, Kar-Chai Koh7, Pui-Li Wong8, Kejal Hasmuk9, Noor Harzana Harrun10 & …Siti Aisah Mokhtar2 Show authors BMC Infectious Diseases volume 22, Article number: 943 (2022) Cite this article 3654 Accesses 2 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundOlder persons are at high-risk of developing severe complications from influenza. This consensus statement was developed to provide guidance on appropriate influenza prevention strategies relevant to the Malaysian healthcare setting.MethodsUnder the initiative of the Malaysian Influenza Working Group (MIWG), a panel comprising 11 multi-speciality physicians was convened to develop a consensus statement. Using a modified Delphi process, the panellists reviewed published evidence on various influenza management interventions and synthesised 10 recommendations for the prevention of influenza among the aged population via group discussions and a blinded rating exercise.ResultsOverall, annual influenza vaccination is recommended for individuals aged ≥ 60 years, particularly those with specific medical conditions or residing in aged care facilities (ACFs). There is no preference for a particular vaccine type in this target population. Antiviral agents can be given for post-exposure chemoprophylaxis or when vaccine contraindication exists. Infection control measures should serve as adjuncts to prevent the spread of influenza, especially during Hajj.ConclusionThis consensus statement presents 10 evidence-based recommendations that can be adopted by healthcare providers to prevent influenza among the aged population in Malaysia. It could also serve as a basis for health policy planning in other lower- and middle-income countries. Peer Review reports IntroductionInfluenza (commonly known as flu) is a respiratory infectious disease caused by the influenza virus that mainly infects the nose, throat, and sometimes lungs [1]. Most people recover from uncomplicated influenza but certain populations, particularly those aged 60 years and above, are considered at higher risk of developing influenza-related complications that may result in severe disease and death [2, 3]. In 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) indicated that 290,000 to 650,000 annual global deaths were associated with influenza [4]. A recent study estimated that the global mean annual influenza-associated excess respiratory mortality rate ranged from 0.1 to 6.4 per 100,000 individuals among people aged ≤ 64 years, 2.9–44.0 per 100,000 individuals among people aged 65–74 years, and 17.9–224.5 per 100,000 individuals among people aged ≥ 75 years [5]. These estimates suggest a greater annual burden of influenza than the figures reported by WHO in 2017, underscoring the impact that influenza has on healthcare systems worldwide.Older persons typically suffer the most severe health effects of influenza as they have an ageing immune system (immunosenescence) and more medical comorbidities [6]. According to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), approximately 90% of influenza-related deaths and up to 70% of influenza-related hospitalisations have occurred among older persons aged ≥ 65 years [7]. It has been reported that older persons in Hong Kong, specifically those aged ≥ 65 years, are about 14 times more likely to die from influenza compared with adults in the 40–65 years age group [8]. In Singapore, influenza-related deaths were 11.3 times higher among older persons than in the general population [9]. From 2010 to 2017, 16.3% of all pneumonia and influenza hospitalisations in Singapore were estimated to be attributed to influenza, with a higher excess rate estimated for individuals aged ≥ 65 years (338.0 per 100,000 person-years) [10]. In Malaysia, influenza has a disproportionately higher impact on older persons, with 28.3% of patients aged ≥ 65 years experiencing hospitalisation, intensive care unit admission, or death within a year owing to influenza-related illnesses or complications compared with 9.6% of patients in the 25–64 years age group [11]. Therefore, the prevention of influenza in this high-risk group is of great importance.In 2020, there were 2.2 million (6.8%) people in Malaysia aged ≥ 65 years and this number is projected to reach six million by 2040 [12, 13]. To address the growing need of having a localised guideline on the prevention of influenza among the aged population in Malaysia, a consensus panel was convened to develop a consensus statement that lists a set of evidence-based recommendations, aimed at raising awareness among healthcare providers and caregivers about the importance of influenza prevention among older persons, and providing guidance on appropriate influenza prevention strategies that are relevant to the Malaysian healthcare setting.MethodsThe MIWG was formed by the Malaysian Society of Infectious Diseases and Chemotherapy (MSIDC), comprising an interdisciplinary group of experts from the fields of paediatrics, public health, infectious diseases, virology, respiratory medicine, and geriatrics, to advocate for influenza prevention in the general population in Malaysia. In 2020, a sub-committee (senior section) of MIWG was formed as an initiative between MSIDC and the Malaysian Society of Geriatric Medicine to specifically lobby for influenza vaccination in older adults. The group recognised that having appropriate guidelines for influenza prevention would strengthen the call for reducing the impact of influenza on the aged population, among policymakers, healthcare practitioners and the public. The MIWG subsequently invited 11 physicians (five consultant geriatricians, a senior consultant medical microbiologist, a senior consultant respiratory physician, a general practitioner, an infectious diseases physician, a family medicine specialist, and a public health medicine specialist) from public academic centres, public and private primary healthcare centres, as well as a private clinic to be members of the consensus panel.A literature search of the MEDLINE database was conducted using the PubMed search engine to identify influenza-related studies—involving older persons (defined as individuals aged ≥ 60 years based on the guidelines provided by the Malaysian Ministry of Women, Family and Community Development and the Ministry of Health) [14, 15], residents and staff of ACFs, older persons with comorbidities and/or immune suppression, as well as older Hajj pilgrims—that have been published over a 15-year period (2006–2021). The following medical subject headings (MeSHs) and subheading were used as the search terms: Influenza; aged; prevention and control; and diagnosis. The inputted search syntax was: “(((“Influenza, Human“[MeSH]) AND (“Aged“[MeSH])) AND (“prevention and control“[Subheading])) AND (“Diagnosis“[MeSH]); Filters: Guideline, Meta-Analysis, Randomised Controlled Trial, 2006–2021”.A total of 152 relevant articles were retrieved from MEDLINE. In addition, recommendations of interest were also sourced from the verified websites of medical organisations and societies. Upon reviewing the pool of information generated via the said search strategy, the consensus panel drafted 22 preliminary statements that were deemed valuable in guiding the development of the influenza prevention consensus document. These statements were subsequently subjected to a modified Delphi process where the value of various interventions in preventing influenza was scrutinised and debated to derive a list of evidence-based recommendations that would meet the objectives of this study.Specifically, the modified Delphi technique used in this study consisted of two virtual expert meetings and one blinded rating exercise.First expert meetingA set of 22 preliminary statements describing various interventions for the prevention of influenza was presented for discussion. Having reviewed the statements and their corresponding supporting evidence, panellists indicated their position on the statements by openly voting for or against their inclusion in the proposed consensus document. Only statements with ≥ 70% of positive responses were shortlisted for the subsequent blinded Delphi rating exercise. During this meeting, panellists also amended the shortlisted statements for accuracy and clarity. A total of 13 statements were eventually shortlisted for the next step.Blinded Delphi ratingThe 13 shortlisted statements from the first expert meeting were subjected to a blinded Delphi rating process. Guided by scientific evidence, members of the consensus panel independently and anonymously rated each statement based on a 5-point Likert scale (‘strongly disagree’, ‘disagree’, ‘neutral’, ‘agree’, ‘strongly agree’). For each statement, the experts could also suggest minor amendments to the original phrasing, which was discussed in the second expert meeting. A consensus was defined as a combined ‘strongly agree’ and ‘agree’ acceptance rate of ≥ 70% [16, 17]. A total of 12 statements achieved consensus after the rating process. One statement did not achieve the minimum level of support required and was further discussed at the next meeting.Second expert meetingResults of the blinded Delphi rating exercise were compiled and shared with members of the MIWG during a second virtual expert meeting. During this meeting, the panellists reviewed the reported results and appropriate revisions were made to the accepted consensus statements. At the end of the meeting, a total of 10 consensus statements were finalised as the official recommendations of the MIWG for the prevention of influenza in the aged population.Results and discussionRecommendation 1: all persons aged 60 years and above who do not have contraindications should receive an influenza vaccine annuallyOlder persons represent 90% of influenza-related deaths and 50–70% of influenza-related hospitalisations [7]. A study that examined the effectiveness of influenza vaccine in seniors over an extended duration found that influenza vaccination was associated with a 27% reduction in the risk of hospitalisation due to influenza or pneumonia, and a 48% reduction in the risk of death [18]. Separately, a modelling study documented that influenza vaccination in Europe averted an average of 1.6–2.1 million cases of influenza, 45,300–65,600 hospitalisations, and 25,200–37,200 deaths each year [19].A cost-benefit analysis also showed that vaccination would result in net savings of Malaysian Ringgit (MYR) 313 for each vaccinated older person and net savings of MYR 3565 per life-year gained [20]. While influenza vaccines have a good safety profile in general, their use may be limited by certain contraindications [1]. For example, people who are allergic to any components, adjuvants, or trace ingredients in influenza vaccines (e.g., neomycin, formaldehyde, or Triton X-100) and those who have prior experience of anaphylaxis after vaccination should not be vaccinated [21, 22]. For older persons with egg allergy, influenza vaccines produced using nonegg-based techniques (e.g., trivalent and quadrivalent recombinant influenza vaccines) can be considered for administration, though available published reviews have reported that severe allergic reactions to currently available egg-based influenza vaccines in individuals with egg allergy are unlikely [23]. Nonetheless, it is recommended that older persons who have a history of severe allergic reactions to eggs be vaccinated in a medical setting under the supervision of a healthcare worker who is able to identify and manage severe allergic conditions [24].Recommendation 2: older persons with comorbidities should be prioritised for annual influenza vaccinationOlder persons with comorbidities, including chronic lung diseases (e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, bronchiectasis, and lung fibrosis), heart diseases (e.g., heart failure and coronary artery disease), kidney and liver disorders, endocrine (e.g., diabetes melitus), and neurological disorders are at higher risk for influenza-related complications [25, 26]. In Malaysia, older persons are more likely to have ≥ 2 comorbidities with advanced age being an independent predictor of poor health outcomes [11]. This population should be prioritised for annual influenza vaccination, especially during periods of vaccine shortage. A randomised, double-blind, multicentre, active-controlled trial found that vaccination against influenza was 22.1% effective in preventing influenza among older persons with at least one high-risk comorbid condition and 23.6% effective among those with at least two high-risk comorbid conditions [27].Moreover, a prospective, randomised, open with blinded endpoint study involving 439 patients who had been admitted to hospital for acute coronary syndrome (ACS) reported that patients who received influenza vaccination had a lower rate of developing major adverse cardiovascular events (including death and hospitalisation due to ACS, heart failure, or stroke) than those who did not (9.5% vs. 19.3%; unadjusted hazard ratio, 0.70 [0.57–0.86]; p = 0.004) [28].Recommendation 3: older persons should receive any available influenza vaccine approved for use in their age groupCurrently, more than one licensed influenza vaccine has been approved for use in older persons. They are available as trivalent or quadrivalent, cell-cultured or egg-based, standard-dose or high-dose, and adjuvanted or nonadjuvanted vaccines. Regardless of the vaccine type, antibodies typically develop in the body approximately two weeks after vaccination [29]. Presently, three influenza vaccines are preferentially recommended for older persons: Fluzone high-dose quadrivalent, Flublok quadrivalent recombinant, and Fluad quadrivalent adjuvanted influenza vaccines [30]. If none of the three influenza vaccines is available, older persons who have no contraindication to influenza vaccination should receive any registered and age-appropriate influenza vaccine [30]. Generally, the availability of influenza vaccines can vary from year to year and from country to country [31]; clinicians in Malaysia should administer whichever formulation that is available locally to achieve the highest possible vaccine coverage among aged individuals (Table 1). Table 1 Influenza vaccines currently available in Malaysia (as of June 2022)Full size table Recommendation 4: post-exposure prophylaxis with antiviral agents can be considered within 48 h for preventing the transmission of influenza in older personsPost-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) with antiviral medications can be prescribed to older persons to prevent the transmission of influenza and should be given within 48 h of exposure to a person with influenza for 7 days after the last known exposure [2]. PEP is particularly important for those who cannot receive vaccination owing to contraindications or if they are severely immunocompromised [2]. A randomised, double-blind study assessing the effectiveness of a neuraminidase inhibitor, oseltamivir, as PEP among close contacts of individuals with influenza showed that the risk of developing influenza was reduced by 89% compared with those who received a placebo [32].PEP with another neuraminidase inhibitor, zanamivir, protected close contacts with similarly high prophylactic efficacy, ranging from 82 to 84% [33, 34]. In 2020, a selective inhibitor of influenza cap-dependent endonuclease (i.e., baloxavir) was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for influenza PEP [35]. It has been demonstrated that close contacts of people with influenza who were given baloxavir were 86% less likely to contract influenza after exposure to an infected person compared with those who received a placebo (1.9% [7 of 374] vs. 13.6% [51 of 375]; adjusted risk ratio, 0.14; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.06–0.30; p < 0.001) [36].Recommendation 5: antiviral agents should be given as post-exposure chemoprophylaxis as soon as possible to all non-ill residents during influenza outbreaks in ACFsAn influenza outbreak at an ACF can be suspected when there is a resident with laboratory-confirmed influenza and another resident at the same facility develops influenza-like illness (ILI) within 72 h [37]. When an influenza outbreak is recognised in an ACF, chemoprophylaxis should be administered immediately to all non-ill residents, regardless of their influenza vaccination status, to prevent the spread of the virus. Oseltamivir has been shown to be 92% effective in preventing influenza in residents of ACFs exposed to influenza [38], while zanamivir was reportedly effective in controlling at least five influenza outbreaks in ACFs [39,40,41,42,43]. To effectively control influenza outbreaks, chemoprophylaxis should be taken for a minimum of two weeks and continued for seven days after the last known case of influenza was identified [2].Recommendation 6: immunocompromised older persons should receive inactivated influenza vaccine annuallyImmunocompromised patients are at high-risk of contracting influenza and have significant influenza-associated excess mortality rates [44]. Annual inactivated influenza vaccination is widely recommended for this group, including those with primary immune deficiencies related to inherited diseases that affect the immune system, as well as those with secondary immune deficiencies resulting from human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, solid organ or stem cell transplant, cancers associated with immune deficiency, and cancer chemotherapy [45].A randomised controlled trial indicated that the influenza vaccine was highly effective among patients with HIV, providing a protective efficacy of 100% for vaccine recipients against laboratory-confirmed symptomatic influenza (95% CI, 73–100%) [46]. Moreover, a prospective study on the immunogenicity of inactivated influenza vaccine among patients receiving cytotoxic myelosuppressive chemotherapy for solid tumours and haematologic malignancies demonstrated that the influenza vaccine could induce an immune response similar to that seen in healthy controls [47].Recommendation 7: influenza vaccine, education on influenza prevention, and infection control measures should be recommended to all older Hajj and Umrah pilgrimsInfluenza vaccination is currently not mandatory for Malaysian Hajj and Umrah pilgrims. In a cross-sectional study conducted amongst 394 Malaysian Hajj pilgrims in 2007, 96.4% of the study population had an ILI—out of which 91.5% experienced cough; 59.2%, fever; 79.3%, runny nose; and 57.1%, sore throat [48]. Alborzi and associates (2009) found that vaccinated pilgrims contracted the influenza virus less frequently than unvaccinated pilgrims (9.2% vs. 16.5%) [49]. A case-control study on the effectiveness of influenza vaccination among Malaysian pilgrims attending the Hajj in 2000 showed that the influenza vaccine was 77% effective in preventing clinic visits for ILI and 66% effective in reducing the use of antibiotics [50]. All older Hajj pilgrims who had not been immunised are recommended to receive an influenza vaccine, preferably no less than two weeks prior to their arrival in Saudi Arabia [51].Nonetheless, vaccination alone is not an adequate infection control measure for pilgrims. In a study assessing the incidence rate of influenza among 115 pilgrims during the 2003 Hajj season, nine out of 30 vaccinated pilgrims (30%) still experienced breakthrough infection [52]. Therefore, the implementation of other supportive infection control measures, including the use of face masks, alcohol-based hand sanitisers, and health education, is important in mitigating the potential transmission of influenza during Hajj. Previous studies reported that the regular use of a face mask was a significant protective factor in reducing the incidence of infection [53, 54]. Al-Asmary and colleagues found that Hajj pilgrims who consistently used alcohol-based hand sanitisers had more than an eight-fold lower risk of acquiring infection compared with those who did not [55]. Similarly, Alqahtani et al. revealed that pilgrims who had received health education before travelling to Hajj were twice as likely to get vaccinated than those who had no exposure to proper education materials [56]. Hence, appropriate education of pilgrims by healthcare professionals and Hajj and Umrah travel agents is recommended to maximise the adherence to influenza prevention measures among pilgrims.Recommendation 8: all residents of ACFs should be offered annual influenza vaccinationMenec and colleagues reported that hospitalisation and deaths due to influenza and pneumonia were about two to three times higher among older persons living in ACFs compared with those living in the community (31.9 vs. 9.8 per 1000 population, and 61.9% vs. 30.7%, respectively) [57]. Influenza vaccination is currently one of the most optimal ways of reducing the risk of hospitalisation and death among older persons who live in ACFs [58, 59]. Among vaccinated residents, there were significantly fewer clinical cases, hospitalisations, and deaths due to influenza (256 cases among 10,739 subjects, 32 hospitalisations, and one death) compared with unvaccinated residents (694 cases among 11,723 subjects, 150 hospitalisations, and five deaths) (p ˂ 0.001) [58], thus reducing the risks by 59.7%, 76.7%, and 78.2% respectively.The influenza vaccine has also been shown to be effective not only in reducing the incidence of ILI and influenza-related hospitalisation but also in preventing serious complications caused by influenza, such as pneumonia (17% among vaccinated vs. 27% among unvaccinated residents; p < 0.05) and deaths (5% vs. 14%; p < 0.05) in the ACF setting [59]. Based on a nonrandomised, single-blind placebo control study on the effectiveness of influenza vaccination for the prevention of ILI among residents of ACF in Malaysia, influenza vaccination reduced the risk of contracting ILI by 14–45% and showed 55–76% vaccine effectiveness in reducing the occurrence of ILI [60].Recommendation 9: annual influenza vaccination should be offered to all staff of ACFsIn line with WHO recommendations, annual influenza vaccination should be offered to all staff who will potentially have contact with residents of ACFs, unless contraindicated [61]. In this consensus statement, the term ‘ACFs’ encompasses long-term care facilities, nursing homes, day care centres, and residential care facilities that provide care to people who are unable to live independently owing to advanced age, physical disability, or mental disability. The term ‘staff’ includes any person employed by the ACFs, caregivers, and volunteers (e.g., doctors, nurses, cooks, laundry workers, cleaners, and security staff).A randomised controlled trial showed that the vaccination of healthcare workers not only reduced influenza infection by 88% in vaccinated individuals but also reduced absenteeism caused by influenza illness (9.9 days per 100 vaccinated staff vs. 21.1 days per 100 unvaccinated staff) [62]. Importantly, vaccination of staff at ACFs may have beneficial effects on the aged residents. The reduction of complications afforded by vaccinating staff is equivalent to preventing five deaths, two admissions to hospital with ILI, seven general practitioner consultations for ILI, and nine cases of ILI per 100 residents [63]. Moreover, a pair-matched cluster study involving 1,059 patients in 12 geriatric medical long-term care sites also found that vaccination of staff was associated with reductions in ILI (odds ratio [OR], 0.57; 95% CI, 0.34–0.94) and total patient mortality from 17 to 10% (OR, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.40–0.80) [64].Recommendation 10: staff and residents in ACFs with influenza-like illnesses should be isolated and tested for influenza, and outbreak control measures institutedTo prevent influenza outbreaks in ACFs, staff and residents in ACFs with ILI should be isolated from healthy individuals in a timely manner. In general, isolation should be maintained for 7 days after the onset of symptoms or until their symptoms have resolved [65]. Meanwhile, laboratory tests, including rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDTs), molecular assays, and virus culture should be performed to determine if their illness is due to influenza infection [21]. As compared with molecular assays such as reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, RIDTs have a lower and inconsistent sensitivity, ranging from 10 to 80% [66, 67]. In addition, the results of RIDTs may be affected by various factors, including the prevalence of influenza activity in the population tested [66, 67]. Typically, false-negative RIDTs results are more likely to occur when the influenza prevalence is high in the community [67]. However, RIDTs have a high specificity (90–95%); thus, positive RIDTs results can rule in influenza infection but negative RIDTs results do not exclude influenza infection in individuals with symptoms suggestive of influenza [66, 67]. Confirmatory testing using molecular assay is recommended when negative RIDTs results are obtained for a symptomatic staff or resident; antiviral treatment should be initiated if clinically indicated and should not be delayed while influenza testing results are pending [2]. Standard and droplet precautions should also be implemented immediately when two cases of laboratory-confirmed influenza affecting staff or residents of the same facility are identified within 72 h (Table 2) [2, 68]. Table 2 Essential components of standard and droplet precautionsFull size table ConclusionThis consensus statement presents 10 evidence-based recommendations that healthcare providers and caregivers can adopt to prevent influenza among the aged population in Malaysia. It can be used as a fundamental guide to facilitate the planning and execution of influenza prevention strategies across various healthcare settings and environment. These recommendations may also help to inform policymaking decisions in other lower- to middle-income countries. Availability of data and materials Data sharing is not applicable to this article as all data generated and analysed during the current study are included in this article. ReferencesDhar R, Ghoshal AG, Guleria R, Sharma S, Kulkarni T, Swarnakar R, et al. Clinical practice guidelines 2019: indian consensus-based recommendations on influenza vaccination in adults. Lung India. 2020;37:4–18.Article Google Scholar Uyeki TM, Bernstein HH, Bradley JS, Englund JA, File TM, Fry AM, et al. Clinical practice guidelines by the infectious Diseases Society of America: 2018 update on diagnosis, treatment, chemoprophylaxis, and institutional outbreak management of seasonal influenza. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;68:e1–47.Article Google Scholar Feldman LY, Zhu JQ, To T. Estimating age-specific influenza-associated asthma morbidity in Ontario, Canada. Respir Med. 2019;155:104–12.Article Google Scholar World Health Organization. Up to 650,000 people die of respiratory diseases linked to seasonal flu each year. 2017. https://www.who.intews/item/13-12-2017-up-to-650-000-people-die-of-respiratory-diseases-linked-to-seasonal-flu-each-year. Accessed 14 Dec 2021.Iuliano AD, Roguski KM, Chang HH, Muscatello DJ, Palekar R, Tempia S, et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet. 2018;391:1285–300.Article Google Scholar Czaja CA, Miller L, Alden N, Wald HL, Cummings CN, Rolfes MA, et al. Age-related differences in hospitalisation rates, clinical presentation, and outcomes among older adults hospitalised with influenza - U.S. Influenza Hospitalisation Surveillance Network (FluSurv-NET). Open Forum Infect Dis. 2019;6:1–8.Article Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Study shows hospitalisation rates and risk of death from seasonal flu increase with age among people 65 years and older. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/spotlights/2018-2019/hopitalization-rates-older.html. Accessed 28 Jun 2022.Wong CM, Chan KP, Hedley AJ, Peiris JSM. Influenza-associated mortality in Hong Kong. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;39:1611–7.Article Google Scholar Chow A, Ma S, Ai EL, Suok KC. Influenza-associated deaths in tropical Singapore. Emerg Infect Dis. 2006;12:114–21.Article Google Scholar Ng Y, Chua LAV, Ma S, Lee VJM. Estimates of influenza-associated hospitalisations in tropical Singapore, 2010–2017: higher burden estimated in more recent years. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2019;13:574–81.Article Google Scholar Wong PL, Sii HL, P’ng CK, Ee SS, Yong Oong X, Ng KT, et al. The effects of age on clinical characteristics, hospitalisation and mortality of patients with influenza-related illness at a tertiary care centre in Malaysia. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2020;14:286–93.Article Google Scholar Department of Statistics Malaysia. Launching on report on the key findings population and housing census of Malaysia 2020. 2022. https://www.dosm.gov.my/v1/index.php?r=column/cthemeByCat%26cat=117%26bul_id=akliVWdIa2g3Y2VubTVSMkxmYXp1UT09%26menu_id=L0pheU43NWJwRWVSZklWdzQ4TlhUUT09. Accessed 1 Jul 2022.Department of Statistics Malaysia. Ageing. 2017. https://www.dosm.gov.my/v1/uploads/files/6_Newsletter/Ageing.pdf. Accessed 1 Jul 2022.Institute for Public Health. National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019: non-communicable diseases, healthcare demand, and health literacy–Key findings. 2020.Ministry of Women. Family and Community Development. Beijing declaration and platform for action: Malaysia progress report 2014–2019. 2019.Mahler DA, Selecky PA, Harrod CG. Management of dyspnea in patients with advanced lung or heart disease. Practical guidance from the American College of chest Physicians consensus statement. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2010;120:160–6. Google Scholar Sumsion T. The Delphi technique: an adaptive research tool. Br J Occup Ther. 1998;61:153–6.Article Google Scholar Nichol KL, Nordin JD, Nelson DB, Mullooly JP, Hak E. Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in the community-dwelling elderly. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:1373–81.Article CAS Google Scholar Preaud E, Durand L, Macabeo B, Farkas N, Sloesen B, Palache A, et al. Annual public health and economic benefits of seasonal influenza vaccination: a European estimate. BMC Public Health. 2014;14:1–12.Article Google Scholar Nichol KL, Nordin J, Mullooly J, Lask R. Influenza vaccination of the elderly is associated with direct medical care cost savings. Int Congr Ser. 2004;1263:658–60.Article Google Scholar Baek JH, Seo Y, Bin, Choi WS, Kee SY, Jeong HW, Lee HY, et al. Guideline on the prevention and control of seasonal influenza in healthcare setting. Korean J Intern Med. 2014;29:265–80.Article Google Scholar Chen Q, Wang L, Xie M, Li X. Recommendations for influenza and Streptococcus pneumoniae vaccination in elderly people in China. Aging Med. 2020;3:1–11.Article Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Safety of influenza vaccines. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/acip/safety-vaccines.htm#EggAllergy. Accessed 26 Oct 2022.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Flu vaccine and people with egg allergies. 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/egg-allergies.htm. Accessed 26 Oct 2022.World Health Organization. Global surveillance, prevention and control of chronic respiratory diseases: a comprehensive approach. Geneva: WHO Press; 2007. Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. People at higher risk of flu complications. 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/highrisk/index.htm?web=1%26wdLOR=c27B3E6EB-B5BE-4B91-9120-F846F9F57108. Accessed 28 Jun 2022.DiazGranados CA, Dunning AJ, Robertson CA, Talbot HK, Landolfi V, Greenberg DP. Efficacy and immunogenicity of high-dose influenza vaccine in older adults by age, comorbidities, and frailty. Vaccine. 2015;33:4565–71.Article CAS Google Scholar Phrommintikul A, Kuanprasert S, Wongcharoen W, Kanjanavanit R, Chaiwarith R, Sukonthasarn A. Influenza vaccination reduces cardiovascular events in patients with acute coronary syndrome. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1730–5.Article Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Different types of flu vaccines. 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/different-flu-vaccines.htm. Accessed 28 Jun 2022.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Fluzone high-dose seasonal influenza vaccine. 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/qa_fluzone.htm?web=1&wdLOR=c9B48F9AB-3E41-4A81-B3DD-8BEBC075D8E4. Accessed 28 Jun 2022.Smetana J, Chlibek R, Shaw J, Splino M, Prymula R. Influenza vaccination in the elderly. Hum Vaccines Immunother. 2018;14:540–9.Article Google Scholar Welliver R, Monto AS, Hassman M, Hedrick J, Jackson HC, Huson L, et al. Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing influenza in household contacts. JAMA. 2001;285:748–54.Article CAS Google Scholar Hayden FG, Gubareva LV, Monto AS, Klein TC, Elliott MJ, Hammond JM, et al. Inhaled zanamivir for the prevention of influenza in families. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1282–9.Article CAS Google Scholar Monto AS, Pichichero ME, Blanckenberg SJ, Ruuskanen O, Cooper C, Fleming DM, et al. Zanamivir prophylaxis: an effective strategy for the prevention of influenza types a and B within households. J Infect Dis. 2002;186:1582–8.Article CAS Google Scholar Food and Drug Administration. FDA expands approval of influenza treatment to post-exposure prevention. 2020. https://www.fda.govews-events/press-announcements/fda-expands-approval-influenza-treatment-post-exposure-prevention. Accessed 10 Jun 2022.Ikematsu H, Hayden FG, Kawaguchi K, Kinoshita M, de Jong MD, Lee N, et al. Baloxavir marboxil for prophylaxis against influenza in household contacts. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:309–20.Article CAS Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Interim guidance for influenza outbreak management in long-term care and post-acute care facilities 2020. 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/infectioncontrol/ltc-facility-guidance.htm?web=1%26wdLOR=c54461F81-9FED-49D6-9E5C-E9204D95215B. Accessed 28 Jun 2022.Peters PH, Gravenstein S, De Bock PNV, Van Couter A, Gibbens M, Von Planta TA, et al. Long-term use of oseltamivir for the prophylaxis of influenza in a vaccinated frail older population. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2001;49:1025–31.Article Google Scholar Ambrozaitis A, Gravenstein S, Van Essen GA, Rubinstein E, Balciuniene L, Stikleryte A, et al. Inhaled zanamivir versus placebo for the prevention of influenza outbreaks in an unvaccinated long-term care population. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2005;6:367–74.Article Google Scholar Gravenstein S, Drinka P, Osterweil D, Schilling M, Krause P, Elliott M, et al. Inhaled zanamivir versus rimantadine for the control of influenza in a highly vaccinated long-term care population. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2005;6:359–66.Article Google Scholar Hirji Z, O’Grady S, Bonham J, Mak M, Takata-Shewchuk J, Hawkins K, et al. Utility of zanamivir for chemoprophylaxis of concomitant influenza A and B in a complex continuing care population. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2002;23:604–8.Article CAS Google Scholar Lee C, Loeb M, Phillips A, Nesbitt J, Smith K, Fearon M, et al. Zanamivir use during transmission of amantadine-resistant influenza A in a nursing home. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2000;21:700–4.Article CAS Google Scholar Schilling M, Povinelli L, Krause P, Gravenstein M, Ambrozaitis A, Jones HH, et al. Efficacy of zanamivir for chemoprophylaxis of nursing home influenza outbreaks. Vaccine. 1998;16:1771–4.Article CAS Google Scholar Lin JC, Nichol KL. Excess mortality due to pneumonia or influenza during influenza seasons among persons with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Arch Intern Med. 2001;161:441–6.Article CAS Google Scholar Rubin LG, Levin MJ, Ljungman P, Davies EG, Avery R, Tomblyn M, et al. 2013 IDSA clinical practice guideline for vaccination of the immunocompromised host. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;58:e44–100.Article Google Scholar Tasker SA, Treanor JJ, Paxton WB, Wallace MR. Efficacy of influenza vaccination in HIV-infected persons. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131:430–3.Article CAS Google Scholar Xu Y, Methuku N, Coimbatore P, Fitzgerald T, Huang Y, Xiao Y-Y, et al. Immunogenicity of an inactivated monovalent 2009 influenza A (H1N1) vaccine in patients who have cancer. Oncologist. 2012;17:125–34.Article Google Scholar Deris ZZ, Hasan H, Sulaiman SA, Wahab MSA, Naing NN, Othman NH. The prevalence of acute respiratory symptoms and role of protective measures among malaysian Hajj pilgrims. J Travel Med. 2010;17:82–8.Article Google Scholar Alborzi A, Aelami MH, Ziyaeyan M, Jamalidoust M, Moeini M, Pourabbas B, et al. Viral etiology of acute respiratory infections among iranian Hajj pilgrims, 2006. J Travel Med. 2009;16:239–42.Article Google Scholar Mustafa AN, Gessner BD, Ismail R, Yusoff AF, Abdullah Nasuruddin, Ishak I, et al. A case-control study of influenza vaccine effectiveness among malaysian pilgrims attending the Haj in Saudi Arabia. Int J Infect Dis. 2003;7:210–4.Article Google Scholar Taghioff SM, Slavin BR, Holton T, Singh D. Examining the potential benefits of the influenza vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a retrospective cohort analysis of 74,754 patients. PLoS One. 2021;16:e0255541.Article CAS Google Scholar El Bashir H, Haworth E, Zambon M, Shafi S, Zuckerman J, Booy R. Influenza among U.K. pilgrims to Hajj, 2003. Emerg Infect Dis. 2004;10:1882–3.Article Google Scholar Al-Jasser FS, Kabbash IA, AlMazroa MA, Memish ZA. Patterns of diseases and preventive measures among domestic Hajjis from Central, Saudi Arabia [complete republication]. East Mediterr Health J. 2013;19(Suppl 2):34–41.Article Google Scholar Choudhry AJ, Al-Mudaimegh KS, Turkistani AM, Al-Hamdan NA. Hajj-associated acute respiratory infection among Hajjis from Riyadh. East Mediterr Heal J. 2006;12:300–9.CAS Google Scholar Al-Asmary S, Al-Shehri AS, Abou-Zeid A, Abdel-Fattah M, Hifnawy T, El-Said T. Acute respiratory tract infections among Hajj medical mission personnel, Saudi Arabia. Int J Infect Dis. 2007;11:268–72.Article Google Scholar Alqahtani AS, Alsharif SA, Garnan MA, Tashani M, BinDhim NF, Heywood AE, et al. The impact of receiving pretravel health advice on the prevention of Hajj-related illnesses among australian pilgrims: cohort study. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2020;6:e10959.Article Google Scholar Menec VH, MacWilliam L, Aoki FY. Hospitalisations and deaths due to respiratory illnesses during influenza seasons: a comparison of community residents, senior housing residents, and nursing home residents. J Gerontol Med Sci. 2002;57A:M629-35. Google Scholar Deguchi Y, Nishimura K. Efficacy of influenza vaccine in elderly persons in welfare nursing homes: reduction in risks of mortality and morbidity during an influenza A (H3N2) epidemic. J Gerontol Med Sci. 2001;56A:M391-4. Google Scholar Patriarca PA. Efficacy of influenza vaccine in nursing homes. JAMA. 1985;253:1136–9.Article CAS Google Scholar Isahak I, Mahayiddin AA, Ismail R. Effectiveness of influenza vaccination in prevention of influenza-like illness among inhabitants of old folk homes. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2007;38:841–8. Google Scholar Lansbury L, Nguyen-Van-Tam J. Prevention and control of outbreaks of seasonal influenza in long-term care facilities: a review of the evidence and best-practice guidance. Copenhagen, Denmark: 2017.Wilde JA, McMillan JA, Serwint J, Butta J, O’Riordan MA, Steinhoff MC. Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in health care professionals: a randomised trial. J Am Med Assoc. 1999;281:908–13.Article CAS Google Scholar Hayward AC, Harling R, Wetten S, Johnson AM, Munro S, Smedley J, et al. Effectiveness of an influenza vaccine programme for care home staff to prevent death, morbidity, and health service use among residents: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2006;333:1241.Article Google Scholar Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, Elder AG, O’Donnell B, Knight PV, et al. Influenza vaccination of health care workers in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality of elderly patients. J Infect Dis. 1997;175:1–6.Article CAS Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention strategies for seasonal influenza in healthcare settings. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/infectioncontrol/healthcaresettings.htm. Accessed 18 Oct 2022.Chartrand C, Leeflang MMG, Minion J, Brewer T, Pai M. Accuracy of rapid influenza diagnostic tests. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156:500–11.Article Google Scholar Centers for Disease and Prevention. Rapid influenza diagnostic tests. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/diagnosis/clinician_guidance_ridt.htm. Accessed 18 Oct 2022.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Isolation precautions. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/guidelines/isolation/index.html#4. Accessed 28 Jun 2022.Download referencesAcknowledgementsMedical writing assistance was provided by LC Cheng and TS Jong of MIMS (Malaysia), which was funded by the MIWG and complied with Good Publication Practice 3 ethical guidelines (Battisti et al. Ann Int Med 2015;163:461–464).FundingThis paper was supported by the Sanofi-Aventis (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd., Abbott Laboratories (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd., and Roche (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd. However, there were no representatives of funders present during the expert panel discussions and they were not involved in the writing or approval of the manuscript.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsAgeing and Age-Associated Disorders Research Group, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya, Jalan Profesor DiRaja Ungku Aziz, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaMaw-Pin TanUniversiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, MalaysiaZamberi Sekawi & Siti Aisah MokhtarNational University of Malaysia, Cheras, Selangor, MalaysiaRoslina Abdul ManapHospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaRizah Mazzuin RazaliHospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Cheras, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaHazlina MahadzirKPJ Damansara Specialist Hospital, Petaling Jaya, Selangor, MalaysiaNordiana NordinPoliklinik Kepong Baru, Kepong, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaKar-Chai KohUniversiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaPui-Li WongUniversity Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaKejal HasmukPandamaran Health Clinic, Pelabuhan Klang, Selangor, MalaysiaNoor Harzana HarrunAuthorsMaw-Pin TanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZamberi SekawiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRoslina Abdul ManapView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRizah Mazzuin RazaliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHazlina MahadzirView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNordiana NordinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKar-Chai KohView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPui-Li WongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKejal HasmukView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNoor Harzana HarrunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSiti Aisah MokhtarView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsAll authors reviewed the literature, provided substantial input, and reviewed the manuscript. All authors approved the final draft for submission and are accountable for all aspects of the work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Maw-Pin Tan.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable as per Guideline 1: Waiver for Medical Review & Ethics Committee review and approval for research not involving the human subject, released by the Ministry of Health Malaysia (31 Oct 2006). Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleTan, MP., Sekawi, Z., Abdul Manap, R. et al. A Malaysian consensus recommendation for the prevention of influenza in older persons. BMC Infect Dis 22, 943 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-022-07920-3Download citationReceived: 19 July 2022Accepted: 05 December 2022Published: 15 December 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-022-07920-3Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsHuman influenzaOlder personAgedPreventionDelphi techniqueMalaysia Download PDF Advertisement BMC Infectious Diseases ISSN: 1471-2334 Contact us General enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.While RSV may have peaked, influenza activity is surging in Washington statePlease ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of website accessibilityTue, 12 Nov 2024 01:15:48 GMT (1731374148130)Story Infinite Scroll - News3 v1.0.0 (common)c176e2edee36242d1f910bbcf0b370e84d231d3fNewsWeatherRadarSatelliteMapsSchool DelaysWeather FAQKOMO CamsHurricane TrackerSeattle Weather HistoryRefinedGame CenterChime InWatch Now 51 Tue 54 Wed 55While RSV may have peaked, influenza activity is surging in Washington stateby Lee Stoll & KOMO News StaffTue, December 13th 2022 at 10:34 AMUpdated Tue, December 13th 2022 at 1:03 PM7VIEW ALL PHOTOSTina Sandri, CEO of Forest Hills of DC senior living facility, demonstrates COVID-19 testing procedures on Thursday, Dec. 8, 2022, in Washington. As nursing home leaders redouble efforts to get staff and residents boosted with the new vaccine version, now recommended for those 6 months and older, they face complacency, misinformation and COVID-19 fatigue. (AP Photo/Nathan Howard)TOPICS:Health Medical PharmaMayo ClinicUnited StatesGreg PolandTao Kwan-GettUmair ShahFlu SeasonHuman OrthopneumovirusSEATTLE — Hospital admissions for COVID-19 and other respiratory-related illnesses are climbing again in the United States, including in Washington state.Washington State Department of Health (DOH) leaders said in a briefing Tuesday the state is in the midst of a "winter surge" for respiratory illnesses, which is impacting hospitals across the state."We are in the midst of this winter surge in influenza and respiratory illnesses and we have to continue taking the necessary steps to combat it," said Dr. Umair Shah, secretary of health for the state. Shah encouraged people to keep wearing masks in crowded indoor settings, washing hands regularly, and staying home when you're sick to help limit the spread of illnesses.The latest data from the DOH shows influenza has hit earlier and harder this year in the state than the previous two years. Doctors said this is because precautions such as masking and social distancing during the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic also helped reduce the spread of influenza.There have been 26 confirmed flu-related deaths in Washington state, including three children, for the 2022-23 flu season so far, according to DOH data.While influenza activity is up, cases of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) appear to be doming down."RSV positive specimens are declining while influenza is still rising," said Dr. Tao Kwan-Gett, chief science officer for the DOH. "Although RSV may have peaked, we are not out of the woods by any means."RELATED:How to tell if your child has RSV and what to do nextKwan-Gett said COVID-19 is also still very much active in communities.Nearly 7% of the state’s hospital beds were taken by COVID patients, according to DOH data from Dec. 6. The number of hospitalizations is up from 5% just a few weeks ago."It's really important we don't let our guard down," saidKwan-Gett.Health officials across the state are also recommending people wear masks indoors. Shah said Tuesday that at this time, there is no plan to implement a statewide mask mandate again.The numbers are not only concerning, but also the trajectory we’re on just two weeks before Christmas.For months, the focus has been an increase in respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) cases among children. But now, many new patients who end up in the hospital are much older, adding to a perfect storm of RSV, COVID-19 and the flu.RELATED: Public health leaders recommend masks indoors amid flu, RSV, COVID-19 surgeOne troubling indicator for seniors is that hospitalizations for people with COVID-19 rose nationally by more than 30% in two weeks. Nearly 80% of adult hospital beds are full nationwide.The number of people dying from COVID-19 in the United States is up 62% in the last week. Around 90% of those deaths are among people ages 65 and older."I don't want to be dramatic about this, but I also want to be very honest about it," said Dr. Greg Poland, with the Mayo Clinic.If you’re traveling for the holidays, 43 states are reporting high or very high levels of flu activity.Stay ConnectedLike UsFollow Ussbg-envelopeNewsletter Sign up /sign-up© 2024 Sinclair, Inc.TermsEEOFCCFCCFCCFCCPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyCookie PreferencesLoading ...Michigan is one of 3 remaining states with low flu activity - mlive.com Skip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseQuick Look-Change your current location »Current -Mostly SunnyTonightLow -Mostly SunnyTomorrowHigh -Mostly SunnyView full weather reportAnn ArborFlintGrand Rapids/MuskegonJacksonKalamazooSaginaw/Bay CityAll MichiganSubscribe Michigan is one of 3 remaining states with low flu activityUpdated: Dec. 12, 2022, 8:38 a.m.|Published: Dec. 09, 2022, 4:32 p.m.State-by-state influenza-like illness activity levels as of the week ending Dec. 3, 2022, according to the CDC. An interactive version of the map is available in the story below.By Justin P. Hicks | jhicks3@mlive.comInfluenza rates are taking off throughout the country and while Michigan is one of the few outliers, that could change in the near future.According to the latest data from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, only three states -- including Michigan -- had low activity levels of influenza-like illness for the week ending Dec. 3. The other two states were Alaska and New Hampshire, according to data published Friday, Dec. 9.If you purchase a product or register for an account through a link on our site, we may receive compensation. By using this site, you consent to our User Agreement and agree that your clicks, interactions, and personal information may be collected, recorded, and/or stored by us and social media and other third-party partners in accordance with our Privacy Policy.Footer NavigationAbout UsContact UsJobs at MLiveMLive Media GroupOur TeamAdvertise with usAccessibility StatementSubscriptionsMLive.comNewslettersThe Ann Arbor NewsThe Bay City TimesThe Flint JournalThe Grand Rapids PressJackson Citizen PatriotKalamazoo GazetteMuskegon ChronicleThe Saginaw NewsAlready a SubscriberManage your SubscriptionPlace a Vacation HoldMake a PaymentDelivery FeedbackMLive SectionsJobsAutosReal EstateRentalsClassifiedsNewsBusinessSportsAdviceHigh School SportsBettingLifeOpinionObituariesYour Regional News PagesSaginawJacksonKalamazooMuskegonAnn ArborBay CityFlintGrand RapidsMobileMobile appsMore on MLiveVideoWeatherPost a jobArchivesClassifiedsSell your carSell/Rent your homeSponsor ContentFollow UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeRSSCookie Settings|Privacy Policy|User Agreement|Ad ChoicesDisclaimerUse of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement, (updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights (updated 7/1/2024).© 2024 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.Ad ChoicesFlu causes huge spike in child hospitalizations in Canada Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature news article NEWS 12 December 2022 Flu causes huge spike in child hospitalizations in Canada Seasonal influenza is hitting North America hard owing to a lack of exposure and dominance of the virulent strain H3N2. By Nicola Jones0 Nicola Jones Nicola Jones is a freelance writer in Pemberton, British Columbia. View author publications You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar Twitter Facebook Email Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Clinicians and parents in Canada are watching with concern as paediatric hospitalizations for seasonal influenza climb — at present, they are at more than ten times the normal rate for this time of year. In late November, weekly admissions were 50% higher than at the record peak for at least the past seven flu seasons (see ‘Severe flu’). Access options Access through your institution Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription 24,99 € / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscription info for Korean customersWe have a dedicated website for our Korean customers. Please go to natureasia.com to subscribe to this journal.Go to natureasia.comRent or buy this articlePrices vary by article typefrom$1.95to$39.95Learn morePrices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-04408-7 Reprints and permissions Related Articles Flu vaccine could cut COVID risk Why easing COVID restrictions could prompt a fierce flu rebound How COVID-19 is changing the cold and flu season How coronavirus lockdowns stopped flu in its tracks Why unprecedented bird flu outbreaks sweeping the world are concerning scientists Flu and colds are back with a vengeance — why now? Subjects Public health Epidemiology Diseases Latest on: Public health Diabetes risk soars for adults who had a sweet tooth as kids News 31 OCT 24 How to recover when a climate disaster destroys your city News Feature 30 OCT 24 A thaw in scientific relations could help clear the air in India and Pakistan Editorial 30 OCT 24 Epidemiology Diabetes risk soars for adults who had a sweet tooth as kids News 31 OCT 24 Lethal Marburg virus is on the rise in Rwanda: why scientists are worried News 08 OCT 24 Life expectancy rise in rich countries slows down: why discovery took 30 years to prove News 07 OCT 24 Diseases How understudied endometriosis causes pain for hundreds of millions of women News 06 NOV 24 Blood test could help diagnose bipolar disorder — but some researchers are sceptical News 06 NOV 24 Immune responses in checkpoint myocarditis across heart, blood and tumour Article 06 NOV 24 Jobs Independent junior research group leader registration number: ZE-0104-mikrokos-nwgl-2024 Entry date: as soon as possible Application deadline: 2024-12-15 Salary: E 15 TV-H Duration: 3 year... 35037, Marburg (DE) Philipps-Universität Marburg Research associate (Postdoc) Registration number: fb20-0239-wmz-2024 Entry date: as soon as possible Application deadline: 2024-12-01 Salary: E 13 TV-H Duration: 2 years Volume... Marburg, Hessen (DE) Philipps-Universität Marburg Doctoral positions at International Max Planck Research School for Biology and Computation, Berlin The IMPRS for Biology and Computation, Berlin, offers several PhD positions to outstanding students at the interface between biology and computation. Berlin (DE) Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (MPI-MG) 2024 Recruitment notice Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology: Shenzhen, China The wide-ranging expertise drawing from technical, engineering or science professions... Shenzhen,China Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology Southeast University Future Technology Institute Recruitment Notice Professor openings in mechanical engineering, control science and engineering, and integrating emerging interdisciplinary majors Nanjing, Jiangsu (CN) Southeast University Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Related Articles Flu vaccine could cut COVID risk Why easing COVID restrictions could prompt a fierce flu rebound How COVID-19 is changing the cold and flu season How coronavirus lockdowns stopped flu in its tracks Why unprecedented bird flu outbreaks sweeping the world are concerning scientists Flu and colds are back with a vengeance — why now? Subjects Public health Epidemiology Diseases Sign up to Nature Briefing An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday. Email address Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Sign up Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing Explore content Research articles News Opinion Research Analysis Careers Books & Culture Podcasts Videos Current issue Browse issues Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Staff About the Editors Journal Information Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Awards Contact Editorial policies History of Nature Send a news tip Publish with us For Authors For Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature (Nature) ISSN 1476-4687 (online) ISSN 0028-0836 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedAvian flu in Colorado killing raptors in numbers not seen beforeSkip to main content HomeElection 2024Voter GuideNewsCrime and CourtsHistoryNational PoliticsUSA TODAY Avian flu killing Colorado eagles, hawks and owls in record numbersMiles Blumhardt Fort Collins ColoradoanShow Caption Hide Caption See hawk infected with avian fluThis video taken by the Rocky Mountain Raptor Program in Fort CoIlins, Colo., shows a hawk infected with highly pathogenic avian flu.Courtesy Rocky Mountain Raptor ProgramThe deadly, highly pathogenic avian influenza that has caused a spike in chicken egg prices and inflated turkey prices has spread to bald eagles, hawks, owls and thousands of snow geese in the largest outbreak in wild birds the state has seen.The current outbreak of the virus has heavily impacted domestic poultry operations around the country, including in Colorado, where more than 4.6 million chickens have been killed off at egg-laying operations, the majority of them in Weld County, due to the highly contagious virus, according to the Colorado Department of Agriculture.On the Eastern Plains, more than 4,500 snow geese have died in the last month, including at least 2,000 each in Morgan and Logan counties. Those counties are located in the migratory waterfowl Central Flyway, where tens of thousands of waterfowl congregate in winter.And now Colorado Parks and Wildlife and wildlife rehabilitation centers are being overwhelmed with cases of dying raptors.Mike Tincher, rehabilitation and research coordinator at the Rocky Mountain Raptor Program in Fort Collins, said in the past month, the center has seen 13 positive cases, with three pending testing results."Right now, there is not a whole lot we can do as they either die shortly after they arrive or we humanely euthanize them,'' Tincher said. "And this is just the tip of the iceberg.''Virus killing wild geese and raptors in numbers never seen beforeIn the wild, geese, ducks and water birds are the primary carrier of the virus. Some show no signs of the virus while others die from it. Raptors mainly pick up the virus from eating infected geese and ducks or by coming in contact with their infected feces and saliva.Once that happens and raptors show signs of the virus, the outcome is often death, as there are few treatment options.Mary Wood, wildlife health program supervisor for Colorado Parks and Wildlife, said the virus has caused intermittent outbreaks in domestic poultry but usually the strain is not as virulent as the current outbreak. She said the last outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza, commonly known as bird flu, in the country was 2015 but that it was largely contained to domestic poultry.She said the virus has likely mutated and the current strain is more virulent, which is killing wild geese and raptors in numbers never seen before."We have seen some pretty big mortality events with snow geese and quite a lot with hawks, eagles and owls,'' she said. "We don't know what the impact might be but there is concern our raptor population won't be able to sustain high losses.''That is especially true with bald eagles. The state wildlife agency estimates there to be more than 200 pair of nesting bald eagles in the state, including more than 90 on the northern Front Range from Denver to the Wyoming state line. Despite the bald eagle population increasing in recent years, the state still closely monitors them.A concern now is Colorado bald eagle numbers grow in winter, when they largely feed on geese, which likely will lead to more eagle deaths.The Colorado Department of Agriculture's website has kept track of confirmed cases of the virus in domestic poultry and wild birds, the first of which was reported in April. As of Dec. 13, it listed 27 raptors statewide that tested positive, though there is lag time in testing results and reporting, and scores of raptors have been tested in recent weeks with results not yet confirmed, according to officials.Of those cases, 12 were red-tailed hawks, eight were great horned owls, four were bald eagles and three were turkey vultures. In Larimer County, five red-tailed hawks, three great horned owls, one bald eagle and one turkey vulture have been confirmed positive as have a Canada goose and mallard duck.Tincher and Wood said the number is much higher because of how many raptors have died from the disease but will not be found.There have been cases of the virus in two backyard domestic non-poultry operations in the county.More: On the riseBald eagle numbers rising despite human population increasing along northern Front RangeWildlife officials, rehabilitators overwhelmed with casesTincher and Wood acknowledged they are being swamped with reports of raptor deaths due to the virus. They said an overwhelming number of reports combined with limited resources make it difficult to investigate each report.Tincher said the number of raptors the center is seeing is putting an emotional and financial strain on resources.He said rehabilitators must wear full Tyvek suits, masks, gloves and eye protection when receiving and testing the birds, and the center is cleaned with disinfectant. Still, there is a concern the center's raptors that are used as educational ambassadors and human rehabilitators may become infected.The virus is not readily transmissible to humans, but there have been cases, including one during the current outbreak affecting a Colorado poultry employee.And there is the cost of tests, which range from $25 to $80, Tincher said. The center sends its tests to the Colorado State University Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory."Right now, we are playing the long game, collecting as much data as possible,'' Tincher said. "The resources to respond to every report, collect all the carcasses, treat and test every bird does not exist.''Wood said her agency has been and will continue to work with other state and federal governmental agencies collecting data and monitoring the virus's spread. She encouraged the public to be patient as the agency works through large volumes of reports, realizing how difficult it might be for members of the public to see sick and dying birds."Managing a disease like this in wild birds is very challenging, and we know we can't eliminate it,'' she said. "But we will look for actions that minimize the spillover to raptors as best we can.''More: Colorado wolvesColorado's initial wolf recovery plan is out: Here's a breakdown of key issuesHow you can help with highly pathogenic avian influenzaIf you find birds you believe to be sick, do not pick them up or remove them, as transmission to humans is rare but possible.If walking outdoors in areas where there is goose or duck feces, remove the feces from your footwear so you do not potentially spread the virus.If you find three or more dead wild birds in a specific area within a two-week period or you see live birds swimming or walking in circles, appearing lethargic and not escaping if approached, call the Colorado Parks and Wildlife Northeast Regional Office at (970) 472-4300 or Rocky Mountain Raptor Program in Fort Collins at (970) 484-7756.For sick birds or birds that have died from unknown causes, call the Avian Health Hotline at Colorado State University at (970) 297-4008.For multiple sick domestic birds or multiple unusual domestic bird deaths, call the Colorado State Veterinarian’s Office at (303) 869-9130 or the USDA-Veterinary Services Colorado Office at (303) 231-5385.Source: Colorado Department of Agriculture, othersRocky Mountain Raptor Program open houseThe center will hold an open house from noon to 3 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 17, at its facility at 720B E. Vine Drive in Fort Collins. Facebook Twitter EmailHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024More than a million chickens in Franklin County, Washington, have bird flu - OPB Nov. 12, 2024contribute nowElection results and analysisStay updated as votes are counted and trends emergeMore than a million chickens in Franklin County, Washington, have bird fluBy Anna King (Northwest News Network)Dec. 16, 2022 7:28 p.m. Updated: Dec. 17, 2022 1:46 a.m.Hoar frost collects like icy-armored spikes against the steady trunks of rural poplars.The stout trees define the edges of vast snowy crop fields in Franklin County, in southeast Washington, from the white blur of flat land everywhere else.THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:Become a SponsorBut this bleak scene is made grimmer when approaching Oakdell Farms off of East Sagemoor Road, where highly pathogenic avian influenza is in a commercial flock of 1,015,500 — more than a million — chickens. State and federal officials aren’t naming the farm, but there are few egg operations in Franklin County with that many fowl. At the edge of the farm, a man in Carhartt-colored winter coveralls sits warming from the 20-degree temps in a small white pickup with a utility light flashing.When cars approach from the farm side toward the highway, he scrambles from the truck to stop them. He sprays a pink disinfectant from a large sprayer bottle with a hand wand over the tires. Signs out front — some handmade on cardboard — read “Biosecurity Control Area, Authorized Personnel Only,” and “Do not enter, call …”A man waits near a white pickup for cars to pass so he can spray their tires with disinfectant. The problemThe state received the USDA’s confirmed test results on Wednesday — that the chickens here do have highly pathogenic avian influenza, known as H5N1, said Amber Betts, a spokesperson for the Washington State Department of Agriculture.More than a million birds live in several large long rectangular warehouse-like buildings. The buildings are painted desert tan, aside from one slate blue one, and built-in neat rows with massive air handling units at their ends.It’s going to be a massive job to clean up this property, and sanitize everything, Betts said.“No matter the size of the farm, whether it’s a backyard or a commercial, whether it’s five birds or a million, it’s incredibly taxing on everybody that’s involved,” she said. “In addition to the birds themselves that are suffering this terrible virus, which is just brutal. It’s not a good way to go out.”‘Not a good way to go out’THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:Become a SponsorBirds that get sick with avian influenza often see discharge from the eyes or nasal openings, a tilting head and sudden death. This is the first commercial flock ever to be infected in Washington state, although more than 30 backyard flocks have come down with the virus. In Oregon, there have been no commercial flocks infected so far, but more than 20 affected backyard flocks. And it all comes as 694 flocks — 300 of them commercial — are infected across the U.S. so far this year.Bird flu has killed waterfowl and backyard flocks with a vengeance this year, Betts said.The planA million birds is a lot to process, literally. Even when a backyard flock gets infected, state government officials treat biosecurity very seriously. But with a million birds — that’s around 6 million pounds of chicken to dispose of if they’re all full-grown. State officials said they, federal and county officials are weighing the options on how to safely transport, bury, compost or incinerate all the birds. No decision has been made yet.Benton-Franklin Health District officials stressed that the current risk of avian influenza infecting the general public is extremely low. The type of bird flu that is spreading in wild birds and domestic poultry in the U.S. has only been identified in one person who had close contact with infected birds.“There have been no cases of avian influenza identified in humans in Washington state,” said Hannah Schnitzler, communicable disease epidemiologist with the Washington State Department of Health.That said, health officials advise people not to touch or move dead or sick wild birds and ask people to report such instances to the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s online reporting tool.Hoar frost gathers on a electric fence bordering a corn field. In the distance is Oakdell Farms in Franklin County, Washington.Tough dealHaving to destroy animals they’ve taken care of for years and sometimes decades can be very distressing to those who work in these facilities, Betts said.“It’s just devastating,” she said. “When your chickens are part of your family, it’s super difficult to watch them go through this. Or have to euthanize. And then, [at] an operation like this, it’s just taxing on everybody. It’s a lot of work. There’s a lot of emotions from the producers as well as our veterinarians. It’s just a very difficult thing to have to go through.”Oakdell is an egg operation that spans the West. According to its website, the company has operations in Lewiston, Utah; Franklin, Idaho; and outside of Pasco, Washington.“You can find our eggs in eleven states including Washington, Oregon, Utah, Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, Nevada, Colorado, California, Alaska, and Hawaii,” the website reads. “They’re sold under the Oakdell Egg Farms brand as well as many of your favorite store brands.”Sitting in a warming pickup outside a commercial hay outfit nearby, a farmer rubs his face as he said it’s been tough on all who work at Oakdell. He didn’t want to be identified, but he said the egg farm operators are friends of his. And it’s been a really tough deal.THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:Become a SponsorTHANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:Become a Sponsor📨 Stay informed after Election DayLearn what the election results will mean for the Pacific Northwest. Subscribe to our “First Look” newsletter for a daily roundup of the biggest stories shaping the region.EmailPlease leave this field blankSign upOPB’s critical reporting and inspiring programs are made possible by the power of member support.Become a Sustainer nowTV & Radio SchedulesSponsorshipHelp CenterManage My MembershipContact UsNotificationsPrivacy PolicyFCC Public FilesFCC ApplicationsTerms of UseEditorial PolicySMS T&CContest RulesAccessibilityListen to the OPB News live stream (opens new window)Streaming NowAll Things ConsideredShow switch stream buttonsSwitch Stream:OPB NewsListen to the OPB News live stream (opens new window)KMHDListen to the KMHD live stream (opens new window)How to safely celebrate holidays and avoid respiratory viruses - UChicago MedicineSkip to main contentPatients & VisitorsResearch & Clinical TrialsFor CliniciansHealth & Science NewsCareersGiveMyChartComer Children's HospitalFind a DoctorFind a LocationConditions & ServicesPatients & VisitorsResearch & Clinical TrialsFor CliniciansHealth & Science NewsCareersGiveMyChartComer Children's HospitalSearchHomeForefrontCOVID-19 Information From Our ExpertsHow to safely celebrate holidays and avoid respiratory virusesDecember 15, 2022Written By Emily Landon, MDTopicsEmily Landon MDHealth and WellnessInfectious DiseasesPrevention and ScreeningHealth and WellnessCOVID-19Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection (RSV)Call Us At 1-888-824-0200Winter is time for many fun holiday traditions. It is also the season for respiratory viruses, including influenza, RSV and COVID. This year, we have already seen a major (and earlier than expected) spike in RSV cases resulting in many excess hospitalizations in kids — and an earlier than expected rise in influenza. Severe COVID-19 cases are creeping up as well. The amount of respiratory illnesses out there can be overwhelming and it may seem impossible to keep track. It is natural to wonder: how can I keep myself and loved ones safe from viruses this holiday season? As an infectious diseases physician at the University of Chicago Medicine, I can tell you that there are no easy answers or clear-cut decisions. Still, I can offer recommendations and considerations to ensure your holidays are as safe as possible. How can I safely celebrate the holidays this year? Be extra careful leading up to the holidays. Before a big group event where you will be around vulnerable individuals, it is smart to limit your risk of catching something in the days leading up to the event. For example, if you are planning a holiday gathering with an elderly or immunocompromised family member, wear a mask at your work holiday gathering the week before. If you can’t take measures to limit your own exposures before visiting with vulnerable people, wear a mask around them and increase ventilation by opening windows and using a filter like a flu vaccine and a COVID-19 vaccine this fall, you can get them for free at a local pharmacy or doctor’s office. Also, check online for vaccine events in your area. Hurry — flu and COVID are rising earlier than expected. RSV prevention options are finally here — keep those around you safe. In 2023, there are finally ways to protect infants and loved ones from RSV during virus season. Nirsevimab is a one-time injection that provides immediate protection to infants 0 to 8 months old and reduces risk of RSV-related hospitalization significantly. All infants born at Comer Children’s and Ingalls Memorial during RSV season will be offered this injection. Infants less that 8 months old at the start of RSV season can receive nirsevimab from their pediatrician and it can be given along with other routine immunizations. UChicago Medicine is also offering two newly approved RSV vaccinations to eligible adults. A vaccine known as Abrysvo is available to pregnant individuals between their 32nd and 36th weeks. UChicago Medicine patients over 60 can also receive an RSV vaccine known as Arexvy. These adult vaccinations are available during physician office visits and both provide key protection for those at highest risk of severe RSV symptoms. Stay home if you have any symptoms of a respiratory illness. It may seem like “just a cold” or “just allergies,” but it is important to play it safe if you’re feeling under the weather. What is a minor nuisance to you could put someone else on life support. Don’t risk it. If you can get tested at the doctor’s office or a nearby testing facility, that’s great. If not, you can do a COVID test at home. However, you should follow the directions carefully and repeat the test a couple of days later if it is negative. The COVID rapid antigen tests done at home can have a false negative result in the first couple of days of symptoms so if you are just starting to feel sick and your home COVID test is negative, you should still stay home and avoid contact with people who might be high-risk. Currently, we don’t have at home tests for flu or RSV. Regardless of test results, the following two rules will help protect your friends and family: If you have a fever, stay home and away from others until the fever goes away without taking any fever-reducing medicine (like Tylenol or Advil). If you have any cold symptoms, wear a mask around others until the symptoms are completely gone. If your cough is lingering for more than a week or two, you should talk to your doctor. What precautions do I need to take if I’m hosting an in-person holiday celebration? Hosting a holiday celebration can be stressful enough. Adding safety precautions to the to-do list can make things even more complicated. Here are a few ways to help keep family and friends happy and healthy: Make sure everyone washes their hands before they eat. Have hand sanitizer at the table if you’re using shared serving utensils or holding hands for prayer. While COVID doesn’t spread very well on surfaces, flu and RSV do! Have good ventilation and air flow in the house and spend time in the largest room you can, as opposed to smaller, confined spaces. DIY a Corsi-Rosenthal box. The materials are inexpensive and studies show they can help reduce transmission of airborne infections like COVID. Consider asking everyone to take a COVID test when they arrive. In some places, you can get free COVID tests at your local pharmacy. Either way, testing everyone when they arrive can help avoid hurt feelings and sick family members later. If people are staying with you, it’s best to have everyone test daily. Do not be afraid to communicate ahead of time. Contact your loved ones to gauge their comfort level and work together to come up with a safe, welcoming environment. If higher-risk individuals (like people with immune suppression, older individuals, or new babies) will be present, ask people to wear a mask indoors in the week before your get together. What’s the best way to travel safely this holiday? Masking while using public transportation is no longer required. However, the health news and recommendations from health departments in areas where you are traveling. Should I take a COVID test prior to visiting my relatives? Even if you’re up-to-date on your COVID-19 vaccinations, taking a test before the festivities is an important step in ensuring your holidays can stay safe. At-home rapid antigen tests can be found at most pharmacies and provide fast, convenient results. However, unlike the PCR test, they are not as good at detecting COVID early. For this reason, you should test as close to an event as possible. I recommend testing right at the start of an event and daily if you are staying with or seeing higher-risk individuals on a daily basis. If you have any symptoms of a cold at all, you should do a rapid COVID test right away but keep your mask on – even if you test negative. Rapid tests can mistakenly read negative early on in illness so it’s important to repeat the test a couple of days later and keep wearing your mask until you feel better. PCR tests are considered the gold standard for a COVID-19 diagnosis and are able to detect smaller quantities of the virus. This makes them more reliable early in illness. Testing may be available at nearby pharmacies and local health centers, often with same-day appointments and drive-thru options. Flu and RSV can be dangerous for the very young, the old, and people with compromised immune systems. Stay home if you are sick, and if you start feeling unwell while you are at a gathering, put a mask on right away. COVID, flu, and RSV don’t make great holiday gifts, so keep your cold to yourself. "It may seem like 'just a cold' or 'just allergies,' but it is important to play it safe if you’re feeling under the weather. What is a minor nuisance to you could put someone else on life support. Don’t risk it." Emily Landon, MDExecutive Medical Director, Infection Prevention and ControlLearn more about Dr. LandonI'd Like To...Pay a BillRequest Medical RecordsExplore CareersContact UsEmployee LoginQuick LinksAbout UsMediaCommunityBiological Sciences DivisionPritzker School of MedicineJoint Commission Public NoticeAppointments: 1-888-824-0200Sign up for our NewsletterSubscribeThe University of Chicago Medicine 5841 S. Maryland Avenue Chicago, IL 60637 773-702-1000Website PoliciesPrivacy PracticesLegal DisclaimerWebsite Privacy PolicyWebsite Terms of UsePrice TransparencySite Map© 2024 The University of Chicago Medical Center. All rights reserved.How deadly bird flu sparked explosive outbreaks in 2022 — and why it matters for global health | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore How deadly bird flu sparked explosive outbreaks in 2022 — and why it matters for global health | CBC News LoadedHealth·Second OpinionHow deadly bird flu sparked explosive outbreaks in 2022 — and why it matters for global healthThis year, a highly contagious strain of avian influenza tore across Canada, hitting close to 270 farms and production facilities and infecting millions of birds. Scientists worry ongoing, explosive global outbreaks pose threats to bird populations and potentially to human health.4.7 million domestic birds caught virus this year amid massive worldwide outbreaksLauren Pelley · CBC News · Posted: Dec 17, 2022 4:00 AM EST | Last Updated: December 17, 2022Government workers wear protective gear to collect poultry for slaughter during an outbreak of avian influenza on the Ivory Coast. More than 70 countries have reported cases this year, according to the World Organization for Animal Health. (Legnan Koula/EPA-EFE)Social SharingThis is an excerpt from Second Opinion, an analysis of health and medical science news emailed to subscribers weekly. If you haven't subscribed, you can do that by clicking here.Throughout the last decade, the global spread of bird flu has been a growing concern in Canada, but most farms managed to avoid outbreaks. The situation changed in 2022.This year, a highly contagious strain of avian influenza tore across the country, hitting close to 270 farms and production facilities, sparking concerns over poultry shortages and exposing workers from coast to coast to a potentially deadly pathogen.So far, roughly 4.7 million domestic birds have caught the virus. That's not counting untold numbers of wild birds falling ill, whose numbers are far tougher to track."I would describe the scope as explosive and sort of all-encompassing," said Angela Rasmussen, a virologist with the Vaccine and Infectious Diseases Organization at the University of Saskatchewan. "I mean, it really is a huge problem globally, and here in Canada."And it's a brewing crisis on two fronts, both to global bird populations and potentially to human health, if this highly infectious form of the influenza virus eventually evolves to better transmit between people in the decades ahead.B.C. warns doctors to watch for avian flu spreading to humans after spike in cases in birds"Eventually it could mutate itself such that it could gain the capacity and capability to transmit from poultry to humans," said Dr. Shayan Sharif, a professor with the Ontario Veterinary College at the University of Guelph in southern Ontario. "And unfortunately this is the sort of worst-case scenario that we don't want to happen."'Detections haven't stopped'Since 2003, a particularly deadly H5N1 avian influenza strain has led to a high number of deaths in poultry and wild birds around much of the world, including Asia, the Middle East, Europe and Africa.Avian flu causing turkey shortage ahead of Christmas, B.C. Poultry Association saysIn 2014, Canada had its first detection of what's known as a "highly pathogenic" form of avian influenza virus, linked to poultry at a farm in British Columbia. A dozen farms and production facilities wound up dealing with cases that year, according to data provided to CBC News by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA).In the years since, there were few — if any — facilities affected anywhere in the country, the same data shows.The explosion of cases across Canada this year follows a similar pattern globally. The highly contagious strain can transmit quickly in areas with high concentrations of poultry farms, such as Canada's Western regions, and its ongoing global spread may be linked to bird migration patterns."We can't really control migratory birds," said Sharif.Given the scope of 2022 outbreaks across much of North America, there's concern the virus is now establishing itself on this continent."Historically, North America hasn't had tons of problems with avian influenza," said Louise Moncla, an assistant professor of pathobiology at the University of Pennsylvania school of veterinary medicine."This outbreak has been a little bit different because it's been going on for a long time. And unlike the past outbreaks, detections haven't stopped."The scale of global spread of this H5N1 strain has been enormous, with tens of millions of deaths, either through the spread of the virus itself or the preventative culling of farmed birds.B.C. wildlife rescue centres say they're overrun with calls for birds sick with suspected avian fluMore than 70 countries have reported cases, said Gregorio Torres, head of the science department at the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH). This severe form of the disease also spread further south this year into regions where infections weren't previously reported, including Colombia and Peru.The U.S. also hit a grim new record for birds lost to avian influenza, at more than 50 million in 2022, surpassing the largest previous outbreak in 2015 — while the number of states impacted this year is also more than double those affected seven years prior.The other element making this outbreak different from prior ones isn't just the sheer numbers of birds being killed, but the number of species affected, Moncla said.On farms, turkeys and chickens are being impacted. But cases have also been reported among cranes in Israel and hawks and bald eagles in parts of Canada and the U.S.. In Stratford, Ont., the virus likely claimed the lives of several of the theatre city's iconic swans. "And then we've also had more infections in mammals," said Moncla.Sask. issues animal health order after avian flu once again confirmed in province"So we have what appears to be widespread transmission in seals, which is unusual for this type of influenza. We've had detections in bears and foxes, and [some] human infections. So it's been bigger in scope, more species infected, and then it hasn't stopped."Put together, all those factors make it likely that bird flu will become endemic — more commonplace — in North American bird species going forward.WATCH | 'Explosive' global outbreaks of avian influenza:'Explosive' avian flu surge hits global bird populations2 years agoDuration 2:02Global bird populations are being ravaged by a deadly strain of avian flu, wiping out flocks of domestic poultry and killing wild birds. Some researchers warn the virus could eventually evolve to better infect humans and potentially start a future pandemic.Looming threat for human healthThat's bad news for birds, both wild and farmed. But it's also a looming threat for humans, many scientists agree."We definitely need to be doing more human surveillance to understand the extent to which these viruses are actually spilling over into the human population," said Rasmussen. Avian flu suspected in deaths of 3 swans in Stratford, Ont."We only really notice human cases when it makes somebody really sick. But how often are people actually getting infected with this and may not know about it?"The 1918 flu pandemic emerged from an avian influenza outbreak, she said, and was likely linked to a virus that quietly evolved to better infect humans decades earlier.Alongside human surveillance, it's worth keeping an eye on other animal species that can provide "mixing vessels" for the influenza virus, Rasmussen said.A dead gannet in Point Lance, N.L., during an outbreak of avian influenza. (Patrick Butler/Radio-Canada)Pigs, for instance, are often living alongside farmed birds, allowing viruses to spread easily between those species. That's particularly worrisome when it comes to influenza, given its capacity for reassortment — the process by which influenza viruses swap gene segments."So if a pig gets infected with a strain of human flu, and a strain of bird flu, they can essentially shuffle their viral genes and make new viruses," said Rasmussen. "And that, in fact, is how several pandemics throughout history have occurred … a sort of a middleman or a 'middle pig' between these two species to further transmission of new viruses that might arise."Hundreds of dead gulls found as 'unprecedented' avian flu outbreak continues in Nova ScotiaAfter a recent spike in bird flu outbreaks on commercial farms, the B.C. Centre for Disease Control sent out a communicable disease advisory in early December asking doctors to be on the lookout for any instances of bird flu spreading to humans."Exposure to novel influenza viruses is concerning because of the potential for human adaptation and associated pandemic risk. Such risk may be considered a 'low probability, high impact' event," the advisory said.Long-term, this influenza strain would also need to gain the ability to transmit swiftly person-to-person before it posed a true threat to human health.Avian flu is devastating N.L.'s birds. This biologist has some ideas on how to curb itFor now, it only appears capable of infecting people in sporadic instances, and hasn't adapted to transmit efficiently among human populations.Only four human cases of the virus have been reported globally this year, including one in the U.S., one in the U.K. and two in Spain."If it does transmit from humans to humans, then we will be seeing yet another pandemic," said Sharif. "Because this is an airborne virus, and it can be transmitted through aerosols or large droplets very similar to what we saw for COVID-19."Concerns over poultry shortages, higher pricesSharif's lab, at the University of Guelph, is one of the global research teams hoping to eventually create a vaccine against avian influenza to ensure future outbreaks aren't quite so devastating — since at this point there's no shot against this strain available for use in Canada. But he worries there's not much political will to develop a shot to fight a virus that, for now, mainly infects birds. Other scientists stress there's an economic argument to be made for keeping this influenza strain at bay.Nunavut confirms 1st case of avian influenza in thick-billed murre"Bird flu would be a whole lot less of an issue for farmers and producers if there were a vaccine that could protect their flock … from these various subtypes that are causing so much devastation," said Rasmussen.This month in B.C., the province's poultry association even warned of a 20 per cent drop in available turkeys compared to previous years right before the winter holidays.Avian flu responsible for thousands of dead birds in Newfoundland, suggest preliminary testsFood policy researcher Sylvain Charlebois, director of the Agri-Food Analytics Lab at Dalhousie University in Halifax, said bird flu outbreaks could lead to ongoing poultry shortages, pushing up food prices."Avian flu really represents a menace to our food security and to our own public health as well," he said. "So it's a bit of a double whammy that I think requires a little bit more attention."ABOUT THE AUTHORLauren PelleySenior Health & Medical ReporterLauren Pelley covers the global spread of infectious diseases, pandemic preparedness and the crucial intersection between health and climate change. She's a two-time RNAO Media Award winner for in-depth health reporting in 2020 and 2022, a silver medallist for best editorial newsletter at the 2024 Digital Publishing Awards, and a 2024 Covering Climate Now award winner in the health category. Contact her at: lauren.pelley@cbc.ca.@LaurenPelleyCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowWalgreens Now Offering Flu and COVID-19 Testing in a Single Visit at Over 5,000 Locations | Walgreens Boots Alliance Skip to main content Walgreens Boots Alliance Main navigation Open Menu Close Menu About Us Expand About Us Collapse About Us About Us Purpose, Vision & Values Leadership Team Our Impact History Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Trending Stories Walgreens Boots Alliance Reports Fiscal Year 2024 Earnings Learn more Walgreens Appoints Jason Stenta as SVP and Chief Commercial Officer Learn more Our Business Expand Our Business Collapse Our Business Our Business U.S. Retail Pharmacy Segment International Segment U.S. Healthcare Segment No7 Beauty Company Investment Portfolio Trending Stories Walgreens at HLTH 2024: Committing to patient care in local communities Learn more Walgreens Stores Will Close for Thanksgiving Holiday Learn more Environmental, Social & Governance Expand Environmental, Social & Governance Collapse Environmental, Social & Governance Environmental, Social & Governance Governance Healthy Communities Healthy and Inclusive Workplace Healthy Planet Sustainable Marketplace ESG Report Library ESG Report Resources Trending Stories Walgreens and Dion’s Dream Chicago Join Forces to Host a Dream Vault Smart Locker in Gage Park Store Learn more How Walgreens supports LGBTQ+ community health all year round Learn more Careers Expand Careers Collapse Careers Careers Why Work for WBA Find a Position Life at WBA Pharmacy Careers at Walgreens Disability Inclusion at Walgreens Trending Stories Serving my country, seeing the world and remaining fluid in the process Learn more Pharmacy tech and admired mentor marks 30 years at Walgreens Learn more News & Media Expand News & Media Collapse News & Media News & Media News Hub Our Stories Press Releases Media Resources Position Statements Media Contacts Trending Stories What you should know about OTC phenylephrine during cold and flu season Learn more Walgreens Offers No-Cost Rapid COVID-19 and Flu Testing to Military Veterans Learn more Investors Open Search Close Search 95 results for Search Life at WBA … Life at WBA Life at WBA Explore stories of our people from around the world. Explore stories of our people from around the world. From pharmacy to beauty to curbside … nonprofit work... Learn more Meet Peter Mansour, pharmacist, Walgreens Centralized Services support operations People & Perspectives October … Calling the shots … shots Discover the cross-country coordination that goes into helping people in underserved communities secure appointments for the COVID-19 vaccine. Angelica Davis, pharmacy technician at Walgreens’ Centralized Services location in Muscle Shoals, Ala., assists patients … in medically underserved areas. Our goal was to increase our reach to people who are most in need of the vaccine. We considered trying a … The People of WBA Podcast: Episode 1 … The People of WBA Podcast: Episode 1 Meet a former Boots colleague who … the globe. But we’re more than the sum of our parts; each of these people brings their own unique background, experience, beliefs and … kind of section of people and customers, because those who live in Central London live these really big lives. You know, I remember … Meet Peter Mansour, pharmacist, Walgreens Centralized Services support operations … Meet Peter Mansour, pharmacist, Walgreens Centralized Services support operations To mark National Disability … from my short time here that there’s a longstanding mission to help people, which has significant meaning to me. I strongly believe that … with muscular dystrophy MD is pretty rare, affecting about 250,000 people in the U.S. When I was diagnosed, I was just a kid, so I didn’t … Our Stories Stay informed and connected with what’s going on at WBA by catching the latest company stories and videos. Walgreens Launches "Feel More Like You" Program to Assist People Living with Cancer Manage the Physical Changes Associated with Treatment … Walgreens Launches "Feel More Like You" Program to Assist People Living with Cancer Manage the Physical Changes Associated with … launched a new program called Feel More Like You™, developed to help people living with cancer and their caregivers manage the potential … reclaim the sense of control, confidence and self-esteem that are so central to wellbeing. For more information, visit … Meet Everin James, Duane Reade assistant store manager … has become a safer option compared to taking the subway, which most people are avoiding these days. There is much less traffic and I enjoy … workers as they came in to purchase essential items. Sometimes, people call in with questions or to place orders. A few months ago, I … during the day , and if my schedule allows, I take a bike ride to Central Park, pick a nice spot, and enjoy my lunch outside. In the … Why Work for WBA … Embracing diversity is crucial to unlocking our true potential. Our people care deeply about making a difference and see the future … our ambition, we offer career opportunities within WBA, enabling our people to develop and grow within a truly global force for good. There … transform retail pharmacy and healthcare delivery to play a more central role in our patients’ and customers’ daily lives. We’ve created … A prescription for taking the first step … Walgreens had the ability to do more in this space? JC : One in five people in the U S is dealing with a mental health condition every year. … With Walgreens’ footprint, we have the ability to reach 8 million people a day in our stores and online, many of whom are interacting … play – beyond adherence, working with other providers, connecting people to resources. So how could we provide the tools or training for … Walgreens and Prime Therapeutics Complete Formation of AllianceRx Walgreens Prime, a Combined Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Services Company … Complete Formation of AllianceRx Walgreens Prime, a Combined Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Services Company Transaction … . About Prime Therapeutics Prime Therapeutics LLC (Prime) helps people get the medicine they need to feel better and live well. Prime … and delivers medicine to members, offering clinical services for people with complex medical conditions. Prime serves nearly 20 million … Walgreens launches Feel More Like You, a first-of-its kind service to provide personalized care for people living with cancer … Like You, a first-of-its kind service to provide personalized care for people living with cancer Program offers the expertise of more than … pharmacy, health and beauty service available at no cost to help people living with cancer manage the medical and physical changes … reclaim the sense of control, confidence and self-esteem that are so central to wellbeing. For more information, visit … Who drives WBA’s work for social good? … Social and Governance Report , we’re spending time meeting some of the people behind the programs and projects that help local communities … savings, waste mitigation and increase donations from our stores. We centrally collect Green Box items using our reverse logistic hub … Mentoring my team. I have had the chance to work with some of the best people in the company. My team works so hard and give it everything … 'The Vaccine, In Our Words': Massachusetts' Gladys Vega … more than 60 percent of the city’s population coming from Latin and Central American backgrounds. It’s also a sanctuary city with many undocumented people living and working as part of the community. Facing obstacles … and misinformation surrounding access to the vaccine for undocumented people, community organizers like Vega play a crucial role in getting … Walgreens Boots Alliance Announces Completion of Formation of AllianceRx Walgreens Prime, a Combined Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Services Company … Completion of Formation of AllianceRx Walgreens Prime, a Combined Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Services Company DEERFIELD, Ill., 3 … LLC (Prime) have closed their transaction to form a combined central specialty pharmacy and mail services company, as part of the … a presence in more than 25* countries and employ more than 400,000* people. The company is a global leader in pharmacy-led, health and … Walgreens and Prime Therapeutics Agree to Form Strategic Alliance; Includes Retail Pharmacy Network Agreement and Combines Companies' Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Service Businesses … Includes Retail Pharmacy Network Agreement and Combines Companies' Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Service Businesses Innovative model … clinic services. About Prime Prime Therapeutics LLC (Prime) helps people get the medicine they need to feel better and live well. Prime … and delivers medicine to members, offering clinical services for people with complex medical conditions. Headquartered in St. Paul, … Walgreens Announces Winners for 2024 Expressions Challenge During Mental Health Awareness Month … priorities with one 2023 survey revealing that 87 percent of young people in the United States had suffered some mental health problem on … U. S. Virgin Islands in addition to nearly double the online votes for People’s Champs winners. Eligible entries are judged in four … FL • Third Place: (September 20th) Kiara P., Escuela Especializada Central de Artes Visuales, Dorado, PR • People’s Champ: (September … Meet Jessica Zander, manager of strategy and operations for Walgreen Benefit Fund … and have spent my career working for nonprofit organizations that help people in need. During the pandemic, one of my best friends and I … connected to this opportunity through my personal passion of helping people love and take care of themselves. In my role with the Fund, I … More stories Learn more Meet Peter Mansour, pharmacist, Walgreens Centralized Services support operations People & Perspectives October … Meet Dee Fasan, Boots UK pharmacist and store manager … its first lockdown and was greatly impacted as the vast majority of people started to work from home. My tube carriage became a lot … to keep our customers and ourselves as safe as possible. As most people were now spending all their time in the suburbs and in more … for me, as the intensity of these stores was in stark contrast to central London since COVID-19 hit. Patients and customers in central … Listen up: Macmillan Cancer Support’s podcast gets honest about cancer … has reached a remarkable milestone of £19.9 million raised to support people living with cancer. Additionally, the partnership can lay claim … Beauty Advisors have been trained to provide specialist support to people living with cancer and can share hair, skin and other beauty … pharmacist advanced practitioner and BMIP at a Boots pharmacy in central London, is keen on offering support to people whose families or … Meet Beth Dolecki, senior premium beauty operations manager, Boots UK … to our customers. Beauty, for me, has always been about making people feel good. That could be helping a customer who is living with … has had its challenges. As someone who is energized by being around people, not being able to meet others face to face has been draining. I hadn’t realized how important having people around me drives my creativity and lifts my mood. To keep myself … Where does extra inventory go, anyway? … landfill or processed through a hazardous waste program. “I felt like people could use these products,” she says. “That’s when I questioned, … ‘Can we do something differently? Why aren’t we donating?’ And people told me it was going to cost too much or take too much time or … and allow for nonprofits to directly pick up donated items. “We centrally collect Green Box items using a process my team and I … What We Value … transform retail pharmacy and healthcare delivery to play a more central role in our patients’ and customers’ daily lives. Embracing diversity is crucial to unlocking our true potential. Our people care deeply about making a difference and see the future … results. We’ve created an environment of care that helps our people grow and encourages them to make a real difference in the lives … Cancellations are invitations … But even then, it was all put on hold. It just wasn’t practical for people to group together in the way we would normally operate these … social-distancing measures to help keep trainees safe. Only 20 to 30 people would occupy a space designed for up to 300 people, so that they could sit comfortably apart from each other, and … Protecting the people behind the products … Protecting the people behind the products Retail brands owned by WBA are made in … in North America and 43 percent in Asia, with the rest in Europe, Central and South America and elsewhere. It’s the job of Kopf, Staples … all over the world,” says Kopf. “In the U.S., for example, a lot of people might automatically assume that factories are compliant, but … Meet Kapriesse Slade, WBA senior HR business partner … park where the office is located. If I’m in Sedley, I walk around Central London and have a quick look at nearby shops. If I’m home, I … an organization and with individuals who want to do the utmost to help people in our communities. The pandemic also made me appreciate my free … my country, seeing the world and remaining fluid in the process People & Perspectives November 11, 2024 After 15 years in the Navy with … Load More Walgreens Now Offering Flu and COVID-19 Testing in a Single Visit at Over 5,000 LocationsTest results are provided within two hours to help guide treatment decisions and prevent the spread of respiratory illness December 16, 2022 Copy to clipboardCopied to clipboard Linkedin Facebook 5 mins read DEERFIELD, Ill., December 16, 2022 - Walgreens today announced that rapid flu testing will now be available at more than 5,000 pharmacies nationwide to help communities identify and manage the highly transmissible viruses circulating this holiday season.* Walgreens will use Abbott’s ID NOW™ devices to administer the tests, and results will be available within two hours.This press release features multimedia. View the full release here: https://www.businesswire.comews/home/20221216005058/en/“Our Flu Index shows activity 10 times higher compared to the same time last year. Providing convenient access to flu testing is another way Walgreens is helping support and protect local communities during a sustained surge of respiratory illness this winter,” said Anita Patel, PharmD, vice president, pharmacy services development, Walgreens.Individuals can receive COVID-19 and flu testing in a single visit at select Walgreens pharmacies. Accessible and convenient rapid diagnostic testing for routine illness at community pharmacies is a service Americans have come to depend on since the start of the pandemic. A J.D. Power1 survey found that pharmacy customers are interested in receiving routine healthcare services from their pharmacy, including lab tests.“Opening and scaling the first drive-thru COVID-19 testing locations, as well as offering over-the-counter tests, has given our team insights into the health and wellness needs in communities across America,” Patel said. “We’re pleased to be working with Abbott and using their ID NOW rapid molecular tests to accelerate our efforts and provide access to quick and accurate viral testing.”“Having fast and reliable testing gives people the confidence to know what virus they may have and the ability to quickly take the necessary steps to be on their way to recovery,” said Lou Morrone, senior vice president, rapid diagnostics, Abbott. “By making our ID NOW COVID and flu rapid molecular tests available at select Walgreens locations across the United States, testing will be more accessible to more people and families as we gather during the holiday season.”How to Schedule a Flu Test with a COVID-19 TestIndividuals can visit Walgreens.com/CovidTesting or schedule via the Walgreens app where COVID-19 and flu testing locations can be chosen from the list of stores with availability of these services.When scheduling a rapid COVID-19 test, patients are required to enter their information and complete a quick questionnaire, prior to adding a flu test and finalizing appointment details.Testing services are available at no cost for symptomatic individuals based on their insurance plan. Individuals can contact their insurer before scheduling to confirm the test meets coverage criteria.What to Expect at your Appointment and Assessing ResultsAt the time of the appointment, individuals will meet with a Walgreens pharmacist to receive one swab for a COVID-19 test and then one swab for a flu test.After the appointment, individuals will receive an email with a secure link to their results, which will be reported separately, within two hours.If an individual tests positive, a Walgreens pharmacist can reach out to their provider for a prescription or refer them to a primary care physician if they do not have one.Other COVID-19 Testing Options and OfferingsIndividuals can order no-cost at-home COVID-19 tests at Walgreens.com/OrderTest for pickup at the pharmacy or bring insurance information to a local pharmacist for assistance.** Select insurance companies and health plans may cover the cost of up to eight at-home COVID tests per individual per month.24-hour same day delivery is available for last-minute needs like groceries, over-the-counter medications, personal care items, household essentials, along with same-day prescription delivery after filling an eligible prescription, including free delivery of Paxlovid (a COVID-19 oral antiviral therapy) directly to the doorsteps of those who need it.Convenient COVID-19 and flu vaccinations are available for ages 3 and up. Neighborhood locations and appointments are designed to fit family schedules, including evenings and weekends.*Must be symptomatic and have flu testing done with COVID-19 testing in order to be eligible. No cost to you with health plan coverage. Please contact your health plan before scheduling to confirm the test meets coverage criteria. You may be billed by Walgreens and, if applicable, the laboratory for up to the full price of the test if your health plan denies coverage.**No-cost at-home COVID-19 tests are available with select insurance plans. Limits apply to the number of tests covered per person per month. Test kits are non-refundable. After you submit your order, the Walgreens pharmacy will confirm your eligibility and your potential copay amounts with your insurance plan.About WalgreensWalgreens (www.walgreens.com) is included in the U.S. Retail Pharmacy and U.S. Healthcare segments of Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc. (Nasdaq: WBA), an integrated healthcare, pharmacy and retail leader with a 170-year heritage of caring for communities. WBA’s purpose is to create more joyful lives through better health. Operating nearly 9,000 retail locations across America, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, Walgreens is proud to be a neighborhood health destination serving nearly 10 million customers each day. Walgreens pharmacists play a critical role in the U.S. healthcare system by providing a wide range of pharmacy and healthcare services, including those that drive equitable access to care for the nation’s medically underserved populations. To best meet the needs of customers and patients, Walgreens offers a true omnichannel experience, with fully integrated physical and digital platforms supported by the latest technology to deliver high-quality products and services in communities nationwide.____________________1 “Innovations at Retail Pharmacies Accelerate as Digital Competition, Health and Wellness Offerings Grow,” J.D. Power Finds, J.D. Power, July 28, 2022. View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.comews/home/20221216005058/en/ Contact(s)Stephanie CorciliusWalgreens Media Relationsmedia@walgreens.com Copy to clipboardCopied to clipboard Linkedin Facebook Explore Themes in this Press Release Pharmacy & Healthcare Connect With Us Media Contacts Investor Contact Subscribe to Press Releases Follow Us LinkedIn Walgreens Boots Alliance Instagram Switch LanguageEnglish简体中文 Business Newsrooms Boots UK No7 Beauty Company Information Terms of Use Online Privacy and Security Modern Slavery and Human Trafficking Statement The Companies (Miscellaneous Reporting) Regulations 2018 (UK) Walgreens Boots Alliance © 2024 Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc.Flu shot uptake slow in Philadelphia Skip to contentTuesday, November 12, 2024Today's PaperSign In / Sign UpSign inSUBSCRIBESpecial offerKeep reading by creating a free account or signing in.Sign in/Sign upSubscribeSupport local newsSign outNewsSportsBusinessOpinionPoliticsEntertainmentLifeFoodHealthReal EstatePhilly FirstObituariesJobsAdvertisementHealthGift this article!Link IconCopy gift linkFacebook LogoGift via FacebookXGift via XEmailGift via EmailLink copied to clipboardShare IconLink IconCopy linkFacebook LogoShare on FacebookXShare on XEmailShare via EmailLink copied to clipboardPhiladelphians aren’t rolling up their sleeve to get a flu shotThe flu vaccine this year is well matched to the virus that's circulating but uptake remains low.Acme Pharmacists Dawn Cohen, gives Roberta Leiggi, 81, of Levittown, Pa., her COVID-19 booster shot and her flu shot at the Bristol Township Senior Center in 2021.Read moreTYGER WILLIAMS / Staff Photographerby Abraham Gutman Published Dec. 12, 2022, 3:04 p.m. ETOnly one in five Philadelphians has received a flu vaccine so far this season, according to preliminary estimates from the Philadelphia Department of Public Health.The flu has spiked this year after two years in which cases were reduced by COVID-19 mitigation efforts. Influenza cases continued to rise in the city in late November, far outpacing the peaks of the last two winters. The number of emergency department visits for flulike illness are also much higher.Advertisement» READ MORE: Here are the Philadelphia health commissioner’s tips for a safer holiday gathering amid the ‘tripledemic’There has been more flu activity in Pennsylvania this fall than in the last eight seasons, according to the state’s Department of Health. As of Dec 3, about 75,000 people across Pennsylvania have been diagnosed with a laboratory-confirmed influenza case and eight died so far this season.Vaccines can curb influenza and prevent serious illness and death. Infectious-disease specialists say that this year’s vaccine is well-matched to the flu circulating in the community, but fewer people have gotten the shot compared with previous years.Overall, just 21% of Philadelphians received the flu shot between Aug. 1 and Nov. 30. Adults aged 19 to 64 years had the lowest vaccination rate — only 17% have been vaccinated. People age 65 and over are considered at higher risk for serious illness, but only a third got the shot.Still, health-care providers are not required to report flu vaccination data, as they must for COVID-19, which has to be reported 24 to 72 hours after a dose is administered, a spokesperson for the city’s health department said. So this year’s numbers might not include all of the doses delivered in November. In addition, shots administered at employee health clinics or through other campaigns may be missing.Philadelphia Health Commissioner Cheryl Bettigole noted that flu vaccine uptake nationally is lagging compare with last year. She said the shot is important, especially for children and older adults.“I would encourage everybody to get the flu shot,” she said.AdvertisementAdvertisementAdvertisementAbout UsAbout The InquirerDiversity & InclusionAdvertiseContact UsLicensing & PermissionsPhoto ReprintsNewspapers in EducationJobs & InternshipsInquirer EventsAcel Moore WorkshopsNewsroom StaffHelp and FeedbackNews & InfoNewsSportsEntertainmentBusinessHealthFoodLifeOpinionPhilly FirstArchivesSpecial ReportsSite MapMarketplaceSubscribeInquirer StoreJob ListingsAll ClassifiedsDeath NoticesLegal NoticesGift Subscriptionse-EditionsThe InquirerThe Daily NewsSubscriber ServicesMobile AppsApple iOSGoogle AndroidXFacebookInstagram© 2024 The Philadelphia Inquirer, LLCTerms of Use/Privacy Policy/Cancellation Policy/California Notice/California residents do not sell my data requestAre You Up to Date On Your Vaccines? > News > Yale Medicine Skip to Main Content1-877-YALEMDSSearch forSpecialistsFact SheetsDepartmentsClinical TrialsNewsPatient ToolsFor Medical Professionals1-877-YALEMDSFamily HealthAre You Up to Date On Your Vaccines?BY KATHY KATELLA January 13, 2023 Flu, measles, shingles—you want to prevent all of them. Originally published: Dec. 13, 2022. Updated: Jan. 13, 2023.While the COVID-19 vaccines﻿ held center stage over the last couple of years, something else was happening behind the scenes: a dip in the rate of children and adults getting their non-COVID vaccinations, including flu, measles, smallpox, and shingles, among others. An estimated 37 million children and adults in the United States missed some or all of their routine vaccinations when they avoided in-person medical visits during the pandemic. Meanwhile, cases of COVID-19 and flu are rising across the country. We spoke with Yale Medicine infectious diseases specialist Scott Roberts, MD, and pediatrician Maryellen Flaherty-Hewitt, MD. They talked about the dip in vaccination and answered commonly asked questions about the importance of vaccines. How serious is the decline in vaccination?Between the 2019-20 and 2021-22 school years, the percentage of kindergarteners who had their routine vaccines﻿ dropped by 2%, bringing the overall figure down to 93% vaccination—below the 95% target set by the Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, a part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Goals are set for each vaccine, including the MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella) vaccine, DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis) vaccine, and the varicella vaccine. The targets, which vary by vaccine, are vital to maintaining herd immunity for each of the diseases the vaccines are designed to protect against; falling behind on a target may bring a resurgence of the associated disease. Adults were behind on vaccines before the pandemic—three out of four were already missing one or more recommended vaccines, according to a report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The pandemic just exacerbated an existing problem, especially for children. “Pediatricians tried hard to keep their doors open during the pandemic so infants and young children could get into the office, but we’re still finding that there were kids who fell through the cracks, as far as vaccination,” Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt says. What about flu and COVID-19 vaccines?Hospitalizations from COVID-19 began ticking upward around Thanksgiving, while influenza﻿ was already surging, and officials expressed concern at a time when fewer people are wearing masks and taking other mitigation measures. The COVID-19 boosters from Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna, available to people ages 6 months and older, are bivalent, meaning half of the vaccine targets the original coronavirus strain, while the other half targets the BA.4 and BA.5 Omicron subvariant lineages, which are predicted to continue circulating this winter. Most people ages 6 months and older also should get the influenza vaccine if they haven’t already, Dr. Roberts says. The flu has historically been a seasonal virus, surfacing in October in the U.S. and disappearing in May. But vaccination after October still provides protection through the flu season’s peak, which usually falls between December and February, according to the CDC. Could measles become a threat?Measles is one of the most contagious of all known infections. The CDC estimates that if one person gets measles, 90% of people who are close to that person—and who have no immunity to it—will become infected. Overall, the U.S. is less vulnerable to a measles outbreak than many other parts of the world. Here, measles was declared “eliminated” in 2002, a designation that means there was no continuous transmission for a year or longer. Many people have been vaccinated, and a number of people born before 1957 (when the first vaccine became available) have immunity because they had the disease, Dr. Roberts explains. But the infection risk goes back up in areas where people aren’t vaccinated. “Measles is airborne, so if someone sneezes, it can spread,” Dr. Roberts says. There have been scattered clusters of measles cases, including one in 2014 in which measles was diagnosed in people who had visited Disneyland in California. It quickly became a public health problem that resulted in 147 cases in multiple U.S. states, as well as in Mexico and Canada. An even larger outbreak in 2019 led to 1,274 cases in 31 states. But the numbers dropped sharply during the pandemic. As of September, there have only been 13 cases in 2022.What other vaccinations are recommended?There are many vaccines available in the U.S. that protect against severe illness, disability, and death from a variety of infectious diseases. These include (but are not limited to) hepatitis A, hepatitis B, herpes zoster (shingles), HPV﻿-related cancers, influenza, pertussis (or whooping cough), pneumococcal disease, and tetanus. The ones you need—and when—vary, depending on such factors as age, pregnancy, health conditions, and whether you are a health care worker, immigrant, or refugee. The CDC provides vaccination schedules for children and adolescents, as well as for adults. When should you get vaccinated?Generally, the first vaccinations are given in infancy, and more are provided throughout childhood, in middle age, and later in life. “We start protecting newborns early. For example, they routinely get the hepatitis B vaccine in the nursery before they are even discharged from the hospital,” says Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt. “Routinely, pediatricians will continue the vaccine process, with a number of vaccines for different illnesses at the 2-month visit and through the newborn and toddler periods. We can protect them from various diseases by the time they go to kindergarten.” Some vaccines are held for later, such as the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, which is given to preteens to protect against HPV-related cancer that can develop later in life. Another example is the pneumococcal vaccine for pneumonia, which is given at age 65 to anyone who hasn’t received it previously, in some cases because they were immunocompromised﻿. It is also given to those under 65 with risk factors, adds Dr. Roberts. “The pneumonia vaccine is a critical one, and it changes pretty frequently because the strain of that vaccine is updated,” Dr. Roberts says.What if you aren’t sure if you had a particular vaccine?There is no national agency that maintains vaccination records. The best records are the ones in your electronic medical record, or, for those whose medical history started before electronic records, the paper records the doctor provided to you or your parents when the vaccine was given. You can also check your state health department to see if it has a registry that includes adult vaccines. The CDC has additional suggestions for locating vaccination records. If you don’t have records, it’s worth talking with your doctor. You can ask whether there is a blood test that can tell if you have immunity to the disease you are concerned about or, if not, whether you should get the vaccination again. For diseases that people either had or were vaccinated against as children, a written note from a medical provider saying they were immunized is sufficient, as is documentation of certain childhood diseases such as chicken pox or measles, says Dr. Roberts. But obtaining such records might be difficult, if not impossible. “When in doubt, unless you were in a community that deliberately avoided vaccination, most people can assume they were vaccinated,” says Dr. Roberts.How can parents make sure their children are protected?Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt says parents who think their children may have missed vaccines during the pandemic should talk to their pediatrician. Parents who feel hesitant about a vaccine should discuss their concerns, adds Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt. “The most important thing is to have an open dialogue with the pediatrician. Their role is really to guide and help your child grow over 20 years,” she says. “So, no pediatrician should ever shy away from answering questions about vaccines. We understand this is your child, and we will make sure you have all the facts you need to make a good decision.”How safe are the routine vaccines?Vaccines have dramatically improved the odds of avoiding and surviving some of the most difficult diseases. “I have been in practice for 20 years and done thousands of vaccines, and children have done well with them,” says Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt. “I’m part of a crossover generation. So, just as I was starting my training, some of these illnesses were still fairly prevalent. We still had children with bacterial meningitis and other diseases that we now rarely see because of vaccines.” Older people who remember infectious diseases like polio before vaccines became available have seen even worse scenarios, including more children being hospitalized and long-term complications like hearing loss and paralysis, she adds. In comparison, side effects from vaccines are minor. “The biggest side effects are possibly irritation at the injection site and a low fever in some children,” she says. Both doctors say children and adults who have missed their vaccines should talk to their doctors right away about catching up. “Large pockets of unvaccinated people are especially vulnerable to the spread of infectious diseases,” says Dr. Roberts. “At the end of the day, our advice is to follow the routine immunization schedule because we have many years of science to back up our recommendations,” says Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt. “And we want to keep everyone healthy.”Read more Yale Medicine newsRelated Fact SheetsVaccines for AdultsVaccines aren’t just for kids. Thousands of adults go to the hospital each year for a serious (sometimes even deadly) disease they might have avoided if they had received the vaccination to prevent it.Vaccines for KidsVaccines activate the immune system, training it to fight off certain viral and bacterial infections.Related Terms:Tetanus, Diptheria, Pertussis/Whooping Cough Vaccine (DTaP and Tdap)More news from Yale MedicineFamily HealthFamily HealthMore News From Yale MedicineAbout UsContact UsDonateReferring DoctorsClinical Keywords333 Cedar St.New Haven, CT 06510Yale School of MedicineYale UniversityWebsite FeedbackTerms & Privacy PoliciesAccessibility at YSMPatient RightsHIPAA at YaleManage Cookie PreferencesCopyright 2024 Yale Medicine [2419,8006,9736]{"namedChunks":["modules-news-news-details-components-NewsDetails-newsDetails"]}Walgreens Now Offering Flu and COVID-19 Testing in a Single Visit at Over 5,000 Locations | Walgreens Boots Alliance Skip to main content Walgreens Boots Alliance Main navigation Open Menu Close Menu About Us Expand About Us Collapse About Us About Us Purpose, Vision & Values Leadership Team Our Impact History Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Trending Stories Walgreens Boots Alliance Reports Fiscal Year 2024 Earnings Learn more Walgreens Appoints Jason Stenta as SVP and Chief Commercial Officer Learn more Our Business Expand Our Business Collapse Our Business Our Business U.S. Retail Pharmacy Segment International Segment U.S. Healthcare Segment No7 Beauty Company Investment Portfolio Trending Stories Walgreens at HLTH 2024: Committing to patient care in local communities Learn more Walgreens Stores Will Close for Thanksgiving Holiday Learn more Environmental, Social & Governance Expand Environmental, Social & Governance Collapse Environmental, Social & Governance Environmental, Social & Governance Governance Healthy Communities Healthy and Inclusive Workplace Healthy Planet Sustainable Marketplace ESG Report Library ESG Report Resources Trending Stories Walgreens and Dion’s Dream Chicago Join Forces to Host a Dream Vault Smart Locker in Gage Park Store Learn more How Walgreens supports LGBTQ+ community health all year round Learn more Careers Expand Careers Collapse Careers Careers Why Work for WBA Find a Position Life at WBA Pharmacy Careers at Walgreens Disability Inclusion at Walgreens Trending Stories Serving my country, seeing the world and remaining fluid in the process Learn more Pharmacy tech and admired mentor marks 30 years at Walgreens Learn more News & Media Expand News & Media Collapse News & Media News & Media News Hub Our Stories Press Releases Media Resources Position Statements Media Contacts Trending Stories What you should know about OTC phenylephrine during cold and flu season Learn more Walgreens Offers No-Cost Rapid COVID-19 and Flu Testing to Military Veterans Learn more Investors Open Search Close Search 95 results for Search Life at WBA … Life at WBA Life at WBA Explore stories of our people from around the world. Explore stories of our people from around the world. From pharmacy to beauty to curbside … nonprofit work... Learn more Meet Peter Mansour, pharmacist, Walgreens Centralized Services support operations People & Perspectives October … Calling the shots … shots Discover the cross-country coordination that goes into helping people in underserved communities secure appointments for the COVID-19 vaccine. Angelica Davis, pharmacy technician at Walgreens’ Centralized Services location in Muscle Shoals, Ala., assists patients … in medically underserved areas. Our goal was to increase our reach to people who are most in need of the vaccine. We considered trying a … The People of WBA Podcast: Episode 1 … The People of WBA Podcast: Episode 1 Meet a former Boots colleague who … the globe. But we’re more than the sum of our parts; each of these people brings their own unique background, experience, beliefs and … kind of section of people and customers, because those who live in Central London live these really big lives. You know, I remember … Meet Peter Mansour, pharmacist, Walgreens Centralized Services support operations … Meet Peter Mansour, pharmacist, Walgreens Centralized Services support operations To mark National Disability … from my short time here that there’s a longstanding mission to help people, which has significant meaning to me. I strongly believe that … with muscular dystrophy MD is pretty rare, affecting about 250,000 people in the U.S. When I was diagnosed, I was just a kid, so I didn’t … Our Stories Stay informed and connected with what’s going on at WBA by catching the latest company stories and videos. Walgreens Launches "Feel More Like You" Program to Assist People Living with Cancer Manage the Physical Changes Associated with Treatment … Walgreens Launches "Feel More Like You" Program to Assist People Living with Cancer Manage the Physical Changes Associated with … launched a new program called Feel More Like You™, developed to help people living with cancer and their caregivers manage the potential … reclaim the sense of control, confidence and self-esteem that are so central to wellbeing. For more information, visit … Meet Everin James, Duane Reade assistant store manager … has become a safer option compared to taking the subway, which most people are avoiding these days. There is much less traffic and I enjoy … workers as they came in to purchase essential items. Sometimes, people call in with questions or to place orders. A few months ago, I … during the day , and if my schedule allows, I take a bike ride to Central Park, pick a nice spot, and enjoy my lunch outside. In the … Why Work for WBA … Embracing diversity is crucial to unlocking our true potential. Our people care deeply about making a difference and see the future … our ambition, we offer career opportunities within WBA, enabling our people to develop and grow within a truly global force for good. There … transform retail pharmacy and healthcare delivery to play a more central role in our patients’ and customers’ daily lives. We’ve created … A prescription for taking the first step … Walgreens had the ability to do more in this space? JC : One in five people in the U S is dealing with a mental health condition every year. … With Walgreens’ footprint, we have the ability to reach 8 million people a day in our stores and online, many of whom are interacting … play – beyond adherence, working with other providers, connecting people to resources. So how could we provide the tools or training for … Walgreens and Prime Therapeutics Complete Formation of AllianceRx Walgreens Prime, a Combined Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Services Company … Complete Formation of AllianceRx Walgreens Prime, a Combined Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Services Company Transaction … . About Prime Therapeutics Prime Therapeutics LLC (Prime) helps people get the medicine they need to feel better and live well. Prime … and delivers medicine to members, offering clinical services for people with complex medical conditions. Prime serves nearly 20 million … Walgreens launches Feel More Like You, a first-of-its kind service to provide personalized care for people living with cancer … Like You, a first-of-its kind service to provide personalized care for people living with cancer Program offers the expertise of more than … pharmacy, health and beauty service available at no cost to help people living with cancer manage the medical and physical changes … reclaim the sense of control, confidence and self-esteem that are so central to wellbeing. For more information, visit … Who drives WBA’s work for social good? … Social and Governance Report , we’re spending time meeting some of the people behind the programs and projects that help local communities … savings, waste mitigation and increase donations from our stores. We centrally collect Green Box items using our reverse logistic hub … Mentoring my team. I have had the chance to work with some of the best people in the company. My team works so hard and give it everything … 'The Vaccine, In Our Words': Massachusetts' Gladys Vega … more than 60 percent of the city’s population coming from Latin and Central American backgrounds. It’s also a sanctuary city with many undocumented people living and working as part of the community. Facing obstacles … and misinformation surrounding access to the vaccine for undocumented people, community organizers like Vega play a crucial role in getting … Walgreens Boots Alliance Announces Completion of Formation of AllianceRx Walgreens Prime, a Combined Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Services Company … Completion of Formation of AllianceRx Walgreens Prime, a Combined Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Services Company DEERFIELD, Ill., 3 … LLC (Prime) have closed their transaction to form a combined central specialty pharmacy and mail services company, as part of the … a presence in more than 25* countries and employ more than 400,000* people. The company is a global leader in pharmacy-led, health and … Walgreens and Prime Therapeutics Agree to Form Strategic Alliance; Includes Retail Pharmacy Network Agreement and Combines Companies' Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Service Businesses … Includes Retail Pharmacy Network Agreement and Combines Companies' Central Specialty Pharmacy and Mail Service Businesses Innovative model … clinic services. About Prime Prime Therapeutics LLC (Prime) helps people get the medicine they need to feel better and live well. Prime … and delivers medicine to members, offering clinical services for people with complex medical conditions. Headquartered in St. Paul, … Walgreens Announces Winners for 2024 Expressions Challenge During Mental Health Awareness Month … priorities with one 2023 survey revealing that 87 percent of young people in the United States had suffered some mental health problem on … U. S. Virgin Islands in addition to nearly double the online votes for People’s Champs winners. Eligible entries are judged in four … FL • Third Place: (September 20th) Kiara P., Escuela Especializada Central de Artes Visuales, Dorado, PR • People’s Champ: (September … Meet Jessica Zander, manager of strategy and operations for Walgreen Benefit Fund … and have spent my career working for nonprofit organizations that help people in need. During the pandemic, one of my best friends and I … connected to this opportunity through my personal passion of helping people love and take care of themselves. In my role with the Fund, I … More stories Learn more Meet Peter Mansour, pharmacist, Walgreens Centralized Services support operations People & Perspectives October … Meet Dee Fasan, Boots UK pharmacist and store manager … its first lockdown and was greatly impacted as the vast majority of people started to work from home. My tube carriage became a lot … to keep our customers and ourselves as safe as possible. As most people were now spending all their time in the suburbs and in more … for me, as the intensity of these stores was in stark contrast to central London since COVID-19 hit. Patients and customers in central … Listen up: Macmillan Cancer Support’s podcast gets honest about cancer … has reached a remarkable milestone of £19.9 million raised to support people living with cancer. Additionally, the partnership can lay claim … Beauty Advisors have been trained to provide specialist support to people living with cancer and can share hair, skin and other beauty … pharmacist advanced practitioner and BMIP at a Boots pharmacy in central London, is keen on offering support to people whose families or … Meet Beth Dolecki, senior premium beauty operations manager, Boots UK … to our customers. Beauty, for me, has always been about making people feel good. That could be helping a customer who is living with … has had its challenges. As someone who is energized by being around people, not being able to meet others face to face has been draining. I hadn’t realized how important having people around me drives my creativity and lifts my mood. To keep myself … Where does extra inventory go, anyway? … landfill or processed through a hazardous waste program. “I felt like people could use these products,” she says. “That’s when I questioned, … ‘Can we do something differently? Why aren’t we donating?’ And people told me it was going to cost too much or take too much time or … and allow for nonprofits to directly pick up donated items. “We centrally collect Green Box items using a process my team and I … What We Value … transform retail pharmacy and healthcare delivery to play a more central role in our patients’ and customers’ daily lives. Embracing diversity is crucial to unlocking our true potential. Our people care deeply about making a difference and see the future … results. We’ve created an environment of care that helps our people grow and encourages them to make a real difference in the lives … Cancellations are invitations … But even then, it was all put on hold. It just wasn’t practical for people to group together in the way we would normally operate these … social-distancing measures to help keep trainees safe. Only 20 to 30 people would occupy a space designed for up to 300 people, so that they could sit comfortably apart from each other, and … Protecting the people behind the products … Protecting the people behind the products Retail brands owned by WBA are made in … in North America and 43 percent in Asia, with the rest in Europe, Central and South America and elsewhere. It’s the job of Kopf, Staples … all over the world,” says Kopf. “In the U.S., for example, a lot of people might automatically assume that factories are compliant, but … Meet Kapriesse Slade, WBA senior HR business partner … park where the office is located. If I’m in Sedley, I walk around Central London and have a quick look at nearby shops. If I’m home, I … an organization and with individuals who want to do the utmost to help people in our communities. The pandemic also made me appreciate my free … my country, seeing the world and remaining fluid in the process People & Perspectives November 11, 2024 After 15 years in the Navy with … Load More Walgreens Now Offering Flu and COVID-19 Testing in a Single Visit at Over 5,000 LocationsTest results are provided within two hours to help guide treatment decisions and prevent the spread of respiratory illness December 16, 2022 Copy to clipboardCopied to clipboard Linkedin Facebook 5 mins read DEERFIELD, Ill., December 16, 2022 - Walgreens today announced that rapid flu testing will now be available at more than 5,000 pharmacies nationwide to help communities identify and manage the highly transmissible viruses circulating this holiday season.* Walgreens will use Abbott’s ID NOW™ devices to administer the tests, and results will be available within two hours.This press release features multimedia. View the full release here: https://www.businesswire.comews/home/20221216005058/en/“Our Flu Index shows activity 10 times higher compared to the same time last year. Providing convenient access to flu testing is another way Walgreens is helping support and protect local communities during a sustained surge of respiratory illness this winter,” said Anita Patel, PharmD, vice president, pharmacy services development, Walgreens.Individuals can receive COVID-19 and flu testing in a single visit at select Walgreens pharmacies. Accessible and convenient rapid diagnostic testing for routine illness at community pharmacies is a service Americans have come to depend on since the start of the pandemic. A J.D. Power1 survey found that pharmacy customers are interested in receiving routine healthcare services from their pharmacy, including lab tests.“Opening and scaling the first drive-thru COVID-19 testing locations, as well as offering over-the-counter tests, has given our team insights into the health and wellness needs in communities across America,” Patel said. “We’re pleased to be working with Abbott and using their ID NOW rapid molecular tests to accelerate our efforts and provide access to quick and accurate viral testing.”“Having fast and reliable testing gives people the confidence to know what virus they may have and the ability to quickly take the necessary steps to be on their way to recovery,” said Lou Morrone, senior vice president, rapid diagnostics, Abbott. “By making our ID NOW COVID and flu rapid molecular tests available at select Walgreens locations across the United States, testing will be more accessible to more people and families as we gather during the holiday season.”How to Schedule a Flu Test with a COVID-19 TestIndividuals can visit Walgreens.com/CovidTesting or schedule via the Walgreens app where COVID-19 and flu testing locations can be chosen from the list of stores with availability of these services.When scheduling a rapid COVID-19 test, patients are required to enter their information and complete a quick questionnaire, prior to adding a flu test and finalizing appointment details.Testing services are available at no cost for symptomatic individuals based on their insurance plan. Individuals can contact their insurer before scheduling to confirm the test meets coverage criteria.What to Expect at your Appointment and Assessing ResultsAt the time of the appointment, individuals will meet with a Walgreens pharmacist to receive one swab for a COVID-19 test and then one swab for a flu test.After the appointment, individuals will receive an email with a secure link to their results, which will be reported separately, within two hours.If an individual tests positive, a Walgreens pharmacist can reach out to their provider for a prescription or refer them to a primary care physician if they do not have one.Other COVID-19 Testing Options and OfferingsIndividuals can order no-cost at-home COVID-19 tests at Walgreens.com/OrderTest for pickup at the pharmacy or bring insurance information to a local pharmacist for assistance.** Select insurance companies and health plans may cover the cost of up to eight at-home COVID tests per individual per month.24-hour same day delivery is available for last-minute needs like groceries, over-the-counter medications, personal care items, household essentials, along with same-day prescription delivery after filling an eligible prescription, including free delivery of Paxlovid (a COVID-19 oral antiviral therapy) directly to the doorsteps of those who need it.Convenient COVID-19 and flu vaccinations are available for ages 3 and up. Neighborhood locations and appointments are designed to fit family schedules, including evenings and weekends.*Must be symptomatic and have flu testing done with COVID-19 testing in order to be eligible. No cost to you with health plan coverage. Please contact your health plan before scheduling to confirm the test meets coverage criteria. You may be billed by Walgreens and, if applicable, the laboratory for up to the full price of the test if your health plan denies coverage.**No-cost at-home COVID-19 tests are available with select insurance plans. Limits apply to the number of tests covered per person per month. Test kits are non-refundable. After you submit your order, the Walgreens pharmacy will confirm your eligibility and your potential copay amounts with your insurance plan.About WalgreensWalgreens (www.walgreens.com) is included in the U.S. Retail Pharmacy and U.S. Healthcare segments of Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc. (Nasdaq: WBA), an integrated healthcare, pharmacy and retail leader with a 170-year heritage of caring for communities. WBA’s purpose is to create more joyful lives through better health. Operating nearly 9,000 retail locations across America, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, Walgreens is proud to be a neighborhood health destination serving nearly 10 million customers each day. Walgreens pharmacists play a critical role in the U.S. healthcare system by providing a wide range of pharmacy and healthcare services, including those that drive equitable access to care for the nation’s medically underserved populations. To best meet the needs of customers and patients, Walgreens offers a true omnichannel experience, with fully integrated physical and digital platforms supported by the latest technology to deliver high-quality products and services in communities nationwide.____________________1 “Innovations at Retail Pharmacies Accelerate as Digital Competition, Health and Wellness Offerings Grow,” J.D. Power Finds, J.D. Power, July 28, 2022. View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.comews/home/20221216005058/en/ Contact(s)Stephanie CorciliusWalgreens Media Relationsmedia@walgreens.com Copy to clipboardCopied to clipboard Linkedin Facebook Explore Themes in this Press Release Pharmacy & Healthcare Connect With Us Media Contacts Investor Contact Subscribe to Press Releases Follow Us LinkedIn Walgreens Boots Alliance Instagram Switch LanguageEnglish简体中文 Business Newsrooms Boots UK No7 Beauty Company Information Terms of Use Online Privacy and Security Modern Slavery and Human Trafficking Statement The Companies (Miscellaneous Reporting) Regulations 2018 (UK) Walgreens Boots Alliance © 2024 Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc.Are You Up to Date On Your Vaccines? > News > Yale Medicine Skip to Main Content1-877-YALEMDSSearch forSpecialistsFact SheetsDepartmentsClinical TrialsNewsPatient ToolsFor Medical Professionals1-877-YALEMDSFamily HealthAre You Up to Date On Your Vaccines?BY KATHY KATELLA January 13, 2023 Flu, measles, shingles—you want to prevent all of them. Originally published: Dec. 13, 2022. Updated: Jan. 13, 2023.While the COVID-19 vaccines﻿ held center stage over the last couple of years, something else was happening behind the scenes: a dip in the rate of children and adults getting their non-COVID vaccinations, including flu, measles, smallpox, and shingles, among others. An estimated 37 million children and adults in the United States missed some or all of their routine vaccinations when they avoided in-person medical visits during the pandemic. Meanwhile, cases of COVID-19 and flu are rising across the country. We spoke with Yale Medicine infectious diseases specialist Scott Roberts, MD, and pediatrician Maryellen Flaherty-Hewitt, MD. They talked about the dip in vaccination and answered commonly asked questions about the importance of vaccines. How serious is the decline in vaccination?Between the 2019-20 and 2021-22 school years, the percentage of kindergarteners who had their routine vaccines﻿ dropped by 2%, bringing the overall figure down to 93% vaccination—below the 95% target set by the Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, a part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Goals are set for each vaccine, including the MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella) vaccine, DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis) vaccine, and the varicella vaccine. The targets, which vary by vaccine, are vital to maintaining herd immunity for each of the diseases the vaccines are designed to protect against; falling behind on a target may bring a resurgence of the associated disease. Adults were behind on vaccines before the pandemic—three out of four were already missing one or more recommended vaccines, according to a report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The pandemic just exacerbated an existing problem, especially for children. “Pediatricians tried hard to keep their doors open during the pandemic so infants and young children could get into the office, but we’re still finding that there were kids who fell through the cracks, as far as vaccination,” Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt says. What about flu and COVID-19 vaccines?Hospitalizations from COVID-19 began ticking upward around Thanksgiving, while influenza﻿ was already surging, and officials expressed concern at a time when fewer people are wearing masks and taking other mitigation measures. The COVID-19 boosters from Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna, available to people ages 6 months and older, are bivalent, meaning half of the vaccine targets the original coronavirus strain, while the other half targets the BA.4 and BA.5 Omicron subvariant lineages, which are predicted to continue circulating this winter. Most people ages 6 months and older also should get the influenza vaccine if they haven’t already, Dr. Roberts says. The flu has historically been a seasonal virus, surfacing in October in the U.S. and disappearing in May. But vaccination after October still provides protection through the flu season’s peak, which usually falls between December and February, according to the CDC. Could measles become a threat?Measles is one of the most contagious of all known infections. The CDC estimates that if one person gets measles, 90% of people who are close to that person—and who have no immunity to it—will become infected. Overall, the U.S. is less vulnerable to a measles outbreak than many other parts of the world. Here, measles was declared “eliminated” in 2002, a designation that means there was no continuous transmission for a year or longer. Many people have been vaccinated, and a number of people born before 1957 (when the first vaccine became available) have immunity because they had the disease, Dr. Roberts explains. But the infection risk goes back up in areas where people aren’t vaccinated. “Measles is airborne, so if someone sneezes, it can spread,” Dr. Roberts says. There have been scattered clusters of measles cases, including one in 2014 in which measles was diagnosed in people who had visited Disneyland in California. It quickly became a public health problem that resulted in 147 cases in multiple U.S. states, as well as in Mexico and Canada. An even larger outbreak in 2019 led to 1,274 cases in 31 states. But the numbers dropped sharply during the pandemic. As of September, there have only been 13 cases in 2022.What other vaccinations are recommended?There are many vaccines available in the U.S. that protect against severe illness, disability, and death from a variety of infectious diseases. These include (but are not limited to) hepatitis A, hepatitis B, herpes zoster (shingles), HPV﻿-related cancers, influenza, pertussis (or whooping cough), pneumococcal disease, and tetanus. The ones you need—and when—vary, depending on such factors as age, pregnancy, health conditions, and whether you are a health care worker, immigrant, or refugee. The CDC provides vaccination schedules for children and adolescents, as well as for adults. When should you get vaccinated?Generally, the first vaccinations are given in infancy, and more are provided throughout childhood, in middle age, and later in life. “We start protecting newborns early. For example, they routinely get the hepatitis B vaccine in the nursery before they are even discharged from the hospital,” says Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt. “Routinely, pediatricians will continue the vaccine process, with a number of vaccines for different illnesses at the 2-month visit and through the newborn and toddler periods. We can protect them from various diseases by the time they go to kindergarten.” Some vaccines are held for later, such as the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, which is given to preteens to protect against HPV-related cancer that can develop later in life. Another example is the pneumococcal vaccine for pneumonia, which is given at age 65 to anyone who hasn’t received it previously, in some cases because they were immunocompromised﻿. It is also given to those under 65 with risk factors, adds Dr. Roberts. “The pneumonia vaccine is a critical one, and it changes pretty frequently because the strain of that vaccine is updated,” Dr. Roberts says.What if you aren’t sure if you had a particular vaccine?There is no national agency that maintains vaccination records. The best records are the ones in your electronic medical record, or, for those whose medical history started before electronic records, the paper records the doctor provided to you or your parents when the vaccine was given. You can also check your state health department to see if it has a registry that includes adult vaccines. The CDC has additional suggestions for locating vaccination records. If you don’t have records, it’s worth talking with your doctor. You can ask whether there is a blood test that can tell if you have immunity to the disease you are concerned about or, if not, whether you should get the vaccination again. For diseases that people either had or were vaccinated against as children, a written note from a medical provider saying they were immunized is sufficient, as is documentation of certain childhood diseases such as chicken pox or measles, says Dr. Roberts. But obtaining such records might be difficult, if not impossible. “When in doubt, unless you were in a community that deliberately avoided vaccination, most people can assume they were vaccinated,” says Dr. Roberts.How can parents make sure their children are protected?Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt says parents who think their children may have missed vaccines during the pandemic should talk to their pediatrician. Parents who feel hesitant about a vaccine should discuss their concerns, adds Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt. “The most important thing is to have an open dialogue with the pediatrician. Their role is really to guide and help your child grow over 20 years,” she says. “So, no pediatrician should ever shy away from answering questions about vaccines. We understand this is your child, and we will make sure you have all the facts you need to make a good decision.”How safe are the routine vaccines?Vaccines have dramatically improved the odds of avoiding and surviving some of the most difficult diseases. “I have been in practice for 20 years and done thousands of vaccines, and children have done well with them,” says Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt. “I’m part of a crossover generation. So, just as I was starting my training, some of these illnesses were still fairly prevalent. We still had children with bacterial meningitis and other diseases that we now rarely see because of vaccines.” Older people who remember infectious diseases like polio before vaccines became available have seen even worse scenarios, including more children being hospitalized and long-term complications like hearing loss and paralysis, she adds. In comparison, side effects from vaccines are minor. “The biggest side effects are possibly irritation at the injection site and a low fever in some children,” she says. Both doctors say children and adults who have missed their vaccines should talk to their doctors right away about catching up. “Large pockets of unvaccinated people are especially vulnerable to the spread of infectious diseases,” says Dr. Roberts. “At the end of the day, our advice is to follow the routine immunization schedule because we have many years of science to back up our recommendations,” says Dr. Flaherty-Hewitt. “And we want to keep everyone healthy.”Read more Yale Medicine newsRelated Fact SheetsVaccines for AdultsVaccines aren’t just for kids. Thousands of adults go to the hospital each year for a serious (sometimes even deadly) disease they might have avoided if they had received the vaccination to prevent it.Vaccines for KidsVaccines activate the immune system, training it to fight off certain viral and bacterial infections.Related Terms:Tetanus, Diptheria, Pertussis/Whooping Cough Vaccine (DTaP and Tdap)More news from Yale MedicineFamily HealthDoctors & AdviceMore News From Yale MedicineAbout UsContact UsDonateReferring DoctorsClinical Keywords333 Cedar St.New Haven, CT 06510Yale School of MedicineYale UniversityWebsite FeedbackTerms & Privacy PoliciesAccessibility at YSMPatient RightsHIPAA at YaleManage Cookie PreferencesCopyright 2024 Yale Medicine [2419,8006,9736]{"namedChunks":["modules-news-news-details-components-NewsDetails-newsDetails"]}Massachusetts’ flu season is already the worst in over a decade | GBH Search Query Show Search Sign Out Sign In TV All TV Shows TV Schedule Watch GBH 2 Watch GBH WORLD Watch GBH Kids GBH Passport Radio & Podcasts All Radio Shows All Podcasts Radio Schedule Ways to listen News Music & Culture Events Support GBH Membership Corporate Sponsorship Directed Giving Planned Giving Other Ways to Support Menu What matters to you. Show Search SEARCH Search Query Sign Out Sign In Donate TV All TV Shows TV Schedule Watch GBH 2 Watch GBH WORLD Watch GBH Kids GBH Passport Radio & Podcasts All Radio Shows All Podcasts Radio Schedule Ways to listen News Music & Culture Events Support GBH Membership Corporate Sponsorship Directed Giving Planned Giving Other Ways to Support Play Live Radio 0:00 0:00 NEXT UP: All Live Streams Perfect Holiday Party Ultimate Holiday Classical Mix Heavenly Holiday Classics CRB Classical 99.5 CAI GBH 89.7 Top News Local News Massachusetts’ flu season is already the worst in over a decade Share Email Facebook Twitter Free flu shots availability signs at a CVS Health Corp. Pharmacy in Miami, Florida, U.S., on Wednesday, Sept. 30, 2020. CVS Health Corp. said this month that it expects to vaccinate up to 18 million people. Marco Bello/Bloomberg via Getty Images Bloomberg Craig LeMoult clemoult Craig LeMoult is a reporter for GBH News. Feedback? Questions? Story ideas? Reach out to Craig at craig_lemoult@wgbh.org. December 16, 2022 Flu rates in Massachusetts are already higher than at any point in more than a decade, and the season is just getting started. Data released Friday by the state Department of Public Health shows more than 7% of patients who saw an outpatient doctor last week had flu-like symptoms. The state uses that as an indicator for how prevalent influenza is, since relatively few people wind up taking a test for the flu. "I don't think we've seen activity like this since the swine flu, the H1N1 pandemic of 2009," said Dr. Larry Madoff, medical director for the state DPH's bureau of infectious disease and lab sciences. "And that was a very high and unusual season. We haven't seen anything like this since then."Right now, flu numbers are increasing far more rapidly than COVID-19 numbers, said Dr. Daniel Kuritzkes, chief of the division of infectious diseases at Brigham and Women's Hospital. "Whereas we typically see influenza striking in January, February, there's really been a rapid rise now in December that parallels the rise we've seen in previous years in later winter months," Kuritzkes said. "But it's just happening that much earlier."Essentially, it's spiked early, and it's not clear if it will also go down early or continue to rise. "We don't know what's going to happen next," Madoff said. A state-provided chart shows this year’s flu-like illness prevalence outstripping the previous three years. Screengrab from Mass. Department of Public Health, modified to show the legend The DPH also reported that 3.6% of hospitalizations statewide last week were associated with influenza. Higher percentages were seen in the 2019-2020 season, but not until February. "Fortunately, people tend not to get quite as sick with influenza as with COVID," Kuritzkes said. "So I don't expect that we're going to see dozens and dozens of people on ventilators or in the intensive care unit," he said. "But everybody with influenza needs to be in a private room or roomed with someone else with influenza. That clearly has an impact on capacity and how we can handle folks."Those capacity issues could ultimately affect hospitals' ability to admit new patients and conduct elective procedures, he said."I would urge everybody to go out and get their flu vaccine if they haven't done it yet," Kuritzkes added.The state reported that 39% of Massachusetts residents have gotten a flu shot so far this year. Madoff said that's on par with previous years at this point in the season. But with the flu spiking earlier than usual, there's an added urgency to getting the shot, said Dr. Sari Sánchez, medical director for infectious diseases at the Boston Public Health Commission."We're definitely urging our communities to get their annual flu vaccines and to really stay home if they feel sick," Sanchez said. "And we are really trying to address that with access to sites."The city has set up free, walk-in flu vaccination clinics around Boston. A list of Boston sites is available here and a state list of vaccination locations can be found here. More Local News Access to telehealth is severely lacking for some Massachusetts populations, research finds All Things Considered You can order free COVID tests again by mail Tips to keep you and your family safe from the tripledemic during the holidays CVS and Walgreens agree to pay $10 billion to settle lawsuits linked to opioid sales The weekly state reports shows stark disparities in flu vaccination by age and race or ethnicity. Nearly 70% of people aged 65 or older have gotten a flu shot, compared to just 28% of Massachusetts residents between the ages of 18 and 49.Forty percent of white people in the state have gotten a flu vaccination, compared to 28% of Black residents and just 23% of Hispanic people."We know the disparities have historically existed where communities of color, particular Black and Latinx communities, often have lower rates of vaccination uptake," Sanchez said. "And we've also often seen historically that they that we also see higher rates of influenza in these communities."More than half of flu cases in Boston are in Black and Latino people, she said, with residents of Dorchester, Roxbury and Hyde Park being disproportionately hit."We also recognize that there might be a lot of fatigue out there. You know, we've had many vaccines come out in the past two years," Sanchez said. "And we all need to continue to keep ourselves safe and healthy by being up to date on all of them."Even with the average uptake, one bit of good news is that this year's version of the flu vaccine is believed to be an effective one."The strains that are in the flu vaccine match the ones that are circulating," Madoff said. "And that's not always true."For those who do get the flu, he said, there are treatments available — particularly for people who are immunocompromised, over the age of 65 or very young. "[They] are eligible and should talk to their health care provider about getting treatment for the flu," Madoff said. "It's most effective when given within two days of onset of symptoms. So it's important that if you think you're getting the flu, that you pick up the phone and call your provider."Entering into the holiday season, experts say it's especially important to take precautions."The usual prevention measures of covering your cough, good hand hygiene and mask-wearing can help," Madoff said. "All of those things can can help prevent he transmission of flu. And hopefully we can put a lid on this season's flu outbreak." Craig LeMoult clemoult Craig LeMoult is a reporter for GBH News. Feedback? Questions? Story ideas? Reach out to Craig at craig_lemoult@wgbh.org. Explore Topics: Health Support for GBH is provided by: Become a GBH sponsor Why do people support GBH? "(I) love having access to reliable news to keep me updated and also give me a bit of hope our country will be okay."- A donor in Lawrence, MA"GBH is like an anchor in a world with such bad news."- A donor in Derry, NH"GBH is news I can trust."- A donor in Westwood, MAGBH is public media. Your donation powers our trustworthy, independent journalism and keeps it free and accessible to all. Donate GBH Newsletters GBH offers several newsletters focused on the topics that matter to you. Sign up now! More Local News ‘We’re not listening’: In new GBH interview, Moulton presses critique of Democratic Party Boston Public Radio After pushback, GBH says it’s open to selling CAI’s historic Woods Hole HQ to community group Transit advocates, state officials celebrate Orange Line getting back to full speed Latinos gave Trump a major boost in Massachusetts. Experts say that can't be ignored. All Things Considered ABOUT About GBH GBH Education Inclusion & Equity Services Careers Press SUPPORT GBH Support GBH Donate Membership Corporate Sponsorship Directed Giving Planned Giving Other Ways to Support POLICIES All FCC Public Files WGBH-TV: FCC Public Inspection File WGBX-TV: FCC Public Inspection File WFXZ-CD: FCC Public Inspection File WGBH-FM: FCC Public Inspection File WGBH-FM: FCC Public Inspection File Terms of use Editorial Guidelines Reports & Filings Assistance with Public Files Privacy Policy Land Acknowledgement Accessibility Statement CONNECT WITH US Contact GBH Contact GBH News Media Inquiries Newsletters Visit Us What matters to you. © 2024 WGBH. All rights reserved. Our PartnersFlu activity high across US, but remains low in Michigan Skip to main contentOpen Main Menu NavigationOpen SearchClear icon46ºGo to the WDIV homepageJoin InsiderSign InNeed Assistance?SearchNewsWatch LiveLocal NewsTrafficNationalWorldEntertainmentTravelHealthDecision 2024PoliticsElectionsCommunityLocal 4+Watch Local 4+A Conversation WithWhat's In That GarageDetroit Sports+Live in the DHelp Me HankInvestigationsFlashpointTasty TuesdaySolutionariesTV ListingsMeTV DetroitWeatherWeather NewsAlertsMIPicsSchool ClosingsForecasting ChangeSportsDetroit Sports+LionsLions StatsTigersTigers StatsRed WingsRed Wings StatsPistonsPistons StatsWolverinesSpartansOlympics4FrenzyFeaturesGo 4 ItWatch Local 4+ParadeEvents CalendarVote 4 The Best4YIMIPicsAll 4 PetsBrag BookMoney MinuteSunshine AwardsIn The DIn Your NeighborhoodFoodContests & RulesLive In The DDine In The DClick On DealsCouch ClubWhat's The BuzzEvents Live GuideAnn ArborHeadlinesTopicsSportsEventsAnn Arbor WeatherGet InvolvedContact UsHelp CenterMeet The TeamCareers at WDIVAdvertise with usNewslettersNewsLocal 4+WeatherSportsFeaturesLive In The DAnn ArborContact UsNewslettersNewsLocal 4+WeatherSportsFeaturesLive In The DAnn ArborContact UsNewslettersCloseHealthCassidy Johncox, Senior News EditorPublished: December 12, 2022 at 9:08 AMUpdated: December 12, 2022 at 9:41 AMTags: Flu, Influenza, Virus, Illness, Sick, Health, Data, CDCSign up for our NewslettersSign UpLATEST NEWSDelphine Klaput will celebrate her 100th birthday on Nov. 231 hour agoOriginal ‘Rosie the Riveter’ reflects on legacy at 99 during Veterans Day celebration in YpsilantiRead full article: Original ‘Rosie the Riveter’ reflects on legacy at 99 during Veterans Day celebration in YpsilantiLions host Jaguars on Sunday1 hour agoDetroit Lions' improbable Sunday Night Football victory over Texans sparks citywide feverRead full article: Detroit Lions' improbable Sunday Night Football victory over Texans sparks citywide feverNo description available2 hours agoIn Your Neighborhood: Getting to know TroyRead full article: In Your Neighborhood: Getting to know TroyNo description available2 hours agoGrassroots movement in Troy pushes for action on I-75 noiseRead full article: Grassroots movement in Troy pushes for action on I-75 noiseCLICK ON DEALSTake a look at the latest Insider Deals.Make household chores easier and more with these Insider DealsRead full article: Make household chores easier and more with these Insider DealsHealthFlu activity high across US, but remains low in MichiganCDC data shows Michigan 1 of few states with low activityCassidy Johncox, Senior News EditorPublished: December 12, 2022 at 9:08 AMUpdated: December 12, 2022 at 9:41 AMTags: Flu, Influenza, Virus, Illness, Sick, Health, Data, CDCThe CDC's Weekly US Map: Influenza Summary Update from the week ending on Dec. 3, 2022. Data last updated on Dec. 9, 2022. Image courtesy of CDC's website. (CDC)DETROIT – Flu season is in full swing across the United States, and even struck earlier this year than expected.But though influenza activity is high, or very high, in most parts of the country, activity remains low in Michigan, according to data from the CDC.Recommended VideosAs of the first week of December, flu activity is considered low in the Great Lakes State. Only Michigan and Alaska are experiencing low flu activity, CDC data shows. Activity is only lower in New Hampshire, the Northern Mariana Islands and the Virgin Islands, where activity is considered “minimal.”The rest of the nation is primarily experiencing high or very high flu activity, including states bordering Michigan. In fact, Ohio is one of 12 states experiencing the highest level of flu activity.Below is a photo of the CDC’s weekly map of influenza data (click here for an interactive version of the map).The CDC's Weekly US Map: Influenza Summary Update from the week ending on Dec. 3, 2022. Data last updated on Dec. 9, 2022. Image courtesy of CDC's website. (CDC)Flu activity decreased slightly in the first week of December compared to the week ending on Nov. 26. Flu activity was considered minimal in Michigan all through October and most of November, until it increased to the “low activity” category in the last week of November.Click here to see the CDC’s map, which shows how activity has changed over the past nine weeks.High flu activity is currently coinciding with the spread of COVID and RSV, which are also viral respiratory illnesses. Infections began earlier this year than anticipated, causing a shortage of some over-the-counter medications due to high demand.Read more: Increased demand for over-the-counter medications are causing shortagesRelated: Hospitalizations signal rising COVID-19 risk for US seniorsCopyright 2022 by WDIV ClickOnDetroit - All rights reserved.About the AuthorCassidy Johncox headshotCassidy JohncoxCassidy Johncox is a senior digital news editor covering stories across the spectrum, with a special focus on politics and community issues.emailtwitterLoading...Recommended VideosTV ListingsEmail NewslettersRSS FeedsContests and RulesContact UsCareers at WDIVClosed Captioning / Audio DescriptionPublic FileTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyDo Not Sell My InfoFCC ApplicationsCookie PreferencesFollow UsVisit our YouTube page (opens in a new tab)Visit our Facebook page (opens in a new tab)Visit our Instagram page (opens in a new tab)Visit our X page (opens in a new tab)Visit our RSS Feed page (opens in a new tab)Get Results With OmneIf you need help with the Public File, call (313) 222-0556.At WDIV, we are committed to informing and delighting our audience. In our commitment to covering our communities with innovation and excellence, we incorporate Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies to enhance our news gathering, reporting, and presentation processes. Read our article to see how we are using Artificial Intelligence.Copyright © 2024 ClickOnDetroit.com is managed by Graham Digital and published by Graham Media Group, a division of Graham Holdings.Father warns about how serious flu can be for kids as 10-year-old son battles virus - ABC News ABC NewsVideoLiveShowsElections538ShopStream onLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 11, 8:10 PM ETNational Election Results: presidential Projection: Trump is President-elect226312226312Harris71,584,833270 to winTrump74,896,505Expected vote reporting: 95%Recent ProjectionsColo. Dist. 8Projected WinnerGabe Evans•R1 day agoAriz.PresidentProjected WinnerDonald Trump•R2 days agoNational Election Results: house205214205214Dem.214 up for electionLost: 2218 for controlestimateRep.221 up for electionGained: 2Undecided races of the 2024 election: Live results and analysisLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 11, 4:53 PM ET4:53 PMRep. Stefanik’s U.N. appointment to trigger special election in New York3:24 PMHow all the intraparty House races turned outFather warns about how serious flu can be for kids as 10-year-old son battles virusSo far, 21 pediatric deaths have been recorded this season.ByMary KekatosDecember 15, 2022, 2:51 PM2:51STOCK PHOTO/Getty ImagesA father is warning about how serious the flu can be, especially for children, as his 10-year-old son remains hospitalized with the virus.Cory Tamborelli, from Ramona, California -- about 34 miles northeast of San Diego -- said his son, Tristan, first started experiencing flu symptoms about a week and a half ago.'A fever and a little bit of a runny nose," he told ABC News local affiliate KGTV.MORE: Some schools close to stem flu outbreaks -- but is it a good long-term solution?However, the young boy's condition rapidly deteriorated and within 48 hours, Tristan was unresponsive."He was limp, couldn't move, couldn't talk. It was the most scared I've ever been in my life," Tamborelli said.STOCK PHOTO/Getty ImagesTristan was life-flighted to Rady Children's Hospital in San Diego, where he tested positive for two strains of flu, according to an update from his aunt, Sara Presley Scott.Doctors discovered that Tristan's liver and kidney were failing. He was rushed to the pediatric intensive care unit, where he was sedated and placed on a ventilator.His aunt said he needed to be placed on dialysis to help support his non-functioning kidney."It was so bad. I was scared he wasn't going to make it. You feel helpless," Tamborelli said. "Nothing you can do."Hospitals across the country have been reporting that they are at capacity or near capacity as the flu season has started earlier than usual.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, some children are at higher risk of developing flu-related complications including infants, those up to age 5, American Indian/Alaskan Native children, and those up to age 18 with chronic health problems.MORE: Health officials make urgent push for flu and COVID shots as hospitals feel the strainTristan falls into that latter category. Tamborelli told KGTV that his son suffered a stroke as an infant and, as a result, has several underlying conditions including epilepsy and a blood clotting disorder."Each year, millions of children get sick with seasonal flu, thousands of children are hospitalized and some children die from flu," according to the CDC.Currently, children age 4 and under are being hospitalized at a rate of 42.3 per 100,000 and children between ages 5 and 17 at a rate of 17.9 per 100,000 -- the highest rates recorded since the 2009-10 season, which was the year of the swine flu outbreak, CDC data shows.Additionally, at least 21 pediatric deaths have been recorded so far this season.Tristan has since come off the ventilator and his condition is starting to improve, although doctors told his family it will likely be a long road to recovery.Now, Tamborelli is urging families to make sure their children are vaccinated as the U.S. heads into the colder weather months.According to CDC data, about 42.5% of all children have been vaccinated as of the week ending Nov. 26, the latest date for which data is available.MORE: Suffering from flu, RSV or COVID-19? How you can tell the difference This is similar to the 40.9% of children who were vaccinated this time last year but less than the 46.9% who were in 2020.This year, a CDC study -- conducted alongside other experts -- found that flu shots were 75% effective against life-threatening influenza.Tamborelli said Tristan's flu shot from his pediatrician was delayed last month but is advising other parents not to delay and to be on the lookout for flu symptoms."Keep an eye out. If they get sick, and you're not sure, take them to the hospital," he told KGTV. "I'd hate to have anyone else go through this."Related TopicsFlu SeasonPopular ReadsTrump's plan for education in his second term3 hours agoSotomayor has no plans to resign: SourcesNov 10, 4:27 PMArrest in fatal shooting at Tuskegee UniversityNov 10, 6:35 PMMissing American tourist in Hungary killed: PoliceNov 9, 1:36 PM538's final forecasts for the 2024 electionNov 5, 7:49 AMABC News Live24/7 coverage of breaking news and live eventsABC News NetworkAbout Nielsen MeasurementChildren's Online Privacy PolicyContact UsDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationInterest-Based AdsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseYour US State Privacy Rights © 2024 ABC News7 Cold and Flu Symptoms That Warrant a Doctor’s Visit | SELFSkip to main contentOpen Navigation MenuMenu7 Signs Your ‘Mild’ Flu Symptoms Are Turning Into Something More SeriousFitnessFoodHealthLoveBeautySportsLifeHealth ConditionsShoppingMoreChevronSearchSearchFitnessFoodHealthLoveBeautySportsLifeHealth ConditionsShoppingVideoChallengesWorkoutsNewsletter SignupHealth ConditionsChevronInfectious DiseasesChevronCold and FluChevronRelated Condition CentersInfectious Diseases7 Signs Your ‘Mild’ Flu Symptoms Are Turning Into Something More SeriousIf your cough or fever comes back, it’s time to see a doctor.By Maggie O'NeillDecember 12, 2022A. Martin UW PhotographySave this storySave this storySave this storySave this storyAll products are independently selected by our editors. If you buy something, we may earn an affiliate commission.Flu season is in full swing, and many people are feeling the effects of the virus—which is hitting the US harder than usual. This season, influenza has caused more than 13 million illnesses, 120,000 hospitalizations, and 7,300 deaths so far, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The federal agency hasn’t reported this many people hospitalized with the flu this early in the season in more than 10 years. Even if you take precautions—like getting vaccinated, wearing a face mask, washing your hands frequently, and doing your best to avoid sick people—you may get the flu (or a flu-like illness). If you do get sick, it’s important to take action quickly, Thomas Russo, MD, an infectious disease professor at the University of Buffalo Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, tells SELF. “Even if you have relatively trivial cold-like symptoms—like a runny nose, sore throat, headache, or low-grade fever—getting tested as soon as possible, even at that stage, is “critically important” in order to receive proper treatment for whatever’s ailing you, he says. While the flu can be riskier for young children and the elderly, otherwise healthy adults are not immune from a serious flu illness, Dr. Russo warns. “Every year, there are younger, healthy people who will have a bad outcome,” he says. Influenza can cause moderate complications like a sinus or ear infection (though these are often painful); on the more concerning end, it can lead to severe dehydration, bronchitis, or pneumonia.Antiviral flu treatment can help reduce the virus’s most significant effects, particularly if you already face a higher risk for severe flu illness, Dr. Russo says. If you receive an antiviral early enough, it can shorten the length of time that you experience symptoms, he adds. “The longer you wait to present to your physician, the more difficult it will be for them to help you,” Dr. Russo says.If you put off seeing a doctor when your symptoms feel “mild,” there are potentially concerning symptoms that should signal to you that it’s time to make the trip, Dr. Russo says. If you start experiencing any of the symptoms below, you should seek medical care as soon as you can to hopefully prevent your illness from getting worse, per the CDC:Fever and/or cough that improve and then return: One of the most serious flu complications is pneumonia, Dr. Russo says. It’s especially dangerous because, oftentimes, people start to feel better and think they’re on the mend, then get hit with a nasty cough and fever again. This could mean you developed a secondary infection of bacterial pneumonia, so the return of any flu-like symptoms—especially cough and/or fever—should send you to the doctor right away.Shortness of breath: This could be a sign that your body isn’t getting enough oxygen, the CDC notes. Shortness of breath can also be a sign of bronchitis or pneumonia. People who have shortness of breath aren’t able to breathe normally; they may experience wheezing, “air hunger” (the feeling of breathlessness or not getting enough air), or tightness in the chest, or feel as if they’re suffocating, per the American Lung Association. Chest pain: This, too, can be caused by a lack of oxygen; it can feel like anything from a dull ache to a sharp stab, per the Mayo Clinic.Confusion, dizziness, weakness, or lightheadedness: Not being able to think clearly, nor being able to stand or sit upright without becoming lightheaded, are also signs your oxygen could be too low.Not urinating: If you’re unable to pee (or peeing very infrequently), this could be a sign that you’re very dehydrated—which can be a symptom of influenza, as high fever, vomiting, or diarrhea can affect your ability to retain fluid in the body. As SELF previously reported, dehydration may be an emergency if you feel weak, dizzy, or confused, or if you’re seeing blood in vomit or mucus you’re coughing up. If you notice any of these signs, you need to get help quickly, because you may not be able to rehydrate yourself by simply drinking water. In severe cases, you’ll need to receive IV fluids at a medical facility. Severe muscle pain: Feeling achy can be a sign that your body is fighting off illness, according to experts at UCLA Health. This is because body aches can be triggered when the immune system reacts to the infection, causing inflammation (and, thus, pain). See a doctor if you experience severe, can’t-get-out-of-bed pain, or pain that lasts longer than five days.Worsening of chronic medical conditions: The flu can be more dangerous for people who have certain underlying medical conditions, including asthma, diabetes, or heart disease. If your illness is causing common symptoms or side effects of your condition to get worse, reach out to your health care provider for guidance. No matter what symptoms you’re experiencing, you shouldn’t wait until you’re severely sick to see a doctor. Any flu-like symptoms—even annoyingly persistent congestion—are reason enough to get checked out if you can, Dr. Russo says. A telehealth appointment can be a really helpful option in this case.If you don’t have a primary care doctor, head to the nearest urgent care facility, Dr. Russo suggests. And if you don’t have insurance, consider visiting your local pharmacy, like a MinuteClinic (though you may want to ask about pricing for services before receiving treatment). Some community health centers may also provide free services. If you’re unsure where to start, contacting your local health department is a good first step.Given how quickly the flu can escalate, now’s not the time to put off seeking help if you’re sick. No matter how “mild” your illness feels, influenza poses a risk to you and those you interact with, so you shouldn’t brush it off. “You’re not absolutely bulletproof,” Dr. Russo says, “and you need to take it seriously.” It’s far better to be safe than to risk getting sicker.Related:I Don’t Feel Sick Anymore—But Is My Cold Still Contagious?Here’s How Long It Actually Takes for the Flu Vaccine to Kick In6 Strategies to Help You Avoid Getting Sick While TravelingMaggie O’Neill is a health editor based in New York. She was a fellow of the Association of Health Care Journalists’ 2020 class on Women’s Health Journalism and 2021 class on Cancer Reporting. She received her BA in Journalism and Politics from New York University and her MFA in Creative... Read moreXSELF does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Any information published on this website or by this brand is not intended as a substitute for medical advice, and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.Topicsnewssymptomscold and fluMore from SelfA Massive Frozen Waffle Recall Is Underway Due to Possible Listeria ContaminationDozens of stores and brands are on the list including Target, Kodiak Cakes, Great Value, and Publix.Why the NY Liberty’s Historic WNBA Title Means So Much to These Fans“Twenty-eight years I’ve been waiting for this.”8 G-Spot Sex Positions That’ll Hit All the Right AnglesHit all the right angles with these expert-approved moves.10 Cute and Comfy Travel Outfits to Wear on Your Next TripApproved by flight attendants and SELF staffers.5 Sneaky Ways You Might Be Sabotaging Your RelationshipsPushing great people away is a subconscious attempt to stay emotionally safe.The Best Pillows for Every Type of SleeperDreamy picks to help you wake up refreshed and ache-free.Alpaca Wool Is My Secret to Staying Comfy During Cold-Weather RunsThese pieces help me train outdoors all winter long.The Best Queen Size Mattresses for Sharing a Bed or Spreading Out SoloHere's what to look for in order to maximize the space you have.Discover new workout ideas, healthy-eating recipes, makeup looks, skin-care advice, the best beauty products and tips, trends, and more from SELF.FacebookXPinterestInstagramTiktokMore from SelfAbout SELFNewsletter Sign UpVideoMastheadAccessibility helpContactContactCareersUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy RightsRSS FeedsAccessibility HelpCondé Nast Store© 2024 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. SELF may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad ChoicesAs viral infections skyrocket, masks are still a tried-and-true way to help keep yourself and others safe Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair Masks are an easy and low-cost way to reduce the amount of virus entering the air and spreading to others. william87/iStock via Getty Images Plus As viral infections skyrocket, masks are still a tried-and-true way to help keep yourself and others safe Published: December 14, 2022 1.13pm GMT Emily Toth Martin, Marisa Eisenberg, University of Michigan Authors Emily Toth Martin Assistant Professor of Epidemiology, University of Michigan Marisa Eisenberg Associate Professor of Complex Systems, Epidemiology and Mathematics, University of Michigan Disclosure statement Emily Toth Martin receives funding from the National Institutes of Health, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Flu Lab. Marisa Eisenberg receives funding from the National Institutes of Health, National Science Foundation, Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Partners University of Michigan provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US. View all partners Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger The cold and flu season of 2022 has begun with a vengeance. Viruses that have been unusually scarce over the past three years are reappearing at remarkably high levels, sparking a “tripledemic” of COVID-19, the flu and respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV. This November’s national hospitalization levels for influenza were the highest in 10 years. We are infectious disease epidemiologists and researchers, and we have spent our careers focused on understanding how viruses spread and how best to stop them. To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, we and our public health colleagues have had to quickly revive and apply decades of evidence on respiratory virus transmission to chart a path forward. Over the course of the pandemic, epidemiologists have established with new certainty the fact that one of our oldest methods for controlling respiratory viruses, the face mask, remains one of the most effective tools in a pandemic. Day care centers, college dorms and public gatherings can promote superspreader events. A slew of circulating viruses Unlike the many past waves of COVID-19 since the spring of 2020, this fall’s surge of respiratory disease is not due to a single novel virus. Rather, now that masks and other measures have gone by the wayside, the U.S. has returned to the classic cold and flu season pattern. In a typical year, many viruses cocirculate and cause similar symptoms, leading to a wave of illness that includes ever-shifting combinations of more than 15 types and subtypes of viruses. Nowhere is this pattern more obvious than in young children. Our research has shown that classrooms house many viruses at once, and that individual kids can be infected with two or three viruses even during a single illness. While mere inconveniences for most people, respiratory viruses like the seasonal flu are responsible for missed work and school. In some cases they can lead to severe illnesses, especially in very young children and older adults. After years of fighting one virus, parents are now exhausted by the reality of battling many, many more. But there is a straightforward way to cut down on the risk for ourselves and others. When it comes to individual decisions, masks are among the most low-cost and most effective steps that can be taken to broadly reduce transmission of a multitude of viruses. As of early December 2022, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is now recommending that people wear masks indoors in five New York counties. The latest research Long before the COVID-19 pandemic, researchers were studying the effectiveness of masks at reducing transmission of other respiratory viruses. Meta-analyses of viral spread during the original SARS epidemic in 2002-2003 showed that one infection was averted for every six people wearing a mask, and for every three people who were wearing an N95 mask. Mask-wearing by health care workers has long been considered a primary strategy for protecting young at-risk infants from RSV infection transmitted in hospital settings. Scientific evaluation of the effectiveness of masks has historically been clouded by the fact that mask-wearing is often used in conjunction with other strategies, such as hand-washing. Nonetheless, the use of personal protective equipment, including masks, as well as gowns, gloves and possibly goggles in the health care setting, has been commonly associated with reduced transmission of RSV. Similarly, one of the largest pre-COVID-19 randomized studies of mask-wearing, conducted with over a thousand University of Michigan residence hall students in 2006 to 2007, found that symptomatic respiratory illness was reduced among mask-wearers. This was especially true when masks were combined with hand hygiene. More recently, researchers measured the amount of virus present in exhaled breath from people with respiratory symptoms to study how well masks blocked the release of virus particles. Those who were randomly selected to wear a mask had lower levels of respiratory shedding for influenza, rhinovirus – which causes the common cold – and non-SARS coronaviruses, than those with no mask. Now, three years into the pandemic, evidence around masks and our experience using them has grown enormously. Laboratory studies and outbreak investigations have shown that masks lower the amount of virus that enters the air and reduce the quantity of viruses that enter our airways when we breathe. Recent studies have shown that wearing a surgical mask in an indoor public setting reduces the odds of testing positive for COVID-19 by 66%, and wearing an N95/KN95 type of mask lowers the odds of testing positive by 83%. A study of mask-wearing in public indoor settings found that people who wore surgical masks were 66% less likely to contract COVID-19 than those who wore none. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Infections drop when schoolchildren are masked Our own research has shown the major impact of mask-wearing on transmission of SARS-CoV-2 – the virus that causes COVID-19 – and other viruses. During the circulation of the highly transmissible delta variant in the fall of 2021, we found that schoolwide mask requirements were linked to a reduction in COVID-19 infections. School-age children living in districts without mask requirements were infected at a higher rate that increased faster in the early weeks of the school year than their counterparts in districts with complete or partial mask requirements. Similar patterns occurred in other states coinciding with the lifting of school mask requirements in spring 2022. Our preliminary work in a community with frequent mask-wearing behavior has found that the rate of non-COVID respiratory illness in families fell by 50% during 2020 and 2021 compared with earlier years. In our study, as participants reported the relaxing of mask-wearing and other mitigation behaviors in early 2022, the viruses that are now gripping the U.S. began to return. This resurgence started, curiously enough, with a reappearance of the four “common cold” seasonal coronaviruses. Michigan school districts without mask requirements experienced higher COVID-19 case rates in fall 2021 during the two months after back-to-school. Michigan.gov Data and Modeling Updates, Eisenberg and Martin Research Groups, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor Unfortunately, vaccines are only available for two of the major causes of respiratory illness: SARS-CoV-2 and influenza. Likewise, antiviral treatments are also more commonly available for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza than for RSV. RSV vaccines, which have been in development for many years, are expected to become available soon, but not in time to stem the current wave of illness. In contrast, masks can reduce transmission for all respiratory viruses, with no need to tailor the intervention to the specific virus that is circulating. Masks remain a low-cost, low-tech way to keep people healthier throughout the holiday season so that more of us can be free of illness for the time that we value with our family and friends. Flu Respiratory illness Colds Viruses Masks Flu season COVID-19 COVID-19 pandemic Virus transmission COVID-19 and mask wearing Masking Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationIs my child too sick to go to school? - CHOC - Children's health hub Skip to primary navigation Skip to main content Skip to footer You are here: Health Hub Home » Article » Primary Care / Family Medicine » Is my child too sick to go to school? CHOC Home CHOC - Children's health hubbrought to you by CHOC Children's Hospital of Orange CountyArticles Guides Autism Coping with Chronic Illness Eating Disorders Fevers Fiebre How to choose a pediatrician Immunizations Mental Health ADHD Anxiety Bipolar Disorder Bullying Depression Grief Psychosis Trauma and ACEs Mental Health Treatment and Services Social Media Suicide Prevention Viruses Cold and Flu COVID-19 COVID-19 Vaccines RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) Where to go for care Printable Handouts Podcasts Featured Topics Allergies Asthma Cancer / Oncology Cold and Flu Ears, Nose, Throat / Otolaryngology Heart / Cardiology Nutrition Parenting Primary Care / Family Medicine Recipes Safety Sleeping Browse by Doctor Browse by Topic Español Ansiedad Depresión Fiebre Prevención del suicidio Trastorno por déficit de atención con hiperactividad (TDAH) Search this website Subscribe Is my child too sick to go to school?Published on: December 13, 2022A CHOC expert helps parents know when their child needs a sick day from school for symptoms like sore throat, cold, influenza and more.Link: https://health.choc.org/is-my-child-too-sick-to-go-to-school/ Depending on their symptoms, when your child should stay home from school and when they can return It’s 7 a.m. on a school day and your child has the sniffles, fever or a stomachache. Do you send them to school? In the past, this decision was often based on if the child would feel OK enough to participate at school. But with COVID-19 and respiratory illnesses spreading, parents and caregivers should take extra precautions. Here, Dr. Shelley Chacon, a pediatrician in CHOC’s primary care network, helps you navigate when your child can go to school and when they should stay home sick. Symptoms to watch for to keep your child home from school Symptom Stay home if Go back to school after Cough and other cold symptoms– Your child feels too sick for regular activities.– The cold kept them up the night before and they are groggy.– Symptoms are accompanied by other COVID-19 or respiratory illness symptoms like shortness of breath and fever.– Cough decreases and your child feels better. – Your child knows to cough in their elbow and wash their hands to avoid spreading germs. Eye discharge– Your child has any kind of eye discharge, for they may have conjunctivitis (pink eye) which is highly contagious.– If yellow or green pus appears, call your doctor.– The amount of pus decreases and your child has used antibiotic eye drops for at least 24 hours.– Your doctor gives you the OK.FeverYour child has temperature 100.4°F or more.Their body temperature reaches normal.InfluenzaAs soon as you suspect influenza symptoms like fever, vomiting, sore throat, etc.– Fever has been gone for 24 hours without medication.– Influenza symptoms have subsided.HeadacheYour child has a headache with throbbing, severe pain, moodiness, fatigue and sensitivity to light.– Taking pain medication for a milder headache.– Your child feels well enough to participate at school.Sore throat– Your child has a sore throat.– If your child’s sore throat is accompanied by other cold symptoms like fever, cough or congestion.– See your doctor if your child’s sore throat is accompanied by headache, fever or abdominal pain, (without cold symptoms) to rule out strep throat.– 24 hours after beginning antibiotics for strep throat.– Cold or influenza symptoms have subsided.– Your doctor gives you the OK. StomachacheYour child is vomiting or has uncontrollable diarrhea.Vomiting stops and your child has control of their bathroom breaks. You know your child best! Error on the side of caution when determining whether to keep your child home from school, especially during cold and influenza season when illnesses are spreading rapidly. Make sure your follow your school’s policy for sick children. This list is not intended to replace medical advice from your pediatrician. Be sure to consult your doctor about symptoms and treatments for your child. For more health and wellness resources from the pediatric experts at CHOC, sign up for the Kids Health newsletter. Find a CHOC Primary Care Pediatrician From babies to teens, pediatricians from CHOC’s Primary Care Network partner with parents to offer immunizations, sick visits, sports physicals and more. Find a pediatrician Related Topics Parenting Primary Care / Family Medicine School Dr. Shelley Chacon Child 4 to 5 years old Child 6 to 12 years old Teen 13 to 18 years oldRelated ArticlesOpen Enrollment GUIDE Open Enrollment Choosing your family’s health coverage for next year can be overwhelming. Families have many options to review and insurance plans can be confusing. CHOC makes the choice simple ...Walking pneumonia: What parents should knowWith walking pneumonia cases on the rise, a CHOC pediatrician offers advice to parents about the common infection. DBT: What Is It And How Can It Help?In this podcast, Dr. Micaela Thordarson brings awareness to how impactful Dialectical Behavior Therapy can be for adolescents. KidsHealth Newsletter Get “healthful” information for your family from the pediatric experts at CHOC. This monthly e-newsletter provides parenting tips on topics like nutrition, mental health and more. Subscribe to KidsHealth The guidance on this page has been clinically reviewed by CHOC pediatric experts. Footer . About CHOC Our pediatric healthcare system is dedicated to preserving the magic of childhood. Search this website Find care Find a provider Programs and services Refer a patient Locations Visit CHOC.org About CHOC Donate Careers Events Press room Policies and legal CHOC Inside Becker’s Hospital Review: 100 hospitals and health systems with great oncology programsKNX News Radio: Daylight Saving Time might be impacting your kid more than you thinkKCAL/KCBS: Superheroes surprise kids for Halloween at CHOC Pediatrica Limb-sparing surgeries advance treatment for pediatric bone tumors Small movements, huge steps for Spinal Muscular Atrophy patient enrolled in clinical trialDr. Peter Anderson, globally known expert on newborn brain development, joins CHOC and UCIObstetric device doubles as effective way to correct infant ‘ping pong’ skull fractures Copyright © 2024 CHOC | www.choc.org | A 501(c)(3) Organization 1201 W La Veta Ave, Orange, CA 92866 | (714) 997-3000 These articles are not intended to replace the relationship you have with a physician or another healthcare practitioner. For specific medical advice, diagnoses and treatment, please consult your doctor. This website may include links to other websites which provide additional information that is consistent with the intended purpose of this publication. Linking to a non-CHOC site does not constitute an endorsement by CHOC of the sponsors or the information and products presented on the site.Is my child too sick to go to school? - CHOC - Children's health hub Skip to primary navigation Skip to main content Skip to footer You are here: Health Hub Home » Article » Primary Care / Family Medicine » Is my child too sick to go to school? CHOC Home CHOC - Children's health hubbrought to you by CHOC Children's Hospital of Orange CountyArticles Guides Autism Coping with Chronic Illness Eating Disorders Fevers Fiebre How to choose a pediatrician Immunizations Mental Health ADHD Anxiety Bipolar Disorder Bullying Depression Grief Psychosis Trauma and ACEs Mental Health Treatment and Services Social Media Suicide Prevention Viruses Cold and Flu COVID-19 COVID-19 Vaccines RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) Where to go for care Printable Handouts Podcasts Featured Topics Allergies Asthma Cancer / Oncology Cold and Flu Ears, Nose, Throat / Otolaryngology Heart / Cardiology Nutrition Parenting Primary Care / Family Medicine Recipes Safety Sleeping Browse by Doctor Browse by Topic Español Ansiedad Depresión Fiebre Prevención del suicidio Trastorno por déficit de atención con hiperactividad (TDAH) Search this website Subscribe Is my child too sick to go to school?Published on: December 13, 2022A CHOC expert helps parents know when their child needs a sick day from school for symptoms like sore throat, cold, influenza and more.Link: https://health.choc.org/is-my-child-too-sick-to-go-to-school/ Depending on their symptoms, when your child should stay home from school and when they can return It’s 7 a.m. on a school day and your child has the sniffles, fever or a stomachache. Do you send them to school? In the past, this decision was often based on if the child would feel OK enough to participate at school. But with COVID-19 and respiratory illnesses spreading, parents and caregivers should take extra precautions. Here, Dr. Shelley Chacon, a pediatrician in CHOC’s primary care network, helps you navigate when your child can go to school and when they should stay home sick. Symptoms to watch for to keep your child home from school Symptom Stay home if Go back to school after Cough and other cold symptoms– Your child feels too sick for regular activities.– The cold kept them up the night before and they are groggy.– Symptoms are accompanied by other COVID-19 or respiratory illness symptoms like shortness of breath and fever.– Cough decreases and your child feels better. – Your child knows to cough in their elbow and wash their hands to avoid spreading germs. Eye discharge– Your child has any kind of eye discharge, for they may have conjunctivitis (pink eye) which is highly contagious.– If yellow or green pus appears, call your doctor.– The amount of pus decreases and your child has used antibiotic eye drops for at least 24 hours.– Your doctor gives you the OK.FeverYour child has temperature 100.4°F or more.Their body temperature reaches normal.InfluenzaAs soon as you suspect influenza symptoms like fever, vomiting, sore throat, etc.– Fever has been gone for 24 hours without medication.– Influenza symptoms have subsided.HeadacheYour child has a headache with throbbing, severe pain, moodiness, fatigue and sensitivity to light.– Taking pain medication for a milder headache.– Your child feels well enough to participate at school.Sore throat– Your child has a sore throat.– If your child’s sore throat is accompanied by other cold symptoms like fever, cough or congestion.– See your doctor if your child’s sore throat is accompanied by headache, fever or abdominal pain, (without cold symptoms) to rule out strep throat.– 24 hours after beginning antibiotics for strep throat.– Cold or influenza symptoms have subsided.– Your doctor gives you the OK. StomachacheYour child is vomiting or has uncontrollable diarrhea.Vomiting stops and your child has control of their bathroom breaks. You know your child best! Error on the side of caution when determining whether to keep your child home from school, especially during cold and influenza season when illnesses are spreading rapidly. Make sure your follow your school’s policy for sick children. This list is not intended to replace medical advice from your pediatrician. Be sure to consult your doctor about symptoms and treatments for your child. For more health and wellness resources from the pediatric experts at CHOC, sign up for the Kids Health newsletter. Find a CHOC Primary Care Pediatrician From babies to teens, pediatricians from CHOC’s Primary Care Network partner with parents to offer immunizations, sick visits, sports physicals and more. Find a pediatrician Related Topics Parenting Primary Care / Family Medicine School Dr. Shelley Chacon Child 4 to 5 years old Child 6 to 12 years old Teen 13 to 18 years oldRelated ArticlesOpen Enrollment GUIDE Open Enrollment Choosing your family’s health coverage for next year can be overwhelming. Families have many options to review and insurance plans can be confusing. CHOC makes the choice simple ...Walking pneumonia: What parents should knowWith walking pneumonia cases on the rise, a CHOC pediatrician offers advice to parents about the common infection. DBT: What Is It And How Can It Help?In this podcast, Dr. Micaela Thordarson brings awareness to how impactful Dialectical Behavior Therapy can be for adolescents. KidsHealth Newsletter Get “healthful” information for your family from the pediatric experts at CHOC. This monthly e-newsletter provides parenting tips on topics like nutrition, mental health and more. Subscribe to KidsHealth The guidance on this page has been clinically reviewed by CHOC pediatric experts. Footer . About CHOC Our pediatric healthcare system is dedicated to preserving the magic of childhood. Search this website Find care Find a provider Programs and services Refer a patient Locations Visit CHOC.org About CHOC Donate Careers Events Press room Policies and legal CHOC Inside Becker’s Hospital Review: 100 hospitals and health systems with great oncology programsKNX News Radio: Daylight Saving Time might be impacting your kid more than you thinkKCAL/KCBS: Superheroes surprise kids for Halloween at CHOC Pediatrica Limb-sparing surgeries advance treatment for pediatric bone tumors Small movements, huge steps for Spinal Muscular Atrophy patient enrolled in clinical trialDr. Peter Anderson, globally known expert on newborn brain development, joins CHOC and UCIObstetric device doubles as effective way to correct infant ‘ping pong’ skull fractures Copyright © 2024 CHOC | www.choc.org | A 501(c)(3) Organization 1201 W La Veta Ave, Orange, CA 92866 | (714) 997-3000 These articles are not intended to replace the relationship you have with a physician or another healthcare practitioner. For specific medical advice, diagnoses and treatment, please consult your doctor. This website may include links to other websites which provide additional information that is consistent with the intended purpose of this publication. Linking to a non-CHOC site does not constitute an endorsement by CHOC of the sponsors or the information and products presented on the site.Dog Flu Shot: Why Your Pup May Need The Canine Influenza Vaccine - DodoWell - The DodoSkip to main contentThe DodoSubscribeGo to NavigationNavigationPetsAdoptionDogsCatsTravelWellnessDog WellnessCat WellnessHappy CornerFamilyKids & PetsParentingCelebrationWildlifeAnimal EncountersEnvironmentVideoShopThe PackShop Dodo Adopt or Foster😻 Submit Your PetHealth & WellnessDogssDog HealthDoes My Dog Need A Flu Shot?And how does a flu shot help? 💉By Sam HowellPublished on Dec 16, 2022 at 4:16 PMYou may get your flu shot every year, but what about your pup? Does he need one, too?It turns out a dog flu shot actually exists, according to Kaitlyn Tullio, a veterinary technician with DodoVet. And here’s why it can be super helpful.Can dogs get the flu?Dogs can get the flu just like we can, and it spreads easily like our own strains.“Canine influenza is highly contagious,” Tullio told The Dodo.The virus can spread to other dogs if the infected pup is sneezing, coughing and sharing water bowls and toys with them, according to Dr. Hilary Jones, veterinarian and chief veterinary officer at DodoVet. The virus can also be spread by people caring for multiple dogs (like staff at boarding facilities) if they don’t sanitize their hands after handling infected dogs.Symptoms of canine influenza are pretty similar to our flu, too, and include things like: Fever Dry, hacking cough Appetite loss Lethargy Nose and eye dischargeIf you spot these symptoms in your dog, you should call your vet to ask about treatment.“If left untreated, it may lead to other more serious illnesses or death,” Tullio said. “If you believe your dog has contracted canine influenza, [then] you should contact your veterinarian right away and let them know you think your dog may have the flu so that they can take proper precautions and prepare for your dog’s appointment.”Does my dog need a flu shot?The dog flu shot — aka the canine influenza vaccine — is a non-core vaccination. That means it’s not necessary for every pup, but may be required for certain lifestyles or in specific areas where the risk of developing the flu is higher.“If your dog is in contact with other dogs, such as [at] doggie day care, grooming [facilities], dog parks or just has other dogs in their [life] that they see on a regular basis, it is highly recommended to get them vaccinated for the dog flu,” Tullio said.It’s important to note that the canine influenza vaccine won’t guarantee that your pup will never get the flu — but it will help a ton if he does catch it.“It may reduce the severity and duration of the virus if your dog was to be exposed to and contract it,” Tullio said.How often do dogs need flu shots?The dog flu shot isn’t just a one-and-done thing — your pup will need a couple of injections to be protected from the virus.“This vaccine needs to be boostered, so your dog would get the initial vaccination and then need a second dose 2 to 4 weeks after the first one,” Tullio said. “From this point, they would need to be vaccinated and boostered at the one-year mark from the initial vaccination.”Any pup over 8 weeks old can get the canine influenza vaccine.Side effects of the dog flu shotAccording to Tullio, the dog flu shot may cause some reactions, like: Fever Lethargy Appetite loss Nausea Diarrhea Vomiting Pain or swelling at injection site HivesIf your pup loves being social with other dogs, making sure he’s up to date on his flu shot could help keep him healthy and safe, especially during flu season.Want access to a vet 24/7? With DodoVet, you can connect via video chat, phone or text with an empathetic veterinary expert who can help you be the best pet parent you can be. Say goodbye to Dr. Google and have all your pet parent questions answered anytime, anywhere. Learn more here. Keep Your Dog Happy On Rainy DaysWe may earn commission if you purchase from our links.Keep Your Dog Happy On Rainy DaysWe may earn commission if you purchase from our links.Shop at WalmartThe Dodo Rainy Days Dog RaincoatWalmart$12Shop at WagwearWagWellies Mojave Dog ShoesWagwear$50Shop at chewy.comCanada Pooch The Slush Dog Suit$58Shop at AmazonHapee Dog Raincoat with Reflective Strip HoodieAmazon$19Shop at AmazonFouFou Dog Bodyguard Protective All-Weather Dog PantsAmazon$40Shop at WalmartJustice Pet Packable Waterproof Tiedye Dog RaincoatWalmart$17Shop at AmazonWalkee Paws Dog Boot LeggingsAmazon$50Shop at AmazonCovertSafe Waterproof Dog Booties with Rugged SoleAmazon$23Shop at Canada PoochCanada Pooch Soft Shield Reflective Dog BootsCanada Pooch$57Shop at AmazonQumy Waterproof Shoes for DogsAmazon$29Shop at AmazonMusher's Secret Dog Paw WaxAmazon$16Shop at AmazonWaterproof Dog SnoodAmazon$15Shop at AmazonPet Umbrella with LeashAmazon$26Shop at ChewyFrisco Clear Vinyl Dog RaincoatChewy$12Shop at WalmartPetRageous Designs London Slicker Dog Rain CoatWalmart$15Shop at ChewyGoTags Water Resistant Personalized Dog RaincoatChewy$25Shop at ChewyCanada Pooch Torrential Tracker Dog RaincoatChewy$37$40Shop at ChewyFrisco Rubber Ducky Dog RaincoatChewy$14By signing up, I agree to the Terms and Privacy Policy.More from DodoWellDodoWellNov 20, 2023The Best Toys For Cats That Will Keep Them Entertained And HappyPlaytime with your cat just got a lot more fun.DodoWellNov 20, 20238 Dog Brushes That Are Perfect For Short-Haired PupsYes, short-haired dogs still need to be brushed 🐶DodoWellNov 20, 2023The Best Low-Fat Dog Foods To Help With Weight Management And Other Health IssuesBecause low-fat food isn't just for weight loss.DodoWellNov 20, 20235 Best Large Breed Puppy Foods, According To VeterinariansHere's what to look for in puppy food for big dogs. DodoWellNov 20, 2023The Best Cat Harnesses For Adventurous Cats, According To The ExpertsVets, behaviorists and cat parents weigh in.DodoWellNov 17, 2023Here Are Some Of The Best Dog Treadmills Right NowGive your pup’s exercise routine a boost 🏃‍♀️🏃DodoWellNov 17, 20236 Healthy Cat Food Options That Meet AAFCO RequirementsHere’s the secret to finding healthy cat food 🙀DodoWellNov 17, 2023The Best Wet Dog Food, According To VetsWhat to look for in wet dog food 🐕DodoWellNov 17, 2023The 5 Best Puppy Shampoos, According To ExpertsHere's what to look for (and avoid) in a puppy shampoo. DodoWellNov 17, 2023Your Kids Will Love These Animal-Themed ToysFor aspiring pet parents.DodoWellNov 17, 20234 Calming Treats For Dogs That Actually WorkChill out 😎DodoWellNov 17, 202310 Dog Shampoos That Smell So Good You’ll Want To Use Them YourselfDo you want your dog to smell like pina colada — or grapefruit and lemongrass? 🍍🥥Load MoreLoad MoreCookie SettingsNewsletterCareersSubmit a StoryAdvertise With UsPressAccessibilityPrivacyCookie PolicyTerms + ConditionsThis publication is a Vox Media network.©2024 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved.SubscribePetsAdoptionDogsCatsWellnessDog WellnessCat WellnessMental Health BoostFamilyKids & PetsParentingCelebrationAdventureTravelWildlifeVideoShopDodo FavesShop DodoSubmit Your PetSubscribe to Love, DodoStart your day with heartwarming and hilarious animal stories that will make you fall in love.SubscribeBy signing up, I agree to the Terms and Privacy Policy.Cookie SettingsNewsletterCareersSubmit a StoryAdvertise With UsPressAccessibilityPrivacyCookie PolicyTerms + Conditions©2024 Vox Media, LLC.All Rights Reserved.Seven Things I Learned at the Largest Flu Vaccine Production Facility in Britain Subscribe to Newsletter Manufacture Vaccines, Facilities, Trends & Forecasts, Business Practice A Day in Egg City: Seven Things I Learned on a Visit to Britain’s Largest Flu Vaccine Factory From hemispheric analysis to hatchery logistics, there’s a lot more to vaccine production than you might suspect Angus Stewart | 12/16/2022 | 8 min read | Review On a recent rainy day in Liverpool, UK, I visited a factory owned by one of the world’s largest flu vaccine producers: Seqirus (a company headquartered in Australia). Astute readers of The Medicine Maker might well remember our 2021 coverage of Seqirus, Don’t Shoot the Messenger, in which our Editor Stephanie Sutton interviewed Seqirus’ Head of R&D, Russel Basser. Truly devoted readers may also recall Stephanie’s previous conversation with Basser from 2020, Preparing for the Next Pandemic. During my visit, I did not meet Basser (who is actually based in Australia), but I did meet and speak with Nige Hilton, the company’s VP of Manufacturing and Head of its Liverpool site. During the course of the day, I learned a great deal about influenza and the moves mankind makes to fight it through vaccinations. Below, you’ll find my seven choice Flu Facts: please inoculate yourself with them, and walk away that little bit the wiser. 1. As candidate cities for vaccine production go, Liverpool is hard to beat When I asked Hilton if operating in England’s northwest conferred any particular advantages to Seqirus, he noted (after a caveat that he is from the opposite side of England’s north) that workers in Liverpool – or at least in Seqirus’ factory – have a humble, self-effacing, yet extremely capable quality. “Nothing seems to be too much trouble for them,” he said. “They’re really committed and, even in the face of difficulties, they just get on with the job.”After I pushed Hilton on whether Liverpool offers anything special beyond the character of its people, he affirmed that the city’s academic institutions – from the Liverpool and John Moores universities to the Pandemic Institute (a natural ally!) – provide a huge boost to Seqirus and its incoming workforce, whom Hilton confirmed are largely hired in and around Liverpool. To borrow a Scouse phrase: “That’s boss.”2. The Seqirus site probably “eats” more chicken eggs per day than Liverpool’s residents Depending on how one counts, the population of Liverpool sits at around half a million, which puts the Liverpudlian headcount slightly under the Seqirus UK’s daily egg count (approximately 575,000 eggs). Normally, it’s thinking about Earth’s place in the universe and the number of stars around it that sets me down a road of existential questioning, but I will freely admit that trying to mentally grasp Seqirus’ egg count also leaves me rather dizzy.Most of you will know why a vaccine facility needs eggs, but please allow me the time to help those scratching their eggs – I mean, heads. Put (very simply), the vast majority of influenza viruses destined for the world’s flu shots are grown inside chicken eggs. The technique has a pedigree reaching back to work on growing viruses conducted in 1931 by one Ernest William Goodpasture, which eventually translated into inactivated, egg-incubated flu vaccines rolled out by the US military during World War II.As an editor rarely afraid to pose a potentially silly question, I asked Hilton how Seqirus likes their eggs. Does size matter? The kindly Site Head assured me that size does not matter, but pointed out that other quality factors do. At the 21 hatcheries that supply the Seqirus site, every measure possible is taken to reduce the hens’ bioburden (exposure to pathogens).3. Cracks are showing in the egg’s throne By 2032, Seqirus – and influenza vaccine manufacturing at large – may have moved on from its close relationship with the chicken egg. The storm of the COVID-19 pandemic triggered the first ever rollouts of mRNA vaccines, and now many in the industry believe these entirely chicken-free vaccines could be the future. (At The Medicine Maker we have devoted considerable coverage to this topic – have a look for yourself.)Even Seqirus is riding the mRNA train, having developed its own self-amplifying mRNA technology, which Hilton says could work well as a means to incorporate multiple flu strains into a single vaccine. When quizzed a little harder, Hilton elaborated that, in the next couple of decades, he would like to see Seqirus putting out both adjuvant and mRNA products on a more global scale, but was also willing to confess that much of what lies ahead depends on certain unknowns, such as the emergence, safety, and adoption of these and other new technologies. 4. Seqirus’ parent company was born amid global turmoil Though the reign of the egg-based vaccine may end long before its hundredth birthday, Seqirus’ parent company, CSL, is in no such danger. In fact, it is already 106 years old. The “C” in CSL (Commonwealth Serum Laboratories) gives a hint as to its origins. Midway through World War I, the Australian government was facing an unreliable supply of medicines from overseas, so to help the country become more self-sufficient the government set up CSL as a state enterprise for the production of a range of vaccines – as well as antitoxins to deal with the nasty poisons of the continent’s infamous array of deadly insectile, reptilian, and ocean-borne creatures.In 1919, CSL went through a trial by fire as Spanish flu arrived in Australia, despite a coordinated quarantine the previous year. Four in ten of the country’s population caught the virus, and 15,000 died. Arguably the next-most pivotal moment in CSL’s history came in the mid-nineties, when the Australian government privatized the company. For the purposes of this article, the next major event came in 2014, when CSL bought and absorbed Novartis’ flu vaccine business, rebranding it to Seqirus in 2015.Today, Seqirus does retain something of a link with the state sector – but in more than one state. During my visit, the various Seqirus authority figures in attendance were not at all shy in stressing how much they collaborate and comply with the national governments whose winter flu jab campaigns they supply. In fact, Seqirus also works with numerous national governments on pandemic preparedness too – 30 of them, to be precise. 5. Seqirus has a near-monopoly on supply for the UK seasonal adult flu vaccine If you have received a winter flu jab in Britain, then you are very likely a part of this story. In the 2021/22 flu season, Seqirus supplied 9 out of 10 of vaccines in the seasonal adult flu vaccine program. That translated to 20.3 million jabs in England, 2.8 million in Scotland, 0.8 million in Northern Ireland, and 0.6 million in Wales (roughly proportional to the population in each country apart from Wales, which has a smaller relative share).Despite the major slice of the pie that Seqirus commands, a number of other suppliers’ vaccines ran alongside them in the market in the 2021/22 season, and will largely remain there for the coming 2023 season. These include one egg-grown and one cell-grown quadrivalent vaccine from Sanofi, and a children’s nasal spray from AstraZeneca. Seqirus’ egg-grown virus is the only vaccine on the list specialized for the elderly, but the company has another cell-grown vaccine for ages two and up. For hardcore vegans, I would recommend the latter.6. Our COVID-19 lockdowns and restrictions decimated flu infections You may not be surprised to know that during the period of massive global lockdown that much of mankind undertook to alleviate the COVID-19 pandemic, infection figures for influenza dropped massively. Seqirus has a keen eye on this because it appears to have knocked the “usual” cycle of winter and summer transmissions off its axis. The (relative) resumption of normality in early 2022 saw reemergence of the flu, but at lower rates than before and in a spike-dip-spike pattern from January through July. On my visit, several people were keen to stress that what comes next is something of an unknown, but that a post-lockdown surge could be on the cards.The big technical question regarding such a surge: “Which strain or combination of strains will governments need to vaccinate people against?”Whatever happens, the data generated may prove useful when (not if) another pandemic triggers further major quarantine events…7. Data from the Southern Hemisphere can help institutions in the Northern Hemisphere brace for waves of winter flu, and vice versa Earlier in this listicle, we established the Australian origins of CSL. For flu, a little transhemipherity (or should it be “transhemipherism”?) goes a long way. Flu strikes in winter and recedes in summer, and on either side of the equator those seasons are inverse. Watching a current winter flu in one hemisphere can help you to predict what the next winter flu will do in the other. Surging or shrinking numbers in nations of the southern hemisphere – in this case Australia – can be correlated with social factors also likely to take effect in the north, and vice versa.Across 2022, analysis by Seqirus in Australia reported a rise in flu infections that was both unusually high and unusually early. They have suggested that this could have been linked to two factors: the return of the nation’s children to school after the summer holidays, and the peak of the Omicron wave. The flu spike also triggered a “twindemic,” in which the Australian healthcare system almost buckled under the combined weight of the Omicron wave and a flu spike. Ambulances stopped picking up new patients, and the system began to bleed staff as worsening working conditions pushed nurses and others to leave in search of better paid and more peaceful career paths.So what can the northern hemisphere learn from what happened in Australia? First and foremost, the events may serve as a generalizable demonstration of what happens in a wealthy country when flu returns after a period of relative absence. One Seqirus expert advised that the best approach may be to “hope for the best, and prepare for the worst,” and to that I would add: Be thankful not only for modern pharmaceutical science, but also for modern mass-scale egg logistics. Receive content, products, events as well as relevant industry updates from The Medicine Maker and its sponsors. Email* Choose a password* I have read and understand the Privacy Notice * Stay up to date with our other newsletters and sponsors information, tailored specifically to the fields you are interested in I want to stay up to date with the "Small Molecule" field I want to stay up to date with the Cell and Gene field I want to stay up to date with the Bioprocessing field When you click “Subscribe” we will email you a link, which you must click to verify the email address above and activate your subscription. If you do not receive this email, please contact us at [email protected]. If you wish to unsubscribe, you can update your preferences at any point. Manufacture Vaccines, Facilities, Trends & Forecasts, Business Practice About the Author Angus Stewart Associate Editor of The Medicine Maker Between studying for my English undergrad and Publishing master's degrees I was out in Shanghai, teaching, learning, and getting extremely lost. Now I'm expanding my mind down a rather different rabbit hole: the pharmaceutical industry. Outside of this job I read mountains of fiction and philosophy, and I must say, it's very hard to tell who's sharper: the literati, or the medicine makers. More articles by Angus Stewart Related White Papers Optimizing Downstream Processing for an Inactivated Rabies Vaccine 06/10/2021 | Contributed by Merck A Fast and High Precision Influenza Vaccine Potency Assay 07/09/2019 | Contributed by ForteBio Total virus titer in minutes 06/18/2019 | Contributed by Malvern Panalytical Related Webinars Manufacture Bioprocessing - Upstream & Downstream Intensification, not complication 11/05/2024 | Sponsored by Cytiva Manufacture Process Control Raman Spectroscopy and Process Analytical Technology: Improving SPPS in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing 10/30/2024 | Sponsored by Corden Pharma Manufacture Bioprocessing - Single Use Systems Empowering you to master control, predictability, and efficiency, partnering in your digital transformation 09/19/2024 | Sponsored by Merck Most Popular 1. Business & Regulation Business Practice Who Are the Best Pharma Companies of 2025? 11/06/2024 2. Manufacture Advanced Medicine Facing Up to the Challenges in Cell Therapy 11/01/2024 3. Manufacture Technology and Equipment Gold and Sugar 11/05/2024 | 14 min read 4. Manufacture Small Molecules The Glass Versus Plastic Conundrum 10/31/2024 | Stephen Brimble | 4 min read 5. Manufacture Advanced Medicine The Elite Athlete Concept for Cell Therapy 07/17/2024 | Yelena Bronevetsky, James Lim | 4 min read Register to The Medicine Maker Register to access our FREE online portfolio, request the magazine in print and manage your preferences. You will benefit from: Unlimited access to ALL articles News, interviews & opinions from leading industry experts Receive print (and PDF) copies of The Medicine Maker magazine Register October Issue of The Medicine Maker Discovery & Development The Virus and the Vaccine Manufacture The Elite Athlete Concept for Cell Therapy Manufacture A Love for Complexity: ADC Drug Development About Us Work at Texere Publishing Advertise with us Contact Us Other Brands Read the latest Newsletter Privacy Notice Terms and Conditions TSMM Privacy Notice © 2024 Texere Publishing Limited. All rights reserved. Reproduction in the whole or in parts is prohibited.Utah flu season could be worst in a while as hospitalizations surge early Utah flu season could be worst in a while as hospitalizations surge earlyFlu season started early this year, adding stress to health care workers already busy with unprecedented RSV cases and the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.By Paighten Harkins | Dec. 12, 2022, 1:00 p.m. | Updated: 2:43 p.m.This year’s flu season is on course to be one of the worst in recent memory, sending more Utahns — mostly children and those over 65 — to hospitals and doctors’ offices than the state has seen in the last five seasons, according to state data released last week.This uptick comes after flu cases decreased dramatically in the first years of the coronavirus pandemic, and Utah isn’t alone — the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has reported similar trends across the country.Lynette Brammer, who leads the CDC’s domestic influenza surveillance team, said during a Nov. 21 briefing that at that point in the season, there was a high number of flu cases and more hospitalizations than health care workers had seen in a decade.The virus is “back with a vengeance” this season in part because so few people were infected in recent seasons, said Dr. Andrew Pavia, a pediatric infectious diseases expert with University of Utah Health and Intermountain Primary Children’s Hospital, during a Nov. 28 media briefing.So far, however, it seems Utah hospital systems have not been overwhelmed with the earlier-than-normal surge, said Jill Victory, vice president of the Utah Hospital Association. She said Wednesday that Primary Children’s remains the only hospital struggling with patient capacity, with most patients sick from respiratory illnesses. RSV is the currently the main cause, but flu and lesser known viruses like adenovirus are also a problem, according to Intermountain Healthcare’s GermWatch dashboard.Pediatric hospitals are often “at the mercy of” such respiratory viruses, said Dr. Per Gesteland, a pediatric hospitalist for University of Utah Health and Primary Children’s. And this year’s RSV surge is particularly bad.“If you tack influenza on top of that, especially if you stack them like they are right now,” he said, “those are the outbreaks that really can stress and put together a big surge on our facility.”Flu season is only just beginning, he noted, with cases typically taking off over the Christmas and New Year’s holidays.“We have a lot more work to do, and I think the holiday gatherings are only going to extend or enhance that surge,” Gesteland said.Utah’s flu season so farFlu hospitalizations in Utah began increasing rapidly in November, about a month before normal, according to the Utah Department of Health and Human Services flu report. The influenza-like illness rate also showed a similar early jump.As of Dec. 3, Utah has reported 347 flu-related hospitalizations this season. The dashboard also shows that 4.5% of all people seeking out-patient doctor visits had flu-like symptoms, like fever, cough and sore throat. This time last year, that number was 2.6%.Health officials currently categorize the state’s flu severity as “moderate,” based on those metrics.(Christopher Cherrington | The Salt Lake Tribune)The dashboard states that children ages 0-4 and adults over 65 are currently seeing the highest hospitalizations rates. These age groups also are the most at-risk for infection and severe illness.Health officials recommend getting the flu vaccine to reduce that risk.“In order to reduce the risk of infection and severe illness, it is important to get your flu vaccine as soon as possible. It is not too late to get vaccinated,” health officials state on the dashboard.Health department spokesperson Charla Haley said children’s flu vaccines were slow to arrive to providers taking part in the state’s Vaccines for Children Program this year, like public health departments, but said “that isn’t an issue now.”To schedule a flu vaccine appointment, state health officials recommended contacting your healthcare provider or local health department or searching at vaccines.gov/find-vaccines.Here is what else you need to know about this year’s flu season:How many Utahns have died from the flu?No Utah children have died from the flu so far this year, but it’s harder to know how many adults may have died, Harley said Wednesday, adding that health officials plan to track adult flu mortality “soon.”Harley said it is always been difficult to determine if someone died from the flu, because death certificates often don’t list flu as the cause of death for people who die with flu-like symptoms. Some also die weeks after they were infected because of other illnesses brought on or exacerbated by the flu. Many who die from the flu are not tested for it.State health officials once used a method that tracked influenza and pneumonia deaths and compared them to a seasonal baseline to show unusual increases that could indicate a certain virus outbreak was causing more deaths, according to department of health epidemiologist Janell Delgadillo. The coronavirus pandemic complicated that system, however, since COVID-19 now causes the most pneumonia deaths.Another method the state is considering tracks influenza, pneumonia and coronavirus deaths — then compares those deaths to a baseline instead. The CDC uses this method.As of Dec. 3, the CDC reported 14 children across the country have died from the flu so far this year. Nationally, the agency estimates there have been 8.7 million cases, 78,000 hospitalizations and 4,500 deaths.‘Triple-demic’ of flu, RSV and coronavirusPavia and Dr. Russell Vinik, chief medical operations officer at University of Utah Health, warned Utahns in October of a “triple-demic” of COVID-19, flu and RSV spreading this winter and potentially overloading the state’s hospital systems.Primary Children’s Hospital announced at the end of November that it was delaying some pre-scheduled surgeries and inpatient procedures because of the RSV outbreak.During a Nov. 28 briefing on that announcement, Pavia urged Utahns to get a flu shot to protect themselves and children. He said some hospitalized children are sick with more than one virus.“You might not mind toughing out a case of flu, but our kids really would appreciate your not getting it and passing it on to them,” he said. “So get your flu shot, get up to date on your COVID vaccination with your boosters — if not for yourself, then do it for our community.”CDC director Rochelle Walensky said in a Nov. 21 briefing that “troubling early data show that not enough people have received their flu vaccine this year” and encouraged everyone age 6 months and older to get the vaccine.Despite high infection rates, this year’s flu vaccine is “well-matched” against this year’s virus strains, Brammer, also with the CDC, said.Outside of vaccines, Gesteland said people should wash their hands and cover their nose and mouth when sneezing and coughing to avoid spreading these viruses. Masking also helps, he said.RELATED STORIESUtah coronavirus cases, hospitalizations continue to decreaseHere’s why Utah doctors are worried about how well you’ll be breathing this winterPrimary Children’s Hospital delays surgeries amid ‘unprecedented’ RSV surgeIn case you missed itUtah AD Mark Harlan says BYU game was ‘absolutely stolen from us’Utah holiday pop-up markets have you covered for unusual and locally made giftsPREMIUMBronwyn Newport, the newest member of SLC’s ‘Real Housewives,’ says ‘I’m learning a lot about myself’THE LATESTUtah Hockey Club has a new roster member. He’s 13 weeks old and a very good boy.Utah QB Cam Rising still mulling a decision on his possible return to the UtesReceiver Mycah Pittman leaves the Utes in search of ‘other opportunities’Bagley Cartoon: The Coming Red SharpieGordon Monson: Utah AD Mark Harlan issues another statement, but not an apologyFeatured Local SavingsCONNECT Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube RSS SUBSCRIPTIONSSubscribe to print + digitalSubscribe to digital onlyDigital access for print subscribersEmail newslettersLogin to your print accountLogin to your digital accountSubscription FAQsHelp and contact infoGift SubscriptionsABOUT USHistory and missionOur nonprofit modelBoard and advisersOfficers and staffSupportersDonors and tax filingPrivacy policyCalifornia privacyEditorial policies and ethicsMOREAdvertise with usLegal noticesStorePodcastsArchivesStory TipsSupport The TribuneDonateCookie PreferencesCommenting PolicyABOUT USTERMS OF SERVICEPRIVACY POLICYEDITORIAL POLICYADVERTISECONTACT USHELPSUPPORTWEEKLY PRINT EDITIONEMAIL NEWSLETTERSPODCASTSNEWS TIPSDONATECOOKIE PREFERENCESReport a missed paper by emailing subscribe@sltrib.com or calling 801-237-2900For e-edition questions or comments, contact customer support 801-237-2900 or email subscribe@sltrib.comsltrib.com © 1996-2024 The Salt Lake Tribune. All rights reserved.Vaccine fatigue is leaving the US vulnerable to flu | CNN CNN values your feedback 1. How relevant is this ad to you? 2. Did you encounter any technical issues? Video player was slow to load content Video content never loaded Ad froze or did not finish loading Video content did not start after ad Audio on ad was too loud Other issues Ad never loaded Ad prevented/slowed the page from loading Content moved around while ad loaded Ad was repetitive to ads I've seen previously Other issues Cancel Submit Thank You! Your effort and contribution in providing this feedback is much appreciated. Close Ad Feedback Close icon Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships More Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Watch Listen Live TV Subscribe Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch Edition US International Arabic Español Edition US International Arabic Español Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Follow CNN World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Ad Feedback Vaccine fatigue is leaving the US vulnerable to flu By Deidre McPhillips, CNN 7 minute read Updated 12:53 PM EST, Wed December 14, 2022 Link Copied! Video Ad Feedback Scientists closing in on a better flu vaccine 01:56 - Source: CNN CNN — The flu season ramped up early in the United States this year, but vaccination rates are far from keeping pace. Flu vaccines are always a tough sell for Americans. The US Department of Health and Human Services set a target vaccination rate of 70% in the Healthy People 2030 plan. But less than half of the population has actually gotten their annual flu shot each year for at least the past decade. MIAMI, FLORIDA - SEPTEMBER 10: Susana Sanchez, a Nurse Practitioner, administers a flu vaccination to Loisy Barrera at a CVS pharmacy and MinuteClinic on September 10, 2021 in Miami, Florida. CVS Health is offering the flu shots by appointment or walking in as health experts encourage people to get their flu shots in hopes of preventing a bad flu season. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) Joe Raedle/Getty Images Flu vaccine appears to be a very good match to circulating strains, CDC says Public health leaders say it has been especially challenging to get people to get their flu vaccine this year because they’re growing tired of hearing about shots. What once was an annual push to get people vaccinated at the start of each flu season has become near-constant messaging about vaccines, with an announcement about new Covid-19 vaccine availability or eligibility seeming to come every couple of months. “There’s a great deal of vaccine fatigue out there. Asking people this year to get not just one vaccine but to get the annual influenza vaccine, as well as the Covid booster, has really been what I have called a hard sell,” said Dr. William Schaffner, medical director of the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases and professor at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. “There’s the old saying, ‘familiarity breeds contempt.’ Well, perhaps that’s a bit strong, but familiarity does seem to breed a certain nonchalance,” he said. Millions fewer flu vaccine doses have been distributed this season compared with this point in seasons past, according to data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Just 26% of adults had gotten their flu shot by the end of October, a deadline that medical experts have long encouraged for optimal protection throughout the season. About 43% of children had gotten their flu shot by the end of November. Reckoning with a new normal The first year of the Covid-19 pandemic – the 2020-21 flu season – was a notable outlier, experts say. Flu vaccination rates soared higher than usual amid fears of a “twindemic,” with the coronavirus and flu circulating together. Sick little boy with a thermometer in his mouth Fajrul Islam/Moment RF/Getty Images The flu can be a big deal for children. Here's why “The public health message – and I think we did it very effectively – was, you can’t protect yourself against Covid right now, but you can definitely take flu off the table,” said LJ Tan, chief strategy officer for the Immunization Action Coalition and co-chair of the National Adult and Influenza Immunization Summit, nonprofits dedicated to improving vaccination coverage in the US. “We were coming out of lockdowns, and people wanted to be active as opposed to passive. So when we told people at that time, ‘You don’t have a Covid vaccine, but you can certainly take flu off the table by getting a flu vaccine,’ people said, ‘Yeah, I’m doing that.’ “ But that double threat didn’t materialize. Flu seasons have been uncharacteristically mild for the past two years, and people have let their guard down, experts say. “I’ve almost had to remind people about influenza,” Schaffner said. “We’ve had two quite curtailed, very low influenza years. And of course, everyone’s been preoccupied with Covid, and they want to put Covid behind them and get on with their lives.” Now, continued messaging about a triple threat of viruses – flu, Covid and RSV – isn’t hitting in quite the same way. The urgency is real, as hospitals across the country stretch their capacity to record levels, but it’s not driving people to action. The flu vaccine reduces your chance of severe illness — that is, of being hospitalized or dying — and can reduce your likelihood of contracting the flu at all, says Dr. Leana Wen SDI Productions/Getty Images What you should know about getting a flu vaccine this year, according to an expert “It strikes me that people have gotten used to bad flu seasons for the elderly. So this is kind of just the same, with a few other viruses around. There’s a sense that this is what we’re going to expect and this is what we have to live with,” said Dr. Jesse Hackell, a pediatrician who co-authored a clinical report about countering vaccine hesitancy in 2016. “What we’re missing is the fact that kids and children’s hospitals are suffering in ways that we’ve never seen before.” Numerous studies have found that flu and Covid-19 vaccines significantly reduce the risk of severe outcomes for those who become infected, including hospitalization and death – thus reducing the burden on the health care work force. Exacerbating the general vaccine fatigue is decision fatigue, Hackell said. People have to choose whether to get the flu vaccine each year – and more recently, they have to make decisions about Covid-19 vaccine updates. Each new decision opens the door for misinformation or disinformation to seep into the process. “If it were a vaccine like measles, where it is really effective and it’s not repeated, it might be different,” Hackell said. “But we have to compare it to Covid and flu vaccines, where the efficacy is less than dramatic, and when there’s a lot of controversy going on, I think that spills over.” A nurse prepares a vaccine as part of the start of the seasonal flu vaccination campaign as a preventive measure due to the outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), in Santiago, Chile, March 16, 2020. Ivan Alvarado/Reuters In possible sign for US, Chile's flu hospitalizations were highest in three years, but vaccination helped Health care professionals are worn out too, experts say. “I think there’s fatigue, moral injury, call it burnout on the part of providers as well. We’re not pushing it as hard,” said Hackell, who is also chair of the American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Practice and Ambulatory Medicine. “It gets very difficult to keep having these unproductive conversations over and over again. And there’s so much more respiratory illness now that I don’t know that the time is there to have these long discussions when your office is packed with sick kids.” Linking Covid and flu Uptake for the updated Covid-19 booster has also been lackluster: Fewer than 1 in 7 eligible people have gotten one since it was authorized in the fall, according to CDC data. Ongoing messaging from the White House urges Americans to get their updated Covid-19 booster shot and the flu shot at the same time. Doctor giving vaccine, flu or influenza shot to patient with injection needle. Close up of arm and medical professional. Nurse or physician with syringe. Immunity, HPV or health care concept. Terovesalainen/Adobe Stock As respiratory viruses strain US health care systems, Biden administration tells states how it's ready to help But despite the convenience of getting both shots at once, there’s evidence that linking the two isn’t the best way to boost coverage rates for either. There has always been hesitancy around vaccination, but it has become highly politicized during the Covid-19 pandemic. “We still have plenty of people in this country who do not believe in the flu or the Covid vaccine that we haven’t been able to win over,” said Lori Tremmel Freeman, chief executive officer of the National Association of County and City Health Officials. “Flu is serious in our country, and it kills a lot of people, and it hospitalizes a lot of people, and it attacks the young and old. And so we should pay more attention to it.” A man gets a flu shot at a health facility in Washington, DC January 31, 2020. - The weekly US influenza surveillance report from the Centers for Disease Controle (CDC) reports that flu activity remains high in week 4, ending January 25, 2020 and increased over the past two weeks. The CDC estimates that so far this season there have been at least 19 million flu illnesses in the US, 180,000 hospitalizations and 10,000 deaths from flu. Flu vaccine effectiveness estimates are not available yet this season. (Photo by EVA HAMBACH / AFP) (Photo by EVA HAMBACH/AFP via Getty Images) Eva Hambach/AFP/Getty Images Black, Hispanic and American Indian/Alaska Native adults more likely to be hospitalized for flu and less likely to be vaccinated, CDC report finds But even when interest in booster shots was highest, it was rare for people to get both shots simultaneously. Self-reports to the CDC’s V-safe monitoring system show that fewer than 1 in 10 people who got a Covid-19 booster between September 2021 and May 2022 got a flu shot at the same time. “We give multiple vaccines to our kids at the same time, but we haven’t typically done that for adults,” said Tan, former liaison to the CDC’s vaccine advisory committee for the American Medical Association. Trying to persuade people to do something new can add to the hesitancy that’s already become so pervasive and make them less likely to come in at all. Instead, people seem to be much more likely to accept the offer of a flu vaccine at an appointment they scheduled to get a Covid-19 vaccine booster, or vice versa. girl blowing his nose into handkerchief isolated Maxim Ibragimov/Acobe Stock It seems like everyone's getting sick this winter. Parents and health care workers, how are you coping? “Some confidence is given by direct interaction with a health-care provider – in this case, the pharmacist or the physician or the clinician – who is able to reassure the patient that it’s safe,” Tan said. “In that personal conversation between the provider and the patient, the patient ends up being converted and getting the vaccine. It’s a testimony also to our remarkable health-care providers.” The message might finally be sticking. At Walgreens locations, co-administration of the flu and Covid-19 vaccine is 70% higher this year than it was last year, according to data shared with CNN. Better late than never Tan says there have been signs of improvement in recent weeks. Pharmacies are becoming significantly more popular than doctors offices among adults as they choose where to get the flu shot, and CDC data shows that the number of flu vaccines given in pharmacies this season is actually outpacing last year. It’s a sign that there are more opportunities to reach a broader group of otherwise healthy adults who are less likely to have a primary care provider, Tan said. “At least we’ve got the uptick now, as opposed to this continuous decline that we were seeing four weeks ago,” he said. “But while I’m sounding positive, I want to remind us all that we need to be better than we currently are.” Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Friday from the CNN Health team. And while battling vaccine fatigue is a challenge, it’s not an excuse to let vaccination rates lapse. “In many circumstances, we can overcome fatigue with access,” Tan said. In public health, “we need to start looking outside the box to find out what messaging needs to change so that we can think out of the box and make people motivated to look for the flu vaccine again. Right now, it’s way too much of a vaccine of convenience.” CNN’s Jacqueline Howard contributed to this report. Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Health Watch Listen Live TV Follow CNN Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Terms of Use Privacy Policy Ad Choices Accessibility & CC About Newsletters Transcripts © 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved. CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.Victory for poultry producers and NFU in legal case over Avian Influenza compensation – NFUonline Contact us NFU CallFirst Our offices NFU Cymru Media centre Join the NFU Log in About us About us NFU governance Who's who at the NFU Our history NFU Mutual insurance services NFU Cymru National Pig Association Careers Updates and information Updates and information Regions Sectors Cross sectors Events Campaigning Back British Farming Campaign resources NFU Education NFU reports Consultations Communities Services NFU Professional Services NFU CallFirst Business guides NFU planning services NFU Business Directory NFU Employment Service NFU energy solutions NFU Legal Services The NFU Tenants' Service Rewards Member rewards Business essentials NFU magazines Safety and security Training and resources Vehicles and machinery Wellbeing and lifestyle Home Updates and information Victory for poultry producers and NFU in legal case over AI compensation Victory for poultry producers and NFU in legal case over AI compensation 19 January 2024 Poultry Avian influenza See how the NFU is making a difference Text only view A group of NFU members have won a landmark legal challenge against the APHA (Animal and Plant Health Agency) in an important case about compensation for poultry farmers affected by an AI (Avian Influenza) outbreak on farm. The poultry farmers, supported by the the NFU and its Legal Assistance Scheme, successfully argued that the APHA misinterpreted the legislation which underpins its compensation scheme by failing to properly compensate affected farmers for birds which are healthy at the point at which the APHA decides they should be culled. The judge found that the government’s policy both pre-October 2022 (which calculated compensation for healthy birds at the end of culling) and post-October 2022 (which provided compensation to be calculated at the ‘outset of planning culling’) to be considered unlawful. The ruling by the High Court confirms the NFU’s long-held view that the farmers affected by AI have the right to compensation from the point that the APHA decides that birds should be culled, and not at the later point of culling. "This is a tremendous result for the members who brought the legal challenge, as well as the NFU and its wider membership." NFU President Minette Batters Members who are concerned that they might be impacted can contact NFU CallFirst for advice on 0370 845 8458 Government policy considered unlawful Due to delays by the APHA, many birds that were otherwise healthy became affected by AI in the interim period. As a result of the judgment, other poultry keepers who have had their compensation payments unfairly reduced as a result of the APHA's policy may be entitled to have their compensation reconsidered. The judgment has been described as “hugely significant” by NFU Poultry Board chair James Mottershead, who also called on the government to act quickly to address the financial loss that many poultry farmers have faced due to its approach in calculating AI compensation. He added: “On behalf of the poultry sector, I would like to express my gratitude to the NFU members who have fought this challenge from the outset right up until today’s fantastic judgment”. Members can log in to view more information on the case: NFU briefing on the member led judicial review claim relating to AI compensation ‘A tremendous result’ The members who took on the legal challenge were represented by NFU legal panel firm, Jacksons Law Firm, with Counsel Malcolm Birdling and Jagoda Klimowicz of Brick Court Chambers. As an interested party in the case, the NFU were also represented in the case by its in-house legal department. NFU legal board chair Nick Hamer said: “The NFU’s Legal Assistance Scheme has provided significant financial support to the members bringing the claim. This highlights once again the huge value of the NFU and the NFU’s LAS in supporting our members.” The outcome has also been commended by NFU President Minette Batters, who said this is “a tremendous result” for the members who brought the legal challenge, as well as the NFU and its wider membership. She added: “AI is a truly devasting disease; so many farmers have suffered and are still enduring the aftereffects of the catastrophic outbreaks witnessed since 2021. “The High Court has made clear that APHA’s AI compensation policy is unlawful, and we now look to government to rectify this wrong and to pay farmers the compensation to which they are lawfully entitled.” The full judgment can be found online at: LJ Fairburn & Son Ltd & Ors, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for Environment Food and Rural Affairs Avian influenza – support for members: AI case finder – current and lifted cases of avian influenza Avian influenza – essential information Avian influenza – how the NFU is working to support you 13 December 202213 December 2022 Avian Influenza Ask us a question about this page Once you have submitted your query someone from NFU CallFirst will contact you. If needed, your query will then be passed to the appropriate NFU policy team. Name * Membership number Telephone number * Email address * Enquiry * You have 0 characters remaining. Submit By completing the form with your details on this page, you are agreeing to have this information sent to the NFU for the purposes of contacting you regarding your enquiry. Please take time to read the NFU’s Privacy Policy if you require further information. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Avian influenza – essential information NFU Legal Assistance Scheme (LAS) NFU Legal Panel About the NFU About the NFU Advertise with the NFU NFU Careers NFU Membership The NFU 2023 financial statement Media centre More NFU sites More NFU sites Back British Farming British Agriculture Bureau CFE Online Countryside Online Great British Chicken NFU Cymru NFU Sugar Tried and Tested TB Free England UK Turkeys Member services Member services NFU CallFirst NFU Contract Checking Service CT Planning Farm Safety: Risk Management NFU Legal Assistance Scheme (LAS) NFU Employment Service NFU Energy NFU Rural Surveyor Firms The NFU Tenants' Service Follow Us Follow Us The NFU on social media X (Twitter) Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Back British Farming on social media Facebook Instagram TikTok © 2024 – NFUonline NFUonline terms and conditions NFU mobile app terms and conditions Anti‑slavery and human trafficking statement Privacy policy Cookies policy Complaints procedure NFU terms and conditions NFU gender pay gap reports NFU staff pension scheme 113719 Accept essential cookies Accept all cookies Manage preferencesB.C. launches flu vaccination blitz after deaths of 6 children and youth | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore B.C. launches flu vaccination blitz after deaths of 6 children and youth | CBC News LoadedBritish ColumbiaB.C. launches flu vaccination blitz after deaths of 6 children and youthDrop-in clinics are running Friday, Saturday and Sunday across the province.Drop-in clinics running Friday, Saturday and Sunday across the provinceCBC News · Posted: Dec 09, 2022 1:01 PM EST | Last Updated: December 12, 2022B.C. launches flu vaccine blitz to combat surge in child illness2 years agoDuration 2:00Days after confirming six children and youth have died after contracting influenza this fall, the British Columbia government has launched a flu vaccine blitz, opening drop-in clinics across the province.Social SharingDays after confirming six children and youth have died after contracting influenza this fall, the British Columbia government is launching a flu vaccine blitz, opening drop-in clinics across the province.The clinics launch Friday and will run through the weekend.The province will also be providing weekly updates on flu-related deaths, Provincial Health Officer Dr. Bonnie Henry said Thursday.The six who have died this fall included a child under the age of five, three between the ages of five and nine, and two teenagers between the ages of 15 and 19.B.C. promises weekly updates on flu deaths as 6 children confirmed dead this fallHenry said the flu season has been unusual, with an early and serious surge in cases.B.C. health officials have urged parents to have children vaccinated against the flu, citing a "dramatic increase" in cases of influenza A, a strain which can cause severe illness in children. Henry said the vaccines being distributed to children is able to target influenza A and encouraged people to take advantage of the weekend's walk-in clinics.This year, the province has made influenza vaccines free for everyone aged six months and older. No appointments are necessary but, if preferred, can be made online.Drop-in clinic locations and hours can be found through local health authority websites: Vancouver Coastal Health Fraser Health Island Health Interior Health Northern Health Visits to ERs 'off the chart': doctorOn Friday, the B.C. Centre for Disease Control issued a statement saying the deadly spike in acute respiratory illness is showing signs of stabilizing.It says although test positivity remains high for both influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), the numbers have levelled off in the past week.However, health officials are still urging caution.Watch | How parents can navigate this year's unprecedented flu season:How parents can navigate this year's unprecedented flu season2 years agoDuration 5:18Dr. Laura Sauvé of B.C. Children's Hospital offers some advice on how to tell when to keep your kid home and when it's OK to send them to school again.Dr. Michael Curry, an emergency room physician and clinical associate professor with UBC's department of emergency medicine, said the number of people visiting emergency rooms with respiratory illnesses were "off the chart" compared to previous years — rising to levels higher than he'd ever seen, even pre-pandemic.AnalysisKids are getting hit hard by respiratory viruses. Here's what scientists know — and what they don't"[Respiratory illnesses are] really just coming into the emergency room in unprecedented numbers," he told CBC Early Edition host Stephen Quinn. LISTEN | Dr. Michael Curry on surge in cases of respiratory illness:Pediatric hospitals across the country have seen a surge in respiratory viruses including RSV and influenza for a number of reasons, including a return to levels of activity close to pre-pandemic levels, and interaction kids and adults are having with each other after two years marked by reduced activity, distancing rules and masking that saw a decrease in diseases being spread within the population."Our body hasn't been dealing with flu viruses over the past couple of years," Curry said.In an interview with CBC Daybreak South host Chris Walker, Henry said officials are still trying to "piece together," the reason behind the rise in illness that is being seen in B.C. and other jurisdictions as distant as Australia and New Zealand."Is it because we have such a large group of children that have not been exposed to influenza for two years?" she asked. "Or is this a more severe strain, or [is] it a combination?"What to do when your kids have the sniffles and you've run out of sick leaveHenry also said the province is not yet at the point where it is considering reintroducing public health rules such as mandatory masking or limited gatherings, as has been the case over the past two holiday seasons.But she said it is still important to wash hands, stay home while sick and wear a mask for an extra layer of protection.Curry said while it is reasonable to continue going to school, travel and gather over the holidays after so many years apart, he encouraged people to take lessons from COVID-19 on best practices for preventing the spread of disease."Our experience during the pandemic has really shown that masking, distancing, definitely had a dramatic impact, almost virtually eliminating the flu in British Columbia until this year."LISTEN | Panel discussion on whether to bring back mask mandates:With files from The Canadian PressCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories Top stories from British Columbia How celebrating the ugly Christmas sweater went from a B.C. house party to a global phenomenon Thousands of salmon return to spawning grounds after channel dug around Coldwater River logjam B.C. gets first minister focused on emergency management, climate readinessFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowRSV and flu cases in kids are hammering children's hospitals : Shots - Health News : NPR Accessibility links Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts for audio player Open Navigation Menu Newsletters NPR Shop Close Navigation Menu Home News Expand/collapse submenu for News Election 2024 National World Politics Business Health Science Climate Race Culture Expand/collapse submenu for Culture Books Movies Television Pop Culture Food Art & Design Performing Arts Life Kit Gaming Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music All Songs Considered Music Features Tiny Desk Live Sessions Podcasts & Shows Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows Daily Morning Edition Weekend Edition Saturday Weekend Edition Sunday All Things Considered Fresh Air Up First Featured The NPR Politics Podcast Throughline Trump's Trials Wild Card with Rachel Martin More Podcasts & Shows Search Newsletters NPR Shop All Songs Considered Music Features Tiny Desk Live Sessions About NPR Diversity Support Careers Press Ethics RSV and flu cases in kids are hammering children's hospitals : Shots - Health News Pediatric cases of RSV and flu have sent families crowding into ERs, as health systems struggle with staff shortages. In Michigan, only 9 out of more than 130 hospitals have a pediatric ICU. Shots Health News From NPR Your Health Treatments & Tests Health Inc. Policy-ish Public Health Twitter Health Reporting in the States Children's hospitals are struggling to cope with a surge of respiratory illness December 15, 20227:01 AM ET From By Kate Wells Children's hospitals are struggling to cope with a surge of respiratory illness 3:52 Enlarge this image Caitlyn Houston kisses her seven-week-old daughter, Parker, as they wait in the ER for a hospital bed to open up on Dec. 7 at Corewell Health Helen DeVos Children's Hospital in Grand Rapids, Michigan. "There's so many kids in here that they have to take the ones that are really bad," Houston said. Lester Graham/Michigan Radio hide caption toggle caption Lester Graham/Michigan Radio Caitlyn Houston kisses her seven-week-old daughter, Parker, as they wait in the ER for a hospital bed to open up on Dec. 7 at Corewell Health Helen DeVos Children's Hospital in Grand Rapids, Michigan. "There's so many kids in here that they have to take the ones that are really bad," Houston said. Lester Graham/Michigan Radio Waiting for their turn in the ER, dazed-looking parents in winter coats bounce crying children in their arms, trying to catch the eye of Dr. Erica Michiels. Us! Pick us next! they seem to plead with tired eyes. Michiels directs pediatric emergency medicine at Corewell Health Helen DeVos Children's Hospital in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Lips pressed together in a thin line, she surveys what she calls the "disaster" area. "People have been out here waiting for a couple hours, which is heartbreaking," she says. Sponsor Message This story was produced in partnership with Kaiser Health News. Typically, the ER at Devos Children's sees about 140 kids each day, according to Michiels, but on a recent Tuesday in mid-December, they saw 253. "I hate when we have a wait," sighs Michiels. "But for right now, we can't do it any other way." Like so many other children's hospitals across the nation, the staff at DeVos Children's has been stretched beyond capacity by waves of patients with RSV and, increasingly, the flu. This surge of sick kids is coming after years of some U.S. hospitals cutting back on pediatric beds — in part because it is typically more profitable to treat adult patients. The remaining pediatric beds are increasingly concentrated in urban areas, leaving families in rural areas to travel longer and longer distances to get the care their kids need. When the local ER can't help When Staci Rodriguez brought her nine-month-old son into the ER in their small town of Shelby, Michigan, she was desperate. Santi, who has big brown eyes and long eyelashes that everybody gushes over, had been sick for days. First Santi stopped eating, so she took him to urgent care. Then he started sleeping 20 hours a day, so she went to the pediatrician. Rodriguez says everyone told her Santi was just fighting a virus, and sent them home. Sponsor Message Within hours of leaving the pediatrician though, Santi "was so much worse," she says. "His fever was way too high. I couldn't get it down." She took him to the ER, where doctors told her Santi had RSV, and that his oxygen saturation levels were dangerously low. Rodriguez says staff at the Shelby hospital told her they couldn't give him the care he needed, that they didn't have the proper equipment. Out of 130 acute care hospitals in Michigan, only 10 currently have pediatric ICUs, according to the Michigan Health and Hospital Association. The ER wanted to transfer Santi immediately, but Rodriguez says that first there was an agonizing wait while the medical team deliberated where to send him: Muskegon was much closer, but DeVos could offer more intensive care. "So they sent us to DeVos, and he had to ride in the ambulance." The trip took an hour. "I thought I was going to be able to hold him," Rodriguez says. But for safety, Santi needed to be strapped to the stretcher. "Luckily, he just kind of stared at me the whole time, and then eventually fell asleep." Enlarge this image A staff member at Helen DeVos Children's Hospital cares for nine-month-old Santiago Botello Rodriguez on December 7. Santiago was transferred to the hospital the night before. DeVos Children's is receiving so many transfer requests, they can't take every one. "I have had many calls come in where they said 'We've called 15 other places and they've all said no,'" says Dr. Andrea Hadley. Lester Graham/Michigan Radio hide caption toggle caption Lester Graham/Michigan Radio A staff member at Helen DeVos Children's Hospital cares for nine-month-old Santiago Botello Rodriguez on December 7. Santiago was transferred to the hospital the night before. DeVos Children's is receiving so many transfer requests, they can't take every one. "I have had many calls come in where they said 'We've called 15 other places and they've all said no,'" says Dr. Andrea Hadley. Lester Graham/Michigan Radio Rodriguez watched the beeping monitors as she recounted their story in the hospital room at Devos Children's, which has been partitioned to make room for another sick infant and his family. Moments before, six staff members had assembled around Santi's bed, speaking in soft tones as they worked to thread a tiny feeding tube through his nostril. Next they held down his chubby arms, and kept him still even as he wailed, so they could take an x-ray to confirm the tube had been placed properly. Now Santi lies comfortably on his mother's chest, a small oxygen tube taped to his face. His breathing is labored, and he struggles against sleep, keeping both his eyes on his dad, Saul Botello. Sponsor Message "I hate seeing him like this," Botello says, his hands in his sweatshirt pocket, his own eyes glued to his son. Eventually, Santi's heavy lids close, and he slips into a fitful sleep in the hospital crib. His mom rubs his back, shushing him softly. "He'll be fine, just have to support him through [this]" says Dr. Andrea Hadley, chief of pediatric medicine at DeVos. Turn kids away, or stretch staff even further? Hadley is the one who gets the desperate calls from smaller hospitals or freestanding ERs in rural areas, asking if they can transfer their patients to DeVos Children's. "I have had many calls come in where they said 'We've called 15 other places and they've all said no.'" Big children's hospitals like DeVos regularly get transfer requests. But in recent weeks, the calls are coming from a much larger geographical area, including parts of Illinois. Patients who live in Michigan's Upper Peninsula typically go to Wisconsin for care, Hadley says. But now, those hospitals are full, too. In response, DeVos Children's has doubled up their rooms, squeezing two patients (and their families) into rooms meant for one. The hospital is also allowing no more than one parent or guardian to stay overnight. Even with those changes, Hadley says, the hospital only has capacity to care for the sickest children. "We've had to say, 'We see you, we're going to support you, but we can't bring you here yet.'" Enlarge this image Dr. Andrea Hadley, Chief of Pediatric Medicine at Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, says they've put two children in each single room to try to increase capacity. Lester Graham/Michigan Radio hide caption toggle caption Lester Graham/Michigan Radio Dr. Andrea Hadley, Chief of Pediatric Medicine at Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, says they've put two children in each single room to try to increase capacity. Lester Graham/Michigan Radio Hadley says that in the past, they'd take all the referral requests. Across the health care industry, pandemic-era staffing shortages are adding to the strain. Michigan has lost 1,700 staffed hospital beds since 2020, according to the Michigan Health & Hospital Association. That's left children's hospitals scrambling during this RSV and influenza surge. At the Children's Hospital of Michigan in suburban Detroit, there's only enough staff to cover about 60% of the beds, according to chief medical officer Dr. Rudy Valentini. With 40% of beds unavailable, children who need to be admitted have to wait in the ER until a bed opens up. Sponsor Message "So we have ICU patients in our emergency department that can't get up to our ICU, because either there's no available beds, there's no available staff beds," Valentini said December 6th. The sheer number of pediatric patients, the bed closures, and the staffing shortages have created a perfect storm for children's hospitals, leaving them with difficult decisions. "There's also a moral distress associated with the thought of having to turn patients away," Hadley says. "And how do we balance that distress that comes with knowing potentially, if we as a system don't stretch a little more, that there might be patients that are turned away?" But stretching staff who are already "on the brink of burnout" comes with its own risks, explains nurse manager Jamie West. On her floor at Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, there are enough nurses to safely care for a total of 18 patients. But recently, West says they've had to stretch the same number of nurses to care for up to 33 seriously ill patients. They don't have enough electronic monitors for every patient either, Hadley adds. "These kids are just so much sicker [than we typically see during RSV season,]" West says. "And when you think about nurses that are already in very large patient assignments, nurses are very worried that their child's going to go downhill very quickly, that they're going to maybe miss something because they're spread so thin." 'You're not going to send us home, right?' In the emergency department at DeVos Children's, Dr. Michiels is a constant blur of motion. One moment, she's doing a sepsis work-up for a 12-year-old boy whose fever won't break. The next moment, her pager goes off and she's striding down a long linoleum hall to the room that's been designated as the "resuscitation room." Staffers try to keep that one room open, Michiels says, for "the next blue baby" who's rushed in. Sponsor Message In a room at the end of the hall, Caitlyn Houston hovers over her seven-week-old daughter, Parker, as nurses tie a small band around the baby's flailing arm. Parker's reddened face bunches up in distress, her cries filling the small room. We're going to admit her, Dr. Michiels tells Houston, and probably to the pediatric intensive care unit. Still Houston can't help but ask: "But you're not going to send us home, right?" No, Michiels reassures her softly. The two of them can stay. Houston says they've spent the last several sleepless nights in and out of the ER. Enlarge this image Caitlyn Houston kisses her seven-week-old daughter, Parker, as they wait in the Emergency Department for a bed to open up, December 7th, 2022, Corewell Health Helen DeVos Children's Hospital in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Lester Graham/Michigan Radio hide caption toggle caption Lester Graham/Michigan Radio Caitlyn Houston kisses her seven-week-old daughter, Parker, as they wait in the Emergency Department for a bed to open up, December 7th, 2022, Corewell Health Helen DeVos Children's Hospital in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Lester Graham/Michigan Radio "There's so many kids in here that they have to take the ones that are really bad," Houston says. "And even two nights ago in the middle of the night, the ER was packed. So we were there for 2 hours, waiting." Being told your infant may need lifesaving medical intervention is never good news, but for parents like Houston, being admitted to the hospital brings a feeling of relief. Their child will at last get a bed. This story comes from NPR's health reporting partnership with KHN (Kaiser Health News) and Michigan Radio. It was edited by Carrie Feibel, with photo editing by Max Posner. Correction Dec. 16, 2022 Because of incorrect information from the Michigan Health & Hospital Association, the audio of this story mistakenly says Michigan has nine pediatric ICUs. In fact, the state has 10 pediatric ICUs. This error has been corrected in the web story. respiratory illnesses RSV devos children pediatric ICU pediatric flu Facebook Flipboard Email Read & Listen Home News Culture Music Podcasts & Shows Connect Newsletters Facebook Instagram Press Public Editor Corrections Contact & Help About NPR Overview Diversity NPR Network Accessibility Ethics Finances Get Involved Support Public Radio Sponsor NPR NPR Careers NPR Shop NPR Events NPR Extra Terms of Use Privacy Your Privacy Choices Text Only Sponsor MessageBecome an NPR sponsorCould repeated flu jabs decrease effectiveness? | Doherty Website Search Please do not fill-in this field About Our Work Services & Facilities People Education Careers News & Events Support COVID-19 Research Searchss A joint venture between The University of Melbourne and The Royal Melbourne Hospital Search About Overview Laureate Professor Peter Doherty Governance Reports & Publications Brochures Venue Hire Support our work Advocacy Contact Us Our Work Institute Themes Immunology Viral Infectious Diseases HIV Hepatitis Influenza Emerging Infections COVID-19 Antimicrobial Resistance Bacterial and Parasitic Infections Malaria Tuberculosis Buruli Ulcer Cross-Cutting Disciplines Discovery Research Public Health Clinical and health systems research Global Health Education & Professional Development Indigenous Health Computational Science and Genomics Services & Facilities Services Facilities People Education Study at the Doherty Institute Research Projects PhD Clinician Graduate Research Training Meet our graduate researchers Prospective Student Information Session Contacts Careers News & Events News Events Setting it Straight Podcast: Infection and Immunity - Evidence Explained Publications Support COVID-19 Research News 15 Dec 2022 Could repeated flu jabs decrease effectiveness? As Australia experiences its worst flu season in five years, vaccination remains the best defence against the infection. But a new study suggests that consecutive influenza flu shots may wane in efficacy. In a paper published in The Lancet, researchers at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity (Doherty Institute) reviewed 83 studies to estimate the reduction in vaccine effectiveness associated with repeated influenza vaccination. They found that, when administered repeatedly in consecutive years, the effectiveness of the influenza vaccination might be reduced. However, vaccination in consecutive seasons still provided better protection against influenza than no vaccination. Associate Professor Sheena Sullivan, Epidemiologist at the Doherty Institute and senior author of the study said that the results of the research suggest a need for further research to be done in the area. “There appears to be some attenuation of vaccine effectiveness with repeated vaccination, mainly for H3N2 viruses, but it is not consistent across seasons and therefore further research is needed to better understand the underlying problem," Associate Professor Sullivan said. “There isn't sufficient evidence to warrant any change to influenza vaccination policy at this time, and people should be encouraged to continue to receive annual vaccination,” Associate Professor Sullivan said. “The reduced effectiveness of vaccination in repeatedly vaccinated persons are concerning and warrant additional investigation but are not consistent or severe enough to support an alternative vaccination regimen at this time,” Associate Professor Sullivan said. Funding: World Health Organization (WHO) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(22)00266-1 News Archive 2024 January February March April May June July August September October November 2023 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2022 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 June July August October November December KEEP INFORMED Facebook Twitter Instagram Subscribe for the latest news, events and research For any media enquiries, please contact: Communications Team P: +61383441911 E: doherty-media@unimelb.edu.au Contact Us 792 Elizabeth Street Melbourne, 3000 Get Directions doherty-reception@unimelb.edu.au +61 3 9035 3555 Contact Us Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Keep informed Subscribe for the latest news, events and research First name Last name Email Subscribe We acknowledge the Wurundjeri people of the Kulin Nation as the traditional custodians of the land where our Institute stands. We are committed to collaboration with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities to reduce the unacceptable burden of infectious disease. We are committed to training the next generation of exceptional Indigenous leaders in infection and immunity. Copyright The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity Privacy Policy | Intranet | Site by LemonadeLouisiana flu, COVID cases remain high | Coronavirus | nola.com Skip to main content You are the owner of this article. Edit Article Add New Article Close You have permission to edit this article. Edit Close Baton Rouge New Orleans Acadiana Shreveport-Bossier Gambit Log in Subscribe Log out Site search Search News Business Crime/Police Courts Education Environment Jefferson Parish One Tammany Local Politics State Politics Hurricane Center Weather/Traffic Meet Investigative Team Weekly Editions Sports Rod Walker Betting Saints LSU Pelicans Tulane UNO High School Sports Horse Racing Jeff Duncan Colleges Betting Entertainment Arts Books Calendar Comics Curious Louisiana Festivals Games Louisiana Health Home/Garden Ian McNulty Keith Spera Louisiana Inspired Mardi Gras Arthur Hardy - Mardi Gras Guide Movies/TV Music Society Where NOLA Eats Your Best Life Games Opinions Clancy DuBos Stephanie Grace Ron Faucheux Walt Handelsman Quin Hillyer Faimon Roberts Will Sutton Our Columnists Our Views Guest Columns Letters Obits Jobs Homes Store Public Notices Jefferson Parish E-Edition Newsletters Log out Log in Subscribe My account 77° E-Edition Newsletters News Business Crime/Police Courts Education Environment Jefferson Parish One Tammany Local Politics Local Elections State Politics Statewide Elections Hurricane Center Weather/Traffic Meet Investigative Team Weekly Editions Crescent City East Jefferson St. Tammany West Bank Sports Rod Walker Betting Taylor_swift Saints LSU Pelicans Tulane UNO High School Sports Horse Racing Jeff Duncan Colleges Betting Entertainment Arts Books Calendar Comics Curious Louisiana Festivals Games Louisiana Health Home/Garden Ian McNulty Keith Spera Louisiana Inspired Mardi Gras Arthur Hardy - Mardi Gras Guide Movies/TV Music Society Where NOLA Eats Your Best Life Games Opinions Clancy DuBos Stephanie Grace Ron Faucheux Walt Handelsman Quin Hillyer Faimon Roberts Will Sutton Our Columnists Our Views Guest Columns Letters Obits Jobs Homes Store Public Notices Jefferson Parish Flu, COVID, other viruses spread ahead of holidays, keeping pressure on Louisiana hospitals Share this Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save Close Flu, COVID, other viruses spread ahead of holidays, keeping pressure on Louisiana hospitals COVID is on the rise; Tamiflu is hard to find By EMILY WOODRUFF | Staff writer Emily Woodruff Author email Dec 16, 2022 Dec 16, 2022 3 min to read Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save Public health officials are warning that despite some slight case declines, Louisiana remains in the thick of one of the nastiest respiratory illness seasons in recent years, with a swarm of influenza, COVID and other viruses afflicting the state ahead of holiday travel.Five of Louisiana’s nine regions ranked “high” or “very high” for flu activity in the state's weekly report, making it the most active flu season of the last five years. The four regions in southeastern Louisiana — including New Orleans, Baton Rouge, the north shore and the River Parishes — were seeing fewer cases and remained mostly in the “moderate” range. The Acadiana region was among those ranking "high." “For the past three or four weeks, we've really just been teetering up one week, down one week,” said Dr. Joe Kanter, state health officer at the Louisiana Department of Health. “It’s just as likely we go back up next week as we continue going down.” INFLUENZA-LIKE ILLNESS BY REGION: Rates of influenza-like illness ranged from low to very high in different parts of Louisiana as of the first week of December. Louisiana’s rate of patients coming to hospitals with flu symptoms in the first week of December was at about 8.42% compared to 7.2% nationwide. At the same time last year, patient visits in Louisiana due to flu were at 2.35%. Of all the tests given for influenza, nearly one in five are coming back positive in Louisiana this year. Last year, it was about one in twenty. “It's roaring all throughout the South, big time, and we're seeing a lot of it in emergency departments,” said Susan Hassig, epidemiologist at Tulane University. “The virus variant of influenza that's circulating right now is notorious for making people really sick.” The dominant flu strain circulating right now is the same one that caused record-high mortality rates in the 2018 and 2019 flu season, said Hassig. The flu vaccine, which is formulated each year based on which groups of flu are most likely to cause illness, is a good match for this year’s dominant strain, and Hassig encouraged vaccination to protect against any incoming surges. Flu season typically lasts until February. Tamiflu shortage complicates kids' recoveryFlu-like illness is by far the highest among kids, according to state data. Although the number of kids testing positive for flu is about one-third what it was in October at Children’s Hospital New Orleans, physician-in-chief Dr. Mark Kline said the current level of respiratory illness is still outpacing previous years. “The numbers are much, much higher,” said Kline. ”They're still higher this year than they typically are.” With cold weather finally making an appearance in the state, pushing people indoors, and the holidays bringing people together and shuffling them through airports, viruses will have an opportunity to keep circulating. According to AAA, this holiday season is expected to be the third-busiest for travel since 2000, when the company started tracking travel volume. The number of air passengers traveling through New Orleans during Thanksgiving was up 12% this year, nearly back to pre-pandemic levels. AAA forecast a similar travel recovery for Christmas and New Year's. “Is that going to put some energy back into these epidemics?” said Kline. “That’s the wildcard in this now.” Complicating flu recovery for kids is a national shortage of Tamiflu, the only antiviral approved for young children. Parents are calling the hospital saying they can’t find a pharmacy that will fill it, said Kline. “We’ve got a lot of really sick kids less than five, and now we don't have Tamiflu available for many of them,” said Kline. “We seem to fail our kids every single time. Instead of children first, it’s children last.” Infectious disease experts point to a couple of years without exposure to illnesses during the height of the pandemic as the reason so many viruses are surging now. “People were sheltered between masking and social distancing,” said Dr. Mark Alain Dery, chief innovation officer at Access Health Louisiana and a physician at West Jefferson Medical Center. “We didn't get our yearly dose, which primes the pump a little bit and keeps our immune system intact.” COVID creeps upWhile flu is Louisiana's most prominent respiratory virus, it’s not the only thing circulating. A so-called tripledemic — a collision of flu, RSV and COVID — is sweeping across the U.S. Louisiana has felt less pressure than some states because RSV, or respiratory syncytial virus, was high in this state over the summer, said Kanter, offering some protection in the winter months. But COVID hospitalizations are creeping back up.“It certainly looks like we’re entering into another surge,” said Kanter. “We’ve added 100 inpatients over the past two and a half weeks.” There were 255 people hospitalized with COVID in Louisiana on Wednesday, according to the most recent report. One month prior, there were 94. An uptick in COVID is not the crisis it once was due to immunity from prior illness and vaccines, and health officials feel more prepared for an increase in illness. But if rates of other illnesses go up, it could create strains on the health care system. “Each surge makes me more confident,” said Kanter. “The question will be if our flu rates continue to increase, if RSV picks back up, will we be able to weather them all together.” Email Emily Woodruff at ewoodruff@theadvocate.com. Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save Tags Hardwall Emily Woodruff Author email Follow Emily Woodruff Sections Home News Opinion Sports Entertainment/Life Newsletters Games Services Classifieds Search Subscribe Digital Advertising Help/Contact Us RSS Feeds Media Kit eEdition Careers News in Education Reviewing the Record Our Sites Obituaries Jobs Celebrations NIE Classifieds Homes Pets Archives Store Contact Information nola.com 840 St. Charles Avenue New Orleans, LA 70130 Phone: 504-529-0522 News Tips:nolanewstips@theadvocate.com Other questions:subscriberservices@theadvocate.com Need help? Report a delivery issue Create a temporary stop Sign up for recurring payments Pay your bill Update your billing info × Browser Compatibility Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.We recommend switching to one of the following browsers: Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox © Copyright 2024 NOLA.com 840 St. Charles Avenue, New Orleans, LA | Terms of Use | Privacy PolicyMinisters discuss avian influenza - Country Life in BC Menu Skip to primary navigation Skip to main content Skip to primary sidebarThe agricultural news source in British Columbia since 1915Search this websiteHeadlines Calendar Subscribe Advertise About Archives Contact Search Headlines Calendar Subscribe Advertise About Archives Contact Search Primary Sidebar Current Issue: NOVEMBER 2024 Vol. 110 Issue 11 Subscribe Now! Sign up for free weekly FARM NEWS UPDATES First Name Last Name Email *Constant Contact Use. Please leave this field blank.By submitting this form, you are consenting to receive marketing emails from: . You can revoke your consent to receive emails at any time by using the SafeUnsubscribe® link, found at the bottom of every email. Emails are serviced by Constant Contact Your information will not be shared or sold ever Follow us on FacebookComments Box SVG iconsUsed for the like, share, comment, and reaction icons 7 hours ago Today, we remember those who sacrificed their lives or their well-being for our freedom. Lest we forget. ... See MoreSee LessView CommentsLikes: 6Shares: 1Comments: 0Comment on Facebook 3 days ago A fall wave of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza has hit a cross-section of BC farms, but the response effort is so far keeping pace to contain the outbreaks. Since October 21, testing has confirmed cases at 16 premises across southern BC as of Thursday afternoon, from Campbell River to Chilliwack, affecting birds of all feather groups. Two premises are non-commercial operations, including a petting farm. For more, see this week's Farm News Update from Country Life in BC. www.countrylifeinbc.com/avian-flu-response-keeping-pa#BCAg#BCAg ... See MoreSee LessAvian flu response keeping pacewww.countrylifeinbc.comA fall wave of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza has hit a cross-section of BC farms, but the response effort is so far keeping pace to contain the outbreaks. “We have the capacity to continue�... View CommentsLikes: 3Shares: 0Comments: 1Comment on FacebookThose poor farmers 😢 so sad and depressing they have to go thru this yet again. 4 days ago A federal court in Washington State has upheld Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada’s claim to the successful Staccato cherry against attempts by a Washington grower to market it under a different name. Summerland Varieties Corp general manager Sean Beirnes says AAFC’s suspicions, and decision to pursue the case, represents a victory not just for industry but all Canadians. “This is government stepping up and enforcing their rights for the benefit of Canadians,” he says. The story is part of this week's Farm News Update. #BCAg ... See MoreSee LessStaccato cherry rights defendedwww.countrylifeinbc.comCould a cherry by any other name be as sweet? A federal court in Washington State believes so, and recently upheld Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada’s claim to the successful variety against attempts... View CommentsLikes: 5Shares: 0Comments: 0Comment on Facebook 6 days ago ... See MoreSee LessView CommentsLikes: 5Shares: 0Comments: 0Comment on Facebook 6 days ago BC's cranberry crop is trending below average this fall. Indications are harvest will fall short of the five-year average of nearly 945,000 barrels, and fruit quality is down. Low water levels forced some growers to delay harvest, and overnight temperatures weren't dipping low enough early on to colour up the berries. The harvest is expected to be 95% complete by the end of thi#BCAgk. #BCAg ... See MoreSee LessView CommentsLikes: 6Shares: 1Comments: 0Comment on Facebook Subscribe | Advertise The agricultural news source in British Columbia since 1915 EmailFacebookTwitter Ministers discuss avian influenza BC Minister of Agriculture Pam Alexis | BC Ministry of Agriculture photoDecember 14, 2022 byPeter Mitham The appointment last week of rookie Abbotsford-Mission MLA Pam Alexis as agriculture minister came amid a deepening outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza in her home region of the Fraser Valley. The disease didn’t merit a reference in Alexis’ mandate letter from the premier but it was one of the first orders of business she discussed with her federal counterpart Marie-Claude Bibeau. While a few weeks typically pass before provincial and federal ministers chat, the two have already discussed an outbreak that has infected 56 commercial farms in BC since mid-November and impacted more than 1.3 million birds. The rapid spread of the disease in recent weeks has been blunted by strong industry-led biosecurity protocols and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency has so far held off escalating current measures. However, various sources are indicating a review of practices may be in the offing to better limit the spread of the disease in a region that has the highest concentration of poultry farms in the country. Testing has so far failed to indicate farm-to-farm transmission, indicating the biosecurity protocols are working. However, small-lot growers have not reported a single case since November 14. Prior to this date, they represented the majority of cases. Neither industry nor CFIA representatives have been able to explain the shift in infections. However, all growers are encouraged to maintain existing biosecurity protocols to protect their flocks against infection. Previous Post: « Economic outlook challenges farm marginsNext Post: Potato stocks tight »Copyright © 2024 Country Life in BC · All Rights ReservedInside an Ontario hospital bracing for a surge in adult patients — while overflowing with sick kids | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Inside an Ontario hospital bracing for a surge in adult patients — while overflowing with sick kids | CBC News LoadedHealthInside an Ontario hospital bracing for a surge in adult patients — while overflowing with sick kidsCBC News spent a day inside an Ontario hospital where the pediatric unit is regularly over-capacity and staff are bracing for at least a 20 per cent increase in adult admissions compared with a typical flu season.Clinicians expect at least 20 per cent increase in adult admissions compared to typical flu seasonLauren Pelley · CBC News · Posted: Dec 09, 2022 3:18 PM EST | Last Updated: December 11, 2022Hospital bursting with sick kids braces for influx of adults2 years agoDuration 3:23As the severe flu season puts extraordinary pressure on the health-care system, CBC News goes inside a busy Ontario hospital to see how staff are struggling to cope with the surge of seriously ill children while bracing a new wave of adult influenza patients.Social SharingLying with a stuffed monkey in his hospital bed, with oxygen tubes attached to his tiny nose, four-year-old Wolfgang lets out a few scratchy chest coughs.On this afternoon in early December, the little boy with big eyes and tousled brown hair is one of the youngest patients at Markham Stouffville Hospital, north of Toronto. He was admitted a couple of days earlier to the facility's over-capacity pediatric unit for pneumonia — his third bout since starting kindergarten in September.As a child with severe asthma, Wolfgang — who usually goes by "Wolfy" — is particularly vulnerable during this "brutal" viral season, says his mother, Mary Doering."It's hard to see your little guy struggle," she says.This fall, the explosive return of respiratory viruses started putting immense pressure on a health-care system that's long been under strain — a quiet crisis, playing out behind closed doors. While sweeping pandemic measures kept a variety of pathogens at bay for months on end, they've all roared back, from influenza to RSV, with COVID-19 now firmly in the mix. It's no secret that kids like Wolfgang are currently bearing the brunt. But that could be just the tip of the iceberg of infections in the months ahead.Hospitals like Markham Stouffville are now bracing for a potential surge of adult patients as well, and expecting pressure from both ends of the age spectrum at a time when resources are already tight and staff shortages are a constant battle."Our real concern is the severity of illness that we are seeing in the kids, and we are expecting to see more adult cases; usually they come two to three weeks after the kids cases peak," says Dr. Jeya Nadarajah, an infectious diseases physician with Oak Valley Health, who works at Markham Stouffville. "We are also predicting a more severe set of adult influenza, too."Mary Doering holds her son, Wolfy, in his room in the pediatrics wing of Markham Stouffville Hospital, in Markham, Ont., on Dec. 1. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)Staff hold regular briefings during virus surgeInside the office of Oak Valley Health chief executive officer Jo-anne Marr, she logs into a virtual call with staff from across the hospital. What was once a daily COVID-19 briefing is now a weekly check-in for the return of a broader, if rather unusual, respiratory virus season.AnalysisKids are getting hit hard by respiratory viruses. Here's what scientists know — and what they don'tSpeaking first, for the infection prevention and control team, Nadarajah raises questions over how long the peak of this year's influenza season will last, and says local pediatric hospitals are still seeing high levels of patient admissions."The bottom line with modelling when you're looking at a season with co-infections of COVID and influenza, is that our best weapon is still vaccination," she says on the video call. "That seems to be the only thing in the modelling that will slow the peak and keep it [lower] so hospital capacity can keep up."Oak Valley Health president and CEO Jo-anne Marr looks through a window at Markham Stouffville Hospital. On Dec. 1, the day CBC visited, she said the pediatric unit was running at around 220 per cent capacity. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)After the briefing, Marr tells us that the hospital is doing all it can to manage patient loads. "It is a challenge, there's no question," she says.'Intense' flu season for Canadian kids needs solutions now and longer term, doctors sayAcross the country, children's hospitals have similarly raised alarms about their units being over-capacity, while emergency departments have reported lengthy wait times. A hospice in Calgary temporarily paused its services and discharged its young patients to redeploy staff to the Alberta Children's Hospital; a pediatric hospital in Ottawa was forced to bring in the Red Cross for staffing support. At Markham Stouffville, the kids' unit is now regularly overflowing. Infectious disease specialist Dr. Jeya Nadarajah sits for a portrait in an exam room at Markham Stouffville Hospital. She's expecting at least 20 per cent more adult admissions in the months ahead, compared to a typical flu season. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)Pediatric unit regularly over-capacityOn this day, the pediatric department is running at around 220 per cent capacity — while staff are taking on extra shifts and trying to find additional beds for the high number of sick children still being admitted. Walking through the hallways, you can hear the faint cries and coughs of kids coping with all kinds of respiratory bugs behind the closed doors of their hospital rooms.Flu rising sharply in Canada, Dr. Theresa Tam saysBehind the main desk, chief of pediatrics Dr. Joe Wiley debriefs with Silva Nercessian, clinical director of the childbirth and children's program at Oak Valley Health. Staff are tired, Wiley tells us. The space is funded for five beds, but lately, the team has been caring for a dozen or more children on any given day — still small numbers, but it all adds up.A look inside one of the hospital rooms in the pediatrics wing of Markham Stouffville Hospital. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)This week alone, Wiley has taken on three extra shifts to help keep the team afloat."We are ready for 300 per cent-plus capacity here," adds Nercessian. "But if we want to go higher than that, we have to start creeping into our adult spaces."Families should get flu shots as soon as possible, Canadian Paediatric Society saysThat's where things get tricky.From her office elsewhere in the hospital, Nadarajah tells us Markham Stouffville is bracing for at least 20 per cent more adult admissions in the next couple of months than during a typical flu season."The worst case scenario," she said, "is anything above that."Silva Nercessian, clinical director of the childbirth and children's program at Oak Valley Health, left, and chief of pediatrics Dr. Joe Wiley, right, are pictured at the front desk area of the pediatric unit inside Markham Stouffville Hospital. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)The projection likely applies to hospitals elsewhere, since it's based on a few factors, including a careful watching of the earlier flu season in the southern hemisphere — which started early, like Canada's did this year — coupled with Canada's flu vaccination rates, which have long been stubbornly low.Young and old more likely to face severe flu. Here's why doctors think it happensDuring the last three flu seasons, the number of Canadian adults signing up for an annual flu shot hovered around 40 per cent. Even seniors, a group at higher risk of serious illness, didn't hit the federal government's goal of 80 per cent coverage; only around 70 per cent of Canadians aged 65 and up got the shot between 2019 and 2022.Wolfy Doering’s medical paraphernalia are laid out on a tray in his hospital room. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)If this year's season follows that trend, Nadarajah says plenty of older individuals will wind up hospitalized — which would force the hospital to shuffle resources and add beds in unorthodox areas, like ultrasound clinics.Canada is seeing an early rise in flu cases. Is a 'tidal wave' of infection coming?But that's no easy task, particularly if more staff start catching the flu as well, forcing them to take time off."Because of the steep climb, we just haven't had a chance to expand our bed capacity, and after two years of a lot of staffing shortages in the health-care system, it's just really compounded," Nadarajah said.A health-care worker gowns up before visiting a patient’s room in the pediatric department of Markham Stouffville Hospital. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)3,000+ visits to new COVID-19, cold, flu clinicTo keep people from needing a bed in the first place — and to take pressure off other teams — the hospital is banking on a new clinic to help treat people on an out-patient basis.It's been dubbed the COVID-19, Cold, and Flu Care Clinic, or CCFCC, and just opened a few weeks ago, transitioning from the hospital's previous COVID-19 assessment centre.Hundreds of Canadians are still dying of COVID-19 every week. Who are they?As Dr. Cristina Popa, the CCFCC's physician lead, walks our crew through the clinic's hallways, she explains how the space keeps patients with respiratory symptoms safely separated from other patients, while providing private isolation rooms for families where multiple members are battling similar bugs.It's also appointment-based, she says, so people aren't stuck waiting — and coughing — in the busy nearby emergency department.Registered nurse Karen Hickman looks up a patient’s chart inside the hospital's COVID-19, Cold, and Flu Care Clinic, which opened a few weeks ago, transitioning from the previous COVID-19 assessment centre. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)In just a few weeks, the clinic has seen more than 3,000 patients."It is really good for the emergency department because we can take all this volume away," Popa says. "We allow the ED to take care of sicker patients."Given all the efforts to boost capacity and transition to a new clinic model, teams here are hopeful they'll weather the storm ahead. But as Nadarajah says, it could be a long journey."We are essentially preparing for the worst, which is a high peak of [influenza], a sustained peak and then coming down … that way if we're pleasantly surprised that it's not as bad, then you know what, we over-prepared — but it's for good cause," she says.ABOUT THE AUTHORLauren PelleySenior Health & Medical ReporterLauren Pelley covers the global spread of infectious diseases, pandemic preparedness and the crucial intersection between health and climate change. She's a two-time RNAO Media Award winner for in-depth health reporting in 2020 and 2022, a silver medallist for best editorial newsletter at the 2024 Digital Publishing Awards, and a 2024 Covering Climate Now award winner in the health category. Contact her at: lauren.pelley@cbc.ca.@LaurenPelleyCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowWhy doctors recommend you get a flu shot this week | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Why doctors recommend you get a flu shot this week | CBC News LoadedHealthWhy doctors recommend you get a flu shot this weekFamilies making plans to gather for the holidays should consider getting vaccinated against influenza now, health experts say, as well stay up to date on other immunizations as part of their preparations.Getting vaccinated now will offer prime period of protection over the holidays, health experts say Amina Zafar · CBC News · Posted: Dec 16, 2022 4:00 AM EST | Last Updated: December 16, 2022Shoppers look for holiday deals in Toronto on Nov. 25. Doctors are advising Canadians to also put getting a flu shot on their holiday to-do lists. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)Social SharingFamilies making plans to gather for the holidays should consider getting vaccinated against influenza and stay up to date on other immunizations as part of their preparations, public health officials and medical experts say.Dr. Theresa Tam, Canada's chief public health officer, said influenza continues to be well above expected levels for this time of year, with worrisome increases in flu-related hospitalizations, particularly among children.Data suggests a higher proportion of hospitalizations among those aged 10 to 16 compared with flu seasons that came before the COVID-19 pandemic, with children under five showing the highest totals so far.ICU admissions and deaths are also higher than usual among children, Tam said."As we rapidly approach the holidays, now is the time to get vaccinated if you have not already done so," Tam recommended at a news conference in Ottawa on Wednesday.Flu shot's plusesCanadians aged six months and older who are eligible to get a flu shot should do so now to protect themselves heading into the holiday season, said Dawn Bowdish, an immunologist and professor at McMaster University in Hamilton. Plus, she said, there tends to be a transfer of infection from kids to adults, especially older adults, during this time of year."The holidays are a hot spot of transmission. We all get together, we don't have our masks on, we have lots of intergenerational visiting," said Bowdish, who holds the Canada Research Chair on Aging and Immunity. "Getting a flu shot this week will get you into that prime period of protection over the holiday season."What's more, a flu shot can reduce the time someone is off sick from work, and cuts the severity of symptoms and risk of hospitalization, as well as long-term health risks, like cardiac arrest and other heart conditions, she said.The holidays, and the gathering that comes along with that, can be a hot spot for transmission of respiratory infections like influenza. (Ben Nelms/CBC)Getting vaccinated for influenza and COVID-19 also reduces the chance of getting bacterial co-infections that are also leading to hospitalizations, pediatricians say.Convenience countsInfluenza can be serious enough to lead to not having enough oxygen and difficulty breathing, said Dr. Roger Wong, a clinical professor of geriatric medicine at the University of British Columbia."The flu shot has been proven to be effective and safe in saving lives," Wong said in an interview. "That's a message that we need to get out."Mild influenza can lead to a sore throat, fever, muscle aches, sometimes a runny nose and overall fatigue.WATCH | What to watch for in health in 2023: The road ahead for Canada’s health care system in 20232 years agoDuration 6:39CBC senior health reporters Christine Birak and Lauren Pelley discuss what the most prominent health issues will be in 2023, including why 2023 could be a make-or-break year for Canada’s strained health-care system and the future of the COVID-19 pandemic.Wong noted that the number of older adults who've received at least three doses of COVID-19 vaccines is well over 90 per cent in Canada. But when it comes to the influenza vaccine, he said, it's not even close.The latest available overall influenza immunization rates among the provinces and territories that responded to requests from CBC News and The Canadian Press were 30 per cent or below — and lower among children. For those aged 65 and older, flu vaccination rates vary from about 50 to 70 per cent.When Wong asks his patients why they haven't received a flu shot, he said they may not know how serious influenza can be."Sometimes it's about the convenience factor," he said.Wong suggests applying lessons learned from the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines to flu shots, such as making the shot more readily available and easier to get for older adults."This is not a small thing, because we know that older adults living in a community, many of them are quite homebound and they rarely get out," he said.Home outreach — as was common during COVID-19, when teams of nurses, doctors and paramedics gave the vaccine to people where they live — could help.Your best shot: A science-backed approach to timing your next doseThe Dose2 Montreal children have died from group A strep complications. Here's what parents need to knowSome 95 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines have been administered in two years, according to Health Minister Jean-Yves Duclos. Last week, Health Canada approved bivalent boosters for children aged five to 11, offering protection against more recent variants, as well as the ancestral strain.It is safe to get COVID and flu shots at the same appointment, according to the National Advisory Committee on Immunization, which urges initial COVID immunizations as a top priority, with booster doses also recommended for everyone eligible. The suggested timing for COVID boosters varies.Protecting ourselves against both COVID-19 and influenza also protects our health-care systems from further strain, noted Wong.Going beyond the holidays, influenza vaccines offer about six months of protection, to carry people through the respiratory virus season.With files from CBC's Christine Birak and The Canadian PressCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories Your best shot: A science-backed approach to timing your next doseThe Dose 2 Montreal children have died from group A strep complications. Here's what parents need to knowAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowA 3.5-million-pound problem: More than a million chickens in Franklin County, Washington have bird flu - Northwest Public Broadcasting AboutContact UsCoverage AreaOur StaffWork With UsReport an OutageStation NewsLatest Station NewsConnect ArchivesOur StoriesDownload NWPB AppTVSchedulesChannel GuideOnline SchedulesLocal ProgramsAccess NWAmerican GraduateAsk Dr. UniverseOur Hanford HistoryOur Neighbors’ Stories: Vietnam WarNWPB PassportPBSPBS KidsAll TV ProgramsRadioSchedulesView SchedulePrint ScheduleListen LiveNPR NewsNPR News & Classical MusicKJEM: JazzClassical Music PlaylistJazz Music PlaylistNewsFire CoverageNorthwest NewsEn EspañolNational NewsEnvironmentElections CoveragePBS NewshourBusiness & EconomySchool Closures & DelaysMurrow NewsThe American BuffaloRemembering the Idaho FourMusic & CultureMusic & CultureArtsPodcastsStoryCorps NWPast as ProloguePassing The BatonMusic MomentsEducationExplore TogetherAbout Explore TogetherExplore Together EventsExplore Together ResourcesEventsCommunity CalendarAdd an EventSupportSupport NWPBSustaining MembershipLeadership CircleVehicle DonationBusiness Support & Community SponsorIRA QCDGifts of Stock and Other AssetsEstate & Planned GiftsFormsDonateRadioTelevisionMyNWPBMyNWPB LoginMyNWPB InformationListen/StreamSmart Speaker FAQNPR & Classical MusicNPR NewsJazzNWPB/TV PBSPodcasts About Contact UsCoverage AreaOur StaffWork With UsReport an OutageStation News Latest Station NewsConnect ArchivesOur StoriesDownload NWPB AppTV Schedules Channel GuideOnline SchedulesLocal Programs Access NWAmerican GraduateAsk Dr. UniverseOur Hanford HistoryOur Neighbors’ Stories: Vietnam WarNWPB PassportPBSPBS KidsAll TV ProgramsRadio Schedules View SchedulePrint ScheduleListen Live NPR NewsNPR News & Classical MusicKJEM: JazzClassical Music PlaylistJazz Music PlaylistNews Fire CoverageNorthwest NewsEn EspañolNational NewsEnvironmentElections CoveragePBS NewshourBusiness & EconomySchool Closures & DelaysMurrow NewsThe American BuffaloRemembering the Idaho FourMusic & Culture Music & CultureArtsPodcastsStoryCorps NWPast as ProloguePassing The BatonMusic MomentsEducation Explore TogetherAbout Explore TogetherExplore Together EventsExplore Together ResourcesEvents Community CalendarAdd an EventSupport Support NWPBSustaining MembershipLeadership CircleVehicle DonationBusiness Support & Community SponsorIRA QCDGifts of Stock and Other AssetsEstate & Planned GiftsForms Donate RadioTelevisionMyNWPB MyNWPB LoginMyNWPB InformationListen/Stream Smart Speaker FAQNPR & Classical MusicNPR NewsJazzNWPB/TV PBSPodcasts × A 3.5-million-pound problem: More than a million chickens in Franklin County, Washington have bird flu By Anna King December 16, 2022 Agriculture officials are quarantining flocks at Oakdell Farms in snowy north Franklin County, Washington, because the flock has come down with highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1. Credit: Anna Kind, Northwest News NetworkListen https://www.nwpb.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/FINAL-Bird-Flu.mp3(Runtime 1:10)ReadMore than a million chickens at a farm in Franklin County, Washington, are set to be destroyed because of bird flu. Officials are now deliberating on how to transport, bury, compost or incinerate the birds.Hoar frost collects like icy-armored spikes against the steady trunks of rural poplars.The stout trees define the edges of vast snowy crop fields in Franklin County, in southeast Washington, from the white blur of flat land everywhere else.A worker waits near a white pickup for cars to pass so he can spray their tires with disinfectant at Oakdell Farms in Franklin County, Washington. Credit: Anna King, Northwest News NetworkBut this bleak scene is made more grim, when approaching Oakdell Farms off of East Sagemoor Road, where highly pathogenic avian influenza is in a commercial flock of chickens. At the edge of the farm, a man in Carhartt-colored winter coveralls sits warming from the 20-degree temps in a small white pickup with a utility light flashing.When cars approach from the farm side toward the highway, he scrambles from the truck to stop them. He sprays a pink disinfectant from a large sprayer bottle with a hand wand over the tires. Signs out front – some hand made on cardboard – read “Biosecurity Control Area, Authorized Personnel Only,” and “Do not enter, call …”Oakdell Egg Farms, Inc. The Washington State Department of Agriculture said 1,015,500 birds are affected, although they won’t name the facility. But, Cliff Lillywhite, president of Oakdell Egg Farms, Inc., confirms that it’s their flock.It’s been stressful: The leaders and about 45 full-time staff are helping government officials dispatch the more than a million egg layers.“You know we have an obligation to take care of our birds,” Lillywhite said. “We don’t like to see our birds suffer. And this is a very horrible disease that affects the birds. We don’t like to see that. There is certainly a financial aspect of it too – dead birds don’t lay eggs.”Each chicken lays about an egg a day, so Lillywhite said it’s also stressful to not be able to market those many eggs. Oakdell Farms claims to be the largest egg-laying operation in the Intermountain West.The egg-laying business north of Pasco has massive facilities. Several large desert-brown chicken warehouse-like buildings are lined up in a neat row off the highway behind a corn field.Lillywhite said their operation is a three-generation family business.“I think the egg business is extremely important because the nutritional value of an egg is unsurpassed by virtually any other food item,” Lillywhite said. “It’s kind of the standard whereby any other protein items are compared. I, personally, and many in our company feel a deep obligation to help consumers to make wise choices in their diet and use eggs appropriately to help them achieve a normal, healthy diet. We believe deeply in the nutritional value of an egg.”Lilywhite said after his flock is put down – and the facilities are disinfected – U.S. Department of Agriculture officials will swab and test the buildings. And then, the whole facility has to sit vacant for a couple weeks. It will take nearly six months to raise reliable egg layers from baby chicks.The problemThe state received the USDA’s confirmed test results on Wednesday – that the chickens here do have highly pathogenic avian influenza, known as H5N1, said Amber Betts, a spokesperson for the Washington State Department of Agriculture.More than a million birds live in several large long rectangular warehouse-like buildings. The buildings are painted desert tan, aside from one slate blue one, and built in neat rows with massive air handling units at their ends.It’s going to be a massive job to clean up this property, and sanitize everything, Betts said.“No matter the size of the farm, whether it’s a backyard or a commercial, whether it’s five birds or a million, it’s incredibly taxing on everybody that’s involved,” she said. “In addition to the birds themselves that are suffering this terrible virus, which is just brutal. It’s not a good way to go out.”‘Not a good way to go out’Birds that get sick with avian influenza often see discharge from the eyes or nasal openings, a tilting head and sudden death. This is the first commercial flock ever to be infected in Washington state, although more than 30 backyard flocks have come down with the virus. In Oregon, there have been no commercial flocks infected so far, but more than 20 affected backyard flocks. And it all comes as 694 flocks – 300 of them commercial – are infected across the U.S. so far this year.Bird flu has killed waterfowl and backyard flocks with a vengeance this year, Betts said.The planA million birds is a lot to process, literally. Even when a backyard flock gets infected, state government officials treat biosecurity very seriously. But with a million birds – that’s around 3.5-million pounds of chicken to dispose of if they’re all full grown. State officials said they, federal and county officials are weighing the options on how to safely transport, bury, compost or incinerate all the birds. State officials said late Friday, that they’ve decided to compost the infected birds on the farm.Benton-Franklin Health District officials stressed that the current risk of avian influenza infecting the general public is extremely low. The type of bird flu that is spreading in wild birds and domestic poultry in the U.S. has only been identified in one person who had close contact with infected birds.Hoar frost gathers on a electric fence bordering a corn field. In the distance is Oakdell Farms in Franklin County, Washington. Credit: Anna King, Northwest News Network“There have been no cases of avian influenza identified in humans in Washington state,” said Hannah Schnitzler, communicable disease epidemiologist with Washington State Department of Health.That said, health officials advise people not to touch or move dead or sick wild birds and ask people to report such instances to Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s online reporting tool.Tough dealHaving to destroy animals they’ve taken care of for years and sometimes decades can be very distressing to those who work in these facilities, Betts said.“It’s just devastating,” she said. “When your chickens are part of your family, it’s super difficult to watch them go through this. Or have to euthanize. And then, [at] an operation like this, it’s just taxing on everybody. It’s a lot of work. There’s a lot of emotions from the producers as well as our veterinarians. It’s just a very difficult thing to have to go through.”Oakdell is an egg operation that spans the West. According to its website, the company has operations in Lewiston, Utah; Franklin, Idaho; and outside of Pasco, Washington.“You can find our eggs in eleven states including Washington, Oregon, Utah, Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, Nevada, Colorado, California, Alaska, and Hawaii,” the website reads. “They’re sold under the Oakdell Egg Farms brand as well as many of your favorite store brands.”Sitting in a warming pickup outside a commercial hay outfit nearby, a farmer rubs his face as he said it’s been tough on all who work at Oakdell. He didn’t want to be identified, but he said the egg farm operators are friends of his. And it’s been a really tough deal.12/16: An earlier headline miscalculated the weight of the chickens that need to be composted. The right amount is about 3.5 million pounds. Tags: agriculture avian flu bird flu chickens eggs food Franklin County WashingtonRecent Posts This nonprofit winery connects vineyard workers to health careNovember 10, 2024 Nonprofit aims to increase voter participation in rural Washington communitiesNovember 9, 2024 Helpful supplement or dangerous drug? Doctors discuss use and risks of kratomNovember 8, 2024 Schrier wins reelection for 8th Congressional DistrictNovember 8, 2024 Newhouse holds a narrow lead over Sessler in a race for a seat in the HouseNovember 8, 2024 Washington state working to recruit diversity of behavioral health care providersNovember 7, 2024 Northwest Public Broadcasting Watch Online Listen Online Download KTNW Schedule Download KWSU Schedule Public Inspection Files FCC ApplicationsAbout Us Contact Information Jobs Public Documents Who We Are Coverage AreaSupport Us Pledge Today Leadership Circle Vehicle Donation Estate Planning Business Support & Community SponsorA community service of the Edward R. Murrow College of Communication at Washington State University.PO Box 642530 | Pullman, WA 99164 E-Mail: info@nwpb.org | Phone: 1-800-842-8991 | Fax: 1-509-335-3772Editorial Policy | Privacy Policy | Terms of Use I would like to support:×RadioTVNPR & Classical MusicNPR NewsKJEM Jazz××RadioTVWelcome to the new digital home of Northwest Public Radio and Northwest Public Television. The new year brings an internal change to our organization, joining TV and radio. Together, we’re NWPB. Thank you for your continued support of public broadcasting in our region. Your support matters.×Click here for more information.Thanks for visiting www.nwpb.org. It looks like you might have an Ad Blocker enabled. Please whitelist www.nwpb.org to ensure that you are receiving the fully uncompromised interactive experience. Click here for help whitelisting NWPB.org.××KTNWKWSU NPR & Classical Music NPR News Jazz from KJEM ×NPR & Classical MusicNPR NewsKJEM Jazz×NWPB TV/PBSNPR & Classical MusicNPR NewsJazz×NWPB TV/PBS××RadioTV××GreenCovid-19 vs the flu: Death rates compared | RNZ News Navigation for News Categories New ZealandWorldPoliticsPacificTe Ao MāoriSportBusinessCountryLocal Democracy ReportingComment & AnalysisIn DepthWeather New Zealand health 13 Dec 2022 Covid-19 vs the flu: Death rates compared 10:12 am on 13 December 2022 Share this Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share via email Share on Reddit Share on Linked In Farah Hancock, Data journalist, In Depth @KiwiFarah farah.hancock@rnz.co.nz Photo: AFP.com - RNZ / Composite image RNZ Covid-19 is killing three times as many New Zealanders as influenza does in a typical year. University of Otago epidemiologist Professor Michael Baker said while Covid-19 does share some similarities with influenza, it's had a more severe impact on New Zealanders than influenza usually does. More than 2000 people died this year with Covid-19 identified as the underlying or contributing cause of death. Over the past 30 years an average of 695 people a year died due to influenza or pneumonia. Since 1991 the highest number of deaths attributed to influenza or pneumonia in a single year was 1197 and the lowest was 382. As well as killing more people than influenza, Covid-19 put more people in hospital this year than influenza did in a typical year. More than 20,000 people were admitted to hospital for Covid-19 in 2022. In 2019 influenza hospitalised 6547 people. "It's far more severe," Baker said, and it could be shaping up to be our second biggest killer. RNZ compared Covid-19 deaths per 100,000 people in 2022 to cause of death statistics of other diseases (2019 is the most recent publicly available data). Only deaths where Covid-19 was identified as the underlying or contributing cause of death were included; people who died with Covid-19 but not as a result of it were not included in the totals. While 2022's Covid-19 death rate is a distant second to 2019's heart disease death rate per 100,000, it outranked lung cancer, bowel cancer, respiratory disease and diabetes. Baker said data on Covid-19 as a cause of death is two years ahead of other diseases because the health system has made a considerable effort to promptly identify when Covid-19 has caused or contributed to a death. As well as being a bigger killer than many diseases, Covid-19 deaths were also higher than this year's current road toll and 2019's suspected suicides. However, Baker said it was unclear if Covid-19 would remain one of our top causes of death in the future. "We're really not sure whether getting this virus a second or third or fourth time does carry exactly the same risks as the first time. The evidence is still inconclusive on that. There are studies pointing in both directions." Until this was clear he suggested it would be prudent to assume it would remain a major killer and plan accordingly. "I think what we're missing at the moment in New Zealand is a very clear strategy which says, actually, our goal is both to reduce the rate of infections and the consequences." Clear guidelines on how to run safe workplaces, schools and social events would be helpful, and he would like to see mask use return to public transport, in particular buses and trains, which he said were high-risk environments with "notoriously poor for ventilation". Mask use in other high-risk settings could be looked at if the current wave intensified further, he said. The impact of Long Covid should also be considered. Summer of uncertainty ahead for Covid-19 deaths Covid-19 Modelling Aotearoa's Dr Emily Harvey said the most up-to-date modelling showed our current wave of Covid cases was likely to peak this month. "We're still looking at the end of December, around Christmas." "Cases are very uncertain, because they're so dependent on reporting behaviour," she said, but modelling still suggested reported cases could peak between 10,000 to 14,000 per day. She expected infections to be as high as July's deadly wave in which 554 deaths, around a quarter of all Covid-19 attributed deaths in 2022, occurred in a single month. The peak of hospitalisations may occur in the last week of December through to the first weeks of January, and most deaths would likely occur in the first weeks of January. The current modelling did not include the impact of antivirals, she said. These could reduce the severity of the illness and are available to those at higher risk. If they were widely used it would be possible the deaths from this wave of Covid-19 could be lower than July's wave. Antivirals are available to people aged 65 and older, to people of Māori or Pacific ethnicity aged 50 or older, for unvaccinated people and for those with other risk factors. "The biggest issue is that in order for them to work, they need to be used early on in the infections. This means that people need to be detecting that they have Covid-19 as early as possible in their infection, and then be able to get a prescription, and get it filled, promptly," she said. Harvey suggested people who are eligible for antivirals could ask their GP for an advance prescription before practices shut down over Christmas. Antivirals are available without a prescription from 400 pharmacies, but University of Waikato's Dr Rawiri Keenan was concerned this wouldn't be enough to ensure easy access to the medicines. "While many pharmacies usually stay open over weekends, during these summer holidays on statutory holiday days they will join general practice teams in largely being closed," he said. Christmas and New Year both fall on a Sunday this year and are observed on a Tuesday, meaning many pharmacies will be closed from Saturday afternoon until Wednesday morning. Keenan is worried we are relying heavily on treatment being available, "when we know for everything from infection to diabetes, prevention is better than cure." Both Baker and Harvey suggested taking measures ahead of Christmas get-togethers to keep older relatives, who are most at risk from serious outcomes, safe from Covid-19. This includes doing a RAT test before attending gatherings and taking precautions, such as wearing a mask, in high-risk situations. Baker said one of the joys of December was the many social events. "But just think about doing it safely, particularly in the lead up to Christmas, when after that people are going to be dispersing all around the country, and often visiting more vulnerable relatives and friends. Try not to take the virus with you." Tags: Covid-19 health Share this Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share via email Share on Reddit Share on Linked In Copyright © 2022, Radio New Zealand Subscribe to RNZ's Daily Newsletter View latest newsletter Next story in New Zealand Defence Force personnel warned after signing up with China-linked South African flight school New Zealand Watch live: Christopher Luxon apologises to survivors of abuse in care Pharmac to disestablish its Māori advisory group 'You deserved so much better' - Christopher Luxon apologises to survivors of abuse in care The value of KiwiSaver funds increases by $7 billion in the third quarter, survey finds Labour backs probe into immigration adviser accused of selling job Immigration adviser on tape offering job for $70k Get the RNZ app for ad-free news and current affairs Top News stories Watch live: Christopher Luxon apologises to survivors of abuse in care Super Rugby Pacific 2025: Hurricanes, Crusaders, Chiefs, Highlanders, Blues, Moana Pasifika named Luxon's national apology interupted, heckler removed from Parliament Live: Hīkoi mō te Tiriti arrives in Dargaville Pharmac to disestablish its Māori advisory group Subscribe Subscribe to RNZ's Daily Newsletter View latest newsletter New Zealand RSS Follow RNZ NewsAlberta Health Services adds influenza, RSV to online assessment tool | Globalnews.ca SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT In the news Remembrance Day Counterfeit Coins University Shooting Cuba Earthquake Global News Home Subscribe Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark Live Search Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark GlobalNews home WatchWorldCanadaLocalPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News Alberta Health Services adds influenza, RSV to online assessment tool Click to return to homepage Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Full Menu Search Menu Home Trending Watch Local Menu Menu Close Submit Search Topics WatchWorldCanadaLocalChange locationPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News TV Programs Global NationalWest BlockThe Morning ShowVideo CentreMore… Connect Email alertsAlexaBreaking News Alerts from Global NewsLicense ContentContact Us National Change Close Change Close BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram Go Back Close Local your local region National BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Calendar Close Calendar Close All event types Comedy Festival Food Health Music Sports Theatre Virtual Other Search Close Submit search Quick Search Trending Now Add Global News to Home Screen Close Instructions: Press the share icon on your browser Select Add to Home Screen Press Add Comments Close comments menu Want to discuss? Please read our Commenting Policy first. Video link Headline link Advertisement Close X Click to scroll back to top of the page Backto top Canada Alberta Health Services adds influenza, RSV to online assessment tool By Adam Toy Global News Posted December 14, 2022 7:38 pm Updated December 14, 2022 9:18 pm 3 min read If you get Global News from Instagram or Facebook - that will be changing. Find out how you can still connect with us. Hide message bar 2:59 Health Matters: Gene therapy for blindness available in Edmonton, respiratory illness advice, battery warning Health Matters December 14: Three patients have received a sight-saving gene therapy at the Royal Alexandra Hospital, the only site in Western Canada to offer Luxturna. Plus , Alberta Health Services has revamped its website to offer advice on respiratory illnesses. And, emergency doctors are warning parents about the dangers of button batteries and kids. Su-Ling Goh reports – Dec 14, 2022 Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Descrease article font size Increase article font size Albertans wondering if they’ve got COVID-19, influenza or RSV have a new tool they can go to. On Wednesday, AHS announced an updated respiratory illness assessment tool went live on the AHS website.“This tool is an example of the steps that AHS is taking to ensure that the guidance we provide to adults and parents is reflecting the current reality of the mix of viruses this respiratory illness season,” AHS medical officer of health Dr. Kristin Klein said in a statement.The online assessment was previously used to help Albertans book PCR tests for COVID. In January, the province restricted the molecular tests to those with severe clinical risk or who live and/or work in high-risk settings. Story continues below advertisement AHS says the COVID online assessment tool was accessed at least 15 million times.The new tool designed to address the viruses involved in what’s been nicknamed the “tripledemic” will help guide people to the best care options for their symptoms, ranging from self-care at home to seeking care from a family physician to urgent care or emergency departments. 1:48 Alberta health minister says current peak of influenza may have passed, bracing for more waves in new year “This is another tool, in addition to other available resources such as the HEAL website, to help know your options and use appropriate care whether that be in-home or elsewhere,” Dr. Klein said. “Above all, however, we strongly encourage all Albertans to get immunized against influenza and COVID-19 this season, stay home when sick and do everything we can to reduce the spread of illness in our communities.” Get weekly health news Receive the latest medical news and health information delivered to you every Sunday. Sign up for weekly health newsletter Sign Up By providing your email address, you have read and agree to Global News' Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy. COVID hospitalizations come downCOVID hospitalizations fell below a milestone for the first time in two and a half months. Story continues below advertisement On Dec. 11, fewer than 1,000 Albertans were in hospital with COVID. The last time hospitalizations were that low was Sep. 24 – 78 days prior.The weekly COVID data release from Alberta Health showed 992 COVID hospitalizations, 50 fewer than the week before. COVID in ICU also dropped by six to 32 people.The pandemic death toll increased by 46 in the past week, to 5,308 since March 2020. 1:41 Shelves restocked with kids medication as flu cases rise in Alberta Shelves restocked with kids medication as flu cases rise in Alberta Local doctors urge parents to vaccinate children for influenza, COVID-19 RSV wave—are our seniors at risk? Fears of triple virus threat loom as holiday season approaches Older adults at risk as RSV cases rise across Canada Previous Video Next Video All of the deaths appear to be in Albertans older than 50, with 33 deaths tallied in the 80+ age cohort. Trending Now Ukraine attacks Moscow with 34 drones, biggest strike on the Russian capital RCMP report reveals new details on GTA man and his ‘camel-toe’ fake toonies People across all age ranges continue to be hospitalized:five infants under one year of agefive aged one to four,two kids aged five to nine, andat least one in each of the age groups older than 20 years old was admitted in the past week.The seven-day new case tally from restricted PCR tests was 1,045, a reduction of 102 from the week before, and the seven-day positivity rate was down about a half a percentage point to 13.61 per cent. Story continues below advertisement On Wednesday, Canada’s chief public health officer Dr. Theresa Tam acknowledged the latest wave of cases appears to be receding but warned it was “too soon to let our guard down.”“In Canada, variations in population level of immunity, and current global trends suggest that an uptick in COVID-19 could occur in the new year,” said Tam, who also cited an increase in more immune-evasive variants emerging in Canada.“With the increased prominence of these variants in Canada, at a minimum, we could see a slower decline and a higher plateau in the number of infections, as well as hospital admissions in Canada as this respiratory virus season plays out.” 1:01 COVID-19 capable of becoming chronic illness, accelerate onset of other conditions: expert Tam also advised caution when planning holiday gatherings, saying it is important to consider the potential impact of respiratory illnesses on everyone in attendance, and where those gatherings would be held. Story continues below advertisement “Properly wearing a well-fitted, well-constructed facemask in indoor public spaces or crowded settings and taking steps to take the best ventilation possible are layers of protection that can reduce everyone’s risk,” she said.– with files from Global News’ Aaron D’Andrea More on Calgary More videos Gallery at Military Museums captures realities of war Hundreds of Calgarians race to support cancer research Alberta military reservists eager to join Canadian Forces in Latvia: ‘It is urgent’ Worker dead, charges laid after truck crashes into Fort McMurray Boston Pizza Montreal refugee claimants facing increased racism As possible Canada Post strike looms, who could see biggest impact? Language rights take spotlight at Quebec Liberal Party convention Activist who climbed Jacques-Cartier Bridge speaks out Journalistic standards Comment Report an error © 2022 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Sponsored content More from Global News Crowd brave rain to honour veterans at Fredericton Remembrance Day ceremony First B.C., now Montreal: What a pair of port shutdowns means for Canada Advertisement Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Trending RCMP report reveals new details on GTA man and his ‘camel-toe’ fake toonies 44,080 Read How Canadian consumers can spot counterfeit $2 coins 27,477 Read One person is dead and 16 are injured after a shooting at Tuskegee University 10,363 Read Ukraine attacks Moscow with 34 drones, biggest strike on the Russian capital 9,526 Read 6.8 magnitude earthquake shakes Cuba after hurricanes and blackouts 6,916 Read 1.4M Honda vehicles may see engines fail, prompting U.S. probe 5,335 Read Top Videos Hope for resolution in B.C. port dispute fades as talks break down 40 Viewed Quebec man who imported 26K fake toonies gets jail time 39 Viewed 26,000+ fake toonies seized in CBSA bust 39 Viewed CRTC takes action to make international roaming fees more affordable 37 Viewed Call of the Wilde: Habs’ losing streak continues 34 Viewed H5 avian influenza: B.C. reports 1st suspected human case of bird flu 25 Viewed More Videos Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Advertisement Report an Error Subscribe here AdChoices Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram AboutPrinciples & PracticesBranded ContentContact usRSSNewslettersNotificationsSmart homeAdvertisers Election RegistryGlobal News Licensing RequestsCookie consent ©2024 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Corus News. All rights reserved. Privacy PolicyCopyrightTerms of UseAdvertiseAdvertising Standards TermsCorus EntertainmentAccessibility Advertisement'It isn't too late': Albertans urged to get flu shots as Christmas draws near | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore 'It isn't too late': Albertans urged to get flu shots as Christmas draws near | CBC News LoadedCalgary'It isn't too late': Albertans urged to get flu shots as Christmas draws nearAlbertans are being urged to get their flu vaccine ahead of the holidays as a particularly nasty influenza season continues.45 Albertans have died already this flu seasonJennifer Lee · CBC News · Posted: Dec 16, 2022 8:06 PM EST | Last Updated: December 17, 2022According to provincial data, 25.2 per cent of Albertans have received their flu shot so far this season. Experts say that number should be much higher. (Damian Dovarganes/The Associated Press)Social SharingWith the holidays fast approaching amidst a particularly nasty flu season, Albertans are being urged to roll up their sleeves for their flu vaccine.According to provincial data, 45 Albertans have died of the flu already this season and 1,413 have been hospitalized with lab-confirmed influenza.This fall's death toll is just below the totals for some entire seasons prior to the pandemic (more moderate flu seasons) and it's already higher than the total recorded during the 2019-20 flu season."Unfortunately, it's not really surprising," said Craig Jenne, associate professor in the department of microbiology, immunology and infectious diseases at the University of Calgary. Renewed calls for masking in Alberta schools as viral illnesses surge, hospitals struggle "We are significantly behind in vaccine … uptake in the province, which means our overall level of community protection is significantly lower, and as a result we are seeing a lot of sick individuals."Alberta Health statistics show 25.2 per cent of Albertans have received their free flu shots, lower than pre-pandemic immunization rates.1/3 Influenza continues to trend above expected levels, nationally. Influenza vaccines take ~2 weeks to provide optimal protection, so as we rapidly approach the holidays, now is the time to get vaccinated if you haven’t already done so. <a href="https:/.co/PNJH42zw2g">https:/.co/PNJH42zw2g</a>&mdash;@CPHO_CanadaAnd Jenne said that while case numbers are showing some early signs of plateauing, that could easily change as people gather for the holidays."I don't think it's safe to say we are out of the woods," he said."With a lot virus in the community, low levels of immunity in people and social gatherings [over Christmas], I'm concerned we may see another uptick in flu cases in the coming weeks to months."Dr. Jia Hu, a Calgary-based public health physician, said now is the time to get your flu shot if you haven't already."It isn't too late. We're still very much in very, very high flu season activity," he said.Calgary-based public health physician Dr. Jia Hu wants Albertans to know it's not too late to get their free flu shots (Erin Collins/CBC)"It's really important people do get immunized. We usually say it takes two weeks for the vaccine to take effect, but even if you get vaccinated now, it will give you some protection by the time Christmas rolls around."During a news conference this week, Canada's chief public health officer, Dr. Theresa Tam, called the increase in influenza hospitalizations across the country "worrisome," in particular the high rates among children. Nurses haunted by 'moral distress' as they scramble to treat kids at Alberta Children's Hospital Nearly 29 per cent of Alberta's flu hospitalizations to date have occurred in kids and teens. Two children have died."Laboratory data indicate that this year's influenza vaccine is a good match to circulating strains and therefore is likely to help protect against serious influenza disease," said Tam."As we rapidly approach the holidays, now is the time to get vaccinated if you have not already done so."ABOUT THE AUTHORJennifer LeeReporterJennifer Lee is a CBC News reporter based in Calgary. She worked at CBC Toronto, Saskatoon and Regina before landing in Calgary in 2002. If you have a health or human interest story to share, let her know. Jennifer.Lee@cbc.caCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories Top stories from CBC Calgary Brace yourselves — southern Alberta is headed for a deep freeze. Here's why Alberta NDP holds lead in new survey, but 'reluctant' UCP voters could be key on election day: pollster Alberta Health Services adds RSV, influenza to symptom assessment toolFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowTurkey flock ‘depopulated’ in Osage County | Sedalia Democrat Monday, November 11, 2024 Log in e-Edition Special Sections Newsletter Sign Up Subscribe Toggle navigation Main menu News City & County Business Education Arts & Entertainment Election Health Community Milestones Police & Crash Reports 20 Under 40 City & County Business Education Arts & Entertainment Election Health Community Milestones Police & Crash Reports 20 Under 40 Sports State Fair Community College Smith-Cotton Kaysinger Conference State Fair Community College Smith-Cotton Kaysinger Conference Obituaries Opinion e-Edition Puzzles Marketplace Shop the classifieds Place an ad Legal notices Statewide legal notices Digital Marketing Shop the classifieds Place an ad Legal notices Statewide legal notices Digital Marketing Contact us About Us Change of address Delivery issues Vacation stop Pay your subscription About Us Change of address Delivery issues Vacation stop Pay your subscription Subscribe Log in Turkey flock ‘depopulated’ in Osage County Sick birds had contracted highly pathogenic avian influenza By Chris Howell, chrish@sedaliademocrat.comPosted 12/15/22 Federal officials have confirmed a commercial turkey flock in Osage County contracted highly pathogenic avian influenza. Samples were delivered to the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s … This item is available in full to subscribers. Attention subscribers To continue reading, you will need to either log into your subscriber account or purchase a new subscription. If you are a digital subscriber with an active subscription, then you already have an online account. Please log in below to access this article. If you are a current print subscriber, your subscription includes full access to our website. Please use your online account information to log in below to access this article. If you haven’t already, you can set up a free online account by by clicking here. Click here if you need to reset your password. Otherwise, click here to view your options for subscribing. Please log in to continue E-mail Password Log in Need an account? Print and web subscribers If you're a print and web subscriber, but do not yet have an online account, click here to create one. Online-only subscribers If you are a digital subscriber with an active, online-only subscription then you already have an account here. Just reset your password if you've not yet logged in to your account on this new site. Non-subscribers Click here to see your options for becoming a subscriber. Other items that may interest you Police program to target those ignoring school bus … Experienced nurse practitioner joins Bothwell Cole … Six arrested on drug, firearm offenses after no-knock … Sedalia Veterans Day event celebrates service of local … Advanced search Tuesday, November 12, 2024 View this issue Browse other issues X 111 W. Fourth St. Sedalia, MO Phone: 660-826-1000 Email: news@sedaliademocrat.com Sections News Sports Obituaries Opinion e-Edition Puzzles Marketplace Contact us Subscribe Links of interest Contact Us Send us your news Shop the Classifieds Place a Classified Ad Digital Marketing Calendar of Events Search Puzzles Sign up for Newsletters Nearby News Sites Warrensburg Star-Journal Bolivar Herald-Free Press Buffalo Reflex Cedar County Republican Christian County Headliner The Marshfield Mail West Plains Daily Quill Harrison Daily Times Newton County Times The Baxter Bulletin Kirksville Daily Express Big Nickel NEMO Trader © Copyright 2024 Sedalia Democrat Powered by Creative Circle Media Solutions XCHEO officials plead with families to get flu shots amid 'staggering' rise in cases | Ottawa CitizenSkip to Content Mix up your morning routine! Try PUZZMO, a twist on traditional puzzles >> Mix up your morning routine! Try PUZZMO, a twist on traditional puzzles >> SectionsSearch Search ottawacitizen.com Perform search Share Share this Story : CHEO officials plead with families to get flu shots amid 'staggering' rise in cases Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Subscribe for $0.50/week User My Account Search ottawacitizen.com Perform search Subscribe FAQ My Account Manage My Subscriptions Newsletters News Local News Federal Politics and Public Service National World True Crime Weather Archives Opinion Editorials Letters Submit a Letter Columnists Submit an Opinion Column Food Local Food Reviews Arts Local Arts Music Local Reviews Movies Television TV Listings Books Celebrity Cappies Sports Ottawa Senators NHL PWHL More Hockey Junior Hockey Local Sports Ottawa Redblacks CFL NFL Baseball Basketball NBA Tennis Golf Public Service Defence Watch Longreads Shopping Home Living Tech Style & Beauty Kitchen & Dining Personal Care Entertainment & Hobbies Gift Guide Deals Travel Essentials Outdoor Living Puzzmo Diversions Comics Puzzles New York Times Crossword Contests Healthing ePaper Driving Vehicle Research Reviews News Gear Guide Remembering Place an Obituary Place an In Memoriam Classifieds Browse Listings Place an Ad Business Card Directory Celebrations Real Estate Marketplace Pet Posts and Adoptions Working Business Ads This Week's Flyers Manage Print Subscription Inside Ottawa Hospital Social Scene Profile Settings My Subscriptions Saved Articles Newsletters Customer Service FAQ Sign Out Newsletters News Opinion Food Arts Sports Public Service Defence Watch Longreads Shopping Puzzmo Healthing ePaper Driving Remembering Manage Print Subscription Inside Ottawa Hospital Social Scene Advertisement 1This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below. Share this Story : CHEO officials plead with families to get flu shots amid 'staggering' rise in cases Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Breadcrumb Trail LinksLocal NewsCHEO officials plead with families to get flu shots amid 'staggering' rise in cases“We don’t see a light at the end of the tunnel until sometime in mid-January." Get the latest from Elizabeth Payne straight to your inbox Sign Up Author of the article: Elizabeth Payne Published Dec 12, 2022 • 4 minute read Join the conversation You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account.The entrance to the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO). Photo by Tony Caldwell /POSTMEDIAArticle contentOfficials from CHEO are pleading with families to get their flu shots as the embattled pediatric hospital copes with what it calls a staggering increase in children who are seriously ill with influenza.We apologize, but this video has failed to load.Try refreshing your browser, ortap here to see other videos from our team.CHEO officials plead with families to get flu shots amid 'staggering' rise in cases Back to video We apologize, but this video has failed to load.Try refreshing your browser, ortap here to see other videos from our team.Play VideoThe spike in flu cases comes late in a fall in which record numbers of children have been treated and admitted for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and other viral illnesses, forcing CHEO to open a second intensive care unit and bring in the Red Cross for help. The hospital remains overcapacity.Advertisement 2Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.THIS CONTENT IS RESERVED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLYSubscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.Exclusive articles from Elizabeth Payne, David Pugliese, Andrew Duffy, Bruce Deachman and others. Plus, food reviews and event listings in the weekly newsletter, Ottawa, Out of Office.Unlimited online access to Ottawa Citizen and 15 news sites with one account.Ottawa Citizen ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.Daily puzzles, including the New York Times Crossword.Support local journalism.SUBSCRIBE TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLESSubscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.Exclusive articles from Elizabeth Payne, David Pugliese, Andrew Duffy, Bruce Deachman and others. Plus, food reviews and event listings in the weekly newsletter, Ottawa, Out of Office.Unlimited online access to Ottawa Citizen and 15 news sites with one account.Ottawa Citizen ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.Daily puzzles, including the New York Times Crossword.Support local journalism.REGISTER / SIGN IN TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLESCreate an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.Access articles from across Canada with one account.Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments.Enjoy additional articles per month.Get email updates from your favourite authors.THIS ARTICLE IS FREE TO READ REGISTER TO UNLOCK.Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.Access articles from across Canada with one accountShare your thoughts and join the conversation in the commentsEnjoy additional articles per monthGet email updates from your favourite authorsSign In or Create an AccountEmail AddressContinueor View more offersIf you are a Home delivery print subscriber, unlimited online access is included in your subscription. Activate your Online Access NowArticle contentAnd hospital officials are warning that things could get worse.“We don’t see a light at the end of the tunnel until sometime in mid-January,” said CHEO’s chief of infectious diseases, immunology and allergy, Dr. Chuck Hui.President and CEO Alex Munter tweeted that CHEO usually sees dozens of children with influenza in its emergency department during November, with one or two so sick that they require hospitalization. This November, hundreds of children with influenza were treated in emergency and 73 were sick enough to be admitted.That is the highest number apart from one month during the H1N1 pandemic in 2009 and it came during the same month CHEO admitted a record number of children seriously ill with RSV.Hospital officials say the viral season that has pushed the hospital beyond capacity this fall is far from over. The spike in influenza cases is continuing in December.“Unfortunately, the pace and volumes are not expected to slow because this viral season is not over. In fact, for influenza it is really just beginning. Things could get worse,” the hospital said in a release urging people to get vaccinated.Evening UpdateThe Ottawa Citizen’s best journalism, delivered directly to your inbox by 7 p.m. on weekdays.There was an error, please provide a valid email address.Sign UpBy signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc.Thanks for signing up!A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder.The next issue of Evening Update will soon be in your inbox.We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try againArticle contentAdvertisement 3Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article contentCHEO released a graph showing that it has, so far this fall, seen many times more cases, earlier, than during any of the past years going back to 2018-19.Graphic: Since September, the regional lab at CHEO has identified 992 cases of influenza. That’s the red line. Yet another historic number. It looms above the previous record-setting year of September 2019 to August 2020 (the blue line).Unlike RSV, which has also made unprecedented numbers of children seriously ill this fall, there is a vaccine for influenza and it is a good match this year with the strain that is making so many children ill.Hospital officials have been urging people to wear masks while indoors in crowded spaces to reduce viral transmission and help take the pressure off CHEO. That advice continues for flu, but there is also a push for people to get vaccinated.Ottawa Public Health says it is seeing a good uptake in its flu vaccine clinics for young children.It has administered 8,745 flu vaccine doses in its flu shot clinics and delivered more than 200,000 to health-care workers, hospitals, retirement homes and long-term care homes.Advertisement 4Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article contentTypically, flu vaccine uptake is around 40 per cent in Canada, with higher numbers among the elderly and lower among younger people. This year, Hui and others say, vaccination could make a significant difference to individuals as well as the pediatric health system.Anecdotally, Hui said only a small minority of the young patients admitted to the hospital this fall for influenza or something else have been vaccinated against influenza.Flu is a serious illness, he noted. Patients have extremely high fevers, a cough, chills and feel unwell.“It really feels like somebody has been hit by a truck. When somebody gets very unwell for many days, it is not a minor illness.”Children under five are at the same risk of serious outcomes from the flu as adults who are 65 and over, another high-risk group, Hui said.Pediatric infectious diseases specialist Dr. Anne Pham-Huy is also encouraging vaccine uptake among families, noting it is safe, even after a virus, that it is not too late. She said even people who think they had the flu are encouraged to get it because there are so many viruses circulating, it is likely to have been something else.Advertisement 5Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article content“CHEO is full of kids who were admitted for influenza, making a lot of families wish they had received the flu shot prior to their kids getting sick.”The Kids Come First Health team held a virtual town hall for caregivers and parents Monday evening to answer questions about the increase in respiratory illnesses.Children between six months and five years and their families can get flu shots at an Ottawa Public Health flu immunization clinic. For information: www.ottawapublichealth.ca/en/public-health-topics/influenza-flu.aspxAnyone two and older can get a flu vaccine at a participating pharmacy.Six children have died of influenza in British Columbia this year and a toddler in Carleton Place died after testing positive for influenza. A spokesperson for the ministry of health said information about influenza deaths are not made public in Ontario.Recommended from Editorial 'All hands on deck' as CHEO brings in Red Cross amid respiratory viral crisis As CHEO continues to struggle, Ottawa's adult hospitals brace for viral illness impact Article contentShare this article in your social network Share this Story : CHEO officials plead with families to get flu shots amid 'staggering' rise in cases Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr CommentsYou must be logged in to join the discussion or read more comments.Create an AccountSign in Join the Conversation Postmedia is committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion. Please keep comments relevant and respectful. Comments may take up to an hour to appear on the site. You will receive an email if there is a reply to your comment, an update to a thread you follow or if a user you follow comments. Visit our Community Guidelines for more information.Trending Dr. Ronald Weiss (1956-2024): Ottawa's Wayne Gretzky of vasectomies sterilized nearly 60,000 men Local News Nova Scotia teen accused of making threats against Kemptville high school faces additional charges News Layoffs on the table for permanent government employees as part of spending review Public Service We Are The Dead: Flying Officer Arthur Reid died on a secret mission to occupied France News 'Erratic' driver on Hwy 417 registers twice legal alcohol limit Local News Read Next Latest National StoriesFeatured Local Savings Subscribe for $0.50/week Categories Newsletters News Opinion Food Arts Sports Public Service ePaper SubscribeFollow Ottawa Citizen Secondary Links Advertise With Us Digital Ad Registry Site Map Contact Privacy Policy Terms of Use FAQ Copyright My Account Manage My Print Subscription Manage My Tax Receipt 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4© 2024 Ottawa Citizen, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly prohibited.Notice for the Postmedia NetworkThis website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.OKYou've reached the 20 article limit.You can manage saved articles in your account. Subscribe for $0.50/week and save up to 100 articles!Looks like you've reached your saved article limit!You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article.Nasal flu vaccine may help reduce cases of group A strep - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide this message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Health and social care Public health Health protection Infectious diseases Press release Nasal flu vaccine may help reduce cases of group A strep Analysis by UKHSA suggests a nasal spray vaccine that offers protection to children against flu may also help reduce the rate of group A strep infections. From: UK Health Security Agency Published 16 December 2022 The live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) is a nasal spray offered each season to most children aged 2 and 3 years old, and to school-aged children, to help protect against flu. It was first rolled out in England from 2013, adding a school year each calendar year. In some pilot areas, the vaccine was given to all primary school years from 2013 onwards. The new study looked back at data from 2013 to 2017, comparing rates of group A strep (GAS) infections in pilot areas and comparing them to other areas where the vaccine was not being offered as widely. The study found that incidence of GAS was lower in pilot areas where the LAIV vaccine was being offered to all primary school children, compared to areas where it was being incrementally rolled out. In 2 to 4 year olds, rates of GAS were 73.5 per 100,000 children in pilot areas, compared to 93 per 100,000 children in non-pilot areas. In 5 to 10 year olds, rates of GAS were 50.3 per 100,000 children in pilot areas, compared to 57.8 per 100,000 in non-pilot areas. There was no difference in scarlet fever or invasive group A strep (iGAS) notifications. Dr Jamie Lopez Bernal, Consultant Epidemiologist for Immunisation and Countermeasures at UKHSA, said: Our findings suggest that the nasal spray vaccine programme, which offers very good protection against flu, may also help contribute to reductions in the rates of GAS infections among children. Children who catch influenza are at greater risk from subsequent infections, including group A strep, so these findings provide yet more reasons for parents of eligible children to bring them forward for the flu vaccine. This is particularly important at this time when we are seeing unusually high rates of group A strep infection across the population. The nasal spray flu vaccine given to school-aged children and pre-schoolers has an excellent safety record and has been given to millions of children in the UK and worldwide. It is not too late for children to get the flu vaccine. Parents and guardians of any reception and primary school aged children who missed their vaccination should contact their local school-aged vaccination service, or ask at their school if you are unsure. This winter the vaccine is being offered to secondary school aged children from school years 7, 8 and 9 in December and January, so if you have yet to send back your consent form it’s not too late. Parents and guardians of children aged 2 and 3 and children in a high-risk group can make an appointment through their GP surgery. UK Health Security Agency press office 10 South Colonnade London E14 4PU Email ukhsa-pressoffice@ukhsa.gov.uk Share this page The following links open in a new tab Share on Facebook (opens in new tab) Share on Twitter (opens in new tab) Updates to this page Published 16 December 2022 Related content Vaccine update: issue 333, December 2022 Scarlet fever: managing outbreaks in schools and nurseries Mpox (monkeypox) control: UK strategy 2022 to 2023 Scarlet fever: guidance and data Mpox clade IIb outbreak: epidemiological overview Explore the topic Infectious diseases Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab). Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated © Crown copyrightIf we have at-home test kits for COVID, why isn't there one for Flu? Search Query Show Search Get Our Newsletter News Seen & Heard series Central Florida News State News National / World News Government & Politics Economy & Business Environment & Climate Housing & Homelessness Education Health Space Weather Get our Newsletter Seen & Heard series Central Florida News State News National / World News Government & Politics Economy & Business Environment & Climate Housing & Homelessness Education Health Space Weather Get our Newsletter Shows & Podcasts Radio Schedules Central Florida Podcasts Central Florida Seen & Heard Engage The Wrap Are We There Yet? Spotlight Growing Bolder The Florida Roundup Morning Edition All Things Considered Fresh Air All Shows A-Z NPR+ Podcast Bundle Radio Schedules Central Florida Podcasts Central Florida Seen & Heard Engage The Wrap Are We There Yet? Spotlight Growing Bolder The Florida Roundup Morning Edition All Things Considered Fresh Air All Shows A-Z NPR+ Podcast Bundle Ways to Connect StoryCorps' One Small Step Newsletter Mobile App Text Only / Low Bandwidth Website Contact Us StoryCorps' One Small Step Newsletter Mobile App Text Only / Low Bandwidth Website Contact Us Ways To Support Donations: Monthly / One-Time Major Giving Vehicle Donations Planned Giving Corporate Sponsorship NPR+ Podcast Bundle Donations: Monthly / One-Time Major Giving Vehicle Donations Planned Giving Corporate Sponsorship NPR+ Podcast Bundle Events Tiny Desk Contest Central Florida Showcase Events Community Calendar Tiny Desk Contest Central Florida Showcase Events Community Calendar About Us Our Mission Meet the Staff Boards & Meetings Careers & Internships Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Ethics Guidelines Announcements FAQ Our Mission Meet the Staff Boards & Meetings Careers & Internships Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Ethics Guidelines Announcements FAQ instagram facebook linkedin © 2024 Central Florida Public Media. All Rights Reserved. Menu 90.7 FM Orlando • 89.5 FM Ocala Show Search Search Query Get Our Newsletter Donate Play Live Radio Next Up: 0:00 0:00 0:00 0:00 Available On Air Stations On Air Now Playing 90.7 FM News On Air Now Playing Local Newscast On Air Now Playing 90.7 HD2 Classical On Air Now Playing 89.5 FM News All Streams News Seen & Heard series Central Florida News State News National / World News Government & Politics Economy & Business Environment & Climate Housing & Homelessness Education Health Space Weather Get our Newsletter Seen & Heard series Central Florida News State News National / World News Government & Politics Economy & Business Environment & Climate Housing & Homelessness Education Health Space Weather Get our Newsletter Shows & Podcasts Radio Schedules Central Florida Podcasts Central Florida Seen & Heard Engage The Wrap Are We There Yet? Spotlight Growing Bolder The Florida Roundup Morning Edition All Things Considered Fresh Air All Shows A-Z NPR+ Podcast Bundle Radio Schedules Central Florida Podcasts Central Florida Seen & Heard Engage The Wrap Are We There Yet? Spotlight Growing Bolder The Florida Roundup Morning Edition All Things Considered Fresh Air All Shows A-Z NPR+ Podcast Bundle Ways to Connect StoryCorps' One Small Step Newsletter Mobile App Text Only / Low Bandwidth Website Contact Us StoryCorps' One Small Step Newsletter Mobile App Text Only / Low Bandwidth Website Contact Us Ways To Support Donations: Monthly / One-Time Major Giving Vehicle Donations Planned Giving Corporate Sponsorship NPR+ Podcast Bundle Donations: Monthly / One-Time Major Giving Vehicle Donations Planned Giving Corporate Sponsorship NPR+ Podcast Bundle Events Tiny Desk Contest Central Florida Showcase Events Community Calendar Tiny Desk Contest Central Florida Showcase Events Community Calendar About Us Our Mission Meet the Staff Boards & Meetings Careers & Internships Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Ethics Guidelines Announcements FAQ Our Mission Meet the Staff Boards & Meetings Careers & Internships Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Ethics Guidelines Announcements FAQ instagram facebook linkedin Health If we have at-home test kits for COVID, why isn't there one for Flu? Central Florida Public Media | By Joe Mario Pedersen Published December 14, 2022 at 7:26 AM EST Facebook Flipboard LinkedIn Email Listen • 0:53 pixabay At home COVID tests Cases of COVID-19, Influenza, and RSV continue to rise in Central Florida and throughout the county, yet COVID is the only of the three viruses to have a commercial at-home test kit.After the federal government suspended its at-home COVID test program in September, pharmacies around the country still sell various brands of at-home COVID tests, but of the three viruses driving what experts call a tripledemic there is neither an at-home test kit for the Flu virus or RSV.So why don't we?Dr. Jane Gibson, an associate dean at the College of Medicine at the University of Central Florida, says Flu test kits probably haven’t hit store shelves because of the social perspective of the Flu not being a scary virus… despite increasing hospitalizations. “People may not be as enthusiastic about buying an at-home test kit for something like 'oh, yeah, it's just the Flu.' Well, obviously, it's a serious health concern. But it's a familiar virus," she said.However, the perception of COVID was different as it was a newer virus and less immunity protection was exhibited by populations at the time."I think that the social aspects of COVID-19 being a pandemic, and then moving into an endemic phase, were very different and happened very different from the Flu just because of the whole isolation. The pressure to control the spread of COVID-19 was different," she said. "Obviously, we want to control the spread of the Flu as well, but I think it just hasn't been as foremost on the minds of people as COVID-19 was, and of course, the fear was people going outside of the house or infecting your loved ones." Financial ChallengesBut it's not just an issue of perception. There's also an economic factor to weigh in as keeping up with mutations could prove to be a financial challenge, Gibson said.“So with the Flu, it probably comes down to the fact that we have different strains with different changes to the viral genomes present every year, and to make kits that would be all-encompassing. To do that would create challenges,” she said.Gibson also says that while there is little to no-demand for an at-home Flu test, that could change as more patients want more immediate access to their health status - a mentality produced by the easy access to COVID-19 tests.Could there one day be an at-home Flu test?Tides may already be shifting after the Food and Drug Administration came out in May with a consumer test kit capable of detecting COVID, RSV, and Flu. The test was the first direct-to-consumer multi-analysis COVID-19 test authorized by FDA, the agency said in a press release. While not the same as an at-home test kit, the triple-analysis test requires an individual to collect a nasal swab sample at home, and then turn the sample in to the manufacturer, Labcorp, for analysis and results.The FDA was not immediately available for comment about the possibility of an at-home test kit.But Gibson thinks that COVID at-home kits have empowered patients who want answers on their health status. If that demand becomes larger, there could be more than one kind of viral at-home test kit on store shelves one day."I think that home test kits really are attractive to patients who want to know the answer immediately so that they can make decisions regarding who they're going to be around, or what they need to do next to feel better," she said. Tags Health Central Florida News Facebook Flipboard LinkedIn Email Joe Mario Pedersen Originally from South Florida, Joe Mario came to Orlando to attend the University of Central Florida where he graduated with degrees in Radio & Television Production, Film, and Psychology. He worked several beats and covered multimedia at The Villages Daily Sun but returned to the City Beautiful as a reporter for the Orlando Sentinel where he covered crime, hurricanes, and viral news. Joe Mario has too many interests and not enough time but tries to focus on his love for strange stories in comic books and horror movies. When he's not writing he loves to run in his spare time. See stories by Joe Mario Pedersen One Small Step Central Florida Public Media and StoryCorps invite you to take part in One Small Step, an effort to bring communities together, one conversation at a time. Learn More More Stories Environment & Climate After the storm: Kicking off Part 2 of our Seen & Heard series about Rising Water Environment & Climate Need help cleaning up after Milton? Here's what each Central Florida county offers Environment & Climate FEMA worker harassed in Florida after Hurricane Milton Environment & Climate DeSantis announces housing assistance, polling site changes post-Milton Environment & Climate Why deadly 'midwest-style tornadoes' formed in South Florida during Milton Why Donate to Central Florida Public Media? Simply put, your support ensures we are able to provide independent, trustworthy journalism for all. Please make a donation today. Donate Related Content Health Free Narcan kits are available at Orange County Department of Health Danielle Prieur Narcan can reverse an opioid overdose in minutes. Listen • 0:44 How did COVID warp our sense of time? It's a matter of perception Yuki Noguchi Many people reported a distortion in their sense of time during the pandemic, but the individual experience is highly dependent on a range of factors from emotional state to culture. Listen • 6:56 Health 'Tripledemic' threatens Central Florida as COVID, Flu & RSV cases increase Joe Mario Pedersen Respiratory illness cases are rising in Central Florida with reports of COVID-19, Flu, and Respiratory Syncytial Virus, also known as RSV, increasing, worrying experts that the area is at risk for a "tripledemic." Listen • 0:53 The Pandemic's Toll On Nurses Radio Intern The nursing field experienced a lot of changes during the pandemic. WMFE health reporter Abe Aboraya joins Intersection to discuss how the changes have contributed to a nursing shortage. Listen Journalistic Ethics Code Read The Guidelines Public Media Code of Integrity Read More Details Stay Connected instagram youtube flipboard facebook linkedin © 2024 Central Florida Public Media. All Rights Reserved. Careers Contact Us Legal Documents Ethics Guidelines DEI Statement Privacy Policy Contest Rules FCC Public File Donor Portal LoginFlu season: Why are so many Canadian children falling sick? - National | Globalnews.ca SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT In the news Remembrance Day Counterfeit Coins University Shooting Cuba Earthquake Global News Home Subscribe Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark Live Search Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark GlobalNews home WatchWorldCanadaLocalPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News Flu season: Why are so many Canadian children falling sick? Click to return to homepage Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Full Menu Search Menu Home Trending Watch Local Menu Menu Close Submit Search Topics WatchWorldCanadaLocalChange locationPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News TV Programs Global NationalWest BlockThe Morning ShowVideo CentreMore… Connect Email alertsAlexaBreaking News Alerts from Global NewsLicense ContentContact Us National Change Close Change Close BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram Go Back Close Local your local region National BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Calendar Close Calendar Close All event types Comedy Festival Food Health Music Sports Theatre Virtual Other Search Close Submit search Quick Search Trending Now Add Global News to Home Screen Close Instructions: Press the share icon on your browser Select Add to Home Screen Press Add Comments Close comments menu Want to discuss? Please read our Commenting Policy first. Video link Headline link Advertisement Close X Click to scroll back to top of the page Backto top Health Flu season: Why are so many Canadian children falling sick? By Nicole Ireland The Canadian Press Posted December 16, 2022 8:43 am 5 min read If you get Global News from Instagram or Facebook - that will be changing. Find out how you can still connect with us. Hide message bar 2:05 Tridemic: 10 kids dead amid pediatric flu surge, worst still ahead WATCH: Tridemic: 10 kids dead amid pediatric flu surge, worst still ahead – Dec 11, 2022 Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Descrease article font size Increase article font size The flu has returned with a vengeance after being absent for a couple of years during the COVID-19 pandemic. It’s hitting children especially hard. Here’s what doctors say is happening, and why. What flu strains are we seeing this flu season? Based on predictions from the World Health Organization on what strains would appear, this year’s flu vaccine protects against two Influenza A strains – H3N2 and H1N1 – and two Influenza B strains which are called B/Victoria lineage and B/Yamagata lineage. Story continues below advertisement Right now, H3N2 is causing the vast majority of flu cases in Canada. It’s possible that the other strains could start circulating more widely and peak later in the flu season, doctors say.Over the last decade, Influenza B strains have tended to arrive later in the season, said Dr. Allison McGeer, an infectious diseases specialist and microbiologist at Sinai Health Systems in Toronto. Does H3N2 make people sicker than the other strains? H3N2 can cause more severe illness than other strains, especially among seniors who are more vulnerable, partly because it mutates faster so people don’t have as much acquired immunity protection, said McGeer.That’s because people appear to accumulate some degree of protection throughout their lives to H1N1 and Influenza B strains, but not for H3N2. Story continues below advertisement “(For) kids who haven’t really been exposed to influenza before to any significant degree, there’s not a lot of difference in severity between H1N1, H3N2 and B (strains),” McGeer said. 1:52 Children experiencing hallucinations as part of Influenza A: Vernon doctor Why are so many kids getting sick right now? The flu season started early this year, doctors say, which means kids started getting sick earlier. And COVID-19 safety measures, like masking, also kept other viruses like the flu at bay the previous two cold and flu seasons. Story continues below advertisement “We’re now seeing all our old viral foes coming back to play after being on hiatus for a couple of years,” said Dr. Justin Penner, pediatric infectious diseases specialist at the Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario and member of the Canadian Paediatric Society’s infectious diseases and immunization committee.Kids under five years old are most at risk of getting seriously ill with flu, doctors say. And because of the COVID-19 pandemic precautions, the immune systems of many children under three haven’t previously come in contact with the virus. Get weekly health news Receive the latest medical news and health information delivered to you every Sunday. Sign up for weekly health newsletter Sign Up By providing your email address, you have read and agree to Global News' Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy. “Kids between, you know, zero to three have about a 40 per cent chance of acquiring influenza in any given year,” McGeer said.“We’ve now got like two and a half cohorts of kids who haven’t been exposed to influenza at all. So they’re all getting sick at the same time.” 4:02 How winter can fuel the cold & flu season Why do some people land in hospital with the flu? In the vast majority of cases, flu can be treated at home, doctors say. Story continues below advertisement But like many illnesses, some cases end up being more serious, McGeer said.“There’s an entire range (of reasons) from just severity of the influenza illness itself to complications,” she said.Some flu patients might get pneumonia, for example, or a bacterial infection on top of the virus. 2:12 Hospitals warn of worsening situation as influenza rates rise Myocarditis and encephalitis are other possible complications of the flu.People who are immunocompromised can also be at higher risk of severe illness. Trending Now 1.4M Honda vehicles may see engines fail, prompting U.S. probe RCMP report reveals new details on GTA man and his ‘camel-toe’ fake toonies “Influenza can also trigger exacerbations of underlying illness,” McGeer said, including heart disease and stroke. Story continues below advertisement Seniors are also more prone to being hospitalized with the flu, but a higher risk in the older age demographic appears to be offset this year by public health measures such as continued masking in long-term care homes, she said. Why are so many people reluctant to get the flu vaccine? The Public Health Agency of Canada says it wants to achieve an 80 per cent flu vaccination rate by 2025, but the uptake falls far short of that each year.The influenza vaccine has a “bad reputation” because it’s effective but not perfect, said Dr. James Kellner, a pediatric infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist at the University of Calgary.Based on data from Australia, which already had its flu season, this year’s vaccine appears to be about 50 per cent effective in reducing severe illness from the flu, he said. Story continues below advertisement That’s a difference that people tend to undervalue, Kellner said.“Looking at 50 per cent prevention of severe outcomes could certainly have saved a lot of misery across the country (this year).”The fact that flu vaccinations are needed every year instead of getting a one-time shot also puts some people off, he said. 5:38 Health Matters: Families urged to get their children vaccinated as flu cases surge Plus, “there’s so much fatigue” for public health measures from COVID-19, Kellner said.“COVID vaccine initial uptake was so successful for a variety of reasons, but a big part of it was that there was this sense of public spirit around it in the collective willingness and desire to do the right thing,” he said.“It seems that we’ve lost that quite a bit right now.” Story continues below advertisement Many people also don’t take the flu seriously enough or realize how severe it can be, especially for young children, Kellner said.“There’s a sense that flu vaccine is not that important and so it’s missed out on a lot.”Some people also mistakenly think they got the flu even though they were vaccinated, said Penner of the Canadian Paediatric Society.“People’s perception of what influenza or the flu is, you know, could be a wide variety of different viruses,” he said.Plus, if people do get the flu even though they’ve been immunized, the vaccine can make the illness less severe, Penner said. How can we protect ourselves and our families? The most effective ways to guard against the flu, experts say, are: Story continues below advertisement — Get the flu vaccine. Doctors say it’s not too late.— Stay home if you feel unwell— Masking— Frequent handwashing More on Health More videos With B.C. teen sick in hospital with suspected bird flu, what should parents know? Bird flu: What we know about Canada’s 1st human case detected in B.C. From 300 lbs to 100K races: How this mom of 4 took up ultramarathons Mpox cases in Congo’s epicentre may be ‘plateauing’: WHO Setting new holiday rules November fall prevention month H5 avian flu detected in teen Health Matters: Walking pneumonia cases spike in Canada & Mounjaro injections for weight loss Journalistic standards Comment Report an error © 2022 The Canadian Press Sponsored content More from Global News With B.C. teen sick in hospital with suspected bird flu, what should parents know? Mpox cases in Congo’s epicentre may be ‘plateauing’: WHO Advertisement Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Trending RCMP report reveals new details on GTA man and his ‘camel-toe’ fake toonies 44,080 Read How Canadian consumers can spot counterfeit $2 coins 27,477 Read One person is dead and 16 are injured after a shooting at Tuskegee University 10,363 Read Ukraine attacks Moscow with 34 drones, biggest strike on the Russian capital 9,526 Read 6.8 magnitude earthquake shakes Cuba after hurricanes and blackouts 6,916 Read 1.4M Honda vehicles may see engines fail, prompting U.S. probe 5,335 Read Top Videos Hope for resolution in B.C. port dispute fades as talks break down 40 Viewed Quebec man who imported 26K fake toonies gets jail time 39 Viewed 26,000+ fake toonies seized in CBSA bust 39 Viewed CRTC takes action to make international roaming fees more affordable 37 Viewed Call of the Wilde: Habs’ losing streak continues 34 Viewed H5 avian influenza: B.C. reports 1st suspected human case of bird flu 25 Viewed More Videos Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Advertisement Report an Error Subscribe here AdChoices Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram AboutPrinciples & PracticesBranded ContentContact usRSSNewslettersNotificationsSmart homeAdvertisers Election RegistryGlobal News Licensing RequestsCookie consent ©2024 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Corus News. All rights reserved. Privacy PolicyCopyrightTerms of UseAdvertiseAdvertising Standards TermsCorus EntertainmentAccessibility AdvertisementMore Schools Have Closed in Kentucky This Year Than Rest of U.S. Combined. Why? – The 74 The 74 America's Education News Source About The 74 Donate More Schools Have Closed in Kentucky This Year Than Rest of U.S. Combined. Why? News Opinion Home Video Analysis Search Donate Search Sections News Opinion Video Analysis Interactive School Staffing Map Series School (In)Security Future of High School Pandemic The Big Picture The 74 Interview Weaving a Stronger Society 4Fams Keeping It 100 Topics Research critical race theory Investigation Surveillance teacher voice ed tech learning loss Politics Texas Solutions Los Angeles Youth mental health COVID Recovery STEM Pandemic Podcasts Class Disrupted The 74 Enterprise LA School Report COVID Warriors Brown v. Board B.A. Breakthrough View All > The 74 About Us Team Supporters Jobs Contact Newsletters Donate to The 74 Code of Ethics Contact Us feedback@the74million.org Follow Us Support the 74 Republish Our Content The 74 Support the 74 Donate Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Copyright 2024 The 74 Media, Inc Explore EDlection 2024 Future of High School Artificial Intelligence STEM science of reading Support The 74 and stories like this one. Donate Today! News Pandemic More Schools Have Closed in Kentucky This Year Than Rest of U.S. Combined. Why? Why the Bluegrass state stands out as such an outlier remains something of a mystery to officials An empty classroom in Louisville, Kentucky in January 2022, when in-person learning shut down due to the Omicron surge. In the 2022-23 school year, the state has more illness-related short-term closures than the rest of the country combined, new data show. (Jon Cherry/Getty Images) By Asher Lehrer-Small December 11, 2022 Untangle Your Mind! Sign up for our free newsletter and start your day with in-depth reporting on the latest topics in education. Sign Up Most Popular The Big Picture New Study: Many Older Students Struggle to Push Beyond Reading ‘Threshold’ EDlection 2024 Ballot Propositions: Voters in 2 States Reject Private School Choice Measures Analysis Chicago Is Running Out of Money. Its Teachers Union Wants 9% Raises Anyway EDlection 2024 ‘We’re Here for You’: Election-Fueled Calls to LGBTQ Teen Suicide Hotlines Spike EDlection 2024 Critics Say Ryan Walters Courted Right-Wing Fame as Oklahoma Ed Dept. Fell Apart Get stories like these delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up for The 74 Newsletter This school year, one state has shuttered classrooms due to illness three times as often as the rest of the country combined, new data show. In Kentucky, infection has prompted at least 385 schools across 44 districts to cancel in-person classes for a day or more, accounting for three-quarters of all such disruptions across the country this academic year, according to a recent audit from the school data service Burbio. Tennessee was the state with the second-most closures, with just 46 schools across six districts affected. Why the Bluegrass state stands out as such an outlier remains something of a mystery to officials. “I really cannot imagine why Kentucky is experiencing more closures than other states,” said Ballard County schools Superintendent Casey Allen, whose district shut down for two days in early November when influenza rates were high. Unlike during the peak of the pandemic, disruptions this year have tended to last only a few days and have mostly been spurred by the flu, not COVID. Flu spread in Kentucky has been some of the highest in the nation, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Another 10 states are also at the highest level of risk. In Ballard County in early November, student and staff attendance fell to around 70%, Allen explained in an email. With such large swathes out sick, he felt his hands were tied. “Like many of my colleagues, I consider closing schools due to illness to be a last-ditch effort to stop the spread of an illness,” he said. “Our district values in-person classes and works hard to have our students in school with a teacher in front of them.” Kentucky has shuttered classrooms due to illness three times as often as the rest of the country combined this school year. (Burbio) With so many instructors unable to work, the district did not pivot to virtual learning and will have to make up the days at the end of the year. Powell County schools shut down for a full week and will also have to make up the days, said Superintendent Sarah Wasson. Several other districts used virtual instruction while classrooms were shuttered. “For some reason, flu season seems to be earlier this year than in previous years. This particular flu [strain] appears to have a longer impact period than previous years,” said Jamie Weddington, superintendent of Lewis County Schools, which also briefly closed. Districts can receive approval for up to 10 days of remote learning per year from the state education commissioner, explained Toni Tatman, a Kentucky Department of Education spokesperson. She questioned the accuracy of the Burbio figures and declined to comment on why her state’s rate of school closures this year has been higher than other states with similar levels of flu infections. “We have no reason to believe Kentucky’s numbers would be any different than other states,” Tatman said. Burbio collects its data through weekly audits of news stories and communications from a list of 5,000 school districts that account for 70% of the nation’s students, the company’s co-founder Dennis Roche explained. Though Burbio’s data does not capture every closure, he said his team’s 10 researchers could not have systematically over-represented disruptions in Kentucky compared to those in other states. “We’ve now been doing this … for over two years,” he said. “We really go pretty deep on this stuff.” RelatedNew Data: Red States Offered 432 More Hours of In-Person Learning v. Blue States The Kentucky School Boards Association has also tracked illness-related school closures in the state, documenting 66 districts affected, an even higher tally than Burbio’s. Spokesperson Josh Shoulta said he couldn’t “speculate” on why Kentucky’s numbers have been higher than other regions because the organization hasn’t tracked closures outside its own state. The Kentucky closure numbers arrive during what observers have called the first “normal” school year since COVID initially hit in March 2020, with days- or weeks-long school shutdowns now largely a thing of the past. Still, in another reminder of the pandemic’s long shadow, officials leading Sacramento, California’s school system said they could soon reinstate a requirement that students and staff wear face coverings should COVID rates continue to increase in the city. RelatedWe’re About to Find Out If the Pandemic is Really Over. Are Schools Ready? On Dec. 8, New York state health officials recommended that kids should wear masks in schools, explaining in a letter that, “A host of respiratory viruses, including influenza, RSV and COVID-19, have taken hold in our state and in most of our communities. These viruses, while often manageable, can cause serious outcomes, especially for children.” Get stories like these delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up for The 74 Newsletter Republish This Article Learn More Asher Lehrer-Small is a staff reporter at The 74. @small_asher asher@the74million.org education influenza k-12 Kentucky pandemic public health School Closures Republish This Article We want our stories to be shared as widely as possible — for free. Please view The 74's republishing terms. More Schools Have Closed in Kentucky This Year Than Rest of U.S. Combined. Why? Why the Bluegrass state stands out as such an outlier remains something of a mystery to officials By Asher Lehrer-Small This story first appeared at The 74, a nonprofit news site covering education. Sign up for free newsletters from The 74 to get more like this in your inbox. This school year, one state has shuttered classrooms due to illness three times as often as the rest of the country combined, new data show. In Kentucky, infection has prompted at least 385 schools across 44 districts to cancel in-person classes for a day or more, accounting for three-quarters of all such disruptions across the country this academic year, according to a recent audit from the school data service Burbio. Tennessee was the state with the second-most closures, with just 46 schools across six districts affected. Why the Bluegrass state stands out as such an outlier remains something of a mystery to officials. “I really cannot imagine why Kentucky is experiencing more closures than other states,” said Ballard County schools Superintendent Casey Allen, whose district shut down for two days in early November when influenza rates were high. Unlike during the peak of the pandemic, disruptions this year have tended to last only a few days and have mostly been spurred by the flu, not COVID. Flu spread in Kentucky has been some of the highest in the nation, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Another 10 states are also at the highest level of risk. In Ballard County in early November, student and staff attendance fell to around 70%, Allen explained in an email. With such large swathes out sick, he felt his hands were tied. “Like many of my colleagues, I consider closing schools due to illness to be a last-ditch effort to stop the spread of an illness,” he said. “Our district values in-person classes and works hard to have our students in school with a teacher in front of them.” Kentucky has shuttered classrooms due to illness three times as often as the rest of the country combined this school year. (Burbio) With so many instructors unable to work, the district did not pivot to virtual learning and will have to make up the days at the end of the year. Powell County schools shut down for a full week and will also have to make up the days, said Superintendent Sarah Wasson. Several other districts used virtual instruction while classrooms were shuttered. “For some reason, flu season seems to be earlier this year than in previous years. This particular flu [strain] appears to have a longer impact period than previous years,” said Jamie Weddington, superintendent of Lewis County Schools, which also briefly closed. Districts can receive approval for up to 10 days of remote learning per year from the state education commissioner, explained Toni Tatman, a Kentucky Department of Education spokesperson. She questioned the accuracy of the Burbio figures and declined to comment on why her state’s rate of school closures this year has been higher than other states with similar levels of flu infections. “We have no reason to believe Kentucky’s numbers would be any different than other states,” Tatman said. Burbio collects its data through weekly audits of news stories and communications from a list of 5,000 school districts that account for 70% of the nation’s students, the company’s co-founder Dennis Roche explained. Though Burbio’s data does not capture every closure, he said his team’s 10 researchers could not have systematically over-represented disruptions in Kentucky compared to those in other states. “We’ve now been doing this … for over two years,” he said. “We really go pretty deep on this stuff.” RelatedNew Data: Red States Offered 432 More Hours of In-Person Learning v. Blue States The Kentucky School Boards Association has also tracked illness-related school closures in the state, documenting 66 districts affected, an even higher tally than Burbio’s. Spokesperson Josh Shoulta said he couldn’t “speculate” on why Kentucky’s numbers have been higher than other regions because the organization hasn’t tracked closures outside its own state. The Kentucky closure numbers arrive during what observers have called the first “normal” school year since COVID initially hit in March 2020, with days- or weeks-long school shutdowns now largely a thing of the past. Still, in another reminder of the pandemic’s long shadow, officials leading Sacramento, California’s school system said they could soon reinstate a requirement that students and staff wear face coverings should COVID rates continue to increase in the city. RelatedWe’re About to Find Out If the Pandemic is Really Over. Are Schools Ready? On Dec. 8, New York state health officials recommended that kids should wear masks in schools, explaining in a letter that, “A host of respiratory viruses, including influenza, RSV and COVID-19, have taken hold in our state and in most of our communities. These viruses, while often manageable, can cause serious outcomes, especially for children.” Copy HTML On The 74 Today Sections News Opinion Video Analysis Interactive School Staffing Map Series School (In)Security Future of High School Pandemic The Big Picture The 74 Interview Weaving a Stronger Society 4Fams Keeping It 100 Topics Research critical race theory Investigation Surveillance teacher voice ed tech learning loss Politics Texas Solutions Los Angeles Youth mental health COVID Recovery STEM Pandemic Podcasts Class Disrupted The 74 Enterprise LA School Report COVID Warriors Brown v. Board B.A. Breakthrough View All > The 74 About Us Team Supporters Jobs Contact Newsletters Donate to The 74 Code of Ethics Contact Us feedback@the74million.org Follow Us Support the 74 Republish Our Content The 74 Support the 74 Donate Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Copyright 2024 The 74 Media, IncEngland and Wales – current measures to protect against avian influenza – NFUonline Contact us NFU CallFirst Our offices NFU Cymru Media centre Join the NFU Log in About us About us NFU governance Who's who at the NFU Our history NFU Mutual insurance services NFU Cymru National Pig Association Careers Updates and information Updates and information Regions Sectors Cross sectors Events Campaigning Back British Farming Campaign resources NFU Education NFU reports Consultations Communities Services NFU Professional Services NFU CallFirst Business guides NFU planning services NFU Business Directory NFU Employment Service NFU energy solutions NFU Legal Services The NFU Tenants' Service Rewards Member rewards Business essentials NFU magazines Safety and security Training and resources Vehicles and machinery Wellbeing and lifestyle Home Updates and information Nationwide Avian Influenza Prevention Zone in Great Britain lifted Nationwide Avian Influenza Prevention Zone in Great Britain lifted 04 July 2023 Poultry Avian influenza Text only view The AIPZ's (Avian Influenza Prevention Zone) in place across England and Wales were both lifted on 4 July 2023, following the reduction in risk level to 'low' for all poultry. This announcement follows the lifting of mandatory housing measures on 18 April 2023. A ban on poultry gatherings remains in place. Housing orders will still apply for poultry within protection zones and captive bird (monitoring) controlled zones. Dr Christine Middlemiss, the UK’s Chief Veterinary Officer, said: “Now we are in the summer months and the risk to poultry across Great Britain has reduced, it is the right time to lift the Avian Influenza Prevention Zone. “This would not have been possible without the hard work of all bird keepers, who have upheld high biosecurity standards for many months. “However, there are still localised areas of risk as we have seen recently, and therefore it’s vital that everyone keeps biosecurity and cleanliness at the forefront of their minds to keep their flocks safe.” Keep up to date with the government's latest announcements: GOV.UK | Bird flu (avian influenza): latest situation in England Crucial to remain vigilant NFU Poultry Board chair James Mottershead said: “Poultry farmers have worked incredibly hard to minimise the threat of avian influenza and will continue to do all they can to protect the health and welfare of their birds. “It remains incredibly important that everyone who keeps birds remains vigilant and continues to maintain stringent biosecurity measures. “It remains incredibly important that everyone who keeps birds remains vigilant and continues to maintain stringent biosecurity measures.” NFU Poultry Board chair, James Mottershead “This is crucial whether you are a commercial farmer with thousands of birds or a hobby keeper with one hen in the garden.” Risk levels The risk of incursion of HPAI (Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza) in wild birds has been reduced to high. The risk of incursion of HPAI in poultry with stringent biosecurity in place has been reduced to low. The risk of incursion of HPAI in poultry with suboptimal biosecurity in place has been reduced to low. Be vigilant Poultry and captive bird keepers are advised to be vigilant for any signs of disease in their birds and any wild birds, and seek prompt advice from their vet if they have any concerns. Public health advice remains that the risk to human health from the virus is very low and food standards bodies advise that avian influenzas pose a very low food safety risk for UK consumers. There is no impact on the consumption of properly cooked poultry products including eggs. If disease is suspected Poultry and captive bird keepers and members of the public should report dead wild birds to the Defra helpline on 03459 33 55 77. Bird keepers should report suspicion of disease in England to Defra Rural Services Helpline on 0300 0200 301. In Wales, contact 0300 303 8268. The GB-wide #AvianInfluenza Prevention Zone has been lifted from 12 noon on 4 July. Wild bird risk remains high. Practice good #Biosecurity to protect your birds. Check the relevant websites for what this means for keepers of poultry & other captive birds. pic.twitter.com/DxqiEkvIWR— APHA (@APHAgovuk) July 4, 2023 Read more around the net GOV.UK | Bird flu (avian influenza): latest situation in England AI Avian Influenza Ask us a question about this page Once you have submitted your query someone from NFU CallFirst will contact you. If needed, your query will then be passed to the appropriate NFU policy team. Name * Membership number Telephone number * Email address * Enquiry * You have 0 characters remaining. Submit By completing the form with your details on this page, you are agreeing to have this information sent to the NFU for the purposes of contacting you regarding your enquiry. Please take time to read the NFU’s Privacy Policy if you require further information. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. AI case finder – current and lifted cases of avian influenza Avian influenza – essential information Avian influenza – how the NFU is working to support you 13 December 202213 December 2022 About the NFU About the NFU Advertise with the NFU NFU Careers NFU Membership The NFU 2023 financial statement Media centre More NFU sites More NFU sites Back British Farming British Agriculture Bureau CFE Online Countryside Online Great British Chicken NFU Cymru NFU Sugar Tried and Tested TB Free England UK Turkeys Member services Member services NFU CallFirst NFU Contract Checking Service CT Planning Farm Safety: Risk Management NFU Legal Assistance Scheme (LAS) NFU Employment Service NFU Energy NFU Rural Surveyor Firms The NFU Tenants' Service Follow Us Follow Us The NFU on social media X (Twitter) Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Back British Farming on social media Facebook Instagram TikTok © 2024 – NFUonline NFUonline terms and conditions NFU mobile app terms and conditions Anti‑slavery and human trafficking statement Privacy policy Cookies policy Complaints procedure NFU terms and conditions NFU gender pay gap reports NFU staff pension scheme 109988 Accept essential cookies Accept all cookies Manage preferencesRapid flu and COVID-19 testing Louisville, Ky. | Norton Healthcare Skip to content Find Care Locations Search All Locations Emergency Departments Hospitals Norton Prompt Care Clinics Immediate Care Centers Primary Care Pharmacies Norton Specialty Pharmacy Coming Soon Norton West Louisville Hospital Regional Locations Elizabethtown Frankfort Providers Find a Provider Specialty Centers Classes & Events Find a Class or Event Services Our Services Arm and Hand Behavioral Health Brain Tumor Breast Health Cancer Care Diabetes & Endocrinology Gastroenterology General Surgery Geriatric Care Heart & Vascular Hematology Home Health Imaging Diagnostics Immediate Care Infectious Diseases Kidney, Bladder & Urinary Liver & Pancreas Lymphedema Maternal-Fetal Medicine Neuroscience Occupational Medicine Orthopedics Pain Management Palliative Care Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Prevention & Wellness Primary Care Prompt Care Clinics Pulmonary Rehabilitation Research & Clinical Trials Rheumatology Sleep Center Spine Care Sports Health Telehealth Weight Management Women’s Health Wound Care Patient Resources View All Patient Resources Billing Information Cost Estimates Get Healthy News Gift Shops Hospital Transportation Language & Translation Services LGBTQ+ Inclusion Resources Living Wills & Advance Directives Norton MyChart Norton eCare Norton Now Patient & Family Advisory Councils Pastoral Care Preparing for Surgery Price Transparency Quality Report Say Thanks Standard Hospital Charges Telehealth Appointment Transitions in Care Continuum United Community Care Network Visitor Policy Wave of Light: Honoring Pregnancy and Infant Loss I Want To… Find a Provider Find a Career Learn How to Help Pay My Bill Refer a Patient Access Medical Records / Images Request an Appointment Sign-Up / Sign-In to Norton MyChart Find a Class or Event Cancel my Class/Event Registration Volunteer Health Equity Norton West Louisville Hospital Contracting Opportunities Institute for Health Equity, a Part of Norton Healthcare Equity, Inclusion and Belonging LGBTQ+ Inclusion Resources English Español Getting testing and care for the flu and COVID-19 Home / News / Getting testing and care for the flu and COVID-19 Getting testing and care for the flu and COVID-19 Norton Immediate Care Centers and health care provider offices are seeing increased demand for services, and not just from people who need COVID-19 or flu tests. Author: Maggie Roetker Published: December 13, 2022 | Updated: December 2, 2023 Norton Immediate Care Centers and health care provider offices are seeing increased demand for services, and not just from people who need COVID-19 or flu tests. Emergency departments also are seeing high numbers of patients. “It’s important to know when you need care and the best place to get it,” said Steven T. Hester, M.D., MBA, senior vice president and chief clinical and strategy officer, Norton Healthcare. “This will ensure that our care teams can provide the most efficient care and keep your wait time down.” If you think you may have the flu, you are otherwise healthy and you’re not having difficulty breathing, your symptoms could very well be managed at home with over-the-counter medicines, rest and fluid. If you know you were exposed to COVID-19 but are not having any symptoms, continue to monitor your health. If you develop symptoms, start with a home test. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention offer more guidance on when to test after exposure to COVID-19. “It’s also important to understand that you should never delay getting medical care if you are having a serious issue,” Dr. Hester said. “You can always contact your primary care provider for direction, especially if it is in regard to a pre-existing condition.” COVID-19 and flu vaccines continue to be the best way to prevent severe illness from these two viruses. Flu Shots and Treatment Flu season runs through March, and while it’s best to get your shot early, the vaccine still can provide protection later in the season. Influenza vaccine is available across Louisville and Southern Indiana. If you think you have the flu, consult with your health care provider, especially if you are immunocompromised. Get vaccinated Get treatment Flu You may schedule a Norton eCare appointment to talk to a provider virtually or by phone. If it is determined that a test is necessary, you will have the option of visiting Norton Healthcare Express Services for a drive-thru test. This option is only available with a physician order. Visit NortonHealthcare.com/Flu for more information. Care for COVID-19, flu and other infections Care from your home Norton eCare offers video and phone visits for conditions that are not complex, emergency or life-threatening situations. These include: Eye, nose and throat issues, such as pinkeyeDiarrhea, nausea and vomitingSkin rash, insect bites and poison ivyUrinary issues Same-day care If you need same-day care and are unable to get to your primary care provider, get urgent care at a Norton Immediate Care Center or a Norton Prompt Care at clinic for COVID-19 or Flu testing and treatment or other minor health issues including: CoughEaracheFeverFluMinor animal bitesNausea, vomiting, diarrheaMinor burns or cutsMinor injuriesPinkeyeRash or skin irritationSore throatUrinary tract infectionSuspected broken bone (Norton Immediate Care Center only) Emergency care Serious issues requiring care in an emergency department are: Chest painStroke symptoms (numbness in face, arm or leg; trouble speaking; sudden severe headache)Loss of consciousness or unresponsivenessMajor injury or head traumaSeizure (for those not diagnosed with epilepsy)Severe shortness of breath or asthma attackSevere burn or woundShockUncontrollable bleedingVomiting blood If you have a concern that you think is an emergency and your symptoms are life-threatening, call 911 or go to an emergency department right away. Primary Care Find a Location Immediate Care Reserve My Spot Norton Prompt Care at Walgreens Clinics Choose an Appointment Norton eCare Start an Online Visit Emergency Care Find an Emergency Room Share on Subscribe to Newsletter Categories Flu Immediate Care Centers News Norton Community Medical Associates Norton Now Prompt Care - Walgreens Related Stories Norton West Louisville Hospital opens Foods that trigger gout: What to avoid and what to eat Urban Workforce Development Initiative holds graduation ceremony World-renowned diabetes researcher joins Wendy Novak Diabetes Institute How do you know if you have thyroid issues? Norton Healthcare For more than 130 years, Norton Healthcare’s faith heritage has guided its mission to provide quality health care to all those it serves. Today, Norton Healthcare is a leader in serving adult and pediatric patients from throughout Greater Louisville, Southern Indiana, the commonwealth of Kentucky and beyond. AboutCareers at Norton Healthcare Get Healthy About Norton Healthcare Norton Healthcare Foundation Quality Report Refer a Patient N-Store ConnectDonate For the media Healthcare professionals Employee resources Contact Get Healthy Newsletter Enter your information below to sign up for our free Get Healthy e-mail newsletter. Once a week, you'll receive stories and insights from the Norton Healthcare family, right in your e-mail inbox. Enter your e-mail Please enter your email address. I would like to receive updates and information from Get Healthy Please confirm you want to receive Norton Healthcare Get Healthy newsletters. Español Price Transparency Privacy Policy HIPAA Disclaimer Price Transparency - Audubon Price Transparency - Brownsboro Price Transparency - Children's Price Transparency - Clark Price Transparency - Norton Hospital Price Transparency - Scott Price Transparency - Women's & Children's 200 E. Chestnut St. Louisville, KY 40202 • (502) 629-1234 © 2024 • Norton Healthcare Schedule an Appointment Select an appointment date and time from available spots listed below.Year-end flu season back as doctors in Singapore see rise in respiratory infections - CNA Skip to main content Best News Website or Mobile Service WAN-IFRA Digital Media Awards Worldwide 2022 Best News Website or Mobile Service Digital Media Awards Worldwide 2022 Sign In Account My Feed Search Edition Menu Edition: Singapore Indonesia Asia US/UK Edition: Singapore Indonesia Asia US/UK Navigate to other CNA editions here. Hamburger Menu Close Top Stories Asia East Asia Singapore World Commentary CNA Explains Sustainability Business Sport Latest News Insider TODAY Big Read Up Close Ground Up Voices Adulting Mental Health Matters Learning Minds Watch Live TV News Reports Documentaries & Shows TV Schedule Listen CNA938 Live Podcasts Radio Schedule Special Reports Singapore Parliament Mental Health Interactives Lifestyle Entertainment Women Wellness Living Style & Beauty Dining Travel Luxury Experiences Obsessions People Remarkable Living Sustainability Newsletters CNA Eyewitness Send us a news tip Events & Partnerships Branded Content Business Blueprint Health Matters The Asian Traveller Brand Studio Learning Minds Weather Edition: Singapore Indonesia Asia US/UK Navigate to other CNA editions here. Close Close Top Stories Asia East Asia Singapore World Commentary CNA Explains Sustainability Business Sport Latest News Insider TODAY Big Read Up Close Ground Up Voices Adulting Mental Health Matters Learning Minds Watch Live TV News Reports Documentaries & Shows TV Schedule Listen CNA938 Live Podcasts Radio Schedule Special Reports Singapore Parliament Mental Health Interactives Lifestyle Entertainment Women Wellness Living Style & Beauty Dining Travel Luxury Experiences Obsessions People Remarkable Living Sustainability Newsletters CNA Eyewitness Send us a news tip Events & Partnerships Branded Content Business Blueprint Health Matters The Asian Traveller Brand Studio Learning Minds Weather Edition: Singapore Indonesia Asia US/UK Navigate to other CNA editions here. Search Trending Topics CNA Explains China Malaysia artificial intelligence Israel-Hamas war Snap Insight Indonesia podcasts Wellness Follow CNA Follow our news Facebook Twitter Youtube LinkedIn RSS Recent Searches Trending Topics CNA Explains China Malaysia artificial intelligence Israel-Hamas war Snap Insight Indonesia podcasts Wellness Main navigation Top Stories Latest News Asia East Asia Singapore Commentary Insider TODAY Lifestyle Watch Listen + All Sections Singapore Year-end flu season back as doctors in Singapore see rise in respiratory infections Bookmark Bookmark Share WhatsApp Telegram Facebook Twitter Email LinkedIn Close Close Top Stories Asia East Asia Singapore World Commentary CNA Explains Sustainability Business Sport Latest News Insider TODAY Big Read Up Close Ground Up Voices Adulting Mental Health Matters Learning Minds Watch Live TV News Reports Documentaries & Shows TV Schedule Listen CNA938 Live Podcasts Radio Schedule Special Reports Singapore Parliament Mental Health Interactives Lifestyle Entertainment Women Wellness Living Style & Beauty Dining Travel Luxury Experiences Obsessions People Remarkable Living Sustainability Newsletters CNA Eyewitness Send us a news tip Events & Partnerships Branded Content Business Blueprint Health Matters The Asian Traveller Brand Studio Learning Minds Weather Edition: Singapore Indonesia Asia US/UK Navigate to other CNA editions here. Search Trending Topics CNA Explains China Malaysia artificial intelligence Israel-Hamas war Snap Insight Indonesia podcasts Wellness Follow CNA Follow our news Facebook Twitter Youtube LinkedIn RSS Recent Searches Trending Topics CNA Explains China Malaysia artificial intelligence Israel-Hamas war Snap Insight Indonesia podcasts Wellness Advertisement Advertisement Singapore Year-end flu season back as doctors in Singapore see rise in respiratory infections Health authorities abroad have warned of a “tripledemic” - concurrent outbreaks of COVID-19, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus during the winter season. Overseas, health authorities have warned of a “tripledemic” involving concurrent outbreaks of COVID-19, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus during the winter season. (AP Photo/Mark J. Terrill, File) Sherlyn Seah @SherlynSeahCNA Calvin Yang Sherlyn Seah & Calvin Yang 12 Dec 2022 05:29PM Bookmark Bookmark Share WhatsApp Telegram Facebook Twitter Email LinkedIn SINGAPORE: Flu season is back in Singapore, and doctors are seeing a rise in cases of respiratory infection - some by as much as 20 per cent. Overseas, health authorities have warned of a “tripledemic” involving concurrent outbreaks of COVID-19, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus during the winter season. Clinics have been rushing to ensure they have enough medication available during this period, amid a looming COVID-19 wave with more people travelling and with upcoming year-end festivities. At Fullerton Health, for instance, patient visits have gone up by 10 to 20 per cent over the last few months. The healthcare chain, which has around 30 clinics islandwide, has seen flu cases nearly double, and doctors are now watching out for certain high-risk groups. RISE IN FLU CASES “Over these last two years, especially with the younger children and the elderly - they have not had exposure, so it's kind of like your immunity breaks, and you have not been exposed to flu viruses for a while,” said Dr Ethan Lim, medical director at Fullerton Health. “Then when you get hit by a flu virus, you may experience more severe symptoms. Of course, for the more vulnerable groups like the elderly and younger children - they may suffer more and you may have more severe cases or even complications in them. So those are the worries at this point in time.” Dr Lim added that the demand for medication “is always tight, but we are still getting all the medicine that we need”. At Healthway Medical, cases have also gone up. To ensure that its 50 clinics are able to meet the increasing year-end demand, the group has been stocking up on medication, especially those for cough, cold and fever. “We are always planning ahead of time. During the seasonal period, the holiday seasons, we do often see, for the past few years, an increase in influenza, respiratory tract infection cases,” said Dr Teo Cheng Rong, family physician at Healthway Medical. “So we have sufficient buffers, in terms of medications and medical supplies to cope with any increase in influenza or COVID-19 cases.” Dr Teo noted that there are also various factors at play, including unforeseen global shortages. “But we do whatever we can in terms of buffering our stock supplies, so sometimes our purchaser may source other forms or other sources of medications, and that will help to tide over the period, whereby certain brands may be in short supply,” he added. Doctors told CNA that challenges in getting medical supplies could stem from supply chain issues and a rise in patient numbers. FLU SHOTS IN HIGH DEMAND Meanwhile, flu vaccinations are in high demand. Doctors at Phoenix Medical are administering about 100 flu shots a week, compared to the 20 to 30 weekly jabs in previous years. One likely reason is uptick in cross-border travel this year, said the group. “With the borders being reopened, more travellers are keen to actually have the influenza vaccinations prior to their travel,” said Dr Chua Hshan Cher, medical director and family physician at Phoenix Medical. “And this has spurred demand this year, compared to say, the past two, three years.” Travellers should also still take precautions such as practising good personal hygiene and masking up whenever needed, cautioned observers. Associate Professor Yvonne Su of the Emerging Infectious Diseases Programme at Duke-NUS Medical School told CNA938’s Asia First that it is especially important to get a flu jab when travelling to colder countries, where the flu is active. “When they go to those travel destinations, they may catch the viruses and when they come back to Singapore, they could spread to the vulnerable groups,” she added. Related: More COVID-19 cases, new wave expected with year-end festivities and travel: Ong Ye Kung Commentary: Should Singapore be bracing for a bad flu season? Source: CNA/ca(fk) Sign up for our newsletters Get our pick of top stories and thought-provoking articles in your inbox Subscribe here Get the CNA app Stay updated with notifications for breaking news and our best stories Download here Get WhatsApp alerts Join our channel for the top reads for the day on your preferred chat app Join here Related Topics flu prevention Influenza doctor COVID-19 Health Travel Advertisement Also worth reading Content is loading... Advertisement Expand to read the full story Get bite-sized news via a new cards interface. Give it a try. Click here to return to FAST Tap here to return to FAST FAST CNA Sections Asia Singapore Business Insider TODAY Lifestyle Luxury CNA938 Live Newsletters Commentary Interactives Live TV Sport World Special Reports About CNA About Us Advertise With Us Contact Us Correspondents Presenters Mediacorp Network Follow our news Facebook Twitter Youtube LinkedIn RSS Copyright© Mediacorp 2024. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. Official Domain | Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy | Report Vulnerability This browser is no longer supported We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be. To continue, upgrade to a supported browser or, for the finest experience, download the mobile app. Upgraded but still having issues? Contact usSaudi Arabia warns on spread of influenza cases | Saudi – Gulf News Menu Menu Saudi World UAE Opinion Subscribe now Digital subscription Print+Digital (Bundle) ePaper Logout Go Digital subscription Print+Digital (Bundle) ePaper Trending UAE holidays Videos Classifieds Credit Card Deals Latest News UAE People Science Government Education Crime Emergencies Environment Health Transport Weather Ask the Law Living In UAE Visa+Immigration Housing Phone+Internet Banking Transport Health Education Relocate Reader Queries Safety+Security Business Banking & Insurance Aviation Property Tax News Corporate Tax Analysis Travel & Tourism Markets Retail Corporate News Tech Auto Best Buys Electronics Home and Kitchen Offers Consumables Lifestyle Your Money Saving and Investment Budget Living Taxation Expert Columns Community Tips Cryptocurrency Food Cooking and Cuisines Guide to Cooking Food Show Videos Friday Beauty Wellbeing Art & People Home Friday Partner Games Daily Crossword Sudoku Word Search Spell It Podcasts World Gulf Bahrain Kuwait Oman Qatar Saudi Yemen Mena Europe Africa Americas Asia India Pakistan Philippines Australia-New Zealand Corrections Opinion Columnists Special Reports Things To Do Events & Concerts Bars, Clubs & Pubs Cafes, Restaurants & News Going Out Parenting Pregnancy & Baby Learning & Play Child Health For Mums & Dads Ask Us Games UAE Success Stories Photos Sport UAE Sport Cricket IPL Motorsport Football Premiere League Tennis Golf in UAE UAE World Photos & Videos Course Reviews Learn to Play Gear Olympics Entertainment Hollywood Bollywood South Indian Music OTT Auto Lifestyle Health+Fitness GN Reach Tech Electronics Gaming Media Videos Best Of Bollywood News Entertainment Business Sport Community Special Features Supplement eBook The Kurator Life Luxury Style Gold-Forex Gratuity Calculator Notifications Coupons Gold/Forex Prayer Times ePaper GN Store About Gulf News Contact us Work with us Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Advertise with us Reach by GN GN Focus Gulf News epaper Sitemap Have your say Printing Services © Al Nisr Publishing LLC 2024. All rights reserved. Saudi Arabia warns on spread of influenza cases World Gulf Login / Sign Up Logout Tuesday, November 12, 2024 Gold / Forex Gulf Saudi Bahrain Kuwait Oman Qatar Saudi Yemen All Sections Saudi Arabia warns on spread of influenza cases Ministry of Health asks public to be cautious and take protective measures Published: December 11, 2022 13:53 Staff Report Follow us Saudi Arabia has said that the seasonal influenza vaccine protects 80 per cent of those who suffer from severe symptoms. Image Credit: Shutterstock Dubai: The Saudi Ministry of Health (MoH) has called on the public to be extra cautious following a noticeable surge in the number of influenza cases in the country. The Ministry issued a new alert in light of the increase in seasonal influenza cases. Dr Mohammad Al Abdul Ali, spokesman of the ministry, said that the Kingdom has seen an increase in influenza cases during the current season. He added that its spread is stronger than the reported cases in the past two years and there are many people admitted in intensive care units and the flu may lead to deaths. Dr Abdul Ali said that the seasonal influenza vaccine protects 80 per cent of those who suffer from severe symptoms. “Taking flu vaccine, apart from wearing face mask is the most important way to confront influenza virus.” He urged the public not to be exposed to direct rain and cold waves. More From Saudi Update Saudi crown prince demands Gaza, Lebanon truce Meet Saudi Arabia's youngest paramedic who saved mum Here are Umrah visa options for GCC residents Staff held for forcing patients to kiss their hands Trending Saudi Arabia tightens barbershop regulations Update Saudi army chief in Iran on rare visit Saudi Arabia is the most snow-prone country in the Gulf Over 20,000 illegal residents held in Saudi Arabia School break sets price records for Riyadh hotels Saudi Arabia unveils smart tour guide Latest In Draw for inaugural Fifa Club World Cup set for Dec 5 UAE President hosts special dinner with Heads of States Gurbaz, Omarzai propel Afghanistan to series win Amateur athletes shine on sixth day in Abu Dhabi WHO members' pandemic accord talks to spill into 2025 Go back to top Network links: GN Store About Gulf News Contact us Work with us Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Advertise with us Reach by GN GN Focus Gulf News epaper Sitemap Have your say Printing Services Find us on Social © Al Nisr Publishing LLC 2024. All rights reserved. This website stores cookies on your computer. These cookies are used to improve your experience and provide more personalized service to you. Both on your website and other media. To find out more about the cookies and data we use, please check out our Privacy Policy. OK Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Whatsapp Share on Mail Share on LinkedIn Copy link Follow on Whatsapp Follow on Google Follow on Telegram × Close Get Breaking News Alerts From Gulf News We’ll send you latest news updates through the day. You can manage them any time by clicking on the notification icon. Subscribe No ThanksPerth County poultry plant temporarily shuttered after bird flu discovery | The Stratford Beacon HeraldSkip to Content SectionsSearch Search stratfordbeaconherald.com Perform search The Stratford Beacon Herald Share Share this Story : Perth County poultry plant temporarily shuttered after bird flu discovery Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Subscribe User My Account Subscribe Search stratfordbeaconherald.com Perform search News Local News Provincial Canada World Special-Sections Sports Local Sports Baseball Basketball Football Curling Hockey Auto Racing Other Sports Entertainment Local Entertainment Movies Music Television Books Gaming Celebrities Life Travel Food Health Comics Puzzles Advice Opinion Column Editorial Letters All Newspapers Classifieds Obituaries Shopping Jobs Driving Healthing Puzzmo Diversions Puzzles Comics Newsletters Profile Settings My Subscriptions Newsletters Customer Service FAQ Sign Out News Sports Entertainment Life Opinion All Newspapers Shopping Jobs Driving Healthing Puzzmo Newsletters Advertisement 1This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below. Share this Story : Perth County poultry plant temporarily shuttered after bird flu discovery Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Breadcrumb Trail LinksNewsLocal NewsPerth County poultry plant temporarily shuttered after bird flu discoveryThe Canadian Food Inspection Agency has temporarily shut down operations at a Perth County poultry processing plant after highly pathogenic avian influenza was discovered in poultry that had recently been transported to the plant.Author of the article: Galen Simmons Published Dec 16, 2022 • Last updated Dec 16, 2022 • 4 minute read Join the conversation Sofina Foods' turkey processing plant in Mitchell is one of only three facilities regulated by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency in Perth County. (Andy Bader/Postmedia Network)Article contentThe bird flu epidemic that has forced farmers across Canada to cull tens of thousands of chickens and turkeys has led to the temporary shutdown of a Perth County poultry processing plant, Canadian Food Inspection Agency officials have confirmed.Advertisement 2Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article contentThe Sofina Foods Inc. plant was ordered to cease operations after the highly pathogenic avian influenza was discovered by Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) inspectors in a shipment of poultry that had recently arrived at the plant.According to a CFIA spokesperson, the agency responded after inspectors discovered a high rate of death during a routine inspection of the poultry prior to their slaughter. The virus was confirmed on Dec. 13 following further testing of the birds.Since the virus was discovered, control measures have been implemented at the Mitchell, Ont., plant that include movement restrictions, a halt on processing activities, and the thorough cleaning and disinfection of the plant.Advertisement 3Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article content“On Dec. 13, a flock of turkeys was delivered to our processing facility in Mitchell,” Sofina Foods said in an emailed statement Friday. “A small number of the turkeys tested positive for avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1. This was an isolated incident based on one delivery of birds from an independent, third-party farm. Sofina took immediate action and has been working with the Canadian Food Inspection Agency and Huron Perth public health to ensure the safety of our people, the public and our products.“Affected product was contained on premises and never entered the public domain. The CFIA has also confirmed there is no evidence to suggest that eating cooked poultry or eggs could transmit HPAI to humans. (Public health) has confirmed that the HPAI H5N1 virus does not easily cross from birds to humans and the risk to the public is very low.”Advertisement 4Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article contentIn the statement, Sofina Foods said it plans to return to normal operations at the Mitchell plant on Dec. 19.Since December 2021, when the bird flu made its first reported return to Ontario since a 2015 outbreak, the highly contagious H5N1 strain of the virus has been found at numerous farm operations across the country. Following a four-month lull beginning in May, another outbreak of the virus was discovered in Ontario at a farm in nearby Zorra Township in Oxford County. During that same time, the bird flu has only been detected three times at Canadian processing plants, including this latest incidence at Sofina.Particularly deadly to domestic poultry, the avian flu has also been confirmed in outbreaks across Western Canada in September, as well as non-poultry flocks in the same region. As of Sept. 27, the federal government reported at least 2.5-million birds, including 561,000 in Ontario, had been affected.Advertisement 5Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article content“Avian flu is always circulating but, most years, it’s a less harmful strain than we see this year,” said Western University biology professor Beth MacDougall-Shackleton, an expert in ecoimmunology and behavioural ecology of migratory birds.“This year it’s called highly pathogenic, meaning it’s extremely harmful. It’s not harmful to every single species of bird. Many ducks can be infected with it and not show critical symptoms for example, which actually makes it more dangerous because they can be asymptomatic and then spread it to things like chickens … and wild species of birds too.”MacDougall-Shackleton added, “It is a very nasty disease. This strain kills, I would say, upwards of 90 per cent of birds infected. They die within days and it’s really unpleasant.”Advertisement 6Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article contentThe risk of avian flu to human health is still considered low. In the rare cases where people do catch the virus, the CFIA has said it’s most likely the result of close contact with infected, live birds or heavily contaminated environments. MacDougall-Shackleton said the real risk is to the health of domestic and wild bird populations due the ease of transmission via contaminated surfaces, the feathers and feces of infected birds, nearby waterways, and migratory bird species that can be carriers.“If (the avian flu) is discovered, then all the birds on the farm have to be humanely euthanized (immediately),” she said. “In terms of a processing plant, that would be up to the CFIA, but I believe there would have to be deep cleaning of any surfaces and any structures that would have been in contact with the virus. … I know some poultry farms and they’ve been very, very careful and very proactive making sure nobody wears dirty footwear from outside into the chicken facilities,” she said.Advertisement 7Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article contentThe good news, she said, is that cleaning and disinfection works well to mitigate the spread of the virus.Sofina Foods is relatively new to Perth County. The company expanded its turkey processing operations to the West Perth town of Mitchell after buying a former pork-processing plant in 2015 and spending two years and $55 million, including roughly $5 million from the province, to convert it for turkeys. A privately owned company based in Markham, Ont., Sofina describes itself on its website as a leading manufacturer of “primary and further processed protein products” for both retail and commercial customers.gsimmons@postmedia.comArticle contentShare this article in your social network Share this Story : Perth County poultry plant temporarily shuttered after bird flu discovery Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr CommentsYou must be logged in to join the discussion or read more comments.Create an AccountSign in Join the Conversation Postmedia is committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion. Please keep comments relevant and respectful. Comments may take up to an hour to appear on the site. You will receive an email if there is a reply to your comment, an update to a thread you follow or if a user you follow comments. Visit our Community Guidelines for more information.Latest National StoriesNews Near StratfordFeatured Local Savings Subscribe Categories News Sports Entertainment Life Opinion All Newspapers Shopping ePaper SubscribeFollow The Stratford Beacon Herald Secondary Links Advertise With Us Digital Ad Registry Site Map Contact Privacy Policy Terms of Use FAQ Copyright My Account Manage My Print Subscription Manage My Tax Receipt 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4© 2024 The Stratford Beacon Herald, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly prohibited.Notice for the Postmedia NetworkThis website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.OKMove to let patients get flu, pneumococcal jabs at their designated TTSH specialist outpatient clinic | The Straits Times The Straits Times Toggle navigation The Straits Times Singapore The Straits Times Edition : International Singapore Main navigation Home Singapore Toggle Dropdown Jobs Housing Parenting & Education Politics Health Transport Courts & Crime Consumer Environment Community Asia Toggle Dropdown SE Asia East Asia South Asia Australia/NZ World Toggle Dropdown United States Europe Middle East Opinion Toggle Dropdown ST Editorial Cartoons Forum Life Toggle Dropdown Food Entertainment Style Travel Arts Motoring Home & Design Business Toggle Dropdown Economy Invest Banking Companies & Markets Property Tech Toggle Dropdown Tech News E-sports Reviews Sport Toggle Dropdown Football Schools Formula One Combat Sports Basketball Tennis Golf More Toggle Dropdown Opinion Life Business Tech Sport Videos Podcasts Multimedia LOG IN Subscribe E-paper Toggle navigation The Straits Times Toggle navigation LOG IN Subscribe Edition International Singapore ST Read & Win E-paper Main navigation Home Singapore Toggle Dropdown Jobs Housing Parenting & Education Politics Health Transport Courts & Crime Consumer Environment Community Asia Toggle Dropdown SE Asia East Asia South Asia Australia/NZ World Toggle Dropdown United States Europe Middle East Opinion Toggle Dropdown ST Editorial Cartoons Forum Life Toggle Dropdown Food Entertainment Style Travel Arts Motoring Home & Design Business Toggle Dropdown Economy Invest Banking Companies & Markets Property Tech Toggle Dropdown Tech News E-sports Reviews Sport Toggle Dropdown Football Schools Formula One Combat Sports Basketball Tennis Golf More Toggle Dropdown Opinion Life Business Tech Sport Videos Podcasts Multimedia SPH Websites news with benefits SPH Rewards STJobs STClassifieds SITES Berita Harian Hardwarezone Shin Min Daily News STOMP tabla Tamil Murasu The Business Times The New Paper Lianhe Zaobao Obits.sg Advertise with us Move to let patients get flu, pneumococcal jabs at their designated TTSH specialist outpatient clinic (From left) TTSH’s Department of Preventive and Population Medicine head and senior consultant Angela Chow, TTSH nurse clinician Ye Xiuhua, TTSH’s deputy director of nursing Karen Gomathy Rajoo and NCID consultant Sapna P. Sadarangani. ST PHOTO: ALPHONSUS CHERN Joyce TeoSenior Health Correspondent Updated Dec 16, 2022, 07:08 PM Published Dec 15, 2022, 04:50 PM More Whatsapp Linkedin Twitter FB Messenger Email Print Purchase Article Copy permalinkCopy to clipboard https://str.sg/wCCB SINGAPORE - From 2023, Tan Tock Seng Hospital (TTSH) will progressively roll out a nurse-led initiative to get elderly patients and those at risk of developing influenza or pneumococcal infections to be vaccinated against the two diseases at the specialist outpatient clinic where they are seeking help. The hospital is currently piloting it at seven clinics, and aims to offer this service at all of its 32 clinics in a few years’ time, said Ms Karen Gomathy Rajoo, TTSH’s deputy director of nursing for specialist outpatient clinics, at a media session on Thursday. Outside this initiative, patients may get the flu or pneumococcal vaccines if their doctors recommend that they do so, and they have to make their way to another clinic to get the jabs. Other hospitals may offer a service like TTSH’s in time to come. TTSH nurse clinician Ye Xiuhua said some staff of the upcoming Woodlands Health Campus who are currently stationed at TTSH are undergoing training. In Singapore, the 2019 National Population Health Survey showed that one in five people aged 60 to 74 reported receiving the flu jab in the previous 12 months, and only one in 10 Singapore residents aged 65 to 74 had ever taken the pneumococcal vaccine. The rates are low, Associate Professor Angela Chow, the head and senior consultant at TTSH’s Department of Preventive and Population Medicine, told the media. Many people do not bother about flu jabs, said Prof Chow. Some seniors, for example, think that influenza probably does not happen in Singapore. “So, they take it only when they travel. They also think that they are not susceptible to it,” she added. Others mistake the common cold for influenza. “It’s not really the common cold viruses that we are concerned about because all of us get the common cold... We might feel a bit unwell, a bit fatigued, but you will get over it,” said Dr Sapna P. Sadarangani, a consultant at the National Centre for Infectious Diseases. But it is “well recognised” that influenza “can kill people... by causing pneumonia, triggering heart attacks, and even affect the brain and so on”. And it is the very young, older adults with pre-existing conditions and those with weakened immune systems who are affected, she added. Dr Sapna said a recently published study in the npj Vaccines journal that she, Prof Chow and other experts worked on showed that adults aged 65 and above with metabolic comorbidities, such as diabetes and hypertension, have good immune response to the influenza vaccine if their conditions are well controlled. Their antibody response to the vaccine was measured one month after vaccination. Furthermore, their level of antibodies against the most common circulating influenza sub-type goes up if they engage in physical activities. “A lot of people were saying that they have diabetes, so they won’t respond to the vaccine, so why take it? But that’s not true,” said Dr Sapna, the principal investigator and first author of this study. “If you’re active, if you treat your diabetes and so on... your immune system will respond to vaccines.” More On This Topic S’pore residents can book flu jab with GP via govt health appointment system You can get flu and Covid-19 at the same time, say health experts Dr Sapna said that only a subset of those who have the “flu” have influenza virus infection, as what many people perceive as flu may be an acute respiratory illness that is caused by other viruses. Some people have complained about getting the flu after taking the flu vaccine, said Dr Sapna. “But it may be a cold virus,” she said. “The (flu jab) is not a live vaccine, so it cannot give you flu symptoms. It protects against influenza infection, which has the potential to cause death, and ICU admissions, and not the normal cold,” she said. There is no vaccine for the common cold. Flu jabs are taken annually, while pneumococcal vaccines are taken once. There are two types of pneumococcal vaccines. One dose of each type can provide those aged 65 and above with lifetime protection. Dr Sapna and Prof Chow, the senior author of the study, said that the uptrend in flu cases here is expected to continue in the next few weeks, which makes it more important for the elderly and those at risk of severe infection to get the jab. More On This Topic Pfizer launches mRNA flu vaccine trial Researchers test mRNA technology for universal flu vaccine Your browser does not support iframes, but you can use the following link: Link Join ST's WhatsApp Channel and get the latest news and must-reads. Tan Tock Seng Hospital Vaccines Influenza More Whatsapp Linkedin Twitter FB Messenger Email Print Purchase Article Copy permalink https://str.sg/wCCB Read this subscriber-only article for free! Just sign up for a free account and log in to continue reading. Move to let patients get flu, pneumococcal jabs at their designated TTSH specialist outpatient clinic Sign up Already have an account? Log in. All done! This article is now fully available for you Move to let patients get flu, pneumococcal jabs at their designated TTSH specialist outpatient clinic Read now Please verify your e-mail to read this subscriber-only article in full Move to let patients get flu, pneumococcal jabs at their designated TTSH specialist outpatient clinic Resend verification e-mail The gift link for this subscriber-only article has expired. Get unlimited access to all stories at $0.99/month for the first 3 months. Subscribe now You have reached your limit of subscriber-only articles this month. Get unlimited access to all stories at $0.99/month for the first 3 months. Subscribe now Read and win! Read 3 articles and stand to win rewards Let's go! Terms & conditions apply Frequently asked questions Good job, you've read 3 articles today! Spin the wheel now Let's go! Terms & conditions apply Frequently asked questions The Straits Times Available for iPhones and iPads Available in Google Play E-paper Facebook Instagram Twitter LinkedIn Newsletters RSS Feed Telegram Youtube TikTok Singapore Asia World Opinion Life Business Tech Sport Videos Podcasts Multimedia About Us Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Need help? Reach us here. Advertise with us MCI (P) 066/10/2023. Published by SPH Media Limited, Co. Regn. No. 202120748H. Copyright © 2024 SPH Media Limited. All rights reserved. Back to the topVaccination abysmally low among above 60 in India: ICMR study E-PAPERNATIONWORLDSTATESOPINIONSCITIESBUSINESSSPORTGOOD NEWSMOVIESPHOTOSVIDEOSWEB SCRAWLNATIONWORLDSTATESOPINIONSCITIESBUSINESSSPORTGOOD NEWSMOVIESPHOTOSVIDEOSWEB SCRAWL BhubaneswarVaccination abysmally low among above 60 in India: ICMR studyElderly people belonging to the most affluent groups had the maximum coverage of all the five vaccines.Image used for representational purpose only.(PTI | Photo)Hemant Kumar RoutUpdated on: 14 Dec 2022, 10:54 pm2 min readCopiedBHUBANESWAR: India might be boasting of high immunisation coverage among its children and young population, however, the vaccination coverage in the elderly population, especially people above 60 years, who are at higher health risk post Covid-19, is abysmally low.The first ever study on adult vaccination in the country revealed the coverage of diphtheria and tetanus (DT) vaccine was the highest at 2.75 per cent (pc), followed by typhoid at 1.84 pc, hepatitis B at 1.82 pc, influenza at 1.59 pc and pneumococcal vaccine at 0.74 pc.The study conducted by a group of scientists of Bhubaneswar-based Regional Medical Research Centre (RMRC), a unit of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) found a variation in the coverage of various adult vaccines across wealth indexes.Elderly people belonging to the most affluent groups had the maximum coverage of all the five vaccines. Since the country does not have a universal programme for adult vaccination, individuals have to pay to receive the vaccines.Among the most affluent group, 3.32 pc senior citizens had a chance of getting vaccinated for influenza, 5.53 pc for pneumococcal, 5.24 pc for hepatitis B, 3.53 pc for typhoid and 3.6 pc for DT. People covered under the study having high cholesterol, psychiatric conditions, and cancer had the highest coverage for all vaccines. The DT vaccine had the highest coverage followed by typhoid, hepatitis B, influenza, and pneumococcal vaccines.Even as influenza vaccine is learnt to have reduced hospital admission during epidemics and pneumococcal vaccine has been effective in reducing bacteremic infections, RMRC scientist (public health) Dr Srikanta Kanungo said, the findings showed a very low coverage of both of the vaccines among diabetics, who have a higher chance of complications from influenza and pneumococcal infections leading to hospitalisation and death.“We also found that the deprived group had a lower coverage of typhoid vaccine which may lead to an increased case burden. Chronic infections of hepatitis B also cause higher mortality and morbidity. The low coverage of vaccines might lead to a high disease burden among adults,” he warned.As adult immunisation has become a major concern and the group is more susceptible to acquiring diseases during outbreaks or various other conditions associated with non-communicable diseases, the RMRC scientists have advised inclusion of elderly population with comorbidities in the universal immunisation programme.RMRC director Dr Sanghamitra Pati said a phase-wise coverage based on the assessment of risk factors similar to Covid-19 vaccination is required for all adult vaccines and the provision of subsidised vaccines can also help in achieving higher immunisation coverage.Vax disparityOnly 2.75 pc senior citizens had DT vaccine, 1.84 pc typhoid, 1.82 pc hepatitis B, 1.59 pc influenza and 0.74 pc pneumococcalPeople with high cholesterol, psychiatric conditions and cancer had the highest coverage for all five vaccines Deprived group had a lower coverage of typhoid vaccineLow coverage of vaccines may lead to a high disease burden among adultsFollow The New Indian Express channel on WhatsApp Download the TNIE app to stay with us and follow the latestvaccinationCOVID-19ICMRShow CommentsRelated StoriesNo stories found. Copyright - newindianexpress.com 2024. All rights reserved. Powered by Quintype X The New Indian Express www.newindianexpress.com INSTALL APP