The flu (influenza): Causes, symptoms and treatment | Live Science Skip to main content Open menu Close menu Live Science Live Science Search Search Live Science Subscribe RSS Space Health Planet Earth Animals Archaeology Physics & Math Human Behavior Technology Chemistry More Science news About us Newsletter Follow us Story archive How It Works MagazineWhy subscribe?The ultimate action-packed science and technology magazine bursting with exciting information about the universeSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with checkout code 'LOVE5'Engaging articles, amazing illustrations & exclusive interviewsIssues delivered straight to your door or device From$26.49View Deal Trending'Superheavy' elementPompeii victimsJames Webb Space TelescopeCrocodile quizBest cameras for wildlife photography Health Viruses, Infections & Disease Flu The flu (influenza): Causes, symptoms and treatment References By Rachael RettnerContributions from Alina Bradford last updated 14 October 2022 The flu is a respiratory virus that affects the throat, nose, bronchi and, sometimes, the lungs. When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works. Influenza, commonly known as flu, is a viral respiratory disease that evolves from year to year. (Image credit: Shutterstock) Jump to: History Causes How flu spreads Symptoms Complications Treatment Prevention Additional resources The flu (short for influenza) is a viral respiratory disease that affects the throat, nose and lungs. There are different types of influenza viruses, and they evolve from year to year.For most people, the flu is an inconvenience that subsides in a few days. For others, influenza can lead to health complications, hospital visits and even death. Globally, there are an estimated 1 billion cases of flu each year, and 3 million to 5 million of these cases are severe, leading to about 290,000 to 650,000 deaths annually, according to the World Health Organization (WHO).In the United States, there were an estimated 35 million cases of flu, 380,000 flu-related hospitalizations and 20,000 flu-related deaths during the 2019-2020 flu season (the last flu season with data available before the COVID-19 pandemic), according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).HistoryThe word "influenza" in Italian literally means "influence," a word that Italians have used for illnesses since at least the 1500s because they, like others at the time, believed that the stars influenced health, according to the Douglas Harper Etymology Dictionary. There have been many major pandemics caused by the flu throughout history. For example, the 1918 to 1919 influenza pandemic, known as "The Great Pandemic," is estimated to have infected one-third of the worldwide population and caused 50 million deaths, according to the CDC. This pandemic was also named the "Spanish flu" because early reports of flu cases during that pandemic came from Spain.A more recent flu pandemic occurred in 2009 to 2010, when a new form of the influenza strain H1N1 appeared. This virus is also called "swine flu" because the virus is similar to one found in pigs.The swine flu pandemic caused an estimated 43 million to 89 million illnesses in the United States between April 2009 and April 2010. The CDC estimated there were between 8,870 and 18,300 H1N1-related deaths during that time.CausesThe three main types of influenza virus that cause illness in people are named A, B and C. Influenza A and B viruses cause seasonal epidemics of disease almost every winter in the United States, while influenza C causes only mild respiratory symptoms and is not thought to cause epidemics, according to the CDC. A fourth type of influenza, type D, is not known to cause illness in people and mainly affects cattle, according to the CDC.The influenza A virus is broken down into subtypes based on two proteins on the virus's surface called hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N). A total of 18 different hemagglutinin proteins and 11 different neuraminidase proteins are known to exist, and these two proteins appear together in various combinations, according to the CDC. Over 130 influenza A subtype combinations have been identified in nature, with most infecting wild birds. The two subtypes of influenza A that commonly cause seasonal flu in people are called H1N1 and H3N2. Influenza B viruses aren't divided into subtypes; instead, they are classified into two lineages: B/Yamagata and B/Victoria.While there are many types of flu, it is important to note that the "stomach flu" isn't a type of influenza. Rather, it is gastroenteritis, an inflammation of the lining of the intestines caused by a virus (such as norovirus or rotavirus), bacteria or parasites.Also, avian influenza, or bird flu, refers to flu viruses that typically affect only birds. That's because bird flu viruses are adapted to birds and don't easily spread to other animals, including humans. But in rare cases, certain strains of bird flu have been known to infect humans. These strains include H5N1, H7N9, H5N6, H5N8 and, most recently, H3N8, which was reported in humans for the first time in April 2022, in a 4-year-old boy in China, Live Science previously reported. Among these bird flu strains, H5N1 is perhaps the best known; around 700 cases of H5N1 have been reported worldwide in humans since 2003, according to the CDC. It is most often contracted directly from birds and, unlike most types of influenza, is usually not spread from person to person.How flu spreadsAn artist's illustration of the flu virus. (Image credit: KATERYNA KON/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY via Getty Images)Flu viruses spread from person to person, mainly by droplets from a cough or sneeze of an infected person, according to the CDC. In 2018, researchers also confirmed that the virus can spread through small particles called aerosols that are released when a person breathes, Live Science previously reported. Other research has found that these infectious particles can travel up to 6 feet (1.8 meters) after they are exhaled by a sick person. Less commonly, people may become infected when they touch surfaces contaminated with flu virus particles and then touch their mouth, nose or eyes.People with the flu may be contagious starting one day before their symptoms begin and up to seven days after becoming sick, though they are most contagious in the first three to four days after their symptoms begin, according to the CDC. Young children and people with weakened immune systems may be contagious for longer periods. In addition, some people may not develop symptoms but still spread the virus to others (i.e. asymptomatic spread), according to the CDC. Flu symptomsPeople often confuse the symptoms of flu with those of the common cold. While it sometimes can be hard to tell the difference between a cold and the flu, in general, flu symptoms tend to be more severe than cold symptoms, according to the CDC. For example, people with the flu usually develop a fever, whereas people with colds rarely do. Here are some common signs and symptoms of the flu, according to the CDC:Fever/chillsCoughSore throatRunny or stuffy noseMuscle or body achesHeadacheFatigueVomiting/diarrhea (more common in children than in adults)Flu complicationsMost young and healthy people don't develop serious complications from the flu. But serious effects can occur, particularly among people in high-risk groups, including young children, older adults, pregnant people and those with certain chronic medical conditions. According to the National Institutes of Health, flu can have the following complications:Pneumonia: An infection of the lungs, or pneumonia, is a serious complication of the flu. It can potentially be deadly for older adults and other high-risk individuals.Bronchitis: Flu is a common cause of acute bronchitis, or inflammation of airways in the lungs known as bronchial tubes.Worsening asthma: People with asthma may have flare-ups when they have the flu.Inflammation: The flu may trigger inflammation of the heart (myocarditis), brain (encephalitis) or muscle tissues (myositis or rhabdomyolysis).Ear infections: Young children are more susceptible to this complication.Flu treatmentMost people infected with influenza recover within a few days to less than two weeks without requiring medical treatment, according to the CDC. "It is very important for anyone diagnosed with influenza to take care of themselves, giving themselves enough time, enough fluids and enough rest to fully recover," said Dr. Susan Donelan, medical director of health care epidemiology at Stony Brook University in New York.Over-the-counter pain relievers, such as ibuprofen and aspirin, may help reduce fevers and relieve aches and pains during the flu. Decongestant drops and cough syrups also may help ease symptoms, but always contact a medical professional before administering over-the-counter remedies to children.Certain people are at greater risk for health complications from the flu that could result in hospitalization or death. These groups include people older than 65, children under 5, pregnant people, and people with certain health conditions, such as heart disease, asthma, kidney disease and diabetes, according to the CDC. If you fall into a high-risk group and develop flu symptoms, you should contact your health care provider promptly because you may benefit from taking antiviral drugs to treat the flu. The CDC recommends that people at high risk for flu complications receive antiviral drugs as soon as possible, since these drugs work best if given within two days from symptom onset, according to the agency.Antiviral drugs are prescription medications that fight flu viruses and can shorten the duration of illness and lower the risk of flu complications. Antiviral drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration include oseltamivir phosphate (Tamiflu), zanamivir (Relenza), peramivir (Rapivab) and baloxavir marboxil (Xofluza), according to the CDC. The agency recommends that high-risk patients with a flu-like illness get prompt treatment with influenza antiviral drugs, without waiting for testing results to confirm the flu.People with the flu don't need to go to the emergency room unless they have emergency symptoms of the flu, which, according to the CDC, include the following:Difficulty breathing or shortness of breathPersistent chest pain or abdominal painPersistent dizziness or confusionSeizuresLack of urinationSevere muscle painSevere weakness or unsteadinessFlu-like symptoms that appear to get better but then return with a fever or worse coughWorsening of chronic medical conditionsIn children, emergency symptoms include the following:Fast breathing or trouble breathingBluish lips or faceRibs pulling in with each breathChest painSevere muscle pain (for example, child refuses to walk)Dehydration (no urine or wet diapers for 8 hours, no tears when crying, dry mouth)Not alert or interacting when awakeSeizuresFever above 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius)Any fever in children younger than 12 weeks old Flu-like symptoms that improve but then return with a fever or worse cough.Worsening of chronic medical conditionsPreventionThe flu vaccine helps protect against the flu strains that are predicted to be the most prevalent for that particular year. (Image credit: Lucia Romero Herranz / EyeEm via Getty Images)Though washing your hands regularly and practicing good hygiene are good tactics for preventing the flu, the best course of action is to receive the flu vaccine every year. Each year, researchers determine which strains of the influenza virus are most likely to circulate during flu season, and vaccines are produced to prevent infection.The CDC recommends a yearly flu vaccine for everyone 6 months and older. "For the seasonal flu, those who are younger, those who are older, and those who are immunocompromised are more likely to contract influenza; and if someone in that group is unable to get vaccinated, it is important for those who have close interaction with them or care for them to get vaccinated to reduce their exposure," Donelan said.So, why do some people still get the flu after getting a flu shot? The flu vaccine helps protect against the flu strains that are predicted to be the most prevalent for that particular year. But because the strains included in the vaccine don't always end up matching the strains circulating that year, it is possible to contract a strain of the virus that is different from those included in the seasonal vaccine. It is also possible to become infected with a strain that is included in the vaccine, although symptoms are usually less severe than they would be if the person had not received the vaccine. Still, studies show that when strains in the vaccine are a good match with the ones that are circulating, vaccinated individuals are 40% to 60% less likely to catch the flu than people who aren't vaccinated, according to the CDC.Additional resourcesSearch for flu vaccines near you on Vaccines.gov. Read more about the differences between cold and flu on the CDC's "cold versus flu" page. The CDC also has tips on what to do if you get sick with flu and how to care for someone with flu.This article was updated on Oct. 12, 2022 by Live Science Contributor Rachael Rettner. Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter nowGet the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox.Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over. TOPICS vaccines Rachael RettnerSocial Links NavigationContributorRachael is a Live Science contributor, and was a former channel editor and senior writer for Live Science between 2010 and 2022. She has a master's degree in journalism from New York University's Science, Health and Environmental Reporting Program. She also holds a B.S. in molecular biology and an M.S. in biology from the University of California, San Diego. Her work has appeared in Scienceline, The Washington Post and Scientific American.With contributions fromAlina BradfordLive Science Contributor More about fluH5N1 bird flu is evolving to better infect mammals, CDC study suggestsHow to get better faster when you have the flu, according to scienceLatestNASA's Chandra X-ray telescope sees 'knots' blasting from nearby black hole jetsSee more latest ► Most PopularWhat are ultraprocessed foods?Who invented video games?Easter Island (Rapa Nui) and its famous Moai statuesWhat's the highest place on Earth that humans live?Follow Live Science on social mediaLive Science daily newsletter: Get amazing science every dayWhat is artificial intelligence (AI)?Why is the 'T-zone' on your face so oily?Is it possible to have too many antioxidants?How do fevers kill germs?Is it too late to get a flu shot? LATEST ARTICLES1NASA's Chandra X-ray telescope sees 'knots' blasting from nearby black hole jets2Space Force's mysterious X-37B begins 'aerobraking' to lower orbit. Here's how it works.3Do ostriches really bury their heads in the sand? 4How did the Concorde fly so fast?5Forgetting may provide a surprising evolutionary benefit, experts say Live Science is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookies policy Accessibility Statement Advertise with us Web notifications Careers Editorial standards How to pitch a story to us © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.New Tools Prepare Members for 2022-23 Influenza Season | AAFP Search search close New Tools Prepare Members for 2022-23 Influenza Season AAFP Issues Guidance on Vaccination, Diagnosis, Testing and Treatment October 14, 2022, 1:30 p.m. News Staff — As influenza season approaches, the Academy is taking new steps to ensure family physicians are prepared not just for the flu but also COVID-19, which can present with similar symptoms and is still infecting tens of thousands of people each day. The AAFP’s latest efforts include free resources on the Academy’s Immunizations & Vaccines webpage to help family physicians and their care teams deliver the best patient care, including a clinical guidance sheet, a COVID-19 and influenza patient action plan, and a medical history form for patients 65 years and older. “Nearly every family physician is likely to care for patients exposed to or ill with the flu or COVID, and we know that older adults are among those that face higher rates of severe complications and death from these diseases,” said Julie Wood, M.D., M.P.H., the Academy’s senior vice president for Research, Science and Health of the Public. “Family physicians are well positioned to provide care for older adults in many different settings. Our goal is primary prevention with vaccines and other preventive measures, but it is also important for the patient or their caregiver to be aware of testing and treatment options, ideally before they become ill. The new guidance documents the AAFP has developed facilitate family physicians getting those action plans in place for their practices and patients.” The new resources come as health care professionals across the United States brace for a potentially severe flu season. Surveillance reports from Australia, where the flu season typically runs from April to October, indicate that the country experienced its worst season since before the COVID-19 pandemic. The rate of influenza cases was about three times higher than average and the number of cases peaked about two months earlier than usual. Data from the CDC, meanwhile, show that for the week ending Oct. 8, the latest date for which information is available, clinical laboratories reported 1,766 cases of influenza to the agency — a 39% increase from the previous week. Story Highlights While anyone can become sick from the flu, older adults are considerably more likely to experience severe influenza-associated illness, hospitalization and death compared with younger, healthier people. Children younger than 5 years, pregnant people, and those with weakened immune systems or chronic medical conditions such as asthma or diabetes are also at increased risk. Clinical Guidance and Patient Tools The clinical guidance sheet is divided into three sections. Vaccinating Your Patients encourages FPs to strongly recommend all eligible recommended vaccinations during routine or preventive office visits. It includes detailed recommendations for COVID-19 and influenza vaccination, advice on coadministration of the vaccines, and links to the AAFP’s Seasonal Influenza Prevention & Control webpage and the CDC’s Interim Clinical Considerations for Use of COVID-19 Vaccines in the United States. Diagnosing and Testing Your Patients explains the importance of testing to distinguish between influenza and COVID-19; gives a rundown of symptoms that may occur in both diseases; discusses the use of telemedicine for patients who have acute respiratory illness and those at high risk; and addresses infection prevention and control measures, and collection of respiratory specimens for testing; and reminds members that people can be infected with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus concurrently, and that testing for both viruses is needed to exclude one or the other. Treating Your Patients features links to NIH treatment guidelines for influenza and COVID-19, a clinician summary on antiviral medications from the CDC and the agency’s interim clinical considerations for COVID-19 treatment in outpatients. The guidance sheet notes that empiric antiviral treatment should begin immediately, without waiting for lab confirmation of influenza, for patients who are hospitalized; have severe, complicated or progressive illness; or are at high risk for complications. For patients with suspected influenza who are not at high risk, the CDC recommends that clinicians use their professional judgment about starting outpatient, early empiric antiviral treatment, if it can be done within 48 hours of illness onset. The medical history form and patient action plan complement the guidance sheet and are both designed for use with older patients. Patients can complete the medical form to list their most recent influenza and COVID-19 vaccinations, test results, symptoms, complications and treatments all in one central location, while the action plan helps patients and their family members make decisions and prepare for unexpected illnesses that may result from COVID-19 and/or influenza. More Member Resources The new clinician and patient materials reflect an ongoing Academy campaign to provide members with concise, up-to-date information on vaccines and immunizations. In August, the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices revamped its influenza vaccine recommendations for the 2022-2023 flu season by issuing “preferential” recommendations for three vaccines in older adults — Fluad Quadrivalent, Flublok Quadrivalent and Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent — without a preferential recommendation for one vaccine over another. If none of these vaccines is available, then any other age-appropriate influenza vaccine should be used. The AAFP endorsed the modified recommendations following a review and approval by the Academy’s Commission on Health of the Public and Science, and updated its Seasonal Influenza Prevention & Control webpage to reflect these changes. Other resources the Academy rolled out for members in time for flu season include a pair of factsheets, How to Approach Conversations With Parents About Routine Pediatric Vaccinations and Building Confidence When Talking to Parents About Children’s Vaccines; four tools to help physicians address vaccine hesitancy: a vaccine safety fact sheet, a counseling guide, a patient education infographic and a series of email templates; a fact sheet and a clinical guidance sheet on influenza vaccination; CME activities on increasing adult immunization rates and improving vaccine confidence; patient-related materials on familydoctor.org and a two-part supplement on quality improvement and communication, the first of which appeared in the May/June edition of FPM. Make sure to visit AAFP.org for the latest information on influenza and COVID-19. Copyright © 2024 American Academy of Family Physicians. All Rights Reserved.An anti-influenza combined therapy assessed by single cell RNA-sequencing | Communications Biology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature communications biology articles article An anti-influenza combined therapy assessed by single cell RNA-sequencing Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 10 October 2022 An anti-influenza combined therapy assessed by single cell RNA-sequencing Chiara Medaglia ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1719-764X1 na1, Ilya Kolpakov2 na1, Arnaud Charles-Antoine Zwygart1, Yong Zhu3, Samuel Constant4, Song Huang4, Valeria Cagno5, Emmanouil T. Dermitzakis ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9302-64902, Francesco Stellacci ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4635-60803, Ioannis Xenarios2 & …Caroline Tapparel ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0411-65671 Show authors Communications Biology volume 5, Article number: 1075 (2022) Cite this article 2989 Accesses 4 Citations 3 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Drug developmentInfluenza virus AbstractInfluenza makes millions of people ill every year, placing a large burden on the healthcare system and the economy. To develop a treatment against influenza, we combined virucidal sialylated cyclodextrins with interferon lambda and demonstrated, in human airway epithelia, that the two compounds inhibit the replication of a clinical H1N1 strain more efficiently when administered together rather than alone. We investigated the mechanism of action of the combined treatment by single cell RNA-sequencing analysis and found that both the single and combined treatments impair viral replication to different extents across distinct epithelial cell types. We showed that each cell type comprises multiple sub-types, whose proportions are altered by H1N1 infection, and assessed the ability of the treatments to restore them. To the best of our knowledge this is the first study investigating the effectiveness of an antiviral therapy against influenza virus by single cell transcriptomic studies. Similar content being viewed by others Modeling SARS-CoV-2 and influenza infections and antiviral treatments in human lung epithelial tissue equivalents Article Open access 12 August 2022 COVID-19 severity correlates with airway epithelium–immune cell interactions identified by single-cell analysis Article 26 June 2020 Induction of interferon response by high viral loads at early stage infection may protect against severe outcomes in COVID-19 patients Article Open access 03 August 2021 IntroductionInfluenza is a highly contagious respiratory infection that accounts every year for about ~3–5 million cases of severe illness and up to 650,000 deaths1. More than a century after the Spanish pandemic, the health systems are still struggling to cope with seasonal influenza, something that bodes poorly in the event of a novel pandemic. Influenza is caused, in humans, by influenza A (IAV) and influenza B (IBV) viruses. Although the latter are almost exclusively found in the human population, IAVs emerge from a huge zoonotic reservoir2. In a process called antigenic drift, IAVs rapidly acquire adaptive mutations allowing them not only to evade the host immune response but also to neutralize annual attempts to generate effective vaccines3. As a consequence, seasonal epidemics endanger every year children, elderly people, pregnant women, and people of any age with comorbid illnesses4. In addition, due to their ability to cross the species barrier, IAVs pose a high pandemic risk. The arrangement of the viral genome on multiple RNA segments allows for the exchange of genetic material between different viral strains which co-infect the same host, giving rise to novel gene-reassorted variants. This process, when accompanied by the expression of new surface glycoproteins, is named antigenic shift, as it results in the emergence of strains that infect immunologically naive humans and cause potentially pandemic outbreaks5. Lastly, when the reassortant viruses possess new virulence factors, they can be associated with increased pathogenicity.Influenza virus (IV) is enveloped, with a negative single strand RNA genome. The viral protein hemagglutinin (HA) of human IV binds preferentially α2,6-linked sialic acid (Sia) moieties located on the surface of the host cell, thus triggering viral entry through clathrin-mediated endocytosis6. Upon entering a new host, IV establishes infection in the epithelial cells lining the upper airways7. When the infection stays restricted to this region of the respiratory tract, it causes rather mild disease. But if it spreads to the lungs, it can cause viral pneumonia, with progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and death from respiratory failure8. IAV disrupts the functions of the respiratory barrier by inducing epithelial cell death via intrinsic viral pathogenicity, or through a robust immune response9. This alteration leads to exposure of new attachment sites for bacteria10, thus making the host more vulnerable to secondary infections by other pathogens, which significantly contribute to the morbidity of influenza11.Annual vaccination is the cornerstone of prevention against IVs. However, the vaccine has to be adapted yearly and does not always match with circulating strains. This is further complicated by the co-circulation of different IV types and different IAV subtypes12. In the 2017–2018 United States season, vaccine effectiveness was estimated to be only ∼25% against influenza A subtype H3N2 viruses, which, however, comprised ∼69% of infections13. Antivirals represent an important second line of defense against IV, but all the currently available drugs are only efficient if taken at the early stages of the disease. Moreover, they inevitably exert selective pressure on the virus, which causes the appearance of drug-resistant variants14,15,16. It results that there is an unmet need to develop additional therapies against IV.Several studies indicate IFN λ as a promising therapeutic candidate for controlling influenza and other viral respiratory diseases17,18. The family of IFN λ (alias IFN type III) comprises IFN λ1, IFN λ2, and IFN λ3 (also known as IL-29, IL-28A, and IL-28B, respectively), and the recently identified IFN λ419. Like IFN type I, IFN λ acts both in an autocrine and paracrine fashion, inducing an antiviral state through the expression of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), that inhibit viral replication at multiple steps20. The antiviral state induced by IFN λ is localized to the mucosal surfaces, as the expression of its receptor is mostly restricted to the epithelial cells of the gut and the respiratory tract21. Indeed, immune cells are largely unresponsive to IFN λ21,22. Thus, while IFN type I targets nearly all immune cells, creating massive inflammation that may further weaken the host23, IFN λ only acts at the epithelial barriers and on a few innate immune cells, without causing immunopathology18,24. These properties suggest IFN λ as a treatment of choice against acute viral infections, such as influenza, with higher tolerability than IFN type I. IFN λ plays a critical early role, not shared by IFN type I, in the protection of the lung following IV infection25,26,27,28, and several in vivo studies show that it also exerts variable degrees of antiviral activity against both IAV and IBV strains29. It has been reported that, in B6.A2G-MX1 mice infected with H1N1 IAV, IFN λ intranasal administration prevents viral spread from the upper to the lower airway, without noxious inflammatory side effects26,30. Importantly, human pegylated IFN λ1 passed both phase I and phase II clinical trials for hepatitis C treatment, displaying an attractive pharmacological profile31,32.Combination therapy is considered a valuable approach to provide greater clinical benefit, especially to those at risk of severe disease. Combining drugs targeting different mechanisms of viral replication may increase the success rate of the treatment33,34, as also demonstrated in our previous work, showing that IFN λ1 co-administration delays the emergence of H1N1 IAV resistance to oseltamivir35. We recently developed 6’SLN-CD [heptakis-(6-deoxy-6-thioundec)-beta-cyclodextrin grafted with 6’SLN(Neu5Ac-a-(2-6)-Gal-b-(1-4)-GlcNAc;6’-N-Acetylneuraminyl-N-acetyllactosamine], a nontoxic anti-influenza antiviral designed to target and irreversibly inactivate extracellular IV particles, preventing their entrance into the host cell. 6’SLN-CD significantly decreases IAV replication in both ex vivo and in vivo models of infection36. However, 6’SLN-CD targets the globular head of IV HA, which undergoes constant antigenic drift, thus posing a concrete problem of resistance emergence [14a]. In this work, we chose to combine human IFN λ1, the host frontline defense against IAV, with 6’SLN-CD, in order to increase its effectiveness and lower the chances of antiviral resistance. The two compounds hinder viral replication on different fronts: IFN λ1 boosts the host innate response while 6’SLN-CD traps and inactivates newly formed virions. To mimic the in vivo environment, we assessed the combinatorial effect of the compounds in 3D human airway epithelia (HAE) reconstituted at the air-liquid interface11,37 and showed that IFN λ1 enhances 6’SLN-CD antiviral activity. HAE perfectly mimics both the pseudostratified architecture of the human respiratory epithelium, composed of basal, ciliated, and secretory cells, and its defense mechanisms. In addition, they allow the use of clinical viral specimens, thus preserving their original pathogenicity and biological characteristics, which are inevitably lost upon repeated passages in cell lines37,38,39,40.As host cellular heterogeneity strongly impacts virus-host interplay and is mirrored in response to antiviral treatments41,42, we investigated the mechanism of action of IFN λ1 plus 6’SLN-CD by single cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq). This approach allowed us to trace the landscape of the modifications through which individual cells respond to IAV infection and to the treatments. We found that in different epithelial cell types, both the individual and the combined antivirals hinder viral replication to different extents, depending on the permissiveness of the cells to H1N1. We also showed that each basal, secretory, and ciliated cells comprise multiple subclusters, whose proportions are altered by the infection. Surprisingly even though in each cell type, the antivirals reduced viral replication synergistically, they were not able to restore the changes in cell subcluster composition in a similar manner. Lastly, in the absence of infection, IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD did not alter the proportions of the main epithelial cell types, further supporting the therapeutic potential of the formulation. The findings presented in this work pave the way for future in vivo experiments, to better assess the efficacy of IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD treatment against influenza. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study investigating the effectiveness of antiviral therapy against influenza by scRNA-seq.ResultsIFN λ1 and 6’SLN-CD display synergistic activity against H1N1 IAV ex vivoWe optimized an IFN λ1/6’SLN-CD formulation to inhibit IAV in ex vivo 3D HAE. The tissues were infected with a clinical A/Switzerland/3076/2016 H1N1 strain that has not been passaged in cell lines, to exclude any in vitro adaptation bias. First, we determined the best administration mode for the individual treatments. While 6’SLN-CD successfully inhibited viral replication when administered at 8 h post-infection (hpi) on the apical surface of the HAE, IFN λ1 reduced viral spread only when administered at 24 h before infection (hbi), and on the basal side of the tissue (Supplementary Fig. 1a–c). Even though IFN λ pretreatment is not an ideal clinical option, our data are in line with already published in vitro and ex vivo studies, confirming the effectiveness of IFN λ only in pretreatment and on the basal side of polarized epithelial tissues43,44. The underlying reasons for that are the kinetic and the mechanism of action of IFN λ. Unlike 6’SLN-CD, which directly targets the virus and inactivates it within minutes36, the antiviral state induced by IFN λ relies on the activation of a gene-expression program which takes several hours to be effective. Of note, in mouse models of infection, IFN λ prevents IV spread when administered via the intranasal route in therapeutic use, i.e., once the clinical symptoms of the disease are manifested, which would correspond to an administration at the apical side in our settings26,30. Of note, in vivo, IFN λ is sensed by the trans-epithelial dendritic cells of the respiratory mucosa, which strongly amplify its signal45.Based on these observations and to achieve the maximum combinatorial antiviral effect, we administered 6’SLN-CD and IFN λ1 according to the following protocol: HAE were first treated on their basal side with IFN λ1, starting at 24 hbi, while 6’SLN-CD was administered at 8 hpi on the apical side of the tissue. Both IFN λ1 and 6’SLN-CD were then co-administered daily up to 72 hpi (Fig. 1a). The quantification of viral replication at both 48 and 72 hpi, by measuring the viral particles released from the apical surface of the tissues, revealed that when administered in combination IFN λ1 and 6’SLN-CD were more effective than when administered individually. The synergistic effect was evident at 48 hpi (≥1 log reduction for both individual treatments vs >2 log reduction for the combined one) and it persisted at 72 hpi, when the antiviral effect of the individual treatments was lost (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1d). Of note, IFN λ1 and 6’SLN-CD are nontoxic nor as individual32,36, nor as combined treatments (Supplementary Fig. 2). These data indicate that IFN λ1 treatment potentiates the antiviral action of 6’SLN-CD.Fig. 1: Combinatorial effect of 6’SLN-CD + IFN λ1 in HAE.a Schematics of 6’SLN-CD and IFN λ1 (60 µg and 5.5 ng per tissue, respectively) combined administration. b Bar plot showing the kinetic of IAV replication in HAE treated with 6’SLN-CD only, or with IFN λ1 only, or with both compounds according to a. The results represent mean and standard deviation (calculated with the t-test analysis) of two independent experiments conducted in duplicate in HAE developed from a pool of donors and infected with 103 RNA copies of clinical A/Switzerland/3076/2016 H1N1 (0 h corresponds to the time of viral inoculation). Viral replication was assessed measuring the apical release of IAV by RT-qPCR. **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001; ****p ≤ 0.0001. HAE = human airway epithelia.Full size imagescRNA-seq analysis reveals that the proportions of HAE basal, secretory and ciliated cells are affected neither by IAV infection nor by the antiviral treatmentsIn order to investigate at the molecular level, the mechanism of action of IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD and its effects on HAE, we performed scRNA-seq analysis on both noninfected and infected tissues, administered or not with the individual or with the combined treatments. When conducting transcriptomic studies, it is essential to reach a fair compromise between viral and host gene expression. Viral replication occurs at the expense of the host transcription machinery, resulting eventually in a complete host shutoff46. Preventing the expression of cellular proteins at multiple steps is also a strategy adopted by the virus to counteract the antiviral response47. We selected the time of 48 hpi as the most suitable to perform scRNA-seq in our acute infection model, as it provides a wide window of analysis of both viral and host genes. At 48 hpi multiple cycles of infections already occurred and viral replication is in the exponential phase (Fig. 1b and36) resulting, however, in a still low cytopathic effect11 and in ~10% infected cells, measured based on the expression of IAV nucleoprotein (NP) (Supplementary Fig. 3). Moreover, at this time point the effect of the combined treatment is significantly stronger than the individual ones that are however still efficient, allowing to compare the therapeutic approaches with each other (Fig. 1b). When correlating, within the same HAE model, the number of IAV RNA copies measured from the apically released virus with the number of infected cells measured by FACS, we observed that the majority of the virus was produced by a small percentage of infected cells (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Fig. 1b). This finding is in line with previously published reports showing that between cells, there is a high level of variability in the outcome of IAV infection, resulting from multiple sources of heterogeneity, such as the number of viral transcripts per cell, the antiviral response and the timing of the infection48,49.sc-RNAseq relies on tissue dissociation, which can dramatically impact cell viability in epithelial tissues, as their survival is highly dependent on physical connections and communication between cells50,51. We established a dissociation protocol that allows us to retrieve every cell type of the HAE (secretory, basal, and ciliated cells, Supplementary Fig. 4) without compromising cell viability, thus preserving the quality of the mRNA within individual cells.To perform scRNA-seq analysis, HAE were infected with IAV and treated or not with 6’SLN-CD, IFN λ1, or with IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD. To assess the perturbations induced by the formulation in the absence of a virus, an uninfected control (mock) untreated and one treated with IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD were included. Cells were partitioned for cDNA synthesis and barcoded using the Chromium controller system (10x Genomics), followed by library preparation and sequencing (Illumina). Sample demultiplexing, barcode processing, and gene counting were performed using the Cell Ranger analysis software52.The upper respiratory epithelium comprises several specialized cell types that likely respond to IAV infection in distinct ways53. Using Seurat analytical pipeline, we performed an unsupervised graph-based clustering54 on the Cell Ranger integrated dataset, comprising all the tested experimental conditions (Fig. 2a–c). To match the identified clusters with the cell types found in the respiratory epithelium, we used both cluster-specific and canonical marker genes55 (Fig. 2b, d and Supplementary Fig. 5a, b).Fig. 2: Analysis of HAE cell diversity.a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) visualization of the major cell types composing human HAE. Individual cell types were annotated using a combination of graph-based clustering results from Seurat and expression analysis of several canonical cell-type-specific markers. The t-SNE plots shown in panels a–c are presented in the same spatial orientation (i.e., the location of cells expressing the canonical markers in panel b corresponds to the location of the specific cell types in panel a. b t-SNE plots illustrating in blue the expression patterns of some of the canonical markers used to annotate the three main airway epithelial cell types: FOXJ1 for ciliated cells, TCN1 for all secretory cells, TP63 for basal cells, LY6D for differentiating cells, SCGB1A1 for club cells and MUC5AC for goblet cells; scale bars are Log2. c t-SNE visualization of the scRNA-seq data for all single cells in the following conditions: mock steady sate, infected untreated (infected with A/Switzerland/3076/2016 H1N1 strain), infected + 6’SLN-CD, infected + IFN λ1, infected + IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD, and mock + IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD. d Heatmap representing the gene-expression profiles of 12,778 single cells from human HAE grouped into five clusters. The percentages of viral reads across cells are shown in red above the heatmap, while the number of total UMI counts is shown in light green. In each cluster, infected cells are ordered by increasing number of viral reads. Expression values are Pearson residuals from SCTransform binomial regression model [70] fitted to UMI counts (see Methods). The cells were clustered solely on the expression of the shown hallmark genes; HAE human airway epithelia, BdiS basal differentiating into secretory cells. e Violin plots showing the distributions of per-cell UMI (unique molecular identifiers) counts in HAE cell clusters. f Bar graph showing the relative percentage of each main epithelial cell type described above in each experimental condition described in c.Full size imageIn all analyzed HAE we identified five distinct clusters. Three of them corresponded to mature basal (TP63+/ITGA6+/KRT5 high/KRT17 high), ciliated (FOXJ1+/PIFO+/TPPP3+), and a mixed population of secretory cells, including both goblet-mucous (MUC5AC+) and club cells (SCGB1A1+/SCGB3A1+) (Fig. 2a–d). One cluster was made of a population of basal cells uniquely defined by high levels of LY6D, a marker of cellular plasticity and differentiation56 (Fig. 2a–d). Like in vivo, also ex vivo HAE basal cells have both self-renewing and multipotent properties57,58. The current consensus is that in steady-state conditions, basal cells differentiate first into secretory cells that in turn give rise to ciliated cells59. However, after injury, ciliated cells can be directly generated by basal cells59,60. LY6D high basal cells were characterized by the co-expression of both basal and secretory hallmark genes, such as KRT5, KRT17, and BPIFB1, SPRR3, AGR2, respectively (Fig. 2d). This cluster was hence identified as constituted by basal cells differentiating into secretory cells (BdiS). The fifth and last cluster, consisting of 843 cells (6.6% of the total selected cells), did not display a unique gene signature compared to the others, but co-expressed basal, secretory and ciliated hallmark genes (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. 5b). It was also marked by an increased number of gene counts in comparison to the other clusters (Fig. 2e). We, therefore, concluded that this cluster likely resulted from doublets and excluded it from further analysis. These observed cell types and their proportions (Fig. 2f) are consistent with previous scRNA-seq studies and indicate that our ex vivo model recapitulates the respiratory epithelium in vivo61.We next determined the relative abundances of ciliated, secretory, basal, and BdiS across different conditions (Fig. 2f). We found that neither the infection alone nor the treatments in the presence or absence of the infection, induced substantial changes (>2 folds) in the relative proportions of these main epithelial cell types (Fig. 2f). IAV causes a strong cytopathic effect which results in a massive loss of ciliated cells and important alterations of the tissue structure. However, in our HAE infection model, this phenomenon occurs only at 120 hpi and it is therefore not evident at 48 hpi11, which explains our results.The antiviral treatments affect IAV replication to different extents across different HAE cell typesWe next asked how viral transcripts would distribute across cell-type clusters, in each experimental condition. Global analysis of both host and viral transcriptomes in all 11,935 cells revealed that at 48 hpi and in the absence of treatments, IAV transcripts were detected in all cell types and were more abundant in ciliated cells, followed by secretory cells, BdiS and lastly, by basal cells (Fig. 3a–c). We classified the cells into four categories based on the frequency of viral transcripts (VT), i.e., the percentage of VT per cell: Z (cells bearing no VT), N (cells bearing a minimum non-zero frequency of VT, resulting from background noise), L (cells bearing VT at low frequency), M (cells bearing medium levels of VT), and H (cells bearing high levels of VT). Basal cells are located in the lower part of the epithelium, do not reach the apical side, and are therefore physically protected from the virus in the first stages of the infection when the ciliated cell layer is preserved37. Secretory cells have been shown to be the immediate target of IAV11,62, while ciliated cells become preferentially infected at later stages of infection63,64. Nonetheless, we asked whether the different numbers of viral transcripts between secretory and ciliated cells relied also on the expression levels of host factors involved in IV infection. We measured in steady-state conditions the average mean expression of twelve cellular genes promoting multiple steps of IV replication65, in secretory (including BdIS) vs ciliated cells (Supplementary Fig. 6). We found that secretory cells express higher levels of genes involved in IV RNA replication, such as CD15166 and HMGB167, or in viral maturation and release like TMPRSS467 and Rack168. While ciliated cells express higher levels of CLTA69 and EPS870, necessary for viral endocytosis and uncoating (Supplementary Fig. 6). These data may provide further insights to understand the higher susceptibility to IAV infection of ciliated over secretory cells.Fig. 3: Within-cell viral load across cell types and conditions (log odds scale).a Violin plots of within-cell proportions of viral transcripts (VT) on log odds scale (by cell type and condition). Vertical dashed lines define different viral load classes: Z = zero VT; N = background noise of VT; L = low VT; M = medium VT; H = high VT (see Methods). b Fractions of cells in viral load classes within cell-type and condition groups. The thresholds defining the viral load classes as per (see methods) are shown as vertical dashed lines in panel a. c t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) visualization of fractions of cells in viral load categories, within cell-type and condition groups. Conditions as specified in Fig. 2c.Full size imageCompared to the mock steady state, in the 6’SLN-CD alone condition, all main epithelial cell types displayed a decreased number of viral transcripts. Even so, this reduction was more pronounced in secretory (~13.5 and 4.8-fold reduction in H and M cells, respectively) and in BdIS cells (~3.6 and 9-fold reduction in H and M cells, respectively), rather than in ciliated cells (~3.6 and 1.1-fold reduction in H and M cells, respectively) (Fig. 3a, b). Similarly, the treatment with IFN λ1 alone caused a greater reduction of viral replication in the non-ciliated compartment compared to the ciliated one (Fig. 3a, b). Of note, in all analyzed cell types, the inhibitory effect of IFN λ1 was stronger than that of 6’SLN-CD. Almost no viral reads were detected in the 6’SLN-CD + IFN λ1 condition, independently of the epithelial cell types (Fig. 3a, b). Accordingly, in the presence of both treatments, the number of infected cells measured by FACS accounted for less than 1% of the total epithelium (Supplementary Fig. 3). These results further confirmed the synergistic action of IFN λ1 and 6’SLN-CD and shed light on the cell-type-specific effects of the treatments. Interestingly, in the presence of 6’SLN-CD alone viral replication was hindered preferentially in secretory rather than in ciliated cells. This difference was probably determined by both IAV receptor specificity and the higher susceptibility to the infection of ciliated cells, which explains the stronger reduction of viral replication observed in secretory cells. As the effect of the IFN λ1 alone shows a similar trend across ciliated and secretory cells, the same explanation applies. We asked whether secretory cells mounted a stronger immune response compared to ciliated cells and measured, in both cell types, the average mean expression of several key ISGs, OAS, MX1, MX2, IFIT1, IFIT2, ISG15, and ISG2020, across different experimental conditions.Lastly, we investigated the expression levels of IAV mRNA segments, and we observed the following viral mRNA segment ratio: NEP > M2 > HA ~ NP > NA > M1 ~ NS1 > PA ~ PB1 ~ P2 (Supplementary Fig. 7). The fractions of individual viral genes did not change across the treatments (Supplementary Fig. 7). The spliced transcripts (M2 and NEP) had higher expression level compared to the unspliced transcripts (M1 and NS1). This finding is in line with previous reports showing that the expression of both M2 and NEP is more biased toward the later stages of viral replication, such as 48 hpi64,71.scRNA-seq analysis reveals cell-type-specific responses to the infection and to the treatments within each HAE cell clusterWe then sighted to further investigate the heterogeneous cell responses to IAV infection and to the treatments within each epithelial cell cluster. Individual clustering54 was performed by analyzing each main HAE cell type independently of the others and led to the identification of several subpopulations, or subclusters.Basal cells were distributed across six subclusters annotated as follows: (b1) steady-state basal cells; (b2) and (b3) LY6D + differentiating cells55, with b3 displaying a more pronounced expression of KRT14 and KRT16, markers of tissue repair and regeneration72,73; (b4) highly proliferating cells, based on strong expression levels of genes involved in cell cycle progression such as MIKI67, CDK1, and BIRC5; (b5) proliferating cells with lower levels of cell cycle progression genes, compared to b4, but with high levels of KRT14 high and lastly (b6) inflamed cells, based on high expression of CXCL10, CXCL11 and several others ISGs (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Fig. 8a). The latter subcluster was the less represented in the mock steady-state control, while it became the most abundant in the infected-untreated condition (16-fold increase), with an inflammation signature stronger than that induced in the other subclusters (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Fig. 8a). IAV induced the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines across all basal subpopulations. 6’SLN-CD and IFN λ1, administered alone or in combination, counteracted this effect (Supplementary Fig. 8a). Similarly, the b6 inflamed cluster was decreased by 3-fold by the individual treatments and by 9-fold by the combined formulation. In turn, the levels of differentiating basal clusters (b2 and b3), which were decreased by the infection (2-fold and 3-fold decrease for b2 and b3, respectively), were also restored by the antivirals. In line with previous reports74, IAV infection also reduced the b4 highly proliferating subcluster (2.8-fold decrease), which was not recovered by the individual, nor by the combined treatments (Fig. 4a). This may also result from the inflammatory response triggered by IFN λ1, as b4 is less abundant also in the mock double treated, compared to the mock steady state (2-fold decrease). On the other hand, the b5 low proliferating cells cluster did not undergo strong changes across the tested experimental conditions.Fig. 4: Analysis of HAE cell types heterogeneity.Stacked bar graph showing the relative percentages of HAE basal (a), b BdiS (basal differentiating into secretory), c secretory, and d ciliated subclusters across experimental conditions. Conditions as specified in Fig. 2c. HAE = human airway epithelia.Full size imageOf note, as they are not a direct target of IAV (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Fig. 8a), basal cells mainly contributed to the immune reaction against the virus as bystander cells75. Thus, all the changes induced by IAV in this epithelial compartment were largely independent of viral replication.BdiS cells, characterized by the expression of LY6D55, comprised six subclusters, sharing an overall common transcriptional profile, with the exception of few genes: (bd1) steady-state cells; (bd2) SERPINB3 high cells; (bd3) CXCL1 high cells, displaying a strong expression of CXCL1, but not increased levels of other inflammatory cytokines, compared to bd1; (bd4) and (bd5), characterized by unique high expression of the intermediate filaments genes KRT24 and KRT23, respectively, and, lastly bd6) inflamed BdiS cells, based on the expression of several ISGs (Supplementary Fig. 8b). Similarly to basal cells, IAV infection caused in BdiS an increase of the inflamed cluster (14-fold increase), at the expenses of the others. The antiviral treatments strongly reduced the fraction of bd6 (Fig. 4b). Of note, while mostly acting as bystander cells, BdiS cells supported viral replication more than basal cells (Fig. 3), suggesting that the transition into secretory cells is accompanied by an increased permissiveness to the infection.Secretory cells were classified in three subclusters: (s1) steady-state secretory cells comprising a mixed population (defined as mixed because the gene-expression profiles did not allow unambiguous classification) of mainly club cells and fewer goblet cells, displaying a high expression of SCGB1A1, SCGB3A1, MUC5AC, RARRES1, and LCN2; (s2) SERPINB3/PI3 high cells, and (s3) inflamed cells, based on higher expression levels of ISGs (Fig. 4c and Supplementary Fig. 8c). IAV infection triggered the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in all secretory subpopulations; however, this effect was stronger in the s3 subcluster, whose fraction was increased by 10.8-fold, at the expenses of the others (Fig. 4c and Supplementary Fig. 8c). Secretory cells represent the second target of IAV after ciliated cells. We did not observe an additive effect of the treatments in secretory cells: compared to the infected-untreated condition, IFN λ1 alone decreased the fraction of s3 inflamed cells by only 1.89-fold, while 6’SLN-CD alone restored the secretory subclusters composition nearly as effectively as the combined treatments. This is probably due to the fact that, similarly to basal and BdiS cells, most of the changes occurring in secretory cells after IAV infection were largely independent of viral replication.Within the ciliated compartment, we identified four subclusters: (c1) steady-state cells with high expression of ciliated hallmark genes FOXJ1, TPPP3, and ERICH3; (c2) immature cells, based on lower levels of the ciliated hallmark genes, and on higher expression of RAB11FIP1, which is involved in primary ciliogenesis76; (c3) IFN − inflamed cells; and (c4) IFN + inflamed cells, both characterized by high expression of inflammatory genes, such as ISG20 and GBP1, but differing from each other based on the expression of IFN λ and IFN β1 (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Fig. 8d).Ciliated cells are highly permissive to IAV infection63. Analyzing the distribution of viral transcripts, we found that viral replication occurred across all ciliated subclusters (Supplementary Fig. 8d). However, c4 displayed the highest levels of IAV segments, resulting in 100% of infected cells (Supplementary Fig. 8d). The viral load correlated with the entity of the inflammatory response, as only c4 expressed IFN λ and IFN β1 genes, as well as high levels of NEDD9, which is associated with IAV-induced antiviral response77. Moreover, compared to all other clusters, c4 exhibited high levels of the proapoptotic factor BBC3, and lower or null levels of ciliated hallmark genes, probably as a result of the massive viral genes expression, hijacking the host transcriptional machinery46 (Supplementary Fig. 8d). The changes in the proportions of ciliated cells subclusters across experimental conditions reflected the efficacy of the treatments. Compared to the mock steady-state control, IAV infection resulted in a relative decrease of both the steady-state and immature cells (2.6-fold reduction of c1 and 2.1-fold reduction of c2, respectively), whose levels were restored by both individual and combined treatments (Fig. 4d). In line with that, 6’SLN-CD and IFN λ 1 counteracted the increase in the c3 inflamed IFN-subcluster (Fig. 4d). The C4 inflamed IFN + subpopulation followed a similar trend, but completely disappeared in the 6’SLN-CD + IFN λ 1 condition, further proving the combinatorial effect of the two compounds. Interestingly in the mock-treated condition, the inflamed IFN − cluster was increased compared to the mock steady state but not the inflamed INF+, indicating that the latter represents a virus-specific signature at 48 hpi (Supplementary Fig. 8d).Our findings show that IAV infection alters the subclusters composition in epithelial cell type by inducing the appearance of inflamed populations. As the inflammatory response tightly correlates with the viral load, the ability of the antiviral treatments to restore the tissue composition to the steady-state level is stronger in infected rather than in bystander epithelial cell types.DiscussionInfluenza can be a dreadful disease, with a strong socio-economic impact worldwide. Current antiviral strategies are only efficient when administered within a short time after the onset of the symptoms and are challenged by the genomic instability of the virus. We are in need of additional antiviral therapies targeting the respiratory immune defense to improve viral clearance, reduce the risk of bacterial super-infection, and attenuate tissue injury. A treatment that would prevent viral entry and, at the same time, boost the host antiviral response without causing immunopathology would thus represent an ideal tool to prevent or treat influenza infection. With this in mind, we assessed the antiviral potential of co-administering human IFN λ1 with 6’SLN-CD against H1N1 IAV in ex vivo HAE. The IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD formulation is nontoxic and more effective in reducing viral replication, compared to the individual treatments. IFN λ1 has already been used in clinical trials against viral infections, while 6’SLN-CD is well tolerated in vivo and effectively constrains the spread of IV infection when administered topically36. Overall, our data support a prospective therapeutic application of IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD.We next sought to investigate the investigated transcriptomic impact of this formulation by scRNA-seq in HAE. Transcriptomic analysis unraveled the heterogeneous composition of each main epithelial cell type, which is an assortment of subclusters with unique gene-expression programs underlying different cell states. Besides terminally differentiated cells, we also identified BdiS cells. This subpopulation, roughly equally represented across experimental conditions, derived from the continuous differentiation process occurring in the respiratory epithelium. We did not find basal cells differentiating directly into ciliated cells, a process triggered by tissue injury58,78,79, because, in our settings, the cytopathic effect induced by IAV at 48 hpi is not strong enough to alter the architecture of the tissues11. We also did not observe secretory cells differentiating into ciliated cells54,55,56, probably due to the limitations in sequencing depth and the fact that we did not perform a lineage study57, which would be beyond the scope of this work. When we measured the distribution of viral reads across the main cell types, we found that IAV preferentially infected epithelial cells in the following order: ciliated, secretory, and basal cells. Accordingly, ciliated cells mounted a stronger inflammatory response compared to secretory cells, which, in turn, expressed ISGs and innate cytokines at higher levels than basal cells. Interestingly, only within the ciliated compartment, IAV induced the appearance of highly inflamed cells characterized by a distinctive high expression of IFN type I and type III genes. Basal and BdiS cells, which were the most diverse due to their multipotent potential, displayed extremely low levels of viral transcripts and participated in the tissue immune response as bystander cells. Of note, the infection of basal cells would be highly detrimental to the host as these cells are absolutely necessary to maintain the barrier of the respiratory epithelium by regenerating secretory and ciliated cells targeted by IV79. We observed that the proportions of the main HAE cell-type clusters did not change upon infection and/or treatments which is, as explained above, due to the poor cytopathic effect induced by IAV at 48 hpi11. On the other hand, the subcluster composition of each cell type underwent strong modifications in response to the infection, mostly resulting from the appearance of inflamed cells. These changes were induced in ciliated and to some extent in secretory cells, by a direct cell response to viral replication, while in basal and BdiS cells by the response to the paracrine signaling from infected cells.The individual treatments reduced the percentage of viral transcripts to different extents across epithelial cell types: both 6’SLN-CD and IFN λ1 alone caused a reduction of viral reads more pronounced in secretory rather than in ciliated cells. This finding was unexpected for 6’SLN-CD, which is designed to exclusively target extracellular viral particles and was evenly distributed throughout the apical side of the HAE. We reasoned that the effect of the 6’SLN-CD in reducing viral replication depends on the susceptibility of the cells to the infection, which is dictated by both the distribution of α 2,6-linked Sia and the expression of host factors necessary for viral entry. As IAV infects ciliated cells more easily than secretory cells, the number of viral transcripts is lower in the latter cell type, and in turn, its reduction in response to 6’SLN-CD is more pronounced, compared to that observed in ciliated cells. Of note, the increase of inflamed cells observed in secretory cells upon the infection is higher than that observed in ciliated cells (Fig. 4c, d), even though the latter are the actual source of virus. This finding is in line with the sequential infection of secretory and then ciliated cells. Probably IAV first massively infects secretory cells, that mounts a strong inflammatory response without being able, however, to support viral replication, and in a second step prefers ciliated cells.Viral transcript distribution analysis also indicated a synergistic effect between 6’SLN-CD and IFN λ1 in each main cell type. However, the capacity of the combined treatments to revert IAV-induced perturbations in subclusters composition was greater than the individual ones only in ciliated cells, where the inflammation was a direct consequence of viral replication and in basal cells, but only limited to the inflamed subcluster. In line with that, in the basal compartment, where changes in cell composition were independent of IAV infection, not the individual nor the combined treatments succeeded in restoring the number of highly proliferating cells.Lastly, in the absence of infection, the combined treatment did not alter the ratios between the main basal, ciliated, and secretory cells clusters, but changed the subclusters abundances within each of them, resulting in an increase in inflammatory cells, which was likely induced by IFN λ1.Different macromolecule-based approaches are currently available for the treatment of viral infections. However, a deep knowledge of the impact on the host cells is needed to increase the effectiveness of these therapies, minimize the side effects and reduce the toxicity. Our study, proposing scRNA-seq to assess the effects of a combined therapy against IV, is in line with this need and, to the best of our knowledge, is the first to present such an analytical approach. We suggest that the ability of an antiviral treatment to restore epithelial cell subclusters composition upon infection strongly correlates with that reducing the inflammatory response. This is an important parameter to dissect the effects of the drug on the host cells, beyond its capacity to impair viral replication. Our work is also the first in addressing at the molecular level the anti-IAV effects of IFN λ in HAE. Additional investigations in more relevant in vivo models of infection, such as mice or ferrets, will be necessary to further assess the efficacy of IFN λ1 + 6’SLN-CD formulation, with a more realistic administration protocol where both compounds are administered in post-treatment, and its genetic barrier to antiviral resistance. Also, in light of the ongoing differentiation process occurring in the respiratory epithelium, scRNA-seq velocity analysis80 could allow for investigation of the trajectories of both basal and secretory cells differentiation, as well as how such trajectories would be perturbed by the infection and the treatments.MethodsHuman airway epithelia (MucilAir™)The human airway epithelia used in this study were reconstituted from freshly isolated primary human nasal polyp epithelium collected either from 14 different donors, upon surgical nasal polypectomy, or from individual donors, as previously described11. The patients presented with nasal polyps but were otherwise healthy, with no atopy, asthma, allergy, or other known comorbidities. All experimental procedures were explained in full, and all subjects provided written informed consent. The study was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki on biomedical research (Hong Kong amendment, 1989), and the research protocol was approved by the local ethics committee11. The tissues were maintained at the air-liquid interface according to the manufacturer’s instructions11.Viral stocks and compoundInfluenza H1N1 A/Switzerland/3076/16 clinical specimen was isolated from the nasopharyngeal swab of an anonymized patient, provided from the Geneva University Hospital. The sample was screened by one-step real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR)81. Influenza A virus was subtyped by sequencing the NA gene as previously described82. To prepare viral stocks, 100 µl of the clinical sample was inoculated at the apical surface of several HAE, for 4 h at 33 °C. After the infection, the apical side of the tissues was washed five times with PBS. In order to measure the daily viral production, apical samples were collected every 24 h, by applying 200 µl of medium for 20’ at 33 °C. The viral load of each time point was then measured by RT-qPCR, and the four apical washes with the highest titer were pooled and re-quantified. Aliquots were stored at −80 °C.Human recombinant IFN λ1 protein was obtained from R&D Systems, Inc. (Abingdon, United Kingdom). 6’SLN-CD was synthesized as described previously36.HAE, viral infections, and treatmentsHAE were infected apically with H1N1 A/Switzerland/3076/16 strain (1e3 or 1e4 RNA copiesissue), in a final volume of 100 µl as described above83. Infected tissues were treated with 6’SLN-CD alone, IFN λ1 alone, or with 6’SLN-CD plus IFN λ1. 6’SLN-CD dissolved in PBS was transferred on the apical surface of the tissues (60 μgissue, in a volume of 30 ul), starting from 8 hpi. After each apical wash, performed for daily viral load quantification as described above, 6’SLN-CD was re-added on the apical side of the tissues. IFN λ1 was added on the basal side of the inserts (5.5 ngissue in 550 µl) one day before infection and then added every day, each time replacing the entire basal medium with a fresh one. In parallel, upon each wash, the infected-untreated tissues were administered with 30 µl of PBS on the apical side, the same volume added to the tissues treated with 6’SLN-CD, while the basal medium was changed on a daily basis. The treatments were administered up to 72 hpi.Viral load quantificationViral RNA was extracted from Mucilair apical washes using EZNA viral extraction kit (Omega Biotek) and quantified by using RT-qPCR with the QuantiTect kit (#204443; Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) in a StepOne ABI Thermocycler, as previously described11. The primers used are described in Table 1. Viral RNA copies were quantified as follows: four ten-fold dilution series of in vitro transcripts of the influenza A/California/7/2009(H1N1) M gene were used as reference standard as previously described11. CT values were converted into RNA load using the slope-intercept form. In all experiments, the slope, efficiency, and R2 ranged between 0.96 and 0.9938,84. P-values were calculated relative to untreated controls using the two-way ANOVA with Prism 8.0 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA).Table 1 Primers used for influenza viral load quantification.Full size tableIn addition to RT-qPCR, viral replication in human airway epithelia was quantified by plaque assay. MDCK cells (a kind gift of Prof. Mirco Schmolke, University of Geneva) 500000 cells per well, were seeded in six-well plate 24 h in advance. Serial dilutions were added to cells in a final volume of 500 µl for 1 h at 37 °C. MDCK monolayers were then washed and overlaid with 0.8% agarose in a medium supplemented with TPCK trypsin 1 µg/ml. Two days after infection, cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde 4% and stained with crystal violet solution containing ethanol. Plaques were counted.Toxicity and viability assaysNoninfected tissues were treated with 6’SLN-CD plus IFN λ1, in the same doses/volumes used for infected tissues (as described above). Accordingly, every day an apical wash was performed, and a new dose of 6’SLN-CD was added on the apical side of the tissues, while a fresh medium with IFN λ1 was added on the basal side. Similarly, the untreated control tissues were administered with 30 μl of PBS on their apical side, while the basal medium was replaced every day.Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release in the apical medium was measured with the Cytotoxicity Detection Kit (Roche 04744926001) as described previously36. Percentages of cytotoxicity were calculated compared to the cytotoxicity control tissues, which were treated with 100 μl of PBS-5% Triton ™ X-100 (Sigma–Aldrich) on the apical side.Cell metabolic activity was measured by adding MTT reagent (Promega), diluted in MucilAir medium (1 mg/ml), on the basal side of the tissues. After 3 h at 37 °C the tissues were transferred to a new plate and lysed with 1 ml of DMSO. Subsequently, the absorbance was read at 570 nm according to manufacturer instructions. Percentages of viability were calculated by comparing the absorbance to the untreated control tissues.HAE enzymatic dissociation and flow cytometry analysisHAE tissues were first washed both apically and basally in DPBS without calcium and magnesium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 10′ at 37 °C. Then they were incubated with TrypLE (Thermo Fisher Scientific), both apically and basally, for 30′ at 37 °C. During this time, the tissues were dissociated with a 1 ml pipette. Cells were harvested and washed with ice-cold MACS buffer (PBS without calcium and magnesium, EDTA pH 8, 2 mM BSA 0.5%).For scRNA-seq, cells were stained with Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and DRAQ7 (Biolegend) and analyzed with a MoFlo Astrios Cell Sorter (Beckman Coulter). Viable cells were defined as Hoechst+/DRAQ7-, doublets were excluded by gating for SSC-W vs SSC, and single cells were sorted.To determine the percentages of infected cells, upon HAE dissociation, the cells were fixed/permeabilized using the Perm/Wash Buffer RUO (554723 BD Biosciences-US) and then stained with the primary antibody (mouse monoclonal anti-IVA Ab 1:100 dilution, Chemicon®) for 20′ at 4 °C. After a wash with Perm/Wash Buffer RUO the secondary Ab (Alexa Fluor 488 Invitrogen™, 1:200) was added for 20′ at 4 °C. After one wash with MACS buffer the percentages of IAV infected cells were determined with a MoFlo Astrios Cell Sorter (Beckman Coulter) and the uninfected gating control was defined using uninfected cells stained with both the primary and the secondary antibodies.Single-cell RNA-sequencing of HAEUpon HAE dissociation, viable cells were sorted as described above. Cells were then counted using Countess™ II FL Automated Cell Counter (Invitrogen) and diluted to equivalent concentrations with an intended capture of 5000 cells/sample, following the manufacturer’s provided by 10x Genomics for the Chromium Single Cell platform. All subsequent steps through library preparation followed the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 machine.Computational analysis of scRNA-seq dataUpon demultiplexing and performing the routine quality checks on the raw reads, we processed the data via Cell Ranger version 3.1.0 using the union of human and Influenza A genome as a reference (see References and Annotations) (https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/overview/welcome). We extracted the UMI counts for the 10,000 most frequent cell barcodes in each sample, then screened the distributions of total UMI counts, percentages of mitochondrial and viral genes across these barcodes (within each sample), and, selected cell barcodes having more than 10,000 UMIs85. This selection procedure resulted in 13805 selected cells across all samples with (a) 100,222 raw reads per cell on average, (b) median UMI count per cell from 17,031 to 27,419 depending on the sample, (c) the median number of genes per cell from 3998 to 5223 depending on the sample. The percentage of reads mapped confidently to the genome (transcriptome) varied in the range from 85.3 to 87.3% (61.2–63.9%). We then excluded cells where more than 15% of UMI counts correspond to mitochondrial genes, which resulted in 12,778 captured cells for downstream analysis (~2129 cells per condition). Of note, since our partitioning input was 4000 cells per condition, the recovery rate was about 50%, which is in line with previously reported works52.The analysis of single-cell data was performed using Seurat version 3.2.386. First, the raw UMI counts were transformed to normalized expression levels on a common scale using SCTransform method implemented in Seurat, which amounts to computing (Pearson) residuals in a regularized binomial regression model for UMI counts87. The normalization was performed jointly on all samples, and the genes expressed in less than 10 cells were excluded prior to normalization together with the viral genes.The selected cells from all samples were first clustered on the normalized expressions of hallmark marker genes only, which resulted in five stable clusters. The clustering method implemented in Seurat we applied amounts to (1) constructing a k-nearest neighbor graph of all cells, (2) deriving an (approximate) shared nearest-neighbors graph, and (3) applying a modularity-based community detection to the latter graph88. Euclidian metric was used for the construction of k-NN graph.The five identified global clusters lacked a clear signature and contained a sizeable proportion of cells with high total UMI counts compared to other clusters (Fig. 3). Given it included only a small percentage of cells, we excluded it from further analysis, hypothesizing that this cluster likely contains a large percentage of doublets. The remaining four clusters were clearly identified as basal cells, ciliated cells, secretory cells, and basal cells differentiating into secretory cells (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 6). The latter two clusters were merged for further analysis.The cells in the identified global cell-type clusters were then analyzed in isolation from each other in order to identify cell-type-specific responses. For each cell type, we first found a tentative set of genes differentially expressed between conditions and then reclustered the cells based on their expressions across these genes. The same graph-based clustering was applied with cell distances derived from the first 10 principal components of the expression matrix. Condition-differential genes were found as a union of genes overexpressed in any condition versus the rest as assessed by the Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test with the nominal p-value of 0.01. The obtained differential genes were ordered using a hierarchical clustering algorithm and manually curated before producing the cell-type-specific heatmaps shown in Supplementary Fig. 8. All our scRNA-seq data are deposited to GEO (GSM5740432).Analysis of cluster and subcluster compositions across conditionsto assess whether the proportions of identified HAE cell-type clusters (proportions of identified subclusters within the cell types) were materially different across conditions, we used a Chi-squared contingency in the following comparisons: (1) infected untreated vs mock steady state, (2) each infected treated condition vs infected untreated condition, (3) infected IFN λ1 vs infected 6’SLN-CD, (4) infected combined treatment vs each of the individual treatments, (5) infected combined treatment vs mock steady state, and, finally (6) mock combined treatment versus mock steady state. The p-values were computed by sampling the Chi-squared statistic under the null hypothesis i.e., the joint distribution being a (scaled) product of the marginal distributions (one million samples were generated for each comparison).The results of the tests are presented in Table 2. The nulls that the cell-type distributions or subcluster distributions are independent of conditions were, generally, strongly rejected (with a few exceptions). For cell-type composition tests, the differences between the two individual treatments (in infected cells) were not significant (p-value of 0.012), and the same was observed for the differences between the mock-treated condition and the steady state (p-value of 0.011). For the tests of subcluster compositions, the null of no differences between the mock-treated condition and the steady state was rejected for three out of four cell types suggesting the test might be overly conservative. Indeed, the subclusters were identified by clustering on the condition-differential genes identified in the cell types (in the very same dataset).Table 2 P-values from tests of cell-type or subcluster proportions being the same across conditions.Full size tableAnalysis of host factorsTo test for the differential expression of host factors between secretory and ciliated cells in steady-state conditions, we first filed a list of 52 host factor genes and retained those expressed in more than 50% of secretory and ciliated cells in (steady-state conditions) which resulted in 33 genes. We then tested for the differences in normalized expression between secretory and ciliated cells using Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test (with a two-sided alternative) and adjusted the resulting p-values using Bonferroni correction. Genes displayed in Supplementary Fig. 6 were selected manually, based on their relevance.Computational analysis of within-cell viral loadFirst, we visualized and described within-cell frequencies of viral transcripts (FVTs) across groups using four discrete viral load classes introduced to better highlight the differences in viral load across individual cells, cell types, and conditions (Fig. 3 and Table 3). Next, we statistically investigated the differences across cell types and across conditions both in terms of (a) abundances of viral load classes, and, (b) continuous estimates of group-average FVTs from a Beta-Binomial regression model. Finally, we estimated and documented the global and cell-specific effects of treatments on FVT using data at our disposal and suggested the biological interpretation. Large proportions of uninfected (80–92%) and combined-treatment-infected cells (72–75%) contained exactly zero IAV transcripts and hence were assigned to Zero viral load class (Fig. 3 and Table 1). Similar to previous studies (75), we observed that small fractions of uninfected cells (10–20% depending on the cell type) had small but non-zero levels of viral load (FVTs below 0.02%). Since the distribution of FVTs in uninfected cells had some outliers at the right tail, we defined the right edge (left edge) of the Noise class (Low class) as the 99th percentile (0.012%) of FVTs in noninfected cells having at least one viral transcript. Except for 2% of ciliated cells, virtually all infected cells subject to the combined treatment (6’SLN-CD + IFN λ1 condition) were found to be below the maximum Noise level of 0.012%, making them hardly distinguishable from uninfected cells in terms of viral load (the results of statistical tests are reported later in this section). Every single one of the infected-untreated cells was found to be firmly above the maximum Noise level (0.012%) in terms of viral load. Indeed the minimum FVT across infected-untreated cells was found to be 0.066%, and that threshold was used to define the left edge (right edge) of Low (Medium) viral load classes. Since infected-untreated cells in all cell types except basal cells contained noticeable subpopulations with viral load well in excess of 0.066% (e.g., above 5%), we further divided the range of FVTs defining the High viral load class as containing the 25% of infected-untreated cells with the highest viral load (FVTs above 3.6%). These highly infected cells constituted 11%, 27%, and 55% of (infected untreated) BdiS, secretory and ciliated cells, respectively. For (infected untreated) ciliated cells, in fact, the most frequently observed viral load was close to 50% (the heavier right mode of a bimodal distribution).Table 3 Definition of viral load classes used in Fig. 3 and throughout section “The antiviral treatments affect IAV replication to different extents across different HAE cell types”.Full size tableThe treated infected cells of all types had noticeably lower viral loads compared to the infected-untreated ones. Except for ciliated cells, the majority of infected cells treated with 6’SLN-CD were below the minimum FVT of untreated infected cells (0.066%), clearly highlighting the efficacy of the treatment. The IFN λ1 treatment resulted in further reduction of FVTs compared to 6’SLN-CD as evidenced by density plots and categorizations of cells by viral load classes shown in Fig. 3. In all cell types, the distributions of viral load classes were found to be different between 6’SLN-CD and IFN λ1 conditions as well as between individual treatments and the combined treatment (6’SLN-CD + IFN λ1) as reported below.To assess differences in the viral load across conditions in a given cell type, we used both (1) a Chi-squared contingency test on class counts in condition pairs of interest after merging Noise and Zero viral load classes, and, (2) a test of a difference of estimated average FVTs being zero in a Beta-Binomial model fitted to each cell type—condition group (see Methods). For both methods and all cell types, the null hypotheses of no differences were strongly rejected (p-values below 1e-6) when (a) contrasting treatments versus each other in infected cells, (b) comparing combined treatment with either of the individual treatments in infected cells, (c) comparing each of the treatments with the untreated condition in infected cells. The null of no differences between (viral load in) combined-treatment condition and the uninfected-untreated cells was rejected only for ciliated cells (p-values of 0.004). For the rest of the cell types, the corresponding p-values were in excess of 0.14 (Chi-squared test) and. Finally, the viral loads of uninfected treated cells were found to be highly similar to these of uninfected-untreated cells (the nulls were not rejected with both testing methods with p-values exceeding 0.4.)To examine the differences in viral load across cell types, we used similar methods. Since the average viral load in infected cells was found to be typically increasing across cell types ordered as basal, BdiS, secretory, and ciliated (Fig. 3 and Table 4), we tested for the differences in the same condition across subsequent pairs of cell types (Table 5).Table 4 Average within-cell frequencies of IAV transcripts across cell types and conditions.Full size tableTable 5 P-values from tests of differences in viral load across cell types in the same condition.Full size tableIn the infected-untreated condition, all differences were highly significant (all p-values below 2e-4) regardless of the testing method. For the infected cells treated with 6’SLN-CD the differences in viral load were similarly significant except for the one between BdiS and Secretory cells (p-value of 0.31 from a Beta-Binomial testing method)—in fact, the usual pattern of Secretory cells having higher average viral load compared to BdiS cells was reversed in that condition.In the infected cells treated with IFN λ1, the differences between the (ordered pairs of) cell types were still highly significant according to the Beta-Binomial testing method (p-values below 0.001), while the Chi-squared test (strongly) rejected the null only when comparing the ciliated cells versus secretory cells (Table 3) highlighting the large differences between these cell groups in terms of their viral load classes (see Fig. 3). In the infected cells subject to the combined treatment the only significant difference was again the one between ciliated and secretory cells (p-values below 1e-4 for both testing method). Finally, the uninfected treated cells were generally indistinguishable in terms of viral load (when tested in the usual pairwise manner) regardless of the testing method, with the only exception being the borderline significant difference (p-value of 0.051 from Beta-Binomial method) between uninfected BdiS and basal cells.Human genome annotationGRCh38.p10 with only the main chromosome contigs retained i.e., chr1-chr22, chrX, chrY, and chrM.Human genome annotationsGencode release 29 with annotations of non-gene features (e.g., exons, transcripts, CDSs, and UTRs) removed if they overlapped with protein-coding or lincRNA features and did not have protein-coding, lincRNA, or processed-transcript tags themselves.Influenza A reference and annotationsGCA_001343785.1 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/GCF_001343785.1). The viral reference annotations were preprocessed by prefixing all gene ids with Influenza A and by changing the type of CDS features to an exon.Statistics and reproducibilityThe number of replicates for each experiment is indicated in the legends of the corresponding figures. P-values for the drugs’ antiviral effects were estimated by Student’s t-test. Individual data points, the mean and standard deviation of the mean are shown for respective bar graphs. Single-cell data are based on a sequencing experiment performed on HAE obtained from a pool of donors as explained above, and the reported p-values were computed using the following methods: (a) differences in subcluster proportions across conditions—Chi-squared test; (b) differences in the fraction of viral transcripts across conditions—(two-sided) general linear test on coefficients of a Beta-Binomial model; (c) differences in abundances of viral load classes—Chi-squared test; (d) differences in the expression of the host factors between cell types—(two-sided) Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon with Bonferroni correction. The statistical tests made on the single-cell data are included in the published code (see Code Availability) for reproducibility purposes.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The single-cell sequencing data for current study are available in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus repository under accession number GSE191176. The accession includes the raw FASTQ files and the unfiltered UMI count matrices in Hierarchical Data Format (HDF) produced by the Cell Ranger software by 10x Genomics. In addition, the matrices with the same format containing top 10,000 barcodes by UMI count are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7081937. The source data for main figures are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7082159. Code availability The R code fully reproducing the analysis of single-cell sequencing data reported in the current study including the figures and the statistical tests is available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7081572. ReferencesPaget, J. et al. Global mortality associated with seasonal influenza epidemics: new burden estimates and predictors from the GLaMOR Project. J. Glob. Health 9, 020421 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Long, J. S., Mistry, B., Haslam, S. M. & Barclay, W. S. Host and viral determinants of influenza A virus species specificity. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17, 67–81 (2019).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Schmolke, M. & Garcia-Sastre, A. Evasion of innate and adaptive immune responses by influenza A virus. Cell Microbiol. 12, 873–880 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Sellers, S. A., Hagan, R. S., Hayden, F. G. & Fischer, W. A. 2nd The hidden burden of influenza: a review of the extra-pulmonary complications of influenza infection. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 11, 372–393 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Saunders-Hastings, P. R. & Krewski, D. Reviewing the history of pandemic influenza: understanding patterns of emergence and transmission. Pathogens https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens5040066 (2016).Ibricevic, A. et al. Influenza virus receptor specificity and cell tropism in mouse and human airway epithelial cells. J. Virol. 80, 7469–7480 (2006).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Denney, L. & Ho, L. P. The role of respiratory epithelium in host defence against influenza virus infection. Biomed. J. 41, 218–233 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tavares, L. P., Teixeira, M. M. & Garcia, C. C. The inflammatory response triggered by Influenza virus: a two edged sword. Inflamm. Res. 66, 283–302 (2017).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Paget, C. & Trottein, F. Mechanisms of bacterial superinfection post-influenza: a role for unconventional T cells. Front. Immunol. 10, 336 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Cundell, D. R., Gerard, N. P., Gerard, C., Idanpaan-Heikkila, I. & Tuomanen, E. I. Streptococcus pneumoniae anchor to activated human cells by the receptor for platelet-activating factor. Nature 377, 435–438 (1995).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Essaidi-Laziosi, M. et al. Propagation of respiratory viruses in human airway epithelia reveals persistent virus-specific signatures. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 141, 2074–2084 (2018).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Osterholm, M. T., Kelley, N. S., Sommer, A. & Belongia, E. A. Efficacy and effectiveness of influenza vaccines: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect. Dis. 12, 36–44 (2012).Article PubMed Google Scholar Doyle, J. D. et al. Interim Estimates of 2018-19 Seasonal Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness—United States, February 2019. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 68, 135–139 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Duwe, S. Influenza viruses—antiviral therapy and resistance. GMS Infect. Dis. 5, Doc04 (2017).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gubareva, L. V. et al. Assessing baloxavir susceptibility of influenza viruses circulating in the United States during the 2016/17 and 2017/18 seasons. Eur. Surveill. https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2019.24.3.1800666 (2019).Hayden, F. G. & de Jong, M. D. Emerging influenza antiviral resistance threats. J. Infect. Dis. 203, 6–10 (2011).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kim, S. et al. The superiority of IFN-lambda as a therapeutic candidate to control acute influenza viral lung infection. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 56, 202–212 (2017).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Andreakos, E., Salagianni, M., Galani, I. E. & Koltsida, O. Interferon-lambdas: front-line guardians of immunity and homeostasis in the respiratory tract. Front. Immunol. 8, 1232 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Prokunina-Olsson, L. et al. A variant upstream of IFNL3 (IL28B) creating a new interferon gene IFNL4 is associated with impaired clearance of hepatitis C virus. Nat. Genet. 45, 164–171 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Schoggins, J. W. Interferon-stimulated genes: what do they all do? Annu. Rev. Virol. 6, 567–584 (2019).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Durbin, R. K., Kotenko, S. V. & Durbin, J. E. Interferon induction and function at the mucosal surface. Immunol. Rev. 255, 25–39 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Witte, K., Witte, E., Sabat, R. & Wolk, K. IL-28A, IL-28B, and IL-29: promising cytokines with type I interferon-like properties. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 21, 237–251 (2010).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar McNab, F., Mayer-Barber, K., Sher, A., Wack, A. & O’Garra, A. Type I interferons in infectious disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 87–103 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Brandes, M., Klauschen, F., Kuchen, S. & Germain, R. N. A systems analysis identifies a feedforward inflammatory circuit leading to lethal influenza infection. Cell 154, 197–212 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Robinson, B. A. & Nice, T. J. You can breathe easy: IFNlambda handles flu without triggering a damaging inflammatory response. Immunity 46, 768–770 (2017).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Galani, I. E. et al. Interferon-lambda mediates non-redundant front-line antiviral protection against influenza virus infection without compromising host fitness. Immunity 46, 875–890 e876 (2017).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Davidson, S. et al. IFNlambda is a potent anti-influenza therapeutic without the inflammatory side effects of IFNalpha treatment. EMBO Mol. Med. 8, 1099–1112 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Hermant, P. & Michiels, T. Interferon-lambda in the context of viral infections: production, response and therapeutic implications. J. Innate Immun. 6, 563–574 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Mordstein, M. et al. Interferon-lambda contributes to innate immunity of mice against influenza A virus but not against hepatotropic viruses. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000151 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Klinkhammer, J. et al. IFN-lambda prevents influenza virus spread from the upper airways to the lungs and limits virus transmission. Elife https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.33354 (2018).Muir, A. J. et al. A randomized phase 2b study of peginterferon lambda-1a for the treatment of chronic HCV infection. J. Hepatol. 61, 1238–1246 (2014).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Ramos, E. L. Preclinical and clinical development of pegylated interferon-lambda 1 in chronic hepatitis C. J. Interferon Cytokine Res. 30, 591–595 (2010).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Ilyushina, N. A. & Donnelly, R. P. In vitro anti-influenza A activity of interferon (IFN)-lambda1 combined with IFN-beta or oseltamivir carboxylate. Antivir. Res. 111, 112–120 (2014).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Nguyen, J. T. et al. Efficacy of combined therapy with amantadine, oseltamivir, and ribavirin in vivo against susceptible and amantadine-resistant influenza A viruses. PLoS ONE 7, e31006 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Medaglia, C. et al. Interferon lambda delays the emergence of influenza virus resistance to oseltamivir. Microorganisms https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9061196 (2021).Kocabiyik, O. et al. Non-toxic virucidal macromolecules show high efficacy against influenza virus ex vivo and in vivo. Adv. Sci. 8, 2001012 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Boda, B. et al. Antiviral drug screening by assessing epithelial functions and innate immune responses in human 3D airway epithelium model. Antivir. Res. 156, 72–79 (2018).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Essaidi-Laziosi, M. et al. Interferon-dependent and respiratory virus-specific interference in dual infections of airway epithelia. Sci. Rep. 10, 10246 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar George, I. et al. Toxicological assessment of ITER-like tungsten nanoparticles using an in vitro 3D human airway epithelium model. Nanomaterials (Basel) https://doi.org/10.3390ano9101374 (2019).Roedig, J. V., Rapp, E., Hoper, D., Genzel, Y. & Reichl, U. Impact of host cell line adaptation on quasispecies composition and glycosylation of influenza A virus hemagglutinin. PLoS ONE 6, e27989 (2011).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Ciuffi, A., Rato, S. & Telenti, A. Single-cell genomics for virology. Viruses https://doi.org/10.3390/v8050123 (2016).Cristinelli, S. & Ciuffi, A. The use of single-cell RNA-Seq to understand virus-host interactions. Curr. Opin. Virol. 29, 39–50 (2018).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Ilyushina, N. A. et al. Generation and characterization of interferon-lambda 1-resistant H1N1 influenza A viruses. PLoS ONE 12, e0181999 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Minton, K. Antiviral immunity: IFNlambda offers frontline protection. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 17, 404–405 (2017).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Latino, I. & Gonzalez, S. F. Spatio-temporal profile of innate inflammatory cells and mediators during influenza virus infection. Curr. Opin. Physiol. 19, 175–186 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Davey, N. E., Trave, G. & Gibson, T. J. How viruses hijack cell regulation. Trends Biochem. Sci. 36, 159–169 (2011).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Mahmoudabadi, G., Milo, R. & Phillips, R. Energetic cost of building a virus. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E4324–E4333 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Brooke, C. B. et al. Most influenza a virions fail to express at least one essential viral protein. J. Virol. 87, 3155–3162 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Russell, A. B., Trapnell, C. & Bloom, J. D. Extreme heterogeneity of influenza virus infection in single cells. Elife https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32303 (2018).Puliafito, A. et al. Collective and single cell behavior in epithelial contact inhibition. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 739–744 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Frankel, L. B., Lubas, M. & Lund, A. H. Emerging connections between RNA and autophagy. Autophagy 13, 3–23 (2017).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Zheng, G. X. et al. Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single cells. Nat. Commun. 8, 14049 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Zepp, J. A. & Morrisey, E. E. Cellular crosstalk in the development and regeneration of the respiratory system. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 551–566 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Medaglia, C. et al. Spatial reconstruction of immune niches by combining photoactivatable reporters and scRNA-seq. Science 358, 1622–1626 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Travaglini, K. J. et al. A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single-cell RNA sequencing. Nature 587, 619–625 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Greaney, A. M. et al. Platform effects on regeneration by pulmonary basal cells as evaluated by single-cell RNA sequencing. Cell Rep. 30, 4250–4265 e4256 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Ruiz Garcia, S. et al. Novel dynamics of human mucociliary differentiation revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing of nasal epithelial cultures. Development https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.177428 (2019).Tata, P. R. & Rajagopal, J. Plasticity in the lung: making and breaking cell identity. Development 144, 755–766 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Watson, J. K. et al. Clonal dynamics reveal two distinct populations of basal cells in slow-turnover airway epithelium. Cell Rep. 12, 90–101 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Pardo-Saganta, A. et al. Injury induces direct lineage segregation of functionally distinct airway basal stem/progenitor cell subpopulations. Cell Stem Cell 16, 184–197 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Plasschaert, L. W. et al. A single-cell atlas of the airway epithelium reveals the CFTR-rich pulmonary ionocyte. Nature 560, 377–381 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Matrosovich, M. N., Matrosovich, T. Y., Gray, T., Roberts, N. A. & Klenk, H. D. Human and avian influenza viruses target different cell types in cultures of human airway epithelium. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 4620–4624 (2004).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Shinya, K. et al. Avian flu: influenza virus receptors in the human airway. Nature 440, 435–436 (2006).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Shelton, H. et al. Receptor binding profiles of avian influenza virus hemagglutinin subtypes on human cells as a predictor of pandemic potential. J. Virol. 85, 1875–1880 (2011).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Husain, M. Host factors involved in influenza virus infection. Emerg. Top. Life Sci. 4, 401–410 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Qiao, Y. et al. CD151, a novel host factor of nuclear export signaling in influenza virus infection. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 141, 1799–1817 (2018).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Moisy, D. et al. HMGB1 protein binds to influenza virus nucleoprotein and promotes viral replication. J. Virol. 86, 9122–9133 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Demirov, D., Gabriel, G., Schneider, C., Hohenberg, H. & Ludwig, S. Interaction of influenza A virus matrix protein with RACK1 is required for virus release. Cell Microbiol. 14, 774–789 (2012).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Watanabe, T., Watanabe, S. & Kawaoka, Y. Cellular networks involved in the influenza virus life cycle. Cell Host Microbe 7, 427–439 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Larson, G. P. et al. EPS8 facilitates uncoating of influenza A virus. Cell Rep. 29, 2175–2183 e2174 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Chua, M. A., Schmid, S., Perez, J. T., Langlois, R. A. & Tenoever, B. R. Influenza A virus utilizes suboptimal splicing to coordinate the timing of infection. Cell Rep. 3, 23–29 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Hong, K. U., Reynolds, S. D., Watkins, S., Fuchs, E. & Stripp, B. R. In vivo differentiation potential of tracheal basal cells: evidence for multipotent and unipotent subpopulations. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 286, L643–L649 (2004).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Eenjes, E. et al. A novel method for expansion and differentiation of mouse tracheal epithelial cells in culture. Sci. Rep. 8, 7349 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Fan, Y., Sanyal, S. & Bruzzone, R. Breaking bad: how viruses subvert the cell cycle. Front. Cell Infect. Microbiol. 8, 396 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Ramos, I. et al. Innate immune response to influenza virus at single-cell resolution in human epithelial cells revealed paracrine induction of interferon lambda 1. J. Virol. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00559-19 (2019).Knodler, A. et al. Coordination of Rab8 and Rab11 in primary ciliogenesis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 6346–6351 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Weber, A. et al. Phosphoproteome analysis of cells infected with adapted and nonadapted influenza A virus reveals novel pro- and antiviral signaling networks. J. Virol. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00528-19 (2019).Hogan, B. L. et al. Repair and regeneration of the respiratory system: complexity, plasticity, and mechanisms of lung stem cell function. Cell Stem Cell 15, 123–138 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Rock, J. R. et al. Basal cells as stem cells of the mouse trachea and human airway epithelium. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 12771–12775 (2009).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar La Manno, G. et al. RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 560, 494–498 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Ambrosioni, J., Bridevaux, P. O., Wagner, G., Mamin, A. & Kaiser, L. Epidemiology of viral respiratory infections in a tertiary care centre in the era of molecular diagnosis, Geneva, Switzerland, 2011–2012. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 20, O578–O584 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Pagani, L. et al. Transmission and effect of multiple clusters of seasonal influenza in a Swiss geriatric hospital. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 63, 739–744 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tapparel, C. et al. Growth and characterization of different human rhinovirus C types in three-dimensional human airway epithelia reconstituted in vitro. Virology 446, 1–8 (2013).Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar Tseligka, E. D. et al. A VP1 mutation acquired during an enterovirus 71 disseminated infection confers heparan sulfate binding ability and modulates ex vivo tropism. PLoS Pathog. 14, e1007190 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Luecken, M. D. & Theis, F. J. Current best practices in single-cell RNA-seq analysis: a tutorial. Mol. Syst. Biol. 15, e8746 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888–1902 e1821 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Hafemeister, C. & Satija, R. Normalization and variance stabilization of single-cell RNA-seq data using regularized negative binomial regression. Genome Biol. 20, 296 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar Waltman, L. & van Eck, N. J. A smart local moving algorithm for large-scale modularity-based community detection. Eur. Phys. J. B 86, 471 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe would like to thank the Genomic Platform at the University of Geneva) and Dr. Christel Borel for providing precious assistance and support in data analysis and experimental design. This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (Sinergia grant CRSII5_180323 to F.S. and C.T.) and by the Fondation Aclon (Geneva, to C.T.).Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Chiara Medaglia, Ilya Kolpakov.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva, 1206, Geneva, SwitzerlandChiara Medaglia, Arnaud Charles-Antoine Zwygart & Caroline TapparelHealth 2030 Genome Center, 1202, Geneva, SwitzerlandIlya Kolpakov, Emmanouil T. Dermitzakis & Ioannis XenariosInsitute of Materials, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015, Lausanne, SwitzerlandYong Zhu & Francesco StellacciEpithelix Sas, 1228, Geneva, SwitzerlandSamuel Constant & Song HuangFaculty of Biology and Medicine, Université de Lausanne, 1011, Lausanne, SwitzerlandValeria CagnoAuthorsChiara MedagliaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIlya KolpakovView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarArnaud Charles-Antoine ZwygartView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYong ZhuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSamuel ConstantView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSong HuangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarValeria CagnoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEmmanouil T. DermitzakisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFrancesco StellacciView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIoannis XenariosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCaroline TapparelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsC.M. and I.K. contributed equally to this work. C.M., I.X., E.T.D., and C.T. designed research. C.M., Y.Z., S.C., S.H., A.C.-A.Z., and V.C. performed research. C.M. and I.K. analyzed data. C.M. and C.T. wrote the paper. A.C.-A.Z., I.K., F.S., and I.X. read and edited the paper.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Chiara Medaglia or Caroline Tapparel.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Communications Biology thanks Dahlene Fusco and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editors: Shitao Li and Eve Rogers. Peer reviewer reports are available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationPeer Review FileSupplementary InformationReporting summaryRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleMedaglia, C., Kolpakov, I., Zwygart, A.CA. et al. An anti-influenza combined therapy assessed by single cell RNA-sequencing. Commun Biol 5, 1075 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-04013-4Download citationReceived: 14 February 2022Accepted: 20 September 2022Published: 10 October 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-04013-4Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Single-cell transcriptomic analysis reveals the commonality of immune response upon H1N1 influenza virus infection in mice and humans Yu ChenHuaiyuan CaiJinxia Dai Animal Diseases (2024) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Journal Metrics Editors Editorial Board Calls for Papers Referees Contact Editorial policies Aims & Scope Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Communications Biology (Commun Biol) ISSN 2399-3642 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingBangladesh picks up influenza A(H3N2) outbreak despite COVID-19 challenges Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English العربية 中文 Français Русский Español Português Donate Donate Home Health Topics All topicsABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Resources Fact sheets Facts in pictures Multimedia Podcasts Publications Questions and answers Tools and toolkits Popular Dengue Endometriosis Excessive heat Herpes Mental disorders Mpox Countries All countriesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Regions Africa Americas Europe Eastern Mediterranean South-East Asia Western Pacific WHO in countries Data by country Country presence Country strengthening Country cooperation strategies Newsroom All news News releases Statements Campaigns Events Feature stories Press conferences Speeches Commentaries Photo library Headlines Emergencies Focus on Cholera Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Greater Horn of Africa Israel and occupied Palestinian territory Mpox Sudan Ukraine Latest Disease Outbreak News Situation reports Weekly Epidemiological Record WHO in emergencies Surveillance Operations Research Funding Partners Health emergency appeal International Health Regulations Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee Data Dashboards Triple Billion Progress Health Inequality Monitor Delivery for impact COVID-19 dashboard Data collection Classifications SCORE Surveys Civil registration and vital statistics Routine health information systems Harmonized health facility assessment GIS centre for health Reports World Health Statistics UHC global monitoring report About WHO About WHO Partnerships Committees and advisory groups Collaborating centres Technical teams Organizational structure Who we are Our work Activities Initiatives General Programme of Work WHO Academy Funding Investment in WHO WHO Foundation Accountability External audit Financial statements Internal audit and investigations Programme Budget Results reports Governance Governing bodies World Health Assembly Executive Board Member States Portal Home/ News/ item/ Bangladesh picks up influenza A(H3N2) outbreak despite COVID-19 challenges Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research © Credits Bangladesh picks up influenza A(H3N2) outbreak despite COVID-19 challenges 14 October 2022 Departmental update Reading time: Years of investment in influenza surveillance in Bangladesh has established a robust system that was capable of detecting a surge in co-circulating influenza A(H3N2) at a time when resources were primarily focused on tackling COVID-19.Bangladesh has two sentinel surveillance platforms for monitoring influenza and severe respiratory diseases. These are jointly governed by the Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research and the International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research. Both have benefited from long-standing investment from the Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework Partnership Contribution (PIP PC).During the COVID-19 pandemic, these influenza surveillance systems were re-purposed to also monitor SARS-CoV-2. The surveillance focus during the pandemic was necessarily on the new SARS-CoV-2 virus. Yet the system still managed to detect an acute surge in influenza A(H3N2) cases in mid to late 2020 (during epidemiological weeks 35 to 45). During those ten weeks, 245 cases of influenza {influenza A(H3N2)} were detected among 1588 collected samples of SARI and ILI by laboratory investigation. The government of Bangladesh used information and analysis from the laboratory and surveillance network to design and launch effective measures to manage the outbreak. As a result of these measures, coupled with the public health and social measures applied for containing COVID-19, influenza A(H3N2) cases gradually started decreasing from early October 2020. Later, selected specimens from the outbreak were sent to the WHO collaborating centre at the US Centres for Disease Control in Atlanta, United States to inform the WHO’s bi-annual vaccine composition meeting. The detection and subtyping of, and response to, the surge in influenza A(H3N2) co-circulation amid supply shortages and diverted attention caused by the COVID-19 pandemic was a major achievement and a clear example of Bangladesh’s readiness for early warning, alert and response. There is little doubt that PIP PC investments in laboratory and surveillance capacities contributed to enabling early detection of this most recent and other influenza outbreaks in Bangladesh. For example, PIP PC investments supplied training and technical support to enhance the skills of surveillance officers and Rapid Response Team members at national and sub-national levels. This then helped to establish a strong country-wide network for detecting and responding to referred influenza outbreaks at surveillance sites. It is this network that effectively tracked the spread of influenza across different areas of the country. PIP PC investments have also delivered significant advances in active sample transportation from sentinel sites to testing laboratories, which enabled timely delivery (and then confirmation) of samples during the influenza A/H3N2 outbreak when transportation processes and laboratories were overwhelmed with COVID-19. Bangladesh’s ability to detect, subtype and respond to the 2020 influenza A(H3N2) outbreak is a strong indicator that the country will be able to handle bigger influenza outbreaks. But there are still gaps in the country’s laboratory-assisted system for influenza surveillance and rapid response and continued PIP PC investment will be instrumental to continue addressing these. Regions Africa Americas Eastern Mediterranean Europe South-East Asia Western Pacific Policies Cybersecurity Ethics Information disclosure Permissions and licensing Preventing sexual exploitation Terms of use About us Careers Frequently asked questions Library Newsletters Procurement Publications Contact us Report misconduct Privacy policy © 2024 WHOCan I Get COVID-19 and Flu At the Same Time? | TIMESign Up for Our Ideas Newsletter POVSubscribeSubscribeSectionsHomeU.S.PoliticsWorldHealthClimateFuture of Work by CharterBusinessTechEntertainmentIdeasScienceHistorySportsMagazineTIME 2030Next Generation LeadersTIME100 Leadership SeriesTIME StudiosVideoTIME100 TalksTIMEPiecesThe TIME VaultTIME for HealthTIME for KidsTIME EdgeTIMECO2Red Border: Branded Content by TIMECouponsPersonal Finance by TIME StampedShopping by TIME StampedJoin UsNewslettersSubscribeGive a GiftShop the TIME StoreTIME Cover StoreDigital MagazineCustomer CareUS & CanadaGlobal Help CenterReach OutCareersPress RoomContact the EditorsMedia KitReprints and PermissionsMoreAbout UsPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy RightsTerms of UseModern Slavery StatementSite MapConnect with UsPresented ByHealthCOVID-19What Happens If I Get COVID-19 and the Flu at the Same Time?What Happens If I Get COVID-19 and the Flu at the Same Time?7 minute readBy Alice ParkOctober 11, 2022 12:50 PM EDTSo far, COVID-19 has come with one small silver lining for health: cases of influenza have dropped dramatically. During the first flu season during the pandemic, lockdowns kept people indoors and away from one another, limiting the virus’ ability to spread. And once people began mingling more during the next flu seasons, widespread use of masks blocked influenza’s chances of infecting large numbers of people.But that could change this flu season, as mask mandates have disappeared and more people are interacting in close quarters in school, workplaces, sports events, public transport, and more. Health experts are warning that flu cases could rise again this winter, and that the combination of influenza and COVID-19 together could pose a real public-health threat that sends more people to the hospital and in need of intensive care. Already, the flu season in the southern hemisphere—which runs from April to October and serves as a harbinger of what’s to come for the U.S.—has been severe, with cases in Australia three times higher than average compared to the past five years. That could mean influenza will sweep through North America and Europe with equally aggressive force this winter, alongside rising cases of COVID-19.That opens the possibility that people could get the two infections at the same time—which experts believe could be both unpleasant and dangerous. “Are two viruses that cause huge inflammatory responses together going to make that response worse? Theoretically, yes,” says Dr. Khalilah Gates, a pulmonary critical care physician at Northwestern University.Gates and others stress that there aren’t extensive data yet to be sure exactly what will happen when people are infected with both influenza and SARS-CoV-2. But the limited early data—some from people, but mostly from animals—are not encouraging. Already, doctors know that people who get both the flu and a cold at the same time tend to be sicker than those who are only infected with one virus. The same could be true when flu and COVID-19 combine; classic symptoms, including fever, chills, fatigue, and coughing, could become more intense for some people. In one 2021 study on COVID-19 co-infections, including 17 people who tested positive for both influenza and COVID-19 at King Fahad Hospital in Medina, Saudi Arabia, their rates of hospitalization and death were higher than those for people infected with COVID-19 a type of bacteria that can cause respiratory tract infections.In the largest study so far looking at co-infection of the two viruses, published in April, researchers at the University of Edinburgh reported similar trends. Dr. J. Kenneth Baillie, professor of experimental medicine at the university, and his colleagues analyzed the health records of more than 212,000 people admitted to hospitals in the U.K. for COVID-19, who were also tested for other infections. People infected with influenza and SARS-CoV-2 were four times as likely to need mechanical ventilation, and twice as likely to die, compared to people who just had COVID-19.Read More: Scientists Are Worried About New COVID-19 Variants—But Most Americans Aren’t“We can, with some confidence, say that being infected with flu and SARS-CoV-2 at the same time increases the risk of both needing to go on a ventilator and needing intensive care, and of death,” says Baillie.Animal studies also show that those who are co-infected with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza tend to do worse than those infected with either virus alone. In March, researchers in South Korea found that co-infected mice were sicker for a longer time than those with just one viral infection, and they also had higher levels of inflammation that contributed to pneumonia. The co-infected animals also showed lower levels of virus-fighting antibodies and immune T cells against each virus, compared to mice infected with either influenza or SARS-CoV-2 alone.In another study involving mice, published in 2020, researchers from Wuhan University reported even more concerning data on how influenza and SARS-CoV-2 might interact. They found that influenza can make it easier for SARS-CoV-2 to infect cells in the respiratory tract, including the lungs, of mice. This priming was unique to influenza, because it activates the same receptor, also found in people, that SARS-CoV-2 uses to enter and infect cells. Getting sick with the flu can therefore potentially make animals more vulnerable to getting infected with SARS-CoV-2.“You definitely don’t want either infection, and you don’t want them together,” says Dr. Adam Ratner, director of pediatric infectious diseases at Hassenfeld Children’s Hospital at NYU Langone Health. “Together, they have the potential to be really serious and really deadly, including in people who are not elderly and without underlying health conditions.”Another issue that concerns doctors is the fact that both influenza and COVID-19 can put people at higher risk of other infections, most notably pneumonia. Getting infected with both either at the same time, or in quick succession, could make people more vulnerable to additional infections as well.While treatments exist for both influenza and COVID-19, there aren’t strong data assuring doctors and patients that combining them will be safe or effective. The antiviral drugs Tamiflu for influenza and Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir-ritonavir) or Lagevrio (molnupiravir) for SARS-CoV-2 can minimize the severity of symptoms of either disease, but must be taken soon after infection begins. That could be challenging for patients and doctors to determine, and missing the optimal treatment window may prevent the medications from controlling the virus well.Read More: To Avoid Paxlovid Rebound, Some Experts Call for Longer Courses of TreatmentBaillie says that while his study showed that the risks of needing intensive care or dying are higher if people are infected with both influenza and SARS-CoV-2, it’s not clear if the people who are getting hospitalized are already at higher risk of more severe outcomes. Because both flu and COVID-19 can cause mild symptoms in some people, it may be the case that there is more co-infection occurring in the population that isn’t severe and doesn’t require medical care. Studies so far have estimated that anywhere from about 1% to 4.5% of people might be infected with both viruses—although this may be an underestimate, since most of those studies included people who were tested at hospitals and therefore might have been sick enough to need additional care.Still, the potential that the two viruses could put some people at higher risk of needing ventilators or additional health care is making doctors wary. “As an intensive-care doctor, I’m bracing myself for a difficult winter,” says Baillie. “Whatever happens, hospitals are already busy worldwide with COVID-19 still circulating, and are fully expecting with flu that more patients will require intensive care, so I think it will be a difficult winter for hospitals and ICUs.”Fortunately, there are things people can do to protect themselves from the likelihood of getting infected with either virus. Getting vaccinated against both the flu and COVID-19, including getting the latest COVID-19 booster shot—which targets the variant that’s causing most infections now—can lower both the chances of getting infected and of developing severe disease. Wearing masks, especially in crowded indoor settings where there is poor ventilation, could also help. “I don’t want flu and COVID-19 together,” says Gates. “I don’t want to know what that feels like, so I’m going to keep my mask on if I’m inside or around people that I’m not familiar with their vaccine status.”Gates says she is closely monitoring cases in her community for her daughter as well. Because she didn’t want her to feel different from other students, most of whom aren’t wearing masks in class, she and her husband decided to allow her daughter to go to school without a mask. But if cases of either flu or COVID-19 increase at the school or in their community, she will ask her daughter to start wearing a mask.Taking steps like these will be important for not only lowering individual people’s risk of getting infected with either or both viruses, but for keeping rates of disease down in the country overall.More Must-Reads from TIMEHow Donald Trump WonThe Best Inventions of 2024Why Sleep Is the Key to Living LongerRobert Zemeckis Just Wants to Move YouHow to Break 8 Toxic Communication HabitsNicola Coughlan Bet on Herself—And WonWhy Vinegar Is So Good for YouMeet TIME's Newest Class of Next Generation LeadersContact us at letters@time.comEdit PostHomeU.S.PoliticsWorldHealthBusinessTechPersonal Finance by TIME StampedShopping by TIME StampedFuture of Work by CharterEntertainmentIdeasScienceHistorySportsMagazineThe TIME VaultTIME For KidsTIMECO2CouponsTIME EdgeVideoMastheadNewslettersSubscribeDigital MagazineGive a GiftShop the TIME StoreCareersModern Slavery StatementPress RoomTIME StudiosU.S. & Canada Customer CareGlobal Help CenterContact the EditorsReprints and PermissionsSite MapMedia KitSupplied Partner ContentAbout Us© 2024 TIME USA, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Service, Privacy Policy (Your Privacy Rights) and Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information.TIME may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.Transmission and pathogenicity of canine H3N2 influenza virus in dog and guinea pig models | Virology Journal | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search Virology Journal Home About Articles Sections Submission Guidelines Submit manuscript Transmission and pathogenicity of canine H3N2 influenza virus in dog and guinea pig models Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 12 October 2022 Transmission and pathogenicity of canine H3N2 influenza virus in dog and guinea pig models Ratanaporn Tangwangvivat1,2,3, Supassama Chaiyawong1,2, Nutthawan Nonthabenjawan1,2, Kamonpan Charoenkul1,2, Taveesak Janethanakit1,2, Kitikhun Udom1,2, Sawang Kesdangsakonwut4, Rachod Tantilertcharoen4, Aunyaratana Thontiravong1,5 & …Alongkorn Amonsin ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6769-49061,2 Show authors Virology Journal volume 19, Article number: 162 (2022) Cite this article 2879 Accesses 4 Citations 322 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundInfluenza A virus causes respiratory disease in many animal species as well as in humans. Due to the high human-animal interface, the monitoring of canine influenza in dogs and the study of the transmission and pathogenicity of canine influenza in animals are important.MethodsEight-week-old beagle dogs (Canis lupus familaris) (n = 13) were used for the intraspecies transmission model. The dogs were inoculated intranasally with 1 ml of 106 EID50 per ml of canine H3N2 influenza virus (A/canine/Thailand/CU-DC5299/2012) (CIV-H3N2). In addition, 4-week-old guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus) (n = 20) were used for the interspecies transmission model. The guinea pigs were inoculated intranasally with 300 µl of 106 EID50 per ml of CIV-H3N2.ResultsFor the Thai CIV-H3N2 challenged in the dog model, the incoculated and direct contact dogs developed respiratory signs at 2 dpi. The dogs shed the virus in the respiratory tract at 1 dpi and developed an H3-specific antibody against the virus at 10 dpi. Lung congestion and histopathological changes in the lung were observed. For the Thai CIV-H3N2 challenge in the guinea pig model, the incoculated, direct contact and aerosol-exposed guinea pigs developed fever at 1–2 dpi. The guinea pigs shed virus in the respiratory tract at 2 dpi and developed an H3-specific antibody against the virus at 7 dpi. Mild histopathological changes in the lung were observed.ConclusionThe result of this study demonstrated evidence of intraspecies and interspecies transmission of CIV-H3N2 in a mammalian model. BackgroundInfluenza virus causes respiratory disease in several animal species as well as in humans. The canine H3N8 influenza virus (CIV-H3N8), which originated from an equine H3N8 influenza virus, was first reported in racing grayhounds in the US in 2004. CIV-H3N8-infected dogs showed clinical signs of upper respiratory tract infection, such as cough, nasal discharge, fever and subsequent self-recovery [1, 2]. After the first outbreak, the CIV-H3N8 spread to several states in the US and the UK [3,4,5]. In 2008, avian-origin canine H3N2 influenza virus (CIV-H3N2) emerged in dogs in South Korea. CIV-H3N2 outbreaks were subsequently reported in dogs in southern China and Thailand [6, 7]. In 2015, CIV-H3N2 was also reported in the US [8].Dog-to-dog transmission of CIV-H3N8 and CIV-H3N2 has been documented in dog shelters and animal hospitals [9,10,11]. In an animal experiment setting, CIV-H3N2-infected dogs develop influenza-like symptoms and shed virus [12]. The transmission of CIV-H3N2 from dogs to cats was reported in South Korea. Cats could be infected with CIV-H3N2 and developed respiratory signs in an experimental setting [13].In influenza research, some mammalian species can be used as experimental models, such as ferrets, mice and guinea pigs. Ferrets are an excellent model for influenza and can transmit influenza virus naturally from infected to noninfected ferrets [14, 15]. However, the ferret model presents several disadvantages, such as its high cost and difficult restraint. As an alternative, the guinea pig can be used as a mammalian model for the study of influenza [16, 17]. The guinea pig is suitable for both large droplet and air-born influenza transmission in mammalian hosts [18]. The advantages are that they are inexpensive, easy to handle and susceptible to human influenza virus infection [19, 20]. In this study, the transmission and pathogenicity of Thai CIV-H3N2 (A/canine/Thailand/CU-DC5299/2012 (H3N2)) in dog and guinea pig models were investigated. Our results provide evidence of intraspecies and interspecies transmission of Thai CIV-H3N2 in a mammalian model.MethodsAnimalsThis study was conducted under the ethical approval of the Chulalongkorn University Animal Care and Use Committee (CU-VET, IACUC protocol no. 13310032 and 1431100). Thirteen 8-week-old beagle dogs (Canis lupus familaris, n = 13) were used for transmission and pathogenicity studies. The animals were housed at the Biosafety Level 2 + facility for 14 days before the experiment. Dogs were tested and free from influenza antibody by the hemagglutinin inhibition test (HI) test with CIV-H3N2 before use. Twenty 4-week-old male Hartley strain guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus, n = 20) weighing 300 to 350 g were used for transmission and pathogenicity studies. The animals were obtained from the National Laboratory Animal Center, Bangkok, Thailand. Guinea pigs were housed at Biosafety Level 2 + for 14 days before the experiment. Guinea pigs were tested and confirmed to be influenza-free by the HI test before the experiment.VirusesThe canine H3N2 influenza virus (CIV-H3N2) used in this study was isolated from a dog with respiratory signs in Thailand in 2012. The virus, A/canine/Thailand/CU-DC5299/12 (H3N2), was previously characterized by whole-genome sequencing and was submitted to the Genbank (KC599545-52). In this study, the virus was propagated in embryonic chicken eggs to a concentration of 106 EID50 per ml at the 4th passage level.Transmission and pathogenicity studies in a dog modelDogs (n = 13) were randomly divided into 3 groups: the inoculated group (n = 5), the contact group (n = 5), and the control group (n = 3). Dogs were sedated with a mixture of xylazine and atropine (intramuscular administration). The inoculated group was inoculated intranasally with 1 ml (500 µl per nostril) of 106 EID50 per ml of CIV-H3N2, whereas the control dogs were inoculated intranasally with 1 ml (500 µl per nostril) of phosphate buffer solution (PBS). In the contact group, dogs were placed in the same cage as inoculated dogs at 1 day post-inoculation (dpi). Measurements of CIV infection, transmission and pathogenicity in dogs, including clinical signs, viral shedding, antibody response and pathological changes, were recorded and analyzed. In detail, all dogs were observed daily for clinical signs, including body temperature, ocular discharge, nasal discharge, coughing, sneezing, panting, and abdominal breathing. Nasal swab samples of dogs in each group were collected daily at 1–10 dpi, 14 dpi and 21 dpi to quantitate viral shedding. Serum samples were collected at 7, 10, 14 and 21 dpi to monitor the antibody response. One dog from each group was randomly selected and euthanized at 7 and 14 dpi to observe pathological changes (gross and histopathological lesions) by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining (Fig. 1). Fig. 1Study design of the transmission and pathogenicity of CIV-H3N2 in dog and guinea pig modelsFull size image Transmission and pathogenicity studies in the guinea pig modelTwenty 4-week-old male Hartley strain guinea pigs (n = 20) were randomly divided into 4 groups, including the inoculated group (n = 5), direct contact group (n = 5), aerosol-exposed group (n = 5), and control group (n = 5). The inoculated group was inoculated intranasally with 300 µl of 106 EID50 per ml of CIV-H3N2. The control group (n = 5) was inoculated intranasally with 300 µl of PBS. All guinea pigs were sedated with xylazine and ketamine (intramuscular administration). The guinea pigs of the direct contact group and aerosol-exposed group were placed 1 day after inoculation (1 dpi). For the aerosol-exposed group, the guinea pigs were placed 20 centimeters from the inoculated and direct contact groups. All guinea pigs were observed daily for clinical signs, including body temperature, ocular discharge, nasal discharge, coughing, sneezing, panting, and abdominal breathing. Nasal wash samples were collected at 1–7 dpi, 10 dpi and 14 dpi to quantitate viral shedding. Serum samples were collected at 7, 10 and 14 dpi to monitor the antibody response. One guinea pig from each group was randomly selected and euthanized at 3 dpi and 5 dpi to observe pathological changes (gross and histopathological lesions) using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining (Fig. 1).Quantitation of viral concentration by real-time RT-PCRNasal swabs of dogs and nasal wash samples of guinea pigs were subjected to viral RNA extraction by a QIAamp Viral RNA Mini kit (Qiagen®; Hilden, Germany). Real-time RT-PCR was used for quantitation of viral concentration using the Superscript™ III Platinum® One-step Quantitative RT-PCR System (Invitrogen ™; California, USA) with an M gene-specific TagMan probe [21]. Rreal-time RT-PCR was performed on a Rotor-Gene 3000 (Corbett Research; Sydney, Australia) under the following conditions: 50 °C for 30 min, 95 °C for 15 min and 50 cycles of denaturing at 95 °C for 15 min and annealing/extension at 60 °C for 30 s. The data were analyzed using Rotor-Gene software, v.6.0.19. Ct values lower than 36 were considered positive. A standard curve of the copy number of viral RNA was constructed by ten-fold serial dilution and used for viral quantitation [22].Quantitation of H3-specific antibody by hemagglutinin inhibition (HI) assayBlood samples of dogs and guinea pigs were centrifuged at 3,000 x g for 10 min to separate the serum. Serum samples were tested for H3-specific antibodies using a hemagglutinin inhibition (HI) assay. The HI protocol for canine serum samples was conducted as per the WHO recommendations (WHO, 2002). Briefly, receptor-destroying enzyme (RDE) was used to treat canine serum samples. Then, samples were absorbed with 50% chicken red blood cells and diluted into two-fold serial dilutions. Then, all treated samples were incubated at 25 °C for 45 min. Samples were added to a 0.5% suspension of chicken red blood cells. Then, 4 hemagglutination units per 25 µl of Thai CIV-H3N2 were added and incubated at room temperature for 1 h before HI titer interpretation. For the HI assay in guinea pigs, the assay was optimized following a previous study [23]. The guinea pig serum samples were treated with receptor destroying enzyme (RDE), absorbed with 1% turkey RBCs and then incubated with 4 HAU/25 µl of virus for 1 h before interpreting the results. An HI titer ≥ 40 was considered positive for both dog and guinea pig sera as previously described [23, 24].Statistical analysisThe descriptive statistics frequency and percentage were used to describe the clinical characteristics of dogs and guinea pigs. Analysis of significant differences in viral shedding and HI titers among groups was performed by independent t-test using Software for Statistics and Data Science (Stata) version 13.0. Graphs were plotted with Prism 8.ResultsTransmission and pathogenicity of Thai CIV-H3N2 in dogsDogs in the inoculated group (n = 5) were challenged with 106 EID50 of Thai CIV-H3N2, and the contact groups (n = 5) were placed after 1 dpi. PBS was used as a mock challenge in the control group (n = 3). For clinical presentation, all dogs in the inoculated group and direct contact group showed clinical signs, including fever, depression, nasal discharge, ocular discharge and coughing. In the control group, none of the dogs showed any clinical signs throughout the experiment. In detail, all dogs in the inoculated group and direct contact groups developed fever at 3 dpi and 4 dpi, respectively. Dogs in the inoculated group showed clinical signs from 2 dpi with mild depression, loss of appetite and less activity (2 dpi − 5 dpi) and serous nasal discharge (2 dpi − 10 dpi). One dog developed coughing at 3 dpi and the others presented coughing at 4 dpi − 10 dpi. Ocular discharge was observed at 4 dpi − 7 dpi. In the contact group, one dog (n = 1) showed serous nasal discharge at 3 dpi (3 dpi equal to 2 days post-contact), but the other dogs (n = 4) demonstrated clinical signs from 4 dpi to 14 dpi. Depression was also observed from 4 dpi to 7 dpi. All dogs in the contact group showed coughing at 5 dpi − 10 dpi. Ocular discharge was observed from 4 dpi to 10 dpi (Fig. 2). Fig. 2Clinical presentations and body temperature of CIV-H3N2-challenged dogs in the inoculated group, direct contact group and control groupFull size image For viral shedding in dogs, nasal swab samples were collected on days − 1, 0, 10, 14 and 21 dpi. All dogs were negative for CIV-H3N2 before inoculation (-1 and 0 dpi). After challenge, CIV-H3N2 could be detected in the respiratory tract of dogs in both the inoculated group and the contact group. Dogs in the inoculated group shed the highest CIV-H3N2 in the respiratory tract at 1 dpi and decreased gradually until 9 dpi. In dogs in the contact group, some dogs shed the virus from 2 dpi (1 day post-contact) and the viral shedding was highest at 3 dpi and decreased gradually until 10 dpi. The viral shedding among the inoculated and contact groups was statistically significant (P < 0.05) (Fig. 3). Fig. 3Viral shedding of CIV-H3N2-challenged dogs in the inoculated, direct contact and control groups. Viral shedding was presented as log10 of the geometric mean (copies per microliter). Bars represent the standard deviation of the mean viral titerFull size image For the antibody response to CIV-H3N2, dogs in the inoculated and contact groups were seropositive at 10–21 dpi and 14–21 dpi, respectively. Our results suggested that HI antibody titers against Thai CIV-H3N2 developed at 10 dpi in the inoculated group and 14 dpi in the contact group. As expected, the dogs in the control group did not have HI antibody throughout the experiment. There were statistically significant differences (p < 0.05) in HI antibody titers among the groups (Fig. 4). Fig. 4Antibody response (HI test) of CIV-H3N2-challenged dogs in the inoculated, direct contact and control groups. The antibody titer was presented as the HI titer. Bars represent the standard deviation of the mean HI titerFull size image For pathological changes, dogs in the inoculated group (n = 1) had gross lesions in the lung, spleen and liver at 7 dpi. Lung lobes collapsed with moderate red hepatization. The spleen had a round edge with mild splenomegaly. The liver showed mild hepatic congestion. At 7 dpi in the contact group (n = 1), all lung lobes collapsed with moderate red hepatization and multifocal petechial hemorrhage. At 14 dpi, lung lobes in dogs in both the inoculated group (n = 1) and the contact group (n = 1) showed moderate congestion but no frothy exudate in the tracheal lumen. The histological examination of inoculated dogs and contact dogs at 7 dpi showed diffuse interstitial pneumonia. Pneumocyte type II hyperplasia and inflammatory cells were found. The shortening of tracheal epithelial cells was identified as tracheitis in both groups. At 14 dpi, the inoculated dogs showed moderate diffuse pulmonary edema with focally extensive hemorrhage and mild tracheitis, and the contact dogs showed severe diffuse interstitial bronchopneumonia with edema and moderate tracheitis (Fig. 5). Fig. 5Histopathological changes in CIV-H3N2-challenged dogs, (a) interstitial pneumonia (4x), (b) bronchiolitis obliterans lesion (40x), (c) inflammatory cell infiltration with shortened tracheal epithelium (10x), (d) centrilobular fatty change degeneration (40X)Full size image In conclusion, based on the Thai CIV-H3N2 challenge dog model, the inoculated and direct contact dogs developed respiratory signs at 2 dpi. The dogs shed the virus in the respiratory tract at 1 dpi and developed antibodies against the virus at 10 dpi. Mild lung congestion and histopathological changes in the lung were observed. This result demonstrated dog-to-dog (intraspecies) transmission of Thai CIV-H3N2.Transmission and pathogenicity of Thai CIV-H3N2 in guinea pigsGuinea pigs of the inoculated group (n = 5) were challenged with 106 EID50 of Thai CIV-H3N2. The direct contact group (n = 5) and aerosol-exposed group (n = 5) were placed at 1 dpi. PBS was used as a mock challenge in the control group (n = 5). All guinea pigs in the inoculated group, direct contact group, and aerosol-exposed group showed mild clinical signs and fever compared with the control groups (n = 5) (p < 0.05). The mean weight of the guinea pigs was 497.20-593.67 g in the inoculated group, 468.20-575.33 g in the direct contact group, 490.40–614.67 g in the aerosol-exposed group and 488.00- 612.00 g in the control group, but there was no significant difference among the groups. The body temperature in the inoculated group was 100.44-102.12°F, whereas it was 100.07–101.00°F in the control group. The direct contact and aerosol-exposed groups showed 99.92-102.04°F and 100.23-101.47°F, respectively. The body temperature of guinea pigs in the inoculated group was significantly higher than that in the control group at 1 dpi – 7 dpi (p < 0.05). Similarly, the body temperature of the direct contact and aerosol-exposed groups was significantly higher than that of the control group at 1–10 dpi and at 2–7 dpi, respectively (p < 0.05) (Fig. 6). No significant respiratory signs were observed in guinea pigs, except for hot and red ears due to fever. Fig. 6Clinical presentation and body temperature of CIV-H3N2-challenged guinea pigs in the inoculated group, direct contact group, aerosol-exposed group and control groupFull size image For viral shedding in guinea pigs, CIV-H3N2 could be detected in the respiratory tract of animals in the inoculated group, direct contact group and aerosol-exposed group. In detail, guinea pigs in the inoculated group shed CIV-H3N2 in the respiratory tract at 2 dpi − 3 dpi. Guinea pigs in the direct contact group and aerosol-exposed group shed the virus from 2 − 3 dpi (equal to 1–2 dpc) with a low viral load (ct > 29) and the viral loads increased at 4–8 dpi (ct < 29). Interestingly, the guinea pigs showed the highest titer in the aerosol-exposed group at 7 dpi. Moreover, the viral titers in the direct contact group and aerosol-exposed group were significantly higher than those in the inoculated group (Fig. 7). Fig. 7Viral shedding of CIV-H3N2-challenged guinea pigs in the inoculated group, direct contact group, aerosol-exposed group and control group. Viral shedding was presented as log10 of the geometric mean (copies per microliter). Bars represent the standard deviation of the mean viral titerFull size image For the antibody response to CIV-H3N2, the guinea pigs in the inoculated group (2/3; 66.67%) were seropositive at 7 dpi but guinea pigs in the direct contact (2/3; 66.67%) and aerosol-exposed groups (3/3; 100%) were seropositive at 10 dpi (p < 0.05). These results suggested that HI antibody titers against Thai CIV-H3N2 were completely developed at 10 dpi in the inoculated group (Fig. 8). Fig. 8Antibody response (HI test) of CIV-H3N2-challenged guinea pigs in the inoculated group, direct contact group, aerosol-exposed group and control group. The antibody titer was presented as the HI titer. Bars represent the standard deviation of the mean HI titerFull size image For pathological changes, gross lesions of infected guinea pigs showed mild lung congestion, moderate hepatic congestion and mild splenomegaly. In detail, at 3 dpi, mild congestion in the left caudal lobe of the lung was observed. Moderate emphysema at the periphery was also seen. The spleen was round with mild splenomegaly. The liver had moderate hepatic congestion and the kidney was reddish. Mild lung congestion was also found in the direct contact group and aerosol-exposed group. Histopathological examination in the inoculation group showed necrotizing and lymphocytic bronchointerstitial pneumonia, mild multifocal BALT hyperplasia with type II pneumocyte and PAM hyperplasia with mild tracheitis. In the direct contact and aerosol- exposed groups, the lesions showed bronchointerstitial pneumonia with tracheitis (Fig. 9). Fig. 9Histopathological changes in CIV-H3N2-challenged guinea pigs, (a) bronchointerstitial pneumonia, BALT hyperplasia and hemorrhage 40x; (b) bronchointerstitial pneumonia, BALT hyperplasia and hemorrhage 40x; (c) bronchointerstitial pneumonia and BALT hyperplasia 10x; (d) interstitial pneumonia and type II pneumocyte hyperplasia 40xFull size image In conclusion, based on the Thai CIV-H3N2 challenge in a guinea pig model, incoculated, direct contact and aerosol-exposed guinea pigs developed fever at 1–2 dpi. The guinea pigs shed the virus in the respiratory tract at 2 dpi and developed antibodies against the virus at 7 dpi. Mild lung congestion and histopathological changes in the lung were observed. In the study, viral shedding and antibody responses were observed in inoculated, direct contact and aerosol-exposed guinea pigs, indicating that Thai CIV-H3N2 isolated from dogs could infect guinea pigs and suggesting possible interspecies transmission of Thai CIV-H3N2.DiscussionIn this study, the CIV-H3N2 challenge experiment in dogs showed that CIV-H3N2 can infect dogs and cause respiratory signs in both the inoculated and direct contact groups. CIV-H3N2-infected dogs showed clinical signs, including fever, depression, nasal discharge, ocular discharge and coughing. A previous study supported our result that tracheal, bronchial, and bronchiolar epithelial cells of dogs contain both receptors (SAα 2,3-gal and SAα 2,6-gal) for both avian and mammalian viruses, supporting the potential transmission of avian-origin CIV in dogs [12]. In addition, CIV-H3N2-infected dogs can shed the virus from the respiratory tract and develop H3-specific antibodies. In this study, CIV-H3N2 infected and replicated in the respiratory tract of dogs in the inoculated group (100%) beginning at 2 dpi and in the direct contact group beginning at 3 dpi. Interestingly, viral shedding was prolonged until 9 dpi in the inoculated group and 10 dpi in the contact group. Our result was comparable to a previous study in Korea in which dogs infected with CIV-H3N2 (A/canine/Korea/01/2007) began to shed the virus at 1 dpi and continued until 6 dpi [12]. The differences in the viral shedding period among studies can be explained by; (i) the virulence of the virus (Thai CIV-H3N2 and Korea CIV-H3N2) [12, 25] and (ii) the reinfection among dogs in the direct contact group. For the serological results, the infected dogs showed an antibody response against CIV-H3N2 at 10 dpi compared to those in the previous study at 6 and 8 dpi [12].In this study, we used guinea pigs as an alternate mammalian challenge model [16, 17]. In general, ferrets are used as mammalian models for influenza infection experiments. There have also been many reports of using guinea pigs as models for influenza [17, 19]. Guinea pigs are suitable for both large droplet and airborne viral transmission in mammalian hosts [18]. They are susceptible to both avian and human influenza viruses and are very useful for influenza virus transmission studies. However, the immunological response to influenza in guinea pigs is unclear because of the paucity of species-specific reagents [26].The CIV-H3N2 challenge study in a guinea pig model showed that CIV-H3N2 can infect guinea pigs and transmit to other guinea pigs through both direct contact and aerosol exposure, confirming guinea pig-to-guinea pig transmission. The guinea pigs in the inoculated group shed the virus beginning at 2 dpi. The nasal sheding in the inoculated group was highest at 2–3 dpi, similar to a previous study in which viral sheding in the nasal cavity was highest at 3 dpi after infecting guinea pigs with H1 and H3 swine influenza virus [17]. Our result is also in agreement with a previous study showing that guinea pigs challenged with pandemic H1N1-2009 shed the virus beginning at 2 dpi [27]. Intermittent viral shedding was observed in guinea pigs in all groups. For the serological results, the guinea pigs possessed H3 antibodies against Thai CIV-H3N2 beginning at 7 dpi and 100% at 10 dpi in the inoculated group. In the contact group, guinea pigs presented an antibody response starting at 10 dpi. Our results demonstrated that CIV-H3N2 can induce an antibody response in guinea pigs. It has been reported that SAα 2,3-gal and SAα 2,6-gal receptors are widely present in the nose and trachea of guinea pigs and the SAα 2,3-gal receptor is dominantly present in the lung; thus, infection and an antibody response to CIV-H3N2 in guinea pigs is possible [28].Our result raises the possibility of the transmission of canine influenza from dogs or intermediate mammals (guinea pigs) to humans, since both SAα 2,3-gal and SAα 2,6-gal receptors are also present in the human respiratory tract. A previous study on sialic acid receptor binding showed that the mutation of HA (Q226L, Q226R, and G228S) increases the binding preference and binding affinity of H3N2 influenza viruses for human-type receptors ([29]. Thai CIV-H3N2 dose not contain HA mutations at Q226 or G228, indicating a possible lower binding affinity of the virus for the mammalian receptor. Unfortunately, we did not perform sialic acid receptor binding analysis on Thai CIV-H3N2 to confirm its binding affinity. To date, there are no reports of CIV-H3N2 infection in humans; however, the reassortment of the viruses to novel or more virulent forms should not be ignored. The reassortment of CIV-H3N2 was reported in a previous study [30]. The reassortment of contemporary influenza viruses can result in higher viral replication transmissibility and virulence [31, 32]. Moreover, dog breed can also contribute to a more human-animal interface and lead to viral spillover [33].ConclusionIn this study, the intraspecies transmission of Thai CIV-H3N2 was demonstrated in experimentally challenged dogs. The infected dogs in the inoculated and direct contact groups presented clinical signs, such as fever, serous nasal discharge, ocular discharge, coughing, depression and loss of appetite. All dogs could shed the virus and had an antibody response against CIV-H3N2. The interspecies transmission of CIV-H3N2 was demonstrated in experimentally challenged guinea pigs. The infected guinea pigs showed fever and mild clinical signs related to respiratory disease. Guinea pigs can shed the virus and develop H3-specific antibodies. In Thailand, there are no recommendations for canine influenza vaccines used in pet animals. The canine influenza vaccine for dogs has been developed and used in Korea and China. The inactivated A/canine/Korea/01/07 (H3N2) was shown to be highly efficient in reducing fever and lung lesions and decreasing viral shedding in dogs [34]. In addition, the live-attenuated vaccine was developed and showed higher immunogenicity and protective efficacy than the inactivated influenza vaccine [35]. Canine influenza vaccination in dogs will be another option for the prevention and control of canine influenza virus among dogs and minimize transmission. Moreover, the personal hygiene of pet owners and animal health care workers should be regularly practiced to avoid close contact transmission. One health approach can help raise awareness of the human-domestic animal interface contributing to the potential zoonotic transmission of influenza. Data availability The nucleotide sequence data that support the findings of this study are openly available in GenBank at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/, A/canine/Thailand/CU-DC5299/2012 (H3N2) (KC599545-52). ReferencesCrawford PC, Dubovi EJ, Castleman WL, Stephenson I, Gibbs EP, Chen L, Smith C, Hill RC, Ferro P, Pompey J, et al. Transmission of equine influenza virus to dogs. Science. 2005;310:482–5.Article CAS Google Scholar Zhang W, Jiang Q, Chen Y. Evolution and Variation of the H3 Gene of Influenza A Virus and Interaction among Hosts. Intervirology. 2007;50:287–95.Article CAS Google Scholar Payungporn S, Crawford PC, Kouo TS, Chen LM, Pompey J, Castleman WL, Dubovi EJ, Katz JM, Donis RO. Influenza A virus (H3N8) in dogs with respiratory disease, Florida. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008;14:902–8.Article Google Scholar Daly JM, Blunden AS, Macrae S, Miller J, Bowman SJ, Kolodziejek J, Nowotny N, Smith KC. Transmission of equine influenza virus to English foxhounds. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008;14:461–4.Article Google Scholar Newton R, Cooke A, Elton D, Bryant N, Rash A, Bowman S, Blunden T, Miller J, Hammond TA, Camm I, Day M. Canine influenza virus: cross-species transmission from horses. Vet Rec. 2007;161:142–3.Article Google Scholar Li S, Shi Z, Jiao P, Zhang G, Zhong Z, Tian W, Long LP, Cai Z, Zhu X, Liao M, Wan XF. Avian-origin H3N2 canine influenza A viruses in Southern China. Infect Genet Evol. 2010;10:1286–8.Article Google Scholar Lin D, Sun S, Du L, Ma J, Fan L, Pu J, Sun Y, Zhao J, Sun H, Liu J. Natural and experimental infection of dogs with pandemic H1N1/2009 influenza virus. J Gen Virol. 2012;93:119–23.Article CAS Google Scholar Voorhees IEH, Glaser AL, Toohey-Kurth K, Newbury S, Dalziel BD, Dubovi EJ, Poulsen K, Leutenegger C, Willgert KJE, Brisbane-Cohen L, et al. Spread of Canine Influenza A(H3N2) Virus, United States. Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23:1950–7.Article CAS Google Scholar Jirjis FF, Deshpande MS, Tubbs AL, Jayappa H, Lakshmanan N, Wasmoen TL. Transmission of canine influenza virus (H3N8) among susceptible dogs. Vet Microbiol. 2010;144:303–9.Article Google Scholar Pecoraro HL, Bennett S, Huyvaert KP, Spindel ME, Landolt GA. Epidemiology and ecology of H3N8 canine influenza viruses in US shelter dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2014;28:311–8.Article CAS Google Scholar Jeoung HY, Lim SI, Shin BH, Lim JA, Song JY, Song DS, Kang BK, Moon HJ, An DJ. A novel canine influenza H3N2 virus isolated from cats in an animal shelter. Vet Microbiol. 2013;165:281–6.Article CAS Google Scholar Song D, Kang B, Lee C, Jung K, Ha G, Kang D, Park S, Park B, Oh J. Transmission of avian influenza virus (H3N2) to dogs. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008;14:741–6.Article Google Scholar Song DS, An DJ, Moon HJ, Yeom MJ, Jeong HY, Jeong WS, Park SJ, Kim HK, Han SY, Oh JS, et al. Interspecies transmission of the canine influenza H3N2 virus to domestic cats in South Korea, 2010. J Gen Virol. 2011;92:2350–5.Article CAS Google Scholar Herlocher ML, Elias S, Truscon R, Harrison S, Mindell D, Simon C, Monto AS. Ferrets as a transmission model for influenza: sequence changes in HA1 of type A (H3N2) virus. J Infect Dis. 2001;184:542–6.Article CAS Google Scholar Belser JA, Katz JM, Tumpey TM. The ferret as a model organism to study influenza A virus infection. Dis Model Mech. 2011;4:575–9.Article CAS Google Scholar Azoulay-Dupuis E, Lambre CR, Soler P, Moreau J, Thibon M. Lung alterations in guinea-pigs infected with influenza virus. J Comp Pathol. 1984;94:273–83.Article CAS Google Scholar Tapia R, Garcia V, Mena J, Bucarey S, Medina RA, Neira V. Infection of novel reassortant H1N2 and H3N2 swine influenza A viruses in the guinea pig model. Vet Res. 2018;49:73.Article Google Scholar Mubareka S, Lowen AC, Steel J, Coates AL, Garcia-Sastre A, Palese P. Transmission of influenza virus via aerosols and fomites in the guinea pig model. J Infect Dis. 2009;199:858–65.Article Google Scholar Lowen AC, Mubareka S, Tumpey TM, Garcia-Sastre A, Palese P. The guinea pig as a transmission model for human influenza viruses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;103:9988–92.Article CAS Google Scholar Pica N, Chou YY, Bouvier NM, Palese P. Transmission of influenza B viruses in the guinea pig. J Virol. 2012;86:4279–87.Article CAS Google Scholar Spackman E, Senne DA, Myers TJ, Bulaga LL, Garber LP, Perdue ML, Lohman K, Daum LT, Suarez DL. Development of a real-time reverse transcriptase PCR assay for type A influenza virus and the avian H5 and H7 hemagglutinin subtypes. J Clin Microbiol. 2002;40:3256–60.Article CAS Google Scholar Ngaosuwankul N, Noisumdaeng P, Komolsiri P, Pooruk P, Chokephaibulkit K, Chotpitayasunondh T, Sangsajja C, Chuchottaworn C, Farrar J, Puthavathana P. Influenza A viral loads in respiratory samples collected from patients infected with pandemic H1N1, seasonal H1N1 and H3N2 viruses. Virol J. 2010;7:75.Article Google Scholar Tangwangvivat S, C, N. N K, C T, J DP, B WW,S. N. B, A. A: The validation of Haemagglutinin Inhibition test for the detection of antibodies against canine influenza virus in a guinea pig serum model. Thai J Vet Med. 2022;52:1–8. Google Scholar Kitikoon P, Sreta D, Tuanudom R, Amonsin A, Suradhat S, Oraveerakul K, Poovorawan Y, Thanawongnuwech R. Serological evidence of pig-to-human influenza virus transmission on Thai swine farms. Vet Microbiol. 2011;148:413–8.Article Google Scholar Bunpapong N, Nonthabenjawan N, Chaiwong S, Tangwangvivat R, Boonyapisitsopa S, Jairak W, Tuanudom R, Prakairungnamthip D, Suradhat S, Thanawongnuwech R, Amonsin A. Genetic characterization of canine influenza A virus (H3N2) in Thailand. Virus Genes. 2014;48:56–63.Article CAS Google Scholar Thangavel RR, Bouvier NM. Animal models for influenza virus pathogenesis, transmission, and immunology. J Immunol Methods. 2014;410:60–79.Article CAS Google Scholar Wiersma LCM, Vogelzang-van Trierum SE, van Amerongen G, van Run P, Nieuwkoop NJ, Ladwig M, Banneke S, Schaefer H, Kuiken T, Fouchier RAM, et al. Pathogenesis of Infection with 2009 Pandemic H1N1 Influenza Virus in Isogenic Guinea Pigs after Intranasal or Intratracheal Inoculation. Am J Pathol. 2015;185:643–50.Article CAS Google Scholar Sun YP, Bi YH, Pu JA, Hu YX, Wang JJ, Gao HJ, Liu LQ, Xu Q, Tan YY, Liu MD, et al: Guinea Pig Model for Evaluating the Potential Public Health Risk of Swine and Avian Influenza Viruses. Plos One 2010, 5.Zhang Y, Zhao C, Hou Y, Chen Y, Meng F, Zhuang Y, Liu L, Suzuki Y, Shi J, Deng G, Chen H. Pandemic threat posed by H3N2 avian influenza virus. Sci China Life Sci. 2021;64:1984–7.Article CAS Google Scholar Lee IH, Le TB, Kim HS, Seo SH. Isolation of a novel H3N2 influenza virus containing a gene of H9N2 avian influenza in a dog in South Korea in 2015. Virus Genes. 2016;52:142–5.Article CAS Google Scholar Short KR, Richard M, Verhagen JH, van Riel D, Schrauwen EJ, van den Brand JM, Manz B, Bodewes R, Herfst S. One health, multiple challenges: The inter-species transmission of influenza A virus. One Health. 2015;1:1–13.Article Google Scholar Schrauwen EJA, Herfst S, Chutinimitkul S, Bestebroer TM, Rimmelzwaan GF, Osterhaus ADME, Kuiken T, Fouchier RAM. Possible Increased Pathogenicity of Pandemic (H1N1) 2009 Influenza Virus upon Reassortment. Emerg Infect Dis. 2011;17:200–8.Article Google Scholar Lit L, Schweitzer JB, Oberbauer AM. Characterization of human-dog social interaction using owner report. Behav Process. 2010;84:721–5.Article Google Scholar Lee C, Jung K, Oh J, Oh T, Han S, Hwang J, Yeom M, Son D, Kim J, Park B, et al. Protective efficacy and immunogenicity of an inactivated avian-origin H3N2 canine influenza vaccine in dogs challenged with the virulent virus. Vet Microbiol. 2010;143:184–8.Article CAS Google Scholar Rodriguez L, Nogales A, Reilly EC, Topham DJ, Murcia PR, Parrish CR, Martinez Sobrido L. A live-attenuated influenza vaccine for H3N2 canine influenza virus. Virology. 2017;504:96–106.Article CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThe authors would like to acknowledge the 90th Anniversary of Chulalongkorn University Scholarship, Ratchadaphiseksomphot Endowment Fund (GCUGR1125614075D) and the Royal Golden Jubilee Ph.D. program of the Thailand Research Fund for supporting the first author scholarship (PHD/0098/2554). Financial support of this study was provided by Chulalongkorn University to the Center of Excellence for Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases in Animals (CUEIDAs) and the One Health Research Cluster. This research was partially funded by Chulalongkorn University’s TSRI Fundamental Fund (CUFRB65_Food (18) 182_31_01).FundingThe Thailand Research Fund supported the Royal Golden Jubilee Ph.D. program for the first author scholarship (PHD/0098/2554). Chulalongkorn University supported the 90th Anniversary of Chulalongkorn University Scholarship, Ratchadaphiseksomphot Endowment Fund (GCUGR1125614075D), the Center of Excellence for Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases in Animals (CUEIDAs) and the One Health Research Cluster. Thailand Science Research and Innovation (TSRI) supported the Chulalongkorn University’s TSRI Fundamental Fund (CUFRB65_Food (18) 182_31_01).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsCenter of Excellences for Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases in Animals and One Health Research Cluster, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, 10330, Bangkok, ThailandRatanaporn Tangwangvivat, Supassama Chaiyawong, Nutthawan Nonthabenjawan, Kamonpan Charoenkul, Taveesak Janethanakit, Kitikhun Udom, Aunyaratana Thontiravong & Alongkorn AmonsinDepartment of Veterinary Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, ThailandRatanaporn Tangwangvivat, Supassama Chaiyawong, Nutthawan Nonthabenjawan, Kamonpan Charoenkul, Taveesak Janethanakit, Kitikhun Udom & Alongkorn AmonsinDivision of Communicable Diseases, Department of Disease Control, Ministry of Public Health, Nonthaburi, ThailandRatanaporn TangwangvivatDepartment of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, ThailandSawang Kesdangsakonwut & Rachod TantilertcharoenDepartment of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, ThailandAunyaratana ThontiravongAuthorsRatanaporn TangwangvivatView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSupassama ChaiyawongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNutthawan NonthabenjawanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKamonpan CharoenkulView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTaveesak JanethanakitView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKitikhun UdomView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSawang KesdangsakonwutView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRachod TantilertcharoenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAunyaratana ThontiravongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlongkorn AmonsinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsRT, AT and AA designed the study and drafted the manuscript. RT, SC, NN, KC, TJ, and KU performed the animal experiments. RT, SC, KC, and KU performed molecular and serological testing. RT, SK, and RTa performed the pathological study. AA, supervised the overall study and manuscript preparation. All authors provided critical review and approved the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Alongkorn Amonsin.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate This study was conducted under the approval of the Institute for Animal Care and Use Protocol of the CU-VET, Chulalongkorn University (IACUC # 13310032, 1431100). Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests All authors declare that they have no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleTangwangvivat, R., Chaiyawong, S., Nonthabenjawan, N. et al. Transmission and pathogenicity of canine H3N2 influenza virus in dog and guinea pig models. Virol J 19, 162 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-022-01888-xDownload citationReceived: 25 April 2022Revised: 17 August 2022Accepted: 26 September 2022Published: 12 October 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-022-01888-xShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsCanine influenzaDogGuinea pigsH3N2PathogenicityTransmission Download PDF Advertisement Virology Journal ISSN: 1743-422X Contact us Submission enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.Flu ‘gathering speed’ across US as health officials and doctors prepare for a potentially rough season | CNN CNN values your feedback 1. How relevant is this ad to you? 2. Did you encounter any technical issues? Video player was slow to load content Video content never loaded Ad froze or did not finish loading Video content did not start after ad Audio on ad was too loud Other issues Ad never loaded Ad prevented/slowed the page from loading Content moved around while ad loaded Ad was repetitive to ads I've seen previously Other issues Cancel Submit Thank You! Your effort and contribution in providing this feedback is much appreciated. Close Ad Feedback Close icon Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships More Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Watch Listen Live TV Subscribe Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch Edition US International Arabic Español Edition US International Arabic Español Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Follow CNN World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Ad Feedback Flu ‘gathering speed’ across US as health officials and doctors prepare for a potentially rough season By Jacqueline Howard, CNN 7 minute read Updated 12:18 PM EDT, Fri October 14, 2022 Link Copied! Video Ad Feedback 4 ways the flu turns deadly 01:39 - Source: CNN CNN — US health officials are becoming increasingly concerned about this year’s flu season – and are already seeing signs that the virus is spreading. As the 2022-23 flu season gets underway, one high school in California is facing a “high number of absences” among students due to possible flu cases. Flu activity in the United States often starts to increase in October and usually peaks between December and February. “We can confirm that there is a high number of absences at Henry High School due to probable Influenza,” Samer Naji, a spokesperson for the San Diego Unified School District, said in an email to CNN on Thursday. There were about 1,000 absences Wednesday, out of 2,600 students. CNN video Doctor explains how to tell the difference between Covid-19, flu and a cold “So far COVID tests have been negative but several students have tested positive for flu,” Naji said. “Typical signs and symptoms include cough, sore throat, runny nose, fever, and other upper respiratory infection symptoms. We are in close contact with San Diego County Public Health.” San Diego County Public Health Services confirmed to CNN that it is investigating the large outbreak of respiratory and flu-like symptoms among students at Patrick Henry High School – as well as Del Norte High School in Poway, California. “Del Norte High School (in the Poway Unified School District) had nearly 400 students absent yesterday and Tuesday with cold and flu like symptoms,” Christine Paik, spokesperson at Poway Unified School District, told CNN on Wednesday. “Health officials have told us that the cold/flu season is definitely here and it’s hitting schools harder now that COVID restrictions are no longer in place.” San Diego County Public Health Services announced Wednesday that “it is too early” to determine the cause of the outbreaks and that the county is evaluating. “We are coordinating with local school districts and are checking with other school campuses to try and figure out why so many students have been affected so suddenly,” Dr. Cameron Kaiser, the county’s deputy public health officer, said in an announcement Wednesday. “Unfortunately, we anticipated this would be a rough influenza season, and alongside COVID-19 other respiratory viruses are also making a rapid comeback,” Kaiser said. “If you haven’t already, now is the time to get your flu and COVID-19 shots to gain the extra protections afforded by the vaccines.” Early increases in flu activity sweep the US An early increase in seasonal flu activity has been reported in most of the United States, with the nation’s southeast and south-central areas reporting the highest levels of flu, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. More than a thousand patients have been hospitalized with flu this week, the agency said. “Nationally, the percentage of specimens testing positive for influenza in clinical laboratories is increasing; however, activity varies by region,” CDC researchers wrote in the agency’s latest weekly flu report, published Friday. While current influenza activity is still overall low, the CDC’s report finds that activity is increasing in most of the country, with three jurisdictions experiencing moderate activity and six jurisdictions experiencing high or very high activity. CDC video Seasonal flu: What you need to know This week, 3.3% of respiratory specimens sent to clinical labs tested positive for influenza, according to the new report. That is a jump from the 0.1% of specimens that tested positive this time last year, and the 0.2% of specimens that tested positive this time in 2020. However, the new data suggest the nation might be returning to pre-Covid levels of flu, as around this time in 2019, 3.1% of specimens were reported as testing positive for flu. The new CDC report also said that 1,322 patients were admitted to hospitals with influenza this week and there were three deaths in children this week associated with influenza. Overall, the most frequently reported flu viruses this week were influenza A (H3N2), according to the report, and 2.6% of outpatient visits to health care providers were for respiratory illnesses that included symptoms such as fever plus a cough or sore throat. That is above the national baseline, which is 2.5%. “An annual flu vaccine is the best way to protect against flu. Vaccination helps prevent infection and can also prevent serious outcomes in people who get vaccinated but still get sick with flu,” according to the report. “CDC recommends that everyone ages 6 months and older get a flu vaccine, ideally by the end of October. There are also prescription flu antiviral drugs that can be used to treat flu illness; those need to be started as early as possible.” ‘It’s gathering speed already … about a month early’ Predicting what influenza activity might look like in a particular year can be tricky, but doctors are bracing for “a very substantial” flu season, said Dr. William Schaffner, a professor in the Division of Infectious Diseases at Vanderbilt University Medical Center and medical director of the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases. “I’m concerned that we will have a very substantial influenza season coming up this year, very different from our two previous seasons,” he said. A pharmacist handles a syringe for the flu vaccine in the consultation room at his dispensary on October 6, 2017 in downtown Bordeaux, south western France. For the first time in France, in the regions of New-Aquitaine and Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, 30% of pharmacists have been allowed to administer the flu vaccination. / AFP PHOTO / GEORGES GOBET (Photo credit should read GEORGES GOBET/AFP via Getty Images) GEORGES GOBET/AFP/AFP via Getty Images Australia's tough flu season could spell trouble for the US this winter, especially with Covid-19 in the mix Signs of increased flu activity were first seen in the Southern Hemisphere this summer, and as more people in the Northern Hemisphere relax Covid-19 restrictions and return to socializing without masks and in large crowds, cases of flu are being reported. The widespread number of cases so early in the flu season is unusual. “Here we are in the middle of October – not the middle of November – we’re already seeing scattered influenza cases, even hospitalized influenza cases, around the country,” Schaffner, whose medical center at Vanderbilt University is part of a surveillance network that tracks hospitalized flu cases. “So we know that this virus is now spreading out in the community already. It’s gathering speed already. It looks to me to be about a month early,” Schaffner said. Doctor giving vaccine, flu or influenza shot to patient with injection needle. Close up of arm and medical professional. Nurse or physician with syringe. Immunity, HPV or health care concept. Terovesalainen/Adobe Stock What to know about getting updated Covid-19 booster, flu shot at the same time When people began isolating, social distancing and masking to slow the spread of Covid-19 in early 2020, flu all but disappeared in the US. As a result, most people haven’t been exposed to influenza for a few years, meaning immunity against flu viruses could be low and underscoring the need to get vaccinated. US health officials are encouraging people to get their flu shots as soon as possible, said Adriane Casalotti, chief of government and public affairs for the National Association of County and City Health Officials. “There’s definitely a push now to get flu vaccination to the top of people’s priority lists. We’re all concerned, having seen what’s going on in the Southern Hemisphere, in Australia, that this year’s flu season could be really, really rough, frankly,” Casalotti said. Concern has grown as officials also brace for possible surges this winter in Covid-19 and other common respiratory viruses, such as respiratory syncytial virus or RSV, a leading cause of lower respiratory tract infection in infants and young children. Casalotti said that the spread of influenza can have a significant effects on communities, especially since it can be hard to distinguish flu symptoms from those of Covid-19, common colds or allergies. “We’re already starting to see in some areas that flu is circulating,” Casalotti said. “Overall, flu activity is low nationwide, but it’s starting to tick up in the Southeast in particular.” A higher-dose flu shot for older adults In August, as concern about the coming flu season grew, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices released a report updating its recommendations for the seasonal flu shot for this year. Typically, older adults get a higher dose of flu vaccine than younger adults, but in the latest update, ACIP recommended that adults 65 and older “preferentially receive” a higher dose or an adjuvanted flu vaccine. “There are three of the influenza vaccines that have been shown to work better in people aged 65 and older,” said Schaffner, who is a liaison representative to ACIP. “There is the high-dose vaccine, there’s another that has an adjuvant in it – an immune stimulant – and the third is a recombinant vaccine.” Recombinant flu vaccines do not involve the flu virus or chicken eggs in the manufacturing process. “If you look back at people aged 65 and older in previous seasons, already 80% of them were receiving one of these three vaccines,” he said. “What’s new this year is that the ACIP has made a distinctively preferential recommendation. They actually said if you’re vaccinating people aged 65 and older, preferentially use one of these three vaccines, and only if one of them is not available use the regular vaccine.” Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Friday from the CNN Health team. Overall, the CDC recommends that everyone 6 months and older get an annual flu vaccine, especially people who could be pregnant – as the vaccine offers protection not only to them but to their baby, Schaffner said. “There’s an additional benefit,” he said. “Namely, the antibodies created in response to the vaccine, some of it crosses the placenta and goes into the newborn baby. So the newborn baby gets some of that protection during the first four to six months of its life, before we can actively vaccinate the baby.” CNN’s Stella Chan and Taylor Romine contributed to this report. Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Health Watch Listen Live TV Follow CNN Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Terms of Use Privacy Policy Ad Choices Accessibility & CC About Newsletters Transcripts © 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved. CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.Common Questions About Influenza | University of Utah Health Skip to main content Main navigation Find a Doctor Locations Services Patients & Visitors Patient Services Patient Services Questions About Your Bill? Urgent Care Where to Stay Patient & Family Services Visitor Policy COVID & Vaccine Information Clinical Trials University of Utah Hospital Main navigation University of Utah Hospital Staying at the Hospital Parking & Valet Looking for Another Location? General Questions Main navigation 801-581-2668 Find an Interpreter About U of U Health Billing & Insurance My Chart Search Menu Close Service line menu Find a Doctor Services Locations Patients & Visitors Patient Services Questions About Your Bill? Urgent Care Where to Stay Patient & Family Services Clinical Services COVID & Vaccine Information University of Utah Hospital University of Utah Hospital Staying at the Hospital Parking & Valet Looking for Another Location? General Questions 801-581-2668 Find an Interpreter About U of U Health Billing & Insurance MyChart Health Care Home Healthfeed 2022 10 Common Questions About Influenza Oct 12, 2022 Información en español The best way to prevent flu is by getting vaccinated each year. Doctors at University of Utah Health encourage everyone to get a flu vaccine to protect yourself, the people around you, and to potentially avoid serious complications. Here are some frequently asked questions about influenza. Why is it important to get a flu vaccine? Transmission of influenza and other respiratory viruses, like COVID-19, increase during the fall and winter months. Vaccination can help protect you from developing serious complications and slows down transmission. During the 2019-2020 flu season, flu vaccination prevented about 7.5 million flu illnesses, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). It's important to get a flu shot every year because just like COVID-19, the flu virus evolves and mutates. Every year, researchers try to predict the predominant strains, which is how the next vaccine for the following year is determined. Is it influenza or COVID-19? Doctors determine whether someone has influenza based on a patient's clinical symptoms. Because flu and COVID-19 share similar characteristics, it's important for a patient to have a clinical evaluation and undergo testing. How long until the flu vaccine takes effect? It takes about two weeks for your body to develop its defenses. How effective are flu shots? Flu shots are not 100% effective, but they help reduce the rates of hospitalization and severity of illness in both adults and children. Data supports the fact that patients who have received a flu shot are less likely to get seriously ill if infected by influenza. How long will a flu shot protect you? The flu vaccine generally protects you for five to six months and then steadily decreases after that. Can the flu shot make you sick? After getting a flu vaccine, the body ramps up an immune response against antigens from the flu virus. This means the immune system is working to protect you against influenza. The process could cause some mild symptoms such as body aches or a headache. While your body is building up its immune defenses, it's possible to get sick with the flu or another respiratory virus within that two-week period. During flu season, a lot of respiratory viruses are circulating, so it's very common for children and adults to get other respiratory viruses at the same time. Who is at high risk for complications from the flu? Those at high risk of serious complications include children under five, adults 65 and older, pregnant women, and people with chronic medical conditions. Is it safe to get a flu shot during pregnancy? Yes, it is safe to get a flu vaccine during pregnancy. After vaccination, pregnant people pass antibodies to their babies that continue to protect the child after it is born. This protection is important because babies cannot get a flu vaccine until they are six months old. Can face masks help prevent the spread of influenza? Yes, and they also protect the spread of other respiratory viruses like the common cold. According to the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), both COVID-19 and flu can spread between people who are in close contact with one another. These viruses are spread mainly by droplets made when people with the illness (COVID-19 or flu) cough, sneeze, or talk. These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs. Face masks can help prevent this type of spread from happening. I am sick with the flu, what should I do? Check with your health care provider about any special care you may need, especially if you are pregnant or have a health condition such as diabetes, heart disease, asthma, or emphysema. Stay home when you are sick until at least 24 hours after the fever is gone without fever-reducing medicines (at least four to five days after symptoms have started). Get plenty of rest. Drink clear fluids (such as water, broth, sports drinks, or electrolyte beverages for infants) to keep from being dehydrated. Cover coughs and sneezes. Clean hands with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand gel often and especially after using tissues and coughing or sneezing into hands. Avoid close contact with others. Do not go to work or school while ill. When is it safe for children to go back to school after getting the flu? CDC recommends a child to stay home until they've been without a fever for 24 hours without using fever-reducing medicines. When should I be seen by a doctor? If a person is at high risk for complications or has worsening symptoms, they should seek care from their health care provider or an Urgent Care clinic. If a patient has symptoms such as difficulty breathing, bluish lips, signs of dehydration, or are less responsive than normal, they should go to the emergency room. 10 Things to Know About Flu Shots Flu Is Worse for Pregnant Women How to Avoid the Flu During the Holidays wellness coronavirus flu vaccine Site Links About Us Academics & Research Billing Find an Interpreter Jobs Giving Maps & Directions Newsroom Referring Providers Helpful Links Pricing Transparency Patient Rights & Responsibilities Visitor Policy Disclaimer Privacy Statement DNV Public Information Policy Non-Discrimination Policy Surprise Billing Rights Webmaster 50 North Medical Drive Salt Lake City, Utah 84132 801-581-2121 Scheduling: 801-213-9500 En Español: 801-646-5914 Copyright © 2024 University of Utah HealthPreparing for the 2022 Flu Season – Ventura County News Channel Website Skip to content ventura.org Contact Facebook Twitter Youtube Instagram Linkedin Home Español Español Search ... Results See all results Home Latest News Videos Board Meetings County Website County Reports Contact Subscribe Preparing for the 2022 Flu Season October 10, 2022 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Español Español Ventura, CA – As we enter Flu Season, the Ventura County Health Care Agency is reminding the community that the best way to protect against the flu virus is to receive an annual flu vaccine.The Ventura County Health Care Agency is offering multiple options for the community to conveniently receive a flu shot, through our Ambulatory Care Clinic system, Public Health Clinics, as well as pop-up community clinics.Although seasonal influenza (flu) viruses are detected year-round in the United States, flu viruses are most common during the fall and winter. The timing and duration of flu season can vary, but influenza activity often begins to increase in October, and most often, flu activity peaks between December and February.While receiving a flu vaccination anytime during the flu season can help protect against getting the virus, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that anyone over the age of six months receive a flu vaccine beginning in September or October each year.This year, Ventura County Public Health encourages anyone 65 years of age and older to receive a high dose quadrivalent flu shot. While the regular dose flu vaccine provides those 65 and over with significant protection, the high dose vaccine, with four times the amount of potency, is recommended as seniors have a lower immune response to vaccination. Seniors are at particular risk for experiencing significant and negative outcomes from an influenza infection. For more information on this vaccine, visit: Fluzone High-Dose Seasonal Influenza Vaccine | CDC.It is safe and effective to get a flu vaccine simultaneously with other vaccines, including COVID-19 vaccines/boosters. For more information on the CDC’s approval of co-administration of vaccines, visit: Frequently Asked Influenza (Flu) Questions: 2022-2023 Season | CDC.It is also important that the community take everyday precautions to help minimize the spread of the flu, such as avoiding close contact with people who are sick, covering coughs and sneezes, and practicing proper handwashing.For dates and locations, including drive-thru options, where flu vaccines are being offered countywide, visit www.vchca.org/flu-shots (please note, appointments may be required).For more information about the flu and flu vaccines, visit: Influenza (Flu) | CDC. County of Ventura Agencies Agricultural Commissioner Airports Animal Services Area Agency on Aging Assessor's Office Auditor-Controller’s Office Board of Supervisors Child Support Services Clerk-Recorder & Registrar of Voters County Executive Office District Attorney Fire Department General Services Agency Harbor Department Health Care Agency Human Resources Human Services Agency Information Technology Services Library Medical Examiner's Office Probation Agency Public Defender Public Works Agency Resource Management Agency Sheriff’s Office Treasurer-Tax Collector important links Public Information Office Natalie HernandezPublic Information Officercountypio@ventura.org 800 S. Victoria Ave.Ventura, CA 93009 211 VENTURA LINK https://211ventura.org/ Stay up to date, subscribe to receive the County’s e-newsletter. Copyright © 2022 - Ventura County News ChannelFlu cases on the rise as US prepares for possibly severe season, data shows - ABC News ABC NewsVideoLiveShowsElections538ShopStream onLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 11, 1:13 AM ETNational Election Results: presidential Projection: Trump is President-elect226312226312Harris71,146,679270 to winTrump74,675,378Expected vote reporting: 94%Recent ProjectionsColo. Dist. 8Projected WinnerGabe Evans•R8 hours agoAriz.PresidentProjected WinnerDonald Trump•R1 day agoNational Election Results: house205214205214Dem.214 up for electionLost: 2218 for controlestimateRep.221 up for electionGained: 2Election 2024 updates: With Arizona, Trump sweeps all 7 swing statesLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 9, 9:49 PM ET9:46 PMWith Arizona, Trump sweeps all 7 swing states8:59 PMTrump projected winner in ArizonaFlu cases on the rise as US prepares for possibly severe season, data showsWeekly cases of influenza A have risen in the last two months.ByMary KekatosOctober 10, 2022, 12:47 PM1:18Susana Sanchez, a nurse practitioner, administers a flu vaccination at a CVS pharmacy, Sept. 10, 2021, in Miami.Joe Raedle/Getty ImagesInfluenza cases are rising in the United States as the country prepares for a potentially severe season.During the week ending Oct. 1-- the latest date for which data is available -- there were 969 cases of influenza A and 52 cases of influenza B reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.MORE: Scientists are working on combo flu and COVID-19 shot, but don't expect one this fallWhat's more, over the same period, the percent positivity rate has risen from 0.49% to 2.5%.Flu Cases in the United StatesABC News Photo IllustrationOutpatient visits for influenza-like illnesses have particularly risen for children ages 4 and younger to more than 120,000 during the week ending Oct. 1, a 25.5% spike from the roughly 95,600 visits for this age group that were seen the week ending Aug. 6.The CDC has previously warned the U.S. may see a harsh flu season after few to no cases were reported over the last two years.Similar trends are being seen on statewide level.In New York, 596 cases of influenza were confirmed the week ending Oct. 1, according to the state's Department of Health. This is nearly four times higher than the 150 that were confirmed the same time last year.Additionally, in Texas, the Department of Health and Human Services confirmed 422 cases of influenza A and B during the week ending Oct. 1. During the same week last year, no cases were confirmed.Another sign of the potentially severe season comes after Australia experienced its worst flu season in five years.According to the country's National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System, more than 30,000 cases were being per week during the season's height in June.Comparatively, at the height of Australia's flu season in 2017, there were 25,000 cases being reported every week.Researchers and modelers often look to the southern hemisphere, which experiences its flu season first -- typically from May to October -- to predict how the season will look in the U.S.Last week, CDC Director Dr. Rochelle Walensky urged Americans ages 6 months and up to get a flu shot by the end of October."Over the past two years, we've seen some worrisome drops in flu vaccination coverage, especially in some groups of people who are at the highest risk of developing serious flu illness," she said during a press conference.Earlier this year, the CDC published a report about the drop in flu vaccination uptake. Some reasons given include confusions that COVID-19 vaccines also protect against the flu, people making fewer visits to vaccine providers during the pandemic and fewer flu vaccination clinics open compared to years prior.Related TopicsFlu SeasonPopular ReadsCalifornia fire grows over 20,000 acresNov 7, 9:47 PMSeattle stabbings: 10 attacked in 2 daysNov 8, 7:04 PMMissing American tourist in Hungary killed: PoliceNov 9, 1:36 PMFEMA probing supervisor over Trump sign orderNov 9, 3:46 PM538's final forecasts for the 2024 electionNov 5, 7:49 AMABC News Live24/7 coverage of breaking news and live eventsABC News NetworkAbout Nielsen MeasurementChildren's Online Privacy PolicyContact UsDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationInterest-Based AdsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseYour US State Privacy Rights © 2024 ABC NewsVaccine update for the 2022-23 influenza season | MDedge searchAll SpecialtiesCME Events REGISTER or LOGIN LatestQuizzesVideossearch ADVERTISEMENT Vaccine update for the 2022-23 influenza seasonThe Journal of Family Practice. 2022 October;71(8):362-365 | doi: 10.12788/jfp.0487October 11, 2022|Family MedicineDoug Campos-Outcalt, MD, MPAAuthor and Disclosure Information✕Doug Campos-Outcalt, MD, MPAdougco@email.arizona.eduThe author reported nopotential conflict of interestrelevant to this article.Any one of the HD-IIV4, aIIV4, or RIV4 vaccines is recommended over the SD-IIV4 options for those ages ≥ 65 years. Flucelvax is now approved for those ages ≥ 6 months.In the 2020-2021 influenza season, there was practically no influenza circulating in the United States. This decline from seasonal expectations, described in a previous Practice Alert, was probably due to the interventions aimed at limiting the spread of ­COVID-19: masking, social distancing, working from home, and cancellation of large, crowded events.1 In 2021-2022 influenza returned, but only in moderation. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates there were between 82,000 to 170,000 hospitalizations and 5000 to 14,000 deaths attributed to influenza.2 In addition, US virologic surveillance indicates that 98.6% of specimens tested positive for influenza A.2 While the vaccine’s effectiveness in 2021-2022 was far below what was desired, it still prevented a great deal of flu morbidity and mortality and reduced acute respiratory illness due to influenza A(H3N2) virus by 35% (TABLE 1).3 All vaccines for the upcoming flu season are quadrivalent, containing 2 influenza A antigens and 2 influenza B antigens (TABLES 24 and 35). Vaccine effectiveness in older adults (≥ 65 years) has been very low. TABLE 46 shows vaccine effectiveness in the elderly for 10 influenza seasons between 2011 and 2020.6 In nearly half of those seasons, the estimated vaccine effectiveness was possibly nil. All influenza vaccines licensed for use in the United States are approved for use in those ≥ 65 years of age, except live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV). Three products were developed to address the issue of low vaccine effectiveness in the elderly. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) has not expressed a preference for any specific vaccine for this age group. The high-dose qudrivalent vaccine (HD-IIV4), Fluzone, contains 4 times the antigen level of the standard-dose vaccines (SD-IIV4)—60 μg vs 15 μg. Fluzone was initially approved in 2014 as a trivalent vaccine and was approved as a quadrivalent vaccine in 2019. The adjuvanted quadrivalent influenza vaccine (aIIV4), Fluad, was also inititally approved as a trivalent vaccine in 2015 and as quadrivalent in 2021. Both HD-IIV4 and aIIV4 are approved only for those ≥ 65 years of age. Recombinant quadrivalent influenza vaccine (RIV4), Flublok, is approved for ages ≥ 18 years and is produced by a process that does not involve eggs. It contains 3 times the antigen level as SD-IIV4 vaccines. All 3 of these vaccines (HD-IIV4, aIIV4, and RIV4) have been compared with SD-IIV4 for effectiveness in the elderly and have yielded better outcomes. However, direct comparisons among the 3 vaccines have not shown robust evidence of superiority, and ACIP is unwilling to preferentially recommend one of them at this time. At its June 2022 meeting, ACIP voted to recommend any of these 3 options over the SD-IIV 4 options for those ≥ 65 years of age, with the caveat that if only an SD-IIV4 option is available it should be administered in preference to delaying vaccination. One other vaccine change for the upcoming season involves the cell culture–based quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (ccIIV4), Flucelvax, which is now approved for those ages ≥ 6 months. It previously was approved only for ages ≥ 2 years. All unadjuvanted SD-IIV4 vaccines as well as ccIIV4 are now approved for everyone ≥ 6 months of age. LAIV continues to be approved for ages 2 through 49 years. The only influenza vaccine products that contain thimerosal are those in multidose vials (TABLE 24).Promote vaccination and infection-control practices. ACIP continues to recommend influenza vaccine for all those ages ≥ 6 months, with 2 doses for those < 9 years old not previously vaccinated with an influenza vaccine. In addition to encouraging and offering influenza vaccine to patients and staff, we can minimize the spread of influenza in the community by robust infection-control practices in the clinical setting: masking and isolation of patients with respiratory symptoms, encouraging those with symptoms to stay at home and mask when around family members, advising frequent hand washing and respiratory hygiene, and using pre- and post-exposure chemoprophylaxis as appropriate. All recommendations regarding influenza for 2022-2023 can be found on the CDC website.4ReferencesDownload Article× ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT This PublicationAbout UsAdvertiseContact UsCorporate ManagementCustomer ServiceEditorial Advisory BoardEditorial StaffInformation for AuthorsSubscribe To Family Practice NewsSubscribe To The Journal Of Family PracticeTop SectionsCase ReportsClinical InquiriesCommentaryLaw & MedicineThe Optimized DoctorPhoto RoundsPractice AlertPURLsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseEditorial PolicyCookie PolicyAd PolicyMedscape Customer SupportFrequently Asked Questions Advertise with MDedgeSee more with MDedge! See our Other PublicationsCopyright © 2024 Frontline Medical Communications Inc., Newark, NJ, USA. All rights reserved. Unauthorized use prohibited. The information provided is for educational purposes only. Use of this Web site is subject to the medical disclaimer.How bad will flu and Covid be this winter? Hospitals brace for rough season.IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Skip to ContentNBC News Logo2024 ElectionMeet the PressU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthShoppingTiplineScienceCulture & TrendsShare & Save —My NewsManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearchSearchProfile My NewsSign Out Sign InCreate your free profileSectionsU.S. NewsDecision 2024PoliticsWorldLocalBusinessSportsInvestigationsCulture & TrendsHealthScienceTech & MediaWeatherVideo FeaturesPhotosNBC SelectNBC Asian AmericaNBC BLKNBC LatinoNBC OUTtvTodayNightly NewsMSNBCMeet the PressDatelineFeaturedNBC News NowNightly FilmsStay TunedSpecial FeaturesNewslettersPodcastsListen NowMore From NBCCNBCNBC.COMNBCU AcademyPeacockNEXT STEPS FOR VETSNBC News Site MapHelpFollow NBC News news AlertsThere are no new alerts at this timeSearchSearchFacebookTwitterEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardPinterestLinkedinLatest Stories2024 ElectionMeet the PressU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthShoppingTiplineScienceCulture & TrendsCoronavirusU.S. hospitals brace for an unprecedented winter of virusesHealth care staffing is already stretched as respiratory virus activity is picking up. A health care worker rests near Brooklyn Hospital Center on April 1, 2020.Tayfun Coskun / Anadolu Agency via Getty Images fileOct. 10, 2022, 4:43 PM UTCBy Erika Edwards and Akshay Syal, M.D.Hospitals nationwide are preparing for another winter with Covid — the first one that's also expected to include high levels of influenza and other respiratory illnesses that have simmered quietly in the background for the past two years.Flu cases are already rising in parts of the U.S., according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Pediatricians, too, are seeing a growing number of children sick with respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, and enteroviruses. And despite a downward trend in Covid, tens of thousands of new cases are still being diagnosed every day. The convergence of viruses is hitting health care systems as they're forced to reckon with staffing shortages that worsened during the pandemic."If you go around the nation and ask hospitals how busy they are, every single one of them will tell you: They’re busy," said Dr. Carlos del Rio, an executive associate dean at the Emory University School of Medicine and Grady Health System in Atlanta.Health care workers are quitting at rates 23 percent higher than when the pandemic began, mirroring a larger nationwide trend of workers leaving their jobs, according to Health System Tracker, a joint effort between the nonprofits Peterson Center on Healthcare and Kaiser Family Foundation to monitor how well the U.S. health care system is performing."Nurses were on the front line, and some of them burned out and quit," said Dr. James McDeavitt, executive vice president and dean of clinical affairs at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. "Others that were in their 50s and 60s who maybe thought they'd be working for another five years took an early retirement."Dr. Bernard Camins, medical director for infection prevention at the Mount Sinai Health System in New York City, has noted a similar "mass exodus" of health care workers who retired early or moved to a different line of work altogether.Now, he said, "there's a constant struggle to recruit new people."Staffing deficits mean there is little wiggle room to accommodate any additional surges of patients, whether they're sick with Covid, flu or other illness."There's no excess capacity in hospitals," del Rio said. "Anything that increases the number of patients is going to tip the scales."Despite the shortages, hospital leaders applaud health care workers who have been able to stay the course and are ready for this next phase of infectious disease.Morale is “actually pretty good,” McDeavitt said. “We’ve moved on from early in the pandemic, wondering if we were going to get sick and potentially die.”“I think those worries are alleviated,” McDeavitt said. “We know how to handle it now.”Where are we now?Reports of Covid cases have been decreasing steadily since early August. As of Oct. 6, the average number of new cases per day, based on a seven-day average, is 44,743 — the lowest it's been since April. Covid-related hospitalizations, too, continue to tick down. As of Oct. 5, the average daily number of hospital beds used by a Covid patient was at its lowest since June, at 27,161. But as the cold weather sets in and people increasingly gather indoors, Covid cases are expected to rise. A recent analysis from the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, predicts that average Covid cases per day nationwide will increase by more than 10 percent in the coming weeks.“We’ll see an increase in Covid cases — probably not to the extent that we saw in the winter of 2020 and winter of 2021 — but we will see a rise,” said Matthew Binnicker, director of clinical virology at the Mayo Clinic. “Most of those will be infections that lead to mild to moderate illness.”How well do Covid boosters work? That prediction reflects what is known so far about how the latest Covid vaccines work. While the shots may not prevent a person from getting sick following an infection, they have been shown throughout the pandemic to keep infected people out of the hospital and from dying.It’s very likely that we’re going to see influenza roaring back with a vengeance this winter.Dr. Dan Uslan, UCLA Health“How much of a rise in the hospitalizations and deaths we will see is really going to depend on the extent to which people are getting up to date on their vaccines,” especially those at highest risk for severe illness, such as the elderly and those with weak immune systems, said Jennifer Nuzzo, director of the Pandemic Center at Brown University School of Public Health. The vast majority of Covid cases circulating now are an omicron subvariant, BA.5. The latest version of the Covid vaccine targets BA.5, but since its debut in September, fewer than 4% of people eligible for the extra shot have received it. The Commonwealth Fund recently predicted that more than 745,000 Covid-related hospitalizations and more than 75,000 such deaths could be avoided, if more people got the bivalent shot.The U.S. is also seeing the beginning of what is expected to be the first rough flu season in years. While overall numbers remain low, the CDC reported an increase in positive flu tests last week. “It’s very likely that we’re going to see influenza roaring back with a vengeance this winter,” said Dr. Dan Uslan, co-chief infection prevention officer for UCLA Health in Los Angeles. What's happening in Australia could be a preview: The country is exiting its worst flu season in at least five years, according to the country’s Department of Health and Aged Care. “Data from the Southern Hemisphere are not good,” Binnicker, of the Mayo Clinic, said. “We need to double down on prevention measures,” such as masking and physical distancing. There are already signs that viruses are circulating more than they have in recent years. Pediatricians have begun to see “high numbers of severely sick patients with respiratory illnesses,” said Dr. Sarah Combs, an emergency medicine physician at Children’s National in Washington, D.C. The illnesses are not necessarily linked to either Covid or flu. “We are seeing child after child coming in with breathing trouble related to what would commonly be called just a cold or a sniffle,” Combs said. These are children who do not have asthma or other chronic lung diseases that would make them more susceptible to breathing problems. “They come in having a cold and then within 24 hours they’re actually struggling to breathe,” she said.The CDC recommends an annual flu shot for everyone aged 6 months and older. Children younger than age 9 who have never had a flu vaccine, the CDC said, should get two this year, at least four weeks apart. Follow NBC HEALTH on Twitter & Facebook.Erika EdwardsErika Edwards is a health and medical news writer and reporter for NBC News and "TODAY."Akshay Syal, M.D.Dr. Akshay Syal is a board-certified internal medicine physician at UCLA Health and Instructor of Medicine at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. He also is a member of the NBC News Health Unit where he reports for both NBC News Digital and on-air for NBC News NOW and MSNBC. Nigel Chiwaya contributed.AboutContactHelpCareersAd ChoicesPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023)NBC News SitemapClosed CaptioningAdvertiseSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday Logo7 facts about the flu and why you should get a flu shot Skip to main content UC Davis Health Blogs Cultivating Health menu icon Menu search icon Search subscribe icon Subscribe Cultivating Health × Cancer Care Children's Health Fitness Heart Health Mental Health All Articles Cultivating Health × Enter search words...Submit search icon Search×Enter search words...Submit Cultivating Health × Subscribe to Cultivating HealthSubscribe to our blog and receive notifications of new stories by email. × Success! Done × Error! Please retry Subscribe OCTOBER 12, 2022Updated: OCTOBER 28, 2024 7 facts about the flu and why you should get a flu shot We've all heard a lot about COVID-19 during the last couple of years. But the flu (influenza) is still a serious illness we should be mindful of, especially during the cooler months. Flu is a respiratory illness caused by viruses that infect the nose, throat, and sometimes the lungs. It is contagious and can cause mild to severe illness, including death. It's recommended that everyone older than 6 months get a flu shot each year. Below are some facts about the flu and flu vaccines. 1. Flu symptoms can come on suddenly Flu symptoms can include: Fever or chills (not everyone with the flu will have a fever) Cough Sore throat Runny or stuffy nose Muscle or body aches Headaches Tiredness Vomiting and diarrhea (this is more common in children than adults) 2. You can spread the flu before you have symptoms If you have the flu, you are most contagious in the first 3-4 days after you have symptoms. Some adults who are otherwise healthy may be able to infect others 1 day before symptoms and up to 5-7 days after getting sick. It's possible that young children and people with weak immune systems can infect others for a longer time. 3. Up to 11% of Americans will get sick from the flu each season A CDC study from 2018 found that, on average, about 8% of Americans get sick from the flu each flu season. Although it ranges between 3-11%, depending on the season. This latest study is based on people who had flu symptoms. Previous studies estimated 5-20% based on both symptomatic and asymptomatic flu illness. Flu season in the U.S. is October to April, with peak activity reported December to February. 4. Children are most likely to get sick from the flu Children ages 0-17 years showed the highest rate of flu infection. The CDC estimates that between 2010 and 2019, between 7,000 and 28,000 children younger than 5 years old were hospitalized in the U.S. for the flu each year. This is why it's so important for children to get a flu shot. 5. Flu regularly ranks among the top 10 causes of death in the U.S. The CDC estimates that the flu has caused between 12,000 and 52,000 deaths each year between 2010 and 2020. The 2023-2024 flu season resulted in between 17,000-100,000 deaths and 380,000-900,000 hospitalizations. It was estimated that as many as 75 million people had flu-related illness that season, according to the CDC. 6. Getting a flu shot is the most effective way to prevent illness Flu vaccines have been "shown to reduce flu-related illnesses and the risk of serious flu complications that can result in hospitalization or even death," the CDC reports. Everyone ages 6 months and older is advised to get a flu shot, with few exceptions. The CDC recommends that you get a flu shot before illness starts spreading in your community. October is the best time to get vaccinated. If you can't get a vaccine until November or later, you should still get one because flu season typically peaks in February. UC Davis Health patients: Learn how to schedule your flu vaccine Check out the California Department of Public Health to see clinics offering flu shots 7. COVID-19 symptoms and flu symptoms are similar Both flu and COVID-19 are contagious respiratory illnesses. However, they are caused by different viruses, according to the CDC. Symptoms of COVID-19 and flu can be very similar – and people can have both viruses at the same time. These are some differing symptoms: COVID can cause diarrhea at any age (typically only kids have diarrhea when they get the flu). Change in or loss of taste and smell is more common with COVID-19. Learn more about COVID-19 symptoms Where to get your flu shot UC Davis Health patients: All UC Davis Health clinics across the Sacramento region offer walk-in flu clinics on certain days. Patients can also self-schedule a flu vaccine through MyUCDavisHealth. Anyone: Sacramento County is offering flu vaccines at many locations. View the list of flu vaccine clinics (PDF). You can also use this CDC tool that shows you flu vaccine locations near your zip code. Learn why you should partner with a primary care provider This blog was medically reviewed by Dean Blumberg, chief of pediatric infectious diseases. Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. More Stories Is pneumonia contagious? Learn the early warning signs and treatments for this common illness What causes kidney stones and ways you can try to avoid them Joint replacement: Is hip or knee replacement surgery right for you? Connect with us The views expressed on this blog are those of the author(s) and readers. This blog does not imply that UC Davis Health endorses the views expressed. We cannot diagnose conditions, provide second opinions or make specific treatment recommendations through this website. We invite you to learn more about our social media guidelines, which apply to all UC Davis Health social media channels, including blogs. If you have concerns, comments or suggestions about the care you or your family received, please contact Patient Relations at 800-305-6540. If you have medical questions or would like to make an appointment or find out about the referral process, please call 800-2-UCDAVIS. arrow up right icon © 2024 UC Regents. All Rights Reserved | Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy | Social Media Participation GuidelinesFlu shot myths debunked: Vaccine facts you need to knowSkip to main content HomeWellnessFoodHumankindProblem SolvedHolidaysComicsWomankindPets Common flu vaccine myths debunked: What you need to know this flu seasonDr. Michael Daignault | USA TODAYShow Caption Hide Caption Flu season is coming back to the US this year. Here's what we know.After a two-year hiatus, health experts say the flu may be back this season. Here's why the U.S. could see an uptick in flu cases.USA TODAY, USA TODAYWe look to the Southern Hemisphere countries - notably Australia - as an accurate bellwether for what kind of influenza season we will have. Our friends Down Under just went through their worst flu season in five years.This was likely due to a dropping of all COVID-19 mitigation strategies (masks, social distancing) and a reopening of borders to tourism. But the biggest factor was likely a waning of population-level immunity to flu – as the country's "Zero COVID" strategy effectively kept flu at bay for the previous two seasons as well.Despite all that, we can infer a lot from Australia's experience to help us prepare for our own winter:Australia's flu season peaked two months earlier than usual. Current CDC data shows flu cases and hospitalizations are already rising here, two months earlier compared to last season.Flu sample subtyping from Australia indicates Flu A (including H1N1 and H3N2) dominance again this year. Is Flu B on its way to extinction?The flu hit the 5-9 year old age group hardest, followed by the 0-4 age group - again demonstrating COVID-19 mitigation strategies unfortunately led to reduced influenza immunity among children.The biggest hurdle could be convincing a vaccine-weary American public to get their flu shot this year. A recent survey from the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases indicated that only 49% plan on getting their flu jab even though 69% stated that they believe the vaccine is the best public health weapon we have against flu-related hospitalization and death.As an ER doctor, I've been encouraging my patients to get their flu shot early this year.In addition, there are a lot of myths surrounding the flu shot that need to be debunked. Here are three of the more common misconceptions I hear.Have you been told you're allergic to penicillin? Here's why you're probably not.More: Why you should reconsider taking daily aspirinMyth: You can get the flu from the flu vaccineThe flu strain used in the vaccine is killed, or inactivated, virus. You cannot get the flu from dead virus. Period. If someone gets the flu soon after getting the vaccine, this is likely coincidence. Also, it's important to remember that the flu shot does not provide immediate protection. If you know you are traveling or have to attend a large event, try to get your flu shot 1-2 weeks before to ensure that your immune system has mounted a protective response by the time you are potentially exposed.And finally, there are many other viruses that can give you "flu-like illness" and not necessarily be the flu. There's been a steady upwards trajectory of "influenza-like illness" reported by the CDC this fall – driven in particular by the 0-4 age group.Myth: The flu shot doesn't workStudies show that flu vaccines reduce the risk of illness by 40-60% on average. Remember, the goal of the flu vaccine, like the COVID-19 vaccine, is NOT to prevent any and all infections but to prevent severe illness, hospitalization and death. A 2021 study in the journal Vaccine showed that those vaccinated had a 31% lower risk of death from flu compared to those unvaccinated. And during the 2019-2020 winter, flu vaccines prevented an estimated 105,000 flu-related hospitalizations. Because it remains uncertain whether we will experience a COVID-19-related hospital surge this year as well, flu vaccines are a critical component of preventing a twin-demic of COVID and flu from overwhelming our hospitals this winter.And some potentially favorable news out of Australia: between 92.4% and 94.3% of Flu A samples were antigenically similar to the corresponding strains chosen by scientists for the flu vaccines this year. How this correlates clinically remains uncertain, but this bodes well for the effectiveness of this year's vaccine.Track your vax: Why it's more important than ever to take ownership of your vaccinationsDo this, not that: Simple swaps to boost your wellnessMyth: Taking over-the-counter pain meds after the flu shot reduces its effectivenessThere are two areas for debate here. Some people take over-the-counter (OTC) pain meds like ibuprofen (aka Motrin, Advil) or acetaminophen (Tylenol) for a week before their flu shot to prevent post-shot pain or other side effects. Does this work? Probably not. These OTC meds are short-acting (hence their typical twohree-a-day dosing). Plus there are side effects from taking frequent daily dosing of ibuprofen like stomach irritation or bleeding that don't make this a good idea.An oft-cited 2009 study that gained notoriety warned that ibuprofen (and other NSAIDs), which work by blocking the cox-2 enzyme involved in pain, should be avoided after vaccination. The researches hypothesized that since cox-2 is necessary for the production of memory B cells, which make antibodies that protect against the flu, taking ibuprofen could potentially reduce the immune system's response to the vaccine. However, memory B cells take many months following immunization to "mature," or develop the ability to form antibodies against different strains of the flu virus we encounter. It's again unlikely that short-acting over-the-counter pain meds could exert a long-lasting effect.In addition, a pre-pandemic meta-analysis looking at 13 different studies found that pre-vaccine ibuprofen and acetaminophen did not limit the efficacy of vaccination in children. Although the evidence is mixed, my recommendation would be to try to soldier thru the post-vaccination discomfort. It's usually short-lived; 24-48 hours at most. If you're concerned about an over-the-counter medication reducing your vaccine effectiveness, opt for ice packs or an Epsom salt bath instead. And if you must take a pill, choose acetaminophen instead of ibuprofen.More: Why Epsom salt should be a staple in your home medicine cabinetGot an injury? Should you reach for an ice pack or heating pad?Michael Daignault, MD, is a board-certified ER doctor in Los Angeles. He studied Global Health at Georgetown University and has a Medical Degree from Ben-Gurion University. He completed his residency training in emergency medicine at Lincoln Medical Center in the South Bronx. He is also a former United States Peace Corps Volunteer. Find him on Instagram @dr.daignault and Twitter @MichaelDaigau3 Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 20249 tips for getting through the flu at home - Futurity Search for: Search for: Futurity is your source of research news from leading universities. About Futurity Universities Science Health Culture Environment Videos Interviews Slideshows Audio Science Health Culture Environment Research news from top universities Subscribe Science Health Culture Environment 1665667582 9 tips for getting through the flu at home October 13th, 2022 Posted by Angela Nelson-Tufts "One of the most common things I hear from people is, 'I get the flu shot, and I get the flu anyway, so what's the point?'" says Tuhin Roy. "The point is that the flu shot helps prevent severe symptoms, like ending up in the hospital..." (Credit: Getty Images) Share this Article Facebook Twitter Reddit Email You are free to share this article under the Attribution 4.0 International license. Tags fluinfluenzavaccinesviruses University Tufts University Approximately 30 million Americans will get the flu this year, but fortunately, most of those cases won’t require medical attention. Most cases of the flu can be can be treated at home with remedies such as over the counter (OTC) medication and common kitchen staples. Tuhin Roy, a clinical assistant professor of family medicine at Tufts University School of Medicine and associate medical director at Greater Lawrence Family Health Center, sees many cases of the flu—and other viruses with flu-like symptoms—in adult and child patients at the health center’s busy clinics each year. “First off, know when it’s appropriate to treat the flu at home and when to see a doctor,” he says. “If someone is short of breath, having difficulty breathing, experiencing chest pain, or unable to eat or drink, it is an indication to seek medical care.” Here, Roy shares his best advice for how to relieve flu symptoms while riding out the virus at home: 1. Take acetaminophen or ibuprofen Take acetaminophen or ibuprofen two or three times a day unless there’s an allergy or other reason not to. These OTC medicine cabinet staples won’t fix everything, but they will lessen muscle aches, headaches, and the overall crummy feeling of the flu. 2. Try kitchen medicine Studies have shown that honey is effective when it comes to improving respiratory symptoms quickly. “Warm tea with honey and lemon can soothe a sore throat and help with decongestion, and it’s better than most of the medicines out there,” he says, but don’t give honey to children under 1 year old. 3. Use steam for stuffiness For heavy congestion, steam showers or holding your head over a hot pot of water can open nasal passages. Saline sprays, saline irrigation, and other OTC nasal decongestants also can reduce symptoms. 4. Get some rest Sleep deprivation will make the flu get worse a lot faster, says Roy. Getting a good night’s sleep will give your body the best tools possible to fight off the flu. 5. Stay hydrated “Drinking a lot of fluids all at once can be difficult with the flu because it can cause nausea and make people feel worse,” Roy says. “I recommend putting a timer on your phone, and every 15 minutes, take two or three sips. That’s all you need to stay hydrated throughout the day.” 6. Watch for symptoms in children Children often stop eating or drinking much sooner than adults when they feel ill. Acetaminophen or ibuprofen can help reduce fevers, which in turn can help make kids feel like drinking fluids again. “For babies, make sure they’re having at least four wet diapers a day, and toddlers or older kids should be urinating several times a day,” he cautions. Kids often will not want milk or milk-type products, like formula, so Roy recommends just water or a 50/50 mix of apple juice and water, which contains some electrolytes and nutrients. 7. Get a flu shot The best way to prevent the need for any of this is to get a flu shot, Roy says, and there are very few reasons not to get one. They’re effective and safe, but because the flu virus changes, people should get an influenza vaccination every year. He recommends them for children starting at six months old. “One of the most common things I hear from people is, ‘I get the flu shot, and I get the flu anyway, so what’s the point?'” says Roy. “The point is that the flu shot helps prevent severe symptoms, like ending up in the hospital, which can happen more often in kids and immunocompromised people. So, it might be true that you’ll still get the flu, but it’ll be less intense than what it would be without the vaccination.” 8.Eat nutritiously Good nutrition can be very helpful, and for people who haven’t been eating well, a vitamin supplement like vitamin C might be beneficial, he says. While there are herbal products on the market that claim to be able to shorten the duration of the flu, nothing has been proven with evidence, Roy says. However, one herbal product that has shown promise is uncka, a plant native to South Africa and used in African medicine. Studies have shown it has the potential to reduce the severity and duration of flu-like symptoms. “One thing I don’t recommend is zinc,” he says. “Over-the-counter zinc nasal sprays and tablets can cause side effects such as nausea, vomiting, and the sprays in particular can reduce the sense of smell for a prolonged period of time.” 9. Don’t expect a magic cure “There is no medicine for cutting short the flu significantly,” says Roy. “The flu is a virus, so antibiotics wouldn’t be helpful. For the vast majority of people, I recommend staying home and doing some of these kitchen remedies.” In some cases—young children, pregnant people, the elderly, or other people with significant medical issues—a physician may prescribe an antiviral medication specifically for the flu, but Roy stresses that this medication has side effects and is meant only for people who are extremely high risk. Source: Tufts University Related Why you should definitely get a flu shot this year 5 things parents should know about coughing kids Expert: You won’t get the flu by touching stuff Stay Connected. Subscribe to our Newsletter. Add your information below to receive daily updates. Sign Up Load More First Name Last Name Email* EmailThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Research news from top universities ©2024. Futurity. All rights reserved.Increased genetic variation of A(H3N2) virus from influenza surveillance at the end of the 2016/2017 season for Shanghai port, China | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Increased genetic variation of A(H3N2) virus from influenza surveillance at the end of the 2016/2017 season for Shanghai port, China Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 12 October 2022 Increased genetic variation of A(H3N2) virus from influenza surveillance at the end of the 2016/2017 season for Shanghai port, China Zilong Zhang1,2 na1, Shenwei Li1,2 na1, Xiaolin Zhu4 na1, Jian Hou2, Hong Zhang1,2, Baihui Zhao3,4 & …Zhengan Tian1,2 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 12, Article number: 17089 (2022) Cite this article 2152 Accesses 3 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects PhylogeneticsViral genetics AbstractInfluenza A(H3N2) virus exhibited complex seasonal patterns to evade pre-existing antibodies, resulting in changes in the antigenicity of the viron surface protein hemagglutinin (HA). To monitor the currently imported influenza viruses as well as to assess the capacity of health emergencies at the Shanghai port, we collected respiratory specimens of passengers from different countries and regions including some of Europe with influenza-like illness at the Shanghai port during 2016/2017, examined amino acid substitutions, and calculated the perfect-match vaccine efficacy using the p epitope model. Phylogenetic analysis of the HA genes revealed that influenza A(H3N2) viruses belonging to eight subclades were detected, and three amino acid substitutions in the subclade 3C.2a.4 were also added. Besides, two epidemic influenza virus strains were found in the 2016/2017 winter and 2016 summer. The results of lower predicted vaccine effectiveness in summer suggest that the imported A(H3N2) strains were not a good match for the A/Hong Kong/4801/2014 vaccine strain since the summer of 2017. Therefore, the Shanghai Port might stop the risk of the international spread of influenza for the first time, and curb the entry of A(H3N2) from overseas at the earliest stage of a probable influenza pandemic. Similar content being viewed by others Characterizing genetic and antigenic divergence from vaccine strain of influenza A and B viruses circulating in Thailand, 2017–2020 Article Open access 12 January 2021 The evolutionary footprint of influenza A subtype H3N2 strains in Bangladesh: implication of vaccine strain selection Article Open access 28 September 2022 Genetic and potential antigenic evolution of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses circulating in Kenya during 2009–2018 influenza seasons Article Open access 15 December 2023 IntroductionInfluenza viruses in the Orthomyxoviridae family cause highly contagious respiratory diseases with potentially fatal outcomes. There are currently four types in this family, which are type A, B, C and D. Type D viruses have not been reported to infect human yet1. In contrast to type B and C viruses, type A viruses in humans evolve fast and spark a devastating pandemic2,3,4. In particular, H3N2 subtype viruses hold responsible for a major seasonal influenza epidemic. Additionally, H3N2 subtype viruses could escape host immunity through piecemeal recombination, antigen drift or antigen conversion, and finally induce a lethal new flu pandemic with a potential to kill millions5.On the surface of H3N2 subtype viruses, hemagglutinin (HA) proteins are closely related to the antigen variation of the epidemic influenza virus, and the variants further trigger phylogenetic clade changes. Since the spring and the summer of 2009, there have been up to seven clades (clades 1 to 7) defined by phylogeny inference6. After 2011, the derivative of Clade 3C, 3C1, 3C2, and 3C3 were dominated in many regions7,8. Previous studies demonstrated similar rates for clades 3C.2a, 3C.3, and 3C.3a early in the season9. In 2014, more new genetic subclades with special HA mutation sites emerged, 3C.2a from 3C2, 3C.3a and 3C.3b from 3C310. Past research showed similar rates for clades 3C.2a, 3C.3, and 3C.3a early in the season, but 3C.2a dominated rapidly in the virus population for more than 70% by January 20157. The genetic subclade 3C.2a1 emerged at the end of the 2015/2016 season11 and has become predominant in the 2016/2017 season. Afterwards, A(H3N2) 3C.2a further divided into new genetic groups by genetic drift (3C.2a.2, 3C.2a.3 and 3C.2a.4)12,13,14.Compared to former years, the influenza season 2016/2017 co-circulated earlier in China, particularly in the southern regions. The influenza cases continued to rise, and A(H3N2) viruses became the dominant strain. Hong Kong SAR government continues to report a significant number of serious influenza-related cases and deaths. By June 11st 2017, the Hong Kong Center for Health Protection had confirmed 223 cases, with 155 deaths15. A(H3N2) viruses were also dominant in Europe and North America. The laboratory experiments verified that the vaccine effect of influenza A was not ideal for people over 65 from Finland16 and Sweden17. There were higher mortality and hospitalization rate in the United States in the 2016/2017 flu season18. Therefore, it is extremely vital to evaluate whether the vaccine matches the strains in circulation.Shanghai is one of the port cities of China to the world, from which H3N2 subtype data might indicate the worldwide trend of the viruses’ evolution to some extent. Here, we analyzed virological surveillance data at the Shanghai Port, described the phylogenetic evolution, inspected the antigen variation characteristics from the molecular level of the currently circulating viruses, and compared them with the vaccine and WHO reference viruses representing various genetic clades. Our findings highlighted the structural implications for the understanding of the phenotypic changes, evolution, and epidemiological monitoring of A(H3N2) viruses.ResultsVirological influenza surveillance during flu season 2016/2017Virological influenza surveillance data in the Shanghai port were collected weekly. From February 2016 to September 2017, a total of 64 swab samples were collected from passengers of different countries, including 41 passed through Asia (25 from Hong Kong and 12 from Southeast Asia, especially), 16 passed through Europe, 7 passed through the America, and 7 passed through Oceania.A(H3N2) virus activity increased from the 44th week of 2016, peaked in the 1st week of 2017 and decreased afterwards. The highest proportion of A(H3N2) was observed in summer (28/64, 43.7%), followed by winter (22/64, 34.3%) which outnumbered by that in spring and fall (11/64, 21.8%).Phylogeny relationships of imported A(H3N2) viruses during the flu season 2016/2017Of the 610 genetically characterized viruses, 546 were provided from GISAID EpiFlu databases. All 64 HA genes sequenced by the Shanghai Port belonged to the H3N2 3C.2a clade. This clade also included the vaccine strain A/HongKong/4801/2014, supporting the vaccine recommendation in the 2016–2018 northern hemisphere influenza season by WHO. Among the 64 viruses, the majority (n = 20, 31.2%) belonged to the subclade 3C.2a.1 represented by A/Singapore/INFIMH-16-0019/2016. The proportions for other subclades were 26.5% (3C.2a.2, n = 17), 25% (3C.2a.3, n = 16) and 6.2% (3C.2a.4, n = 4) (Fig. 1).Figure 1Phylogenetic analysis of the HA segments circulating between 2016/2017.Full size imageIndividual clades of A(H3N2) are typically defined by amino acid substitutions that occur as they diversify from parental strains. Analysis of HA sequences indicated co-circulation of multiple variants in clade 3C.2a. All variants within subclade 3C.2a.1 shared four substitutions N121K, N171K, I406V and G484E. Three additional substitutions were observed in the 3C.2a.1 subcluster: S92R and H311Q in cluster I, G479E in cluster II. Variants 3C.2a.3 shared N121K/E and S144K (I58V and S219R in cluster I and T135K and R150K in cluster II), Variants 3C.2a.2 were characterized by T131K and R142K substitutions and variants 3C.2a.4 were characterized by D53N, R142G, S144R, I182T and Q197H (Fig. 2).Figure 2Schematic diagram demonstrating the shared amino acid changes between clades 3C.2a, 3C.2a.1, 3C.2a.2, 3C.2a.3 and 3C.2a.4 on HA gene.Full size imageThere were more 3C.2a.1 variants identified from samples collected in the 2017 summer (n = 11) than in the 2016/2017 winter (n = 7). This subclade was further divided into two homogenous sub-clusters (cluster I and II; Fig. 1). The strains from cluster I were concentrated in winter, and the cluster II strains were persisted more common in the summer months. Most viruses in the subgroup 3C.2a.3 happened in summer. And we also found that there was no prominent summer or winter trend of viruses clustered in 3C.2a.2.The clade pattern of imported A(H3N2) influenza viruses, 2016/2017To analyze the geographical distribution of A(H3N2) in China, 31 provinces were classified into six regions based on geographic proximity: North (Beijing), East-coastal (Shanghai), East-inland (Anhui), South-coastal (Guangdong), South-inland (Guizhou), Northeast (Jilin), Northwest (Shanxi) and West (Sichuan). According to our phylogenetic analysis, the A(H3N2) number of the above six regions be counted (Fig. 3A). The Proportions for A(H3N2) in these regions were 5%, 43%, 7.2%, 19%, 4%, 7% ,5% and 7%, respectively. Interestingly, higher epidemic waves of A(H3N2) were observed in Eastern and Southern in China coastal areas, and we presumed that convenient transportation and dense population contributed to it19.Figure 3The Proportions of Influenza A(H3N2) in China six regions (A) and H3N2 clade patterns in China eight provinces (B).Full size imageThe genetic diversity results (Fig. 3B) indicated that the diversity increased in the East and South, especially coastal cities, Shanghai and Guangzhou. All clades and subclades of the current A(H3N2) were detected in both cities. 3C.2a.3 (60%) was dominant in Guangzhou, with a small proportion of 3C.2a.4 (10%), 3C.2a (3%), 3C.1 (2%), 3C.3 (5%), 3C.2a.1-I (10%) and 3C.2a.1 (5%). In contrast, 3C.2a.1, 3C.2a.1-I and 3C.2a.2 were the major subcluster in Shanghai, with proportions of 19.21%, 32.36% and 30.34%, respectively. 3C.2a.3-II (4%), 3C.1 (1%), 3C.3 (2%) and 3C.2a (1%) were also detected in this region. The diversity of the clade pattern and the dominant clade in these two coastal cities matched well with the trends of the current global A (H3N2), likely because of the higher density of migration and subtropical monsoon climate20.Prediction of glycosylation sites in A(H3N2) viruses during flu season 2016/2017There were two models of predicted glycosylation sites in the HA proteins of the A(H3N2) clade 3C.2a: 12 potential glycosylation sites (N8ST, N22GT, N38AT, N45SS, N63CT, N126WT, N133GT, N158YT, N165VT, N246ST, N285GS and N483GT) and 11 potential glycosylation sites (N8ST, N22GT, N38AT, N45SS, N63CT, N126WT, N133GT, N158YT, N165VT, N246ST and N285GS). All of virus strains detected at the Shanghai Port in the clade 3C.2a.1 had 11 potential glycosylation sites, and the rest in the other clades had 12 sites. Comparing to the vaccine strains 2016/2017 A/HongKong/4801/2014 (N8ST, N22GT, N38AT, N45SS, N63CT, N126WT, N133GT, N165VT, N246ST, N285GS and N483GT), the clade 3C.2a.1 virus did not have potential glycosylation site 483(N483GT), the viruses in the clade 3C.2a.2, the clade 3C.2a.3 and the clade 3C.2a.4 had the potential glycosylation site 158(N158YT).Estimation of vaccine efficacy for A(H3N2)To assess the effect of the accumulated mutations in the HA1 domain on predicted vaccine efficacy in a given year, the p epitope method was used to evaluate how closely the vaccine strain resembles the imported strain (Table 1). Theoretically, when p epitope in the dominant epitope is higher than 0.19, the vaccine efficacy becomes negative21,22. For the 2016/2017 season, the average p epitope for all A(H3N2) strains was 0.090, which indicated the vaccine efficacy (VE) against those strains was 52.96% (E = 24.89% of 47%, p epitope = 0) of that of a perfect match with the vaccine strain. However, from the 2016/2017 winter to the 2017 autumn, the VE value fluctuated first and then decreased, with the highest value in spring (VE = 58.51%), the lowest value in autumn (VE = 58.51%), and the inflection point in summer (VE = 49.29%). These results suggest that the A(H3N2) strains circulating in 2017 were separated from the vaccine strain and effectively reduced the VE starting in the summer.Table 1 Calculated vaccine efficacy using Pepitope model in dominant epitope A of influenza A(H3N2) circulating in Shanghai port during 2016/2017, winter, spring, summer and autumn.Full size tableDiscussionHuman seasonal A(H3N2) virus epidemics in different zone have highly diverse patterns, especially in the northern hemisphere, where these patterns can exhibit semiannual or annual epidemic cycles. Moreover, HA segments of A(H3N2) viruses have undergone considerable genetic differentiation and evolved in seven genetic groups and multiple clades/subclades since 2009. It is the result of H3N2 viruses circulating via the network of temporally overlapping epidemics and high rates of migration, rather than local persistence. It has been suggested that the global persistence of A(H3N2) virus is the result of a migrating meta-population in which multiple different localities may seed seasonal epidemics in temperate regions in a given year23. Shanghai, the most developed and open city in China, attracts people around the world. So, the Shanghai Port has the characteristics of large passenger flow, high workload and wide international flight distribution. Around 44 million passengers enter and exit the Shanghai Port in 2017, accounting for 7.3 percent of the total number of people entering and exiting China's ports24. In addition, the specimens involved in this study were all from international travelers, who pass through cities with high population density or dense traffic, such as Europe, the United States, and Hong Kong, China. These cities or regions provide convenient channels for the mutation, transmission and spread of influenza25. Although surveillance for influenza at ports has been increasing, there have been few reports of interactions between ports and global epidemic trends. In this study, we performed genetic and evolutionary analyses for viruses obtained during 2016/2017 in order to investigate the evolution of the influenza virus during 2016/2017 at the Shanghai Port and predict the influenza A(H3N2) virus epidemic trends in the future.The genetic and phylogenetic analyses in different countries and regions indicated that there has been a similar pattern existed among all of the evolutionary trends of A(H3N2) viruses discussed above. Previous research was reported by either ethnically homogenous (Taiwan26, Australian27 and Canada28) or the GISAID EpiFlu databases (isolated in Japan, Bangladesh, Australia, Thailand and the USA). In the current study, 31.2% viruses of the 3C.2a clade clustered in a subgroup carrying N121K, N171K and G484E. In Europe and Canada, the majority of A(H3N2) viruses also belonged to the subclade 3C.2a.1 during the same season28,29, whereas amino acid substitutions were used as clade markers just at N171K or N121K. Most of the rest viruses evolved away from the 3C.2a-A/Hong Kong/4801/2014-like clade by acquiring the genetic markers T131K, R142K and N121K/E, S144K which have been identified as being characteristic of clades 3C.2a.2 and 3C.2a.3. These markers were reported in most of other H3N2 influenza viruses isolated in the Denmark, Finland, Israel, Korean, Yokohama, Taiwan and the UK, in 2016/201730,31,32,33,34,35,36. Additionally, clade 3C.2a.3 was further grouped into cluster I (carrying I58V and S219Y) and cluster II (T135K and R150K). The substitutions in cluster I has appeared in report from the UK, and in cluster II emerged in the Taiwan putative clades 3C.2a.3a, which were isolated from severe patients. Members of the subclade 3C.2a.4 were characterized by two amino acid substitutions at R142G and S144R. Three other variants (D53N, I182T and Q197H) were not reported previously, which is likely to increases the odds of implications including alterations of the antigenic epitopes and immune escape. These reports, together with our results, suggested that subclusters within clade 3C.2a and eight subclades have emerged and expanded during this recent influenza epidemic. These changes were continuing to diversify worldwide with complicated and rapid dynamics.During 2016/2017, the following two influenza epidemics occurred in this study: one epidemic between December 2016 and February 2017 and one epidemic between June 2017 and August 2017. These epidemics were consistent with the influenza epidemics observed in Hong Kong, Southeast Asia and Europe in 2017. According to the previous research on influenza seasons, Influenza cases usually appear between autumn and spring, with the influenza activity peaking after October37,38. However, the A(H3N2) virus seemed to frequently result in larger summer epidemics, such as those in 2010 and 201239,40. In our study, the H3N2-dominant summer wave occurred in 2017. The number of 2017 summer season was over than the 2016/2017 winter season. Research has shown that the I668V mutation in the PA subunit led to temperature-sensitive and attenuation in the 2016/2017 winter season virus strains and an adaptation to high temperatures in the 2017 summer viruses41. Adaptation to high temperatures may be the result of the natural evolution of the influenza virus and could explain the second epidemic that occurred during the summer of 2017 in this study.Furthermore, we predicted the VE of the 2016/2017 season viruses by the p epitope model and found that predicted VE value to decline overall in 2016/2017. From 2016, A/Hong Kong/4801/2014 is regarded as the vaccine strain in the southern hemisphere, and was well-matched for the imported A(H3N2). Early and mid-season VE estimates for 2016/2017 showed that the A(H3N2) illness had observed antigenic drift and decreased predicted VE29. But in the 2016/2017, it was successively reported that the imported A(H3N2) strains had observed antigenic drift and decreasing predicted VE. Denmark and Finland’s studies indicated a drop in VE from the early period to the later period of the 2016/201742. Coincidentally, this phenomenon exists in 2017/2018 too. In USA analysis of 2017/2018 of A(H3N2) VE in prevention of hospitalization, VE was low across adult age groups and levels of frailty and chronic comorbidities43. We furthermore found that the main antigenic change is the substitution of amino acid 135, 150 and 131 in mid to late 2017 (Table S1). Amino acid 135 is located in a conserved region of the receptor-binding site in the antigenic epitope A and causes a loss of a glycosylation motif44. Changes in glycosylation motifs may be relevant to antigenicity, viral fitness and/or pathogenicity45. Amino acid 131 is located in the antigenic epitope A and conserved in 45% of all human H1, H2 and H3 viruses46. VE studies from Stockholm and Finland show that the proportion of samples containing T131K (36%) increased may be responsible for viral antigenic change and part of the observed VE drop33. Studies from northern Greece have provided evidence supporting indications that the specific T135K variant may be associated with vaccination failure. The T135K mutation was observed in 82% of the viruses originating from vaccinated patients44. Based on the Canadian report, the higher VE estimates may be due to the relatively infrequent (15%) circulation of the T135K variant in Canada47. T135K-R150K are also as genetic markers for clade 3C.2a.3, and viruses in this clade were isolated from patients with severe infections in Taiwan. This finding can be explained by the lower VE and shorter protection time for these clades compared with other circulating clades48. As a result, decreasing influenza vaccine protection with increasing time, A/Hong Kong/4801/2014 may not be as effective in eliciting immunity against future circulating A(H3N2) in the next influenza season. If the emerging A(H3N2) virus subpopulation continues to diversify from vaccine components, VE may decrease further by the end of the 2016/2017 season in terms of its antigenic properties or a broader cycle of variant strains.In addition, compared to A/Hong Kong/4801/2014, the 3C.2a strains in our surveillance data had at least eleven potential N-glycosylation sites and had similar glycosylation patterns. Clade 3C.2a.1-like strains lost one potential glycosylation sites: 483(N483GT), Clade 3C.2a.2-like, 3C.2a.3-like, and 3C.2a.4-like strains gained one potential glycosylation site: 158(N158YT). Research shows that the mechanisms of glycosylation and deglycosylation in virus fall into three general classes: (i) mask antigenic epitopes and thus block binding to neutralizing antibodies49, (ii) adjust receptor-binding affinity50, or (iii) modulate the virulence of the Influenza viruses in mammals51. It’s could be concluded that the virus would make itself to elude the existed antibodies by changing herd immunity or increasing the viral fitness in an unknown mechanism.In summary, our study indicates that new mutations and derivations of clade 3C.2a emerged continuously and rapidly during 2016/2017, which can reflect the trend of the current global influenza A(H3N2), and also has a paramount impact on the viral adaptation and transmission. So Shanghai might stop the risk of the international spread of influenza for the first time, and curbing the entry of A(H3N2) from overseas at the earliest stage of the influenza pandemic. Strengthening the entry monitoring of ports in coastal areas and improving the ability of ports health quarantine to deal with public health emergencis are required to investigate the antigenic effects and to avoid the next pandemic.MethodsEthics statementsThis study was performed with the residual samples collected for the detection of influenza in the Shanghai Port. All the samples used for research have got the informed consent of passengers. The sample for the informed consent was attached as follows.The study protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board of Bio-X Life Science Research Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (IRB No. M202007). Informed consent was obtained from all subjects, and all methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.Surveillance and data collectionThe Shanghai port located on the south wing of the Yangtze River Delta Region. It is a key transportation hub combing water, land, and air transportation, facilitating the airborne survival and transmission of influenza viruses. During 2016/2017, a total of 64 throat swabs were collected from influenza-like illness cases in the Shanghai port. The basics epidemiological data including patients’ age, stopover sites and sampling dates were collected. The detailed list of viruses is provided in Table 2.Table 2 Influenza A(H3N2) virus strains sequenced in this study.Full size tableRNA purification and HA gene sequencingViral RNA was obtained from 140 μL of the sample by the QIAMP viral RNA extraction kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA was eluted in 100 μl RNase/DNase elution buffer provided in the kit and stored at − 40 °C. Samples were subtyped based the Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic assay (Shanghai Biogerm Influenza H1/H3 typing assay) for detection of influenza virus in an ABI Prism 7500 thermocycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA). The HA genes were subsequently amplified by the samples with a Ct value of less than 30, and were subjected to reverse transcription and amplification using a PrimeScript One-step RT-PCR Kit Ver.2 (TaKaRa, Japan) as previously described52. RT-PCR products with the correct band size were selected by agarose gel electrophoresis and sequenced using ABI PRISM Dye Deoxy Terminator cycle sequencing kit (Life Technology, Foster City, CA, USA). These HA gene sequences were assembled using the SeqMan Pro software (DNASTAR, Madison, WI) and deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) with the accession numbers (OM956220-OM956283). Finally we obtained 64 full-length HA sequences.Sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysisReference sequences of known clades and vaccine strains (the accession numbers in Supplementary Table S2) as recommended by WHO53 included in the evolutionary analysis were retrieved from GISAID EpiFlu databases. All HA gene sequences aligned by MAFFT program (MAFFT-7.220-WIN64 version). Protein translation were performed on the basis of nucleotide sequences using Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis software (MEGA, version 6.0; http://www.megasoftware.net/). Phylogenetic tree was constructed using the maximum-likelihood method with a Hasegawa-Kishino-Yano (HKY) + gamma nucleotide substitution model and 1000 bootstrap replications. The ability to perform clade designations based on signature amino acids as compared to A/HongKong/4801/2014-likeA/H3N2-like clade 3C.2a viruses and A/Singapore/INFIMH-16-0019/2016-likeA/H3N2-like clade 3C.2a.1 viruses was confirmed with the 64 isolates depicted in the final tree, and extended to the other 546 isolates.Prediction of glycosylation sitesThe prediction of potential N-liked glycosylation sites was performed with an online server: NetNGlyc 1.054. This server considers the amino acid alignment N-X-S/T, where X can be any amino acid except Asp or Pro. A threshold value of > 0.5 suggests glycosylation.Prediction of vaccine efficacyThe predicted VE of A(H3N2) was estimated using the Pepitope model, which is a measure of the antigenic distance between vaccine and circulating strains. Antigenic distance was calculated from the fraction of substituted amino acid residues in the dominant HA epitope21. The amino acid residues in the HA epitopes of A(H3N2) were pre-defined in the p epitope calculator to respectively possess 19, 21, 27, 41 and 22 amino acids55. The mathematical formula linking VE and the p epitope is given by VE = −2.47 × p epitope + 0.47 in which VE is 47% when p epitope = 0. Data availability The datasets generated and analysed during the current study are available in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), ACCESSION NUMBER TO DATASETS: OM956220-OM956283. ReferencesHause, B. M. et al. Isolation of a novel Swine influenza virus from Oklahoma in 2011 which is distantly related to human influenza C viruses. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003176 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Neumann, G., Noda, T. & Kawaoka, Y. Emergence and pandemic potential of swine-origin H1N1 influenza virus. Nature 459, 931–939 (2009).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mills, C. E., Robins, J. M. & Lipsitch, M. Transmissibility of 1918 pandemic influenza. Nature 432, 904–906 (2004).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stuart-Harris, C. H. Virus of the 1918 influenza pandemic. Nature 225, 66 (1970).Article Google Scholar Laver, W. G., Air, G. M., Dopheide, T. A. & Ward, C. W. Amino acid sequence changes in the haemagglutinin of A/Hong Kong (H3N2) influenza virus during the period 1968–77. Nature 283, 66 (1980).Article Google Scholar European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Influenza virus characterization, summary Europe, March 2012. http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/1204-TED-CNRL-report.pdf. Accessed 1 August 2017.Chambers, B. S., Parkhouse, K., Ross, T. M., Alby, K. & Hensley, S. E. Identification of hemagglutinin residues responsible for H3N2 antigenic drift during the 2014–2015 influenza season. Cell Rep. 12, 1–6 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Influenza virus characterisation, summary Europe. Stockholm: ECDC; 2015. http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/influenza-virus-characterisation-June-2015.pdf.Stellrecht, K. A. Incidence of matrix genes mutations affecting PCR tests among influenza H3N2 clades circulating during the 2014/15 season. Diagn. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 91, 239–244 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Review of the 2014 influenza season in the southern hemisphere. Wkly. Epidemiol. Rec. 89, 529–541 (2014).European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Influenza virus characterisation, Summary Europe, September 2016 2016 14 Feb 2017. http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/influenza-virus-characterisation-september-2016.pdfYang, J.-R. et al. Liu M-T An epidemic surge of infuenza A(H3N2) virus at the end of the 2016–2017 season in Taiwan with an increased viral genetic heterogeneity. J. Clin. Virol. 15, 99–100 (2018). Google Scholar Glatman-Freedman, A. et al. Genetic divergence of influenza A (H3N2) amino acid substitutions mark the beginning of the 2016–2017 winter season in Israel. J. Clin. Virol. 93, 71–75 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Trebbien, R. et al. Changes in genetically drifted H3N2 influenza A viruses and vaccine effectiveness in adults 65 years and older during the 2016/17 season in Denmark. J. Clin. Virol. 94, 1–7 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Epidemiology and risk assessment of seasonal influenza during the summer of 2017 in China. Chin. J. Viral Dis. 4, 8–15 2017.National Institute for Health and Welfare. Finland. Influenssa leviää nyt – rokotuksen ehtii ottaa vielä. Helsinki: THL; 2017. Finnish. https://www.thl.fi/en/web/infektiotaudit/-/influenssa-leviaa-nyt-rokotuksen-ehtii-ottaa-viela.Säsongsstatistik för influensa 2016/2017. Stockholm: Stockholm Smittskydd; 2017.http://www.vardgivarguiden.se/globalassets/behandlingsstod/smittskydd/statistik/influensa/influensasasongen-2016-2017.pdf.Grohskopf, L. A. et al. Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with vaccines. MMWR Recommend. Rep. 65, 1–54 (2016).Article Google Scholar Li, T. Z. et al. Clinical analysis of 979 cases of influenza A patients. Chin. J. Med. 51, 50–51 (2016). Google Scholar Grais, R. F., Ellis, J. H. & Glass, G. E. Assessing the impact of airline travel on geographic spread of pandemic influenza. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 18, 1065–1072 (2003).Article PubMed Google Scholar Gupta, V., Earl, D. J. & Deem, M. W. Quantifying influenza vaccine efficacy and antigenic distance. Vaccine. 24, 3881–3888 (2006). Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tewawong, N. et al. Assessing antigenic drift of seasonal influenza A(H3N2) and A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses. PLoS ONE 10, e0139958 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bahl, J. et al. Temporally structured metapopulation dynamics and persistence of influenza A H3N2 virus in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 19359–19364 (2011).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shanghai Municipai Office For Port Services. 5.25 million people enjoy 10-second self-service for customs clearance in Shanghai Port in 2017.2018. http://kab.sh.gov.cn/gzzt/002007/002007002/20180205/7813c833-abed-4dce-9dde-d024110da26a.htmlJiang, Z. Y. et al. Analysis of temporal and spatial distribution characteristics of 2009 influenza A (H1N1) pandemic. J. GeoInf. Sci. 14, 794–798 (2012). Google Scholar Tsou, T. P., Su, C. P., Huang, W. T., Yang, J. R. & Liu, M. T. Influenza A(H3N2) virus variants and patient characteristics during a summer influenza epidemic in Taiwan, 2017. Euro Surveill. 22, 17–00767 (2017).Article PubMed Central Google Scholar Sullivan, S. G. et al. Low interim influenza vaccine effectiveness, Australia, 1 May to 24 September 2017. Euro Surveill. 22, 66 (2017).Article Google Scholar Skowronski, D. M. et al. Early season co-circulation of influenza A(H3N2) and B(Yamagata): Interim estimates of 2017/18 vaccine effectiveness, Canada, January 2018. Euro Surveill. 23, 66 (2018).Article Google Scholar Melidou A, Broberg E. European region influenza surveillance network. Predominance of influenza A(H3N2) virus genetic subclade 3C.2a1 during an early 2016/17 influenza season in Europe-Contribution of surveillance data from World Health Organization (WHO) European Region to the WHO vaccine composition consultation for northern hemisphere 2017/18. Vaccine. 35, 4828–35 (2017)Trebbien, R. et al. Changes in genetically drifted H3N2 influenza A viruses and vaccine effectiveness in adults 65 years and older during the 2016/17 season in Denmark. J Clin. Virol. 94, 1–7 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Glatman-Freedman, A. et al. Genetic divergence of Influenza A(H3N2) amino acid substitutions mark the beginning of the 2016–2017 winter season in Israel. J. Clin. Virol. 93, 71–75 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Harvala, H. et al. ICONIC Consortium. Emergence of a novel subclade of influenza A(H3N2) virus in London, December 2016 to January 2017. Euro Surveill. 22, 66 (2017).Article Google Scholar Hergens, M. P. et al. Mid-season real-time estimates of seasonal influenza vaccine effectiveness in persons 65 years and older in register-based surveillance, Stockholm County, Sweden, and Finland, January 2017. Eurosurveillance 22, 66 (2017).Article Google Scholar Kawakami Chiharu,Yamayoshi Seiya,Akimoto Miki et al. Genetic and antigenic characterisation of influenza A(H3N2) viruses isolated in Yokohama during the 2016/17 and 2017/18 influenza seasons.Euro Surveill.24, (2019).Il, K. J. et al. Distinct molecular evolution of influenza H3N2 strains in the 2016/17 season and its implications for vaccine effectiveness. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 131, 29–34 (2019).Article Google Scholar Yang, J.-R. et al. An epidemic surge of influenza A (H3N2) virus at the end of the 2016–2017 season in Taiwan with an increased viral genetic heterogeneity. J. Clin. Virol. 99, 15–2 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar Saha, S., Chadha, M. & Shu, Y. Divergent seasonal patterns of influenza types A and B across latitude gradient in Tropical Asia. Influenza other respir. Virus 10, 176–184 (2016). Google Scholar Yu, H. et al. Characterization of regional influenza seasonality patterns in China and implications for vaccination strategies: Spatio-temporal modeling of surveillance data. PLoS Med. 10, e1001552 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Influenza Express Weekly, Influenza Season, 2009–2017 (2017) http://www.cdc.gov.tw/english/submenu.aspx?treeid=00ed75d6c887bb27&nowtreeid=8f1e239d0fd8877aYang, J. R. et al. A virus-like particle vaccination strategy expands its tolerance to H3N2 antigenic drift by enhancing neutralizing antibodies against hemagglutinin stalk. Antiviral Res. 140, 62–75 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wei, D. et al. Genome-wide characterization of the seasonal H3N2 virus in Shanghai reveals natural temperature-sensitive strains conferred by the I668V mutation in the PA subunit. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 171, 66 (2018). Google Scholar Maria-Pia, H. et al. Mid-season real-time estimates of seasonal influenza vaccine effectiveness in persons 65 years and older in register-based surveillance, Stockholm county, Sweden, and Finland, January 2017. Eurosurveillance 6, 66 (2017). Google Scholar Martin, E. T. et al. Low influenza vaccine effectiveness against a(h3n2)-associated hospitalizations in 2016–2017 and 2017–2018 of the hospitalized adult influenza vaccine effectiveness network (Haiven). J. Infect. Dis. 223, 2062–2071 (2020).Article PubMed Central Google Scholar Melidou, A. et al. Influenza A(H3N2) genetic variants in vaccinated patients in northern Greece. J. Clin Virol. 94, 29–32 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar An, Y., Mccullers, J. A., Alymova, I., Parsons, L. M. & Cipollo, J. F. Glycosylation analysis of engineered h3n2 influenza a virus hemagglutinins with sequentially added historically relevant glycosylation sites. J. Proteome Res. 14, 3957–3969 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ekiert, D. C. et al. Cross-neutralization of influenza A viruses mediated by a single antibody loop. Nature 489, 66 (2012).Article Google Scholar Skowronski, D. M., Chambers, C., Sabaiduc, S., Dickinson, J. A. & Krajden, M. Interim estimates of 2016/17 vaccine effectiveness against influenza a(h3n2), Canada, January 2017. Eurosurveillance 22, 66 (2017).Article Google Scholar Tsou, T. P., Su, C. P., Huang, W. T., Yang, J. R. & Liu, M. T. Influenza A(H3N2) virus variants and patient characteristics during a summer influenza epidemic in Taiwan, 2017. Euro Surveill. 22, 17–00767 (2017).Article PubMed Central Google Scholar Long, J. et al. Tobin GJ Evolution of H3N2 influenza virus in a guinea pig model. PLoS ONE 6, e20130 (2011).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Owen, R. E. et al. Borrow P Alterations in receptor binding properties of recent human influenza H3N2 viruses are associated with reduced natural killer cell lysis of infected cells. J. Virol. 81, 11170–11178 (2007).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Spackman, E. et al. Suarez DL Development of a real-time reverse transcriptase PCR assay for type A influenza virus and the avian H5 and H7 hemagglutinin subtypes. J. Clin. Microbiol. 40, 3256–3260 (2002).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hoffmann, E., Stech, J., Guan, Y., Webster, R. G. & Perez, D. R. Universal primer set for the full-length amplification of all influenza A viruses. Arch. Virol. 146, 2275–2289 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar WHO. WHO Recommendations on the Composition of Influenza Virus Vaccines 2018. http://www.who.int/influenza/vaccines/virusecommendations/en/Prediction of N-glycosylation sites in human proteins. [Internet]. 2004. http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetNGlyc/.Bonomo, M. E. & Deem, M. W. Predicting influenza H3N2 vaccine efficacy from evolution of the dominant epitope. Clin. Infect. Dis. 67, 1129–1131 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis study was supported by the National Science and Technology Major Project (2018ZX10101003-002-005), Shanghai Science and Technology Committee Project (18495810900) and Collaborative Research Grant KLMVI-OP-201903 of CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology & Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Zilong Zhang, Shenwei Li and Xiaolin ZhuAuthors and AffiliationsShanghai International Travel Healthcare Center, Shanghai, 200335, ChinaZilong Zhang, Shenwei Li, Hong Zhang & Zhengan TianShanghai Customs District P.R.China, Shanghai, 200135, ChinaZilong Zhang, Shenwei Li, Jian Hou, Hong Zhang & Zhengan TianBio-X Life Science Research Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, ChinaBaihui ZhaoShanghai BioGerm Medical Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Shanghai, 201401, ChinaXiaolin Zhu & Baihui ZhaoAuthorsZilong ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShenwei LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXiaolin ZhuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJian HouView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHong ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBaihui ZhaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZhengan TianView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsZ.T conceived and designed the study; Z.Z. performed the experiments; S.L. analyzed data and discussed the results; X.Z. wrote the manuscript; J.H. and H.Z. collected the samples, B.Z. revised the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Zhengan Tian.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Tables.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleZhang, Z., Li, S., Zhu, X. et al. Increased genetic variation of A(H3N2) virus from influenza surveillance at the end of the 2016/2017 season for Shanghai port, China. Sci Rep 12, 17089 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-19228-yDownload citationReceived: 06 February 2022Accepted: 25 August 2022Published: 12 October 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-19228-yShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingJoint statement: Working together towards COVID-19 and seasonal influenza vaccinations for this winter Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific Countries Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Israel Italy Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Monaco Montenegro Netherlands (Kingdom of the) North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Republic of Moldova Romania Russian Federation San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Tajikistan Türkiye Turkmenistan Ukraine United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Uzbekistan When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English Français Русский Deutsch Europe Home Health topics All topics »ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Resources Fact sheets Feature stories Multimedia Publications Questions & answers Tools and toolkits Popular » Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic Ukraine emergency Nutrition Environment and health Mpox (monkeypox) Our work Our work Publications Tools and toolkits Campaigns Activities Calls for experts Initiatives Policies European Programme of Work One health Sustainable Development Goals Flagship initiatives The Pan-European Mental Health Coalition Empowerment through Digital Health The European Immunization Agenda 2030 Healthier behaviours: incorporating behavioural and cultural insights Core priorities » Moving towards UHC Protecting against health emergencies Promoting health and well-being Newsroom Newsroom News stories Media releases Statements Feature stories Photo stories Podcasts Fact sheets Questions and answers Media Contacts Headlines CampaignsEventsMultimediaNewslettersSpotlights Data Data at WHO/Europe » Overview European Health Information Gateway European health report Core health indicators WHO Immunization Data portal Noncommunicable diseases (NCD) dashboard Highlights News Events Publications About us Teams Data and digital health Policy & Governance f. Health through the Life Course Groups and networks EVIPNet Health Evidence Network (HEN) The European Health Report 2021 » Emergencies Focus on Conflict in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory Armenian refugee health response Climate crisis: extreme weather Türkiye and Syria earthquakes Mpox Ukraine emergency Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic Our work in emergencies About health emergencies Health emergencies newsletter Health emergencies in the Region Health emergencies list Ukraine emergency About us About WHO Europe » Regional Director Executive Council Organigram Technical centres Teams Faces of WHO Governance » Regional Committee for Europe Standing Committee Partnerships » Partnerships Groups and networks WHO collaborating centres 74th session of the WHO Regional Committee for Europe Home/ News/ item/ Joint statement: Working together towards COVID-19 and seasonal influenza vaccinations for this winter Joint statement: Working together towards COVID-19 and seasonal influenza vaccinations for this winter Joint statement by European Commissioner for Health and Food Safety Ms Stella Kyriakides, WHO Regional Director for Europe Dr Hans Henri P. Kluge and Director of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control Dr Andrea Ammon 12 October 2022 Statement Reading time: Although we are not where we were 1 year ago, it is clear that the COVID-19 pandemic is still not over. We are unfortunately seeing indicators rising again in Europe, suggesting that another wave of infections has begun. With the arrival of autumn and winter, the resurgence of influenza can also be expected. In light of this, we reconfirm the need to protect people’s health, especially the most vulnerable, using all the available tools, including vaccination. Preparedness measures need to continue in the WHO European Region – we should not let our guard down. The potential co-circulation of COVID-19 and seasonal influenza will put vulnerable people at increased risk of severe illness and death, with the likelihood of increased pressure on both hospitals and health-care workers, already exhausted from almost 3 years on the front lines of the pandemic. We need to avoid the burden of this co-circulation on our health-care systems. Together with public health measures, vaccination remains one of our most effective tools against both viruses. We urge countries in the European Region to prioritize protecting the most vulnerable groups by co-administering influenza and COVID-19 vaccines whenever feasible. Millions of people across the Region have still not been vaccinated against COVID-19. European countries should make every effort to reach the unvaccinated, making sure that they get their COVID-19 vaccine doses while also rolling out booster doses to priority groups, in line with national recommendations. Many of those most at risk of severe COVID-19 are also at high risk of experiencing a serious influenza infection. It is important that the following priority groups get vaccinated against both influenza and COVID-19: health-care workers, people over 60 years old, pregnant women, and those with comorbidities and/or underlying conditions.The Southern Hemisphere, where winter recently ended, experienced an early and highly active influenza season. While we do not know exactly what to expect in the European Region, we may see a similar scenario in the Northern Hemisphere during autumn and leading into winter. This means we need to be ready and act now. Our message is simple: vaccination saves lives. It decreases the chances of being infected and reduces the risk of severe consequences from COVID-19 and seasonal influenza. There is no time to lose. We encourage everyone eligible, especially the most vulnerable, to come forward as soon as possible for both COVID-19 and influenza vaccination. BackgroundTo help countries prepare their response to a likely increase of COVID-19 and influenza in the coming months, the European Commission published a communication on preparing for autumn and winter 2022–2023. WHO/Europe also issued strategy recommendations to protect the most vulnerable. Together, the documents call on countries across the European Region, which covers 53 countries across Europe and central Asia, to relaunch mitigation efforts and be ready to respond to an increased burden on their health-care systems. Related Photos: At-risk groups getting vaccinated against influenza and COVID-19 EU Vaccination policyCommission vaccine strategyEU response to COVID-19: preparing for autumn and winter 2023European Vaccination Information PortalECDC website News Rapidly escalating COVID-19 cases amid reduced virus surveillance forecasts a challenging autumn and winter in the WHO European Region 19 July 2022 Events Keeping COVID-19 and influenza at bay this autumn/winter. Prepare, prevent, protect 12 October 2022 – 31 March 2023 Quick links Newsroom Emergencies About us » European Programme of Work Publications Campaigns Help » Contact us Careers Cyber Security Privacy Subscribe to our newsletters Privacy Legal Notice © 2024 WHOFlu off to an early start as CDC warns about potentially severe seasonIE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Skip to ContentNBC News Logo2024 ElectionMeet the PressU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthShoppingTiplineScienceCulture & TrendsShare & Save —My NewsManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearchSearchProfile My NewsSign Out Sign InCreate your free profileSectionsU.S. NewsDecision 2024PoliticsWorldLocalBusinessSportsInvestigationsCulture & TrendsHealthScienceTech & MediaWeatherVideo FeaturesPhotosNBC SelectNBC Asian AmericaNBC BLKNBC LatinoNBC OUTtvTodayNightly NewsMSNBCMeet the PressDatelineFeaturedNBC News NowNightly FilmsStay TunedSpecial FeaturesNewslettersPodcastsListen NowMore From NBCCNBCNBC.COMNBCU AcademyPeacockNEXT STEPS FOR VETSNBC News Site MapHelpFollow NBC News news AlertsThere are no new alerts at this timeSearchSearchFacebookTwitterEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardPinterestLinkedinLatest Stories2024 ElectionMeet the PressU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthShoppingTiplineScienceCulture & TrendsHealth newsFlu off to an early start as CDC warns about potentially severe seasonInfluenza and other respiratory viruses are rising in parts of the Southeast and central parts of the U.S.Get more newsLiveonOct. 13, 2022, 9:59 PM UTC / Updated Oct. 14, 2022, 5:41 PM UTCBy Erika EdwardsReports of flu and other respiratory illnesses are higher than what would normally be seen in the U.S. at this time of year, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention."We've noted that flu activity is starting to increase across much of the country," especially in the Southeast and south-central U.S., the CDC's director, Dr. Rochelle Walensky, told NBC News. "Not everybody got flu vaccinated last year, and many people did not get the flu. So that makes us ripe to have potentially a severe flu season." Typical flu seasons ramp up in December and usually peak in February.On Friday, the CDC reported that the flu and similar viral illnesses are notably high in Georgia, New York City, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Washington, DC.Most of those are influenza A, specifically a strain called H3N2. While any version of the flu can be dangerous in vulnerable populations, this strain has been known to cause more severe illness. As of October 8, "influenza-like illness," or ILI, activity — which includes the flu — was highest in the Southeast and south-central U.S., as well as in New York City and Washington, DC. CDCDoctors are not required to report each positive flu test to public health officials, so the CDC and others monitor probable flu activity by looking at "influenza-like illnesses." Those are defined as having a fever of at least 100 degrees and a cough and/or sore throat without any other known cause.Dr. James Cutrell, an infectious disease expert at UT Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, said that “we are definitely seeing a pretty steep rise” in documented flu and influenza-like illnesses, including in both children and adults.On Wednesday, a San Diego school district said there were "hundreds" of absences at a local high school, likely due to an outbreak of the flu, NBC affiliate KNSD reported. Most kids said they were experiencing cough, sore throat, congestion and fever.Tests for Covid so far have been negative, the station reported. Several students, however, have tested positive for the flu."Unfortunately, we anticipated this would be a rough influenza season," said Dr. Cameron Kaiser, deputy public health officer for the County of San Diego Health and Human Services Agency, per KNSD reporting. "Alongside Covid-19, other respiratory viruses are also making a rapid comeback."This includes respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV."Right now, we're in a huge spike of RSV," said Dr. Frank Esper, an infectious diseases expert at the Cleveland Clinic. RSV often affects babies but can also be problematic in adults with underlying lung problems, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.Esper said that cases of RSV are usually seen in December and January, but for the past two years, the typical RSV season has come earlier, during summer and early autumn. Rhinoviruses and enteroviruses are also circulating earlier than usual. This is because measures to curb Covid spread didn't allow other viruses to spread as they historically have."Flu is on the rise, but it's also all of these other viruses that got knocked off kilter," Esper said. "This might be the new normal. We don't know."There is no vaccine for RSV; however, there is one for influenza. So far this year, Walensky said, "about 12 million flu vaccines have been given in pharmacies and in physician's offices."That's slightly less than the number of doses given this time last year, she said, acknowledging that vaccine fatigue could be contributed to the lower rate so far. It takes about two weeks after a flu vaccine injection to provide full protection. The CDC recommends everyone ages 6 months and older get an annual flu shot."We do want to get people protected before they have influenza in their own communities," Walensky said.Follow NBC HEALTH on Twitter & Facebook.Erika EdwardsErika Edwards is a health and medical news writer and reporter for NBC News and "TODAY."Miguel Almaguer contributed.AboutContactHelpCareersAd ChoicesPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023)NBC News SitemapClosed CaptioningAdvertiseSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday LogoHow to fight the flu while living with diabetes | Parkview Health Find a Doctor Locations Locations (with Emergency Department) Parkview Bryan Parkview DeKalb Parkview Huntington Parkview Kosciusko Parkview LaGrange Parkview Montpelier Parkview Noble Parkview Randallia Parkview Regional Medical Center Parkview Southwest Parkview Wabash Parkview Whitley Specialty Locations Parkview Behavioral Health Institute Parkview Packnett Family Cancer Institute Parkview Heart Institute Parkview Ortho Hospital Parkview Women's & Children's Hospital View All Locations Medical Services Featured Medical Services Cancer Care Emergency Medicine Heart Health Orthopedics Neurosciences Pediatrics Primary Care Women's Health Behavioral Health Lab & Diagnostic Imaging Family Birthing Centers Physical Therapy & Rehab Virtual Health Walk-In Clinics View All Medical Services Patients & Visitors Patients & Visitors Billing & Insurance Overview Billing Process Financial Assistance Frequently Asked Questions Glossary of Terms Request an Estimate Medical Records Information Access Medical Records Chart Correction Request Patient Identity Change Request Surgery Resources Patient Safety Preparing for Surgery Pre-Admission Testing Health Resources Health Resources Center for Healthy Living Classes & Events Community Community Greenhouse & Learning Kitchen Local Resources Parkview Blog Contact Us Careers Medical Education Donate Pay a Bill MyChart Login Search Home Parkview Blog How to fight the flu while living with diabetes Return to Parkview Dashboard Blog Share Print Share this story Facebook Twitter Linkedin Pinterest Featured in this post Kaitlyn Creager, lifestyle change specialist Diabetes Care Services Newsletter Sign Up Sign up for our weekly e-newsletter to have wellness tips, inspirational stories and smart recipes from our team of experts sent straight to your inbox! Sign Up Share Your Story If you have a Parkview story you would like to share with us, we would love to hear from you. Share your Parkview story How to fight the flu while living with diabetes Last Modified: October 09, 2022 Diseases & Disorders, Family Medicine This post was written by Kate Creager, MCHES, lifestyle change specialist, Diabetes Care Services, Parkview Health. Individuals with gestational, Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes are at an increased risk of developing complications with influenza. Some problems that could arise include ear infections, sinus infections, bronchitis and pneumonia, not to mention additional challenges with blood glucose management. In recent years, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported that 30% of those hospitalized with influenza had diabetes. Luckily, there are several things you can do to protect yourself. How to distinguish between influenza and the stomach flu Many often confuse influenza with the stomach flu. While some may experience nausea and vomiting when sick with the flu, most people experience the following symptoms with an influenza infection: Fever Cough Sore throat Body aches Fatigue Chills How to avoid illness Managing your diabetes can become incredibly complicated during bouts of illness, which is why you must take the proper precautions to prevent infection and the spread of germs by: Avoiding sick individuals Practicing proper hand washing hygiene Covering your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing Staying hydrated and eating a well-balanced diet with fruits and vegetables Having at least a 2-week supply of regular medications on hand Putting a sick day plan in place for glucose and medication management Stocking up on easy-to-eat foods like soup, pudding, unsweetened applesauce, sports drinks, regular soda, juice and hypoglycemic management items like glucotabs Speaking with your primary care provider about the influenza vaccine How to navigate influenza when you have diabetes If you are living with diabetes and you contract influenza, be sure to follow these steps: Call your primary care provider Check your blood glucose levels every 4 hours and keep a log of your results Drink more water than you usually would to stay adequately hydrated Try to eat as normal as possible Continue to take your medications, even if you are unable to eat If you’re having trouble with any of these steps, please speak with your primary care provider, diabetes educator or endocrinologist. They can help adjust your medications or advise you on next steps so you can get back to feeling your best. When to seek medical attention If you begin to experience any of the following symptoms, contact your primary care provider or go to the emergency department immediately for additional medical assistance and support: Difficulty breathing Moderate to high ketones in your urine Inability to keep liquids down for more than 4 hours Inability to keep food down for over 24 hours Vomiting or severe diarrhea for longer than 6 hours You are experiencing diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) or hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) that is not increasing with the rule of 15 Also, if you cannot think clearly, please have someone else drive you to the hospital or call 911. For additional questions or concerns about managing diabetes, please call Parkview Diabetes Care Services at 260-373-4280 to speak with a diabetes educator, registered dietitian or lifestyle change specialist. Related Blog Posts View all posts November 10, 2024 What to know about brand-name and generic drugs Diseases & Disorders, Family Medicine November 09, 2024 The evolution of radiology Diseases & Disorders, Family Medicine November 07, 2024 How does hyperbaric oxygen therapy accelerate wound healing? Diseases & Disorders, Family Medicine Parkview About Newsroom Contact Us Employee Resources Employer Solutions Legal Research & Innovation Patients Access Medical Records Billing and Insurance Patient Forms Plan your visit Non-discrimination Policy Price Transparency Join Us Careers Current Job Listings Medical Professionals Volunteering Providers Community Connect Credentialing Reference Documents Hospital Affiliation Verification Provider Recruitment pinterest facebook instagram twitter youtube linkedin © 2024 Parkview Health, Fort Wayne, Indiana. | All Rights Reserved. | Privacy Policy, Surprise Billing Notice, and Legal Disclosures | Patient Interpreter RightsDoes The Southern Hemisphere Provide A Leading Indicator Of Flu For The North?Subscribe To NewslettersDoes The Southern Hemisphere Provide A Leading Indicator Of Flu For The North?ByJohn DrakeFollowingSave ArticleCommentBETAThis is a BETA experience. opt-out hereInnovationScienceDoes The Southern Hemisphere Provide A Leading Indicator Of Flu For The North?ByJohn DrakeContributor John Drake is a professor at the University of Georgia. FollowingOct 14, 2022, 02:55pm EDTSave ArticleCommentThis article is more than 2 years old.Artistic rendition of an influenza virus.getty Now that the world has largely returned to business as usual and relaxed Covid-19 precautions, the flu, which has been mostly silent for the last two years, is coming back. Although influenza can be transmitted any time of year, it typically peaks during the winter. This means that peak flu season alternates between the Southern Hemisphere (where June, July and August are the winter months) and the Northern Hemisphere (where December, January, and February are the winter months). This hemispheric alternation has recently led some experts to suggest that the severity of the flu season in the Southern Hemisphere might be a leading indicator for what should be expected in the Northern Hemisphere. Melinda Wenner Moyer, a highly regarded science journalist, was quoted in the New York Times: “We can look at what’s happened in the Southern Hemisphere — their flu season is usually finishing up when ours is getting started. And it has been a pretty bad flu season down there, which does not bode well for us.” Read More: What You Need To Know About The Outbreak Of Marburg Hemorrhagic Fever In Equatorial Guinea And Cameroon Katherine Wu, a PhD microbiologist, takes this line of argument even further in a recent article in The Atlantic. The article, titled “The Strongest Signal That Americans Should Worry About Flu This Winter”, reports that in Australia, the number of flu cases made this season “one of the country’s worst in several years.” Which, she argues, “does not bode terribly well for those of us up north” since “the same viruses that seed outbreaks in the south tend to be the ones that sprout epidemics here as the seasons do their annual flip.” I’m not so sure, and here’s why. The argument contains two claims, both of which are debatable. The first claim is that the Southern Hemisphere actually experienced a “pretty bad flu season” in 2022, i.e. “the country’s worst in several years.” The second claim is that there is indeed a connection between the hemispheres — what we might call the leading indicator hypothesis. In fact, the evidence for both claims is pretty thin. Data from the World Health Organization’s Global Influenza Program are freely available to anyone. So, we can take a look. It is true that the number of laboratory-diagnosed cases in Australia in 2022 was higher than ever previously recorded.Laboratory-tested positive influenza cases in Australia, 2011-2022.World Health Organization Global Influenza Program However, more flu is only one possible explanation for this fact. An alternative explanation is that there was simply more testing. That is, the more you look for something, the more of it you find. Influenza is a nationally notifiable disease in Australia. That means that any time a test is performed, the result must be recorded in a registry. As a form of passive surveillance, these data suffer from variations in test frequency, which makes them difficult to interpret. Given the presence of Covid-19, it stands to reason that Australian health care providers may have tested for flu more aggressively in 2022 than ever before. Is there evidence for this more-testing-hypothesis? Yes. The red line in the figure above is the percent of tests that were positive, and with the exception of the two years of Covid-19 (when there was almost no flu at all), this “positivity rate” was actually considerably lower in 2022 than what is normal for Australia. The combination of a low positivity rate and a large number of positive tests means that the total number of tests must have been higher than usual, perhaps a lot higher. A potentially more accurate measure of flu intensity comes from Australia’s surveillance of influenza-like illness (a.k.a ILI). The figure below shows the number of ILI cases (in green) found in two “sentinel” networks of general practitioners known as the Australian Sentinel Practices Research Network (ASPREN) and the Victorian Sentinel Practice Influenza Network (VicSPIN). Cases of influenza-like illness from sentinel surveillance in Australia, 2011-2022.World Health Organization Global Influenza Program While the 2022 season was definitely more severe than 2021 and 2020, that’s not surprising. The reason is the Covid-19 pandemic. But, otherwise, Australia’s 2022 influenza season is hardly remarkable and in fact appears to have been mild in comparison to years like 2012, 2014, 2015, and 2017. I don’t see the evidence for the claim that Australia’s 2022 flu season was “pretty bad”. We can use the same data to look at the second claim, i.e. that the number of cases in the Southern Hemisphere is a leading indicator of cases in the Northern Hemisphere. The US also reports ILI data. MORE FROMFORBES ADVISORBest Travel Insurance CompaniesByAmy DaniseEditorBest Covid-19 Travel Insurance PlansByAmy DaniseEditorCases of influenza-like illness from sentinel surveillance in the US, 2011-2022.World Health Organization Global Influenza Program If Australia would serve as a leading indicator of ILI in the Northern Hemisphere, then we should expect the number of cases at the peak of each season to be highly positively correlated. Plotting one against the other should fall generally along a diagonal line sloping upward. The following plot shows that this is not the case. (In fact, the correlation is even slightly negative!)There is no correlation between peak influenza-like illness in Australia and the US.J.M. Drake So, there’s no evidence here that Australia is a leading indicator for flu in the US. This is not to say that the US will experience a mild flu season. I think we just don’t know yet. Follow me on LinkedIn. Check out my website.Editorial StandardsForbes AccoladesLOADING VIDEO PLAYER...FORBES’ FEATURED Video© 2024 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.AdChoicesPrivacy StatementDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationLimit the Use of My Sensitive Personal InformationPrivacy PreferencesDigital Terms of SaleTerms of ServiceContact UsSend Us FeedbackReport a Security IssueJobs At ForbesReprints & PermissionsForbes Press RoomAdvertiseIs the nasal spray flu vaccine as good as the flu shot? — Those Nerdy Girls Search for: SUBSCRIBEDONATE Who We Are About Us Team Board Posts Videos In the News Shop Donate Who We Are About Us Team Board of Directors Posts Videos In the News New! Shop Donate October 13, 2022 Is the nasal spray flu vaccine as good as the flu shot? Vaccines Sarah Whitley Coles, MD A: The flu shot and flu nasal spray vaccines are about equally effective at preventing influenza illness and complications. There are many flu vaccine options, but the best thing is for all people age 6 months and up to get vaccinated. The best flu vaccine is the one you can (and are willing) to get! Influenza bites. Flu symptoms hit you all of a sudden and include fever, cough, sore throat, runny nose, body aches, and fatigue. The flu can cause mild to really bad illness. In the US between 2010 and 2020, the CDC estimated that flu caused 9-41 million illnesses; 140,000-710,000 hospitalizations; and 12,000-52,000 deaths every year. One of the best ways to prevent all of this is the flu vaccine. The flu vaccine comes in both shots and a nasal spray. There are different types of flu shots (standard dose, high dose, egg free cell based, adjuvanted, and recombinant) and we can get into the details of different flu shots in another post. There is also a nasal spray flu vaccine, called FluMist. It is sprayed in the nose: 1/2 of the dose in each nostril. This is a live attenuated influenza vaccine (you may see if referred to as LAIV). The nasal spray is made up of weakened live influenza virus (the shots do not contain live virus). The weakened viruses in the nasal spray are cold-adapted, meaning they are designed to only replicate at cooler temperatures found in the nose and not in the lungs where it is warmer. Some people prefer it because it isn’t a shot and doesn’t require any needles. How effective the flu vaccines are vary from year to year and depend on the circulating strain of flu virus, vaccine type, and by age and risk factors. After the 2009 influenza pandemic, there was a series of studies that showed that the nasal spray was as effective as the shot against some types of influenza virus (influenza B viruses and influenza A(H3N2) viruses) but not as effective against the H1N1 influenza virus. This caused the CDC to recommend against using the nasal spray during the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 flu seasons. Since then, the manufacturers have switched to new influenza H1N1 vaccine virus ingredients when making the nasal spray. The nasal spray isn’t used as commonly in the US, so there isn’t really good data on the new ingredient efficacy from US trials. However, data from other countries show that this new and improved LAIV has similar efficacy to the standard dose inactivated flu vaccine shots in kids. The nasal spray is available for healthy, non-pregnant people ages 2 to 49 years old. Not everyone can get the nasal spray though. People with certain medical conditions (like weakened immune systems, cochlear implants, asthma, or don’t have a spleen) should not get the nasal spray. It should not be given to people who had the flu and recently took antiviral flu medications (48 hours for oseltamivir and zanamivir, 5 days for peramivir, and 17 days for baloxavir). Antiviral flu medicines might reduce the effectiveness of the nasal flu vaccine. Check out the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices detailed report for the full list of conditions and situations that should not get the nasal flu vaccine. To sum it up: the nasal spray and flu shot are about equally effective. The CDC, American Academy of Pediatrics, and American Academy of Family Physicians recommend any licensed influenza vaccine appropriate for a person’s age and health status. For people under the age of 65, there is no preference for one product or another. It all comes down to what you can get and are willing to take. If you cannot stand needles or getting your kids to get a flu shot is a massive fight every year, the nasal spray may be a good choice. Stay safe. Stay well. Those Nerdy Girls Links: The CDC Estimate of Flu Burden CDC Seasonal Flu Vaccine Primer CDC explains Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine American Academy of Pediatrics Influenza Vaccine Recommendations American Academy of Family Physicians Influenza Vaccine Recommendations Link to Original FB Post Post navigation ← 💥 Updated boosters approved for kids down to age 5 in the US¿Qué tan bien funcionan las pruebas rápidas de antígenos para detectar COVID-19? ¿Es suficiente una sola prueba de antígeno? → Nerdy Merch Get the perfect gift for the Nerds in your life! Your purchases help financially support the science communication mission of Those Nerdy Girls. Shop Get the Newsletter! Those Nerdy Girls want to help you stay on the frontline of science and health information. Sign up hree to receive our twice weekly newsletter. Stay safe. Stay well. Subscribe on Substack Post Categories: Aging (18) Biology/Immunity (106) Clinical Symptoms (81) COVID Variants (76) Data and Metrics (155) Data Literacy (70) Families/Kids (336) General Health (145) Health Policy (10) Hot Health Topics (14) Infection and Spread (296) Infectious Diseases (166) Long COVID (35) Masks (94) Mental Health (206) Nerdy Notes (1) Posts en Español (527) Reopening (50) Reproductive Health (111) School (49) Social and Racial Justice (63) Socializing (98) Staying Safe (417) Testing and Contact Tracing (140) Travel (36) Treatments (100) Uncategorized (115) Uncertainty and Misinformation (192) Vaccines (641) Videos (94) Women in STEM (44) Browse posts by date: November 2024 M T W T F S S 123 45678910 11121314151617 18192021222324 252627282930 « Oct Donate RSS Feed Content and Comment Policy: The content found on Those Nerdy Girls’ digital platforms, including graphics, images, text, and all other materials is provided for reference and educational purposes only. The content is not meant to be exhaustive or to be applicable to any specific individual’s medical condition. Nothing on Those Nerdy Girls’ page should be taken as medical advice of any kind. Neither our posts nor the comments of our readers are a substitute for the advice of your healthcare provider. We do not vet all comments and cannot vouch for their content. We do not represent any institution, rather a collaborative network of scientists operating independently, with the goal of informing the general public with factual information related to the pandemic. Stay safe. Stay well. The content of Those Nerdy Girls Posts by Those Nerdy Girls is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 Stay Safe. Stay Well. Privacy Policy Donate Media RequestsCold Vs Flu Vs COVID - How Symptoms Differ, According to DoctorsSearchSubscribeMy BookmarksShopPrevention PremiumHealthCondition CentersWeight LossFitnessSexFood &amp; NutritionBeautyLifeNewsletterFollowAbout Prevention.comMedical Review BoardPrevention AwardsWinPrivacy NoticeTerms Of UseSkip to ContentHealthBeautyFitnessNutritionLifeShoppingSubscribesign inSearchHealthHealth ConditionsIs It the Flu, a Cold, or COVID-19? How to Tell Your Symptoms Apart, According to DoctorsIs It the Flu, a Cold, or COVID-19? How to Tell Your Symptoms Apart, According to DoctorsLearning the key differences will help you feel better faster.By Jessica Migala and Brittany RisherUpdated: Oct 11, 2022Medically reviewed by Raj Dasgupta, M.D., FACP, FCCP, FAASMSave ArticleWe may earn commission from links on this page, but we only recommend products we back. Why Trust Us?Jump to:Cold vs. flu vs. COVID-19 symptomsHow do I know if I have the flu or a cold?What to do if you develop symptomsShould you wear a mask if you’re sick?Cold vs. flu vs. COVID-19 treatmentCOVID-19 treatmentWhen to see a doctor about your cold, flu, or COVID-19 symptoms When you’re sick, all you care about is feeling less miserable—but once the temps drop during fall and winter, it can be tricky to figure out if you’re dealing with the flu, COVID-19, or a common cold.So many of the symptoms overlap, but there are a few key differences to keep in mind. (More on that later.) Of course, in order to stop your sniffles, you need to know what’s causing them in the first place. Here, doctors explain how to figure out the answer to your pressing cold vs. flu vs. COVID-19 questions so you can seek the treatment that will actually make you feel better.Cold vs. flu vs. COVID-19 symptomsEmily Schiff-SlaterPart of the reason it can be tricky to know whether you have the flu or a cold or even COVID-19 is simply because there are only a few minor differences between their symptoms. Cold symptomsIn general, cold symptoms show up primarily above your neck: Runny nose Coughing and sneezing Sore throat Slightly swollen glands Minor aches and painsFlu symptomsThis includes symptoms above and below your neck. You have all the signs of a cold, plus the following: Fever over 100°F Chest coughs Weakness and fatigue Headaches Chills Vomiting Diarrhea Full-body achesAnd, again, because COVID-19 should be considered, too, here are the biggest signs of that illness, per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).Fever or chills Cough Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing Fatigue Muscle or body aches Headache New loss of taste or smell Sore throat Congestion or runny nose Nausea or vomiting DiarrheaHow do I know if I have the flu or a cold?The biggest differences between the symptoms of influenza and a cold are their severity and how quickly they develop. With the flu, “one day you are feeling OK, and the next, all your symptoms arise,” says Michael P. Angarone, D.O., professor of infectious diseases at Northwestern Memorial Hospital.Compared to the flu, a cold is milder and symptoms gradually set in. “The flu is like a cold on steroids,” says Joseph Ladapo, M.D., Ph.D., professor of medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles. “I’ve heard patients say, ‘This is worst I’ve ever felt in my life.’” He also adds this: “If you don’t feel horrible, you probably don’t have flu.”But, like many illnesses, it’s tricky to say that this will happen in every situation. “You can be walking around with the flu—there are all different levels of severity,” says Timothy Murphy, M.D., senior associate dean for clinical and translational research at the University at Buffalo Jacobs School of Medicine. Infectious disease expert Amesh A. Adalja, M.D., a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, agrees. “It’s impossible to really differentiate a cold from influenza because the symptoms overlap,” he says. “Influenza tends to be more severe and associated with fever and muscle aches, but it could be mild enough to be confused with the common cold.”It also matters if you’ve been vaccinated against the flu. While the flu vaccine won’t necessarily keep you from getting sick—vaccine effectiveness has ranged from 19% to 60% over the past decade, per CDC data—it “can give partial protection and can turn what would have been a more severe illness into a minor illness,” Dr. Murphy says.David Cennimo, M.D., assistant professor of medicine-pediatrics infectious disease at Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, agrees. “People who get vaccinated against influenza and have a ‘breakthrough’ infection tend to be much less sick with more mid symptoms that can be confused with a cold,” he says. “This confusion means that we really do need testing to be sure.”Basically, it can be confusing, even when you know all the classic signs of each illness. Still not sure what’s happening with your health? Asking yourself these question can help:How severe does this feel?Cold: You feel mildly icky, and things get worse slowly. The first signs might include slight aches, a scratchy throat, a headache, and/or a low-grade fever.Flu: The flu usually hits you like a speeding train. You may first feel feverish at work, and by the time you get home you can barely muster enough energy to climb your porch steps. Every inch of you aches.Can I get out of bed?Cold: Yes, you can walk around. Though you might not want to commute to work or schlep the kids around, you can manage.Flu: In many cases, you’re flat on your back. Extreme fatigue may incapacitate you for at least a few days.What to do if you develop symptomsIn the past, doctors would usually recommend that you see your doctor if you have cold- or flu-like symptoms that make you feel lousy. But with COVID-19 now in the mix, that advice has changed a little. “Do not to go right to your healthcare provider,” says William Schaffner, M.D., an infectious disease specialist and professor at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.“Any respiratory symptoms…should prompt COVID testing,” Dr. Adalja says. If that’s negative and you think there’s even a chance you could have the flu, Dr. Adalja recommends calling your doctor about getting tested for the flu. “There should be a low threshold for influenza testing because there are influenza antivirals that people can benefit from—if given early enough—especially the high risk,” he says. Should you wear a mask if you’re sick?The rules of navigating an illness have changed thanks to the pandemic, and it’s now generally considered courteous to wear a mask if you’re sick. This isn’t just an etiquette thing—it can actually help keep your illness from spreading, Dr. Adalja says. “If people are sick with any respiratory virus and can’t isolate or social distance, they should wear a mask in order to decrease transmission to others, especially indoors,” Dr. Adalja says. Cold vs. flu vs. COVID-19 treatmentIf you aren’t sure what you have and how to treat it, talk to your healthcare provider over the phone or make an appointment to see them in person, Dr. Angarone recommends. Cold treatment Take it easy and rest up. Keep a water bottle nearby to ensure you’re staying hydrated. Popping a pain reliever like ibuprofen or acetaminophen may temporarily perk you up.A cold can follow you around for as long as 10 days, but you don’t have to quarantine yourself the entire time. Once you start feeling better, you’re no longer very contagious, so you can head back to work as long as you’re up for it.Flu treatmentPlan to hunker down for three to seven days, and ask your MD about Tamiflu. “If taken within 48 hours, it will help you get better sooner and reduce the chance that you’ll pass the virus to others,” says William Schaffner, M.D., an infectious disease specialist and professor at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. You can go back to normal life 24 hours after your fever recedes on its own, but you’ll probably be moving slowly for a bit.COVID-19 treatmentCheck in with your doctor to see if you’re considered high risk for severe complications of COVID-19 and a candidate for an anti-viral medication like Paxlovid, Dr. Schaffner says. (This checklist can help.)If your illness is mild, you can treat your symptoms at home with over-the-counter medications like acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil), the CDC says. You should plan to stay in isolation for at least five days from the time your symptoms started, per CDC recommendations. You can end your isolation after five days if you were symptom-free or if you’ve been fever-free for 24 hours without the use of fever-relieving medication, the CDC says. Regardless, you should also wear a mask when you’re indoors and around others until day 11.When to see a doctor about your cold, flu, or COVID-19 symptomsCall your doctor if you experience:Symptoms that overlap with signs of COVID-19 Trouble breathing or eating (call ASAP) You have a fever higher than 100.4°F You’re experiencing severe vomiting or diarrhea Coughing lasts longer than 10 days, is driving you crazy, or is making it hard to sleep Upper-respiratory symptoms last more than a week or 10 daysHow to lower your risk of getting sick in the first placeViral illnesses happen. But doing your best to take the right precautions can lower the risk you’ll have a miserable week or two this winter, Murphy says. That’s why he recommends getting your annual flu shot, along with your COVID-19 vaccine (and your booster shot, if the timing is right.)Otherwise, Dr. Schaffner suggests following COVID-19 prevention strategies most people have memorized over the past two years. “Wash your hands, wear your mask in public, and avoid people who are coughing and sneezing,” Dr. Schaffner says. “Those mitigation strategies really reduced influenza in this country last year and even cases of the common cold—they will continue to help this year.”Related StoryGetting the Flu Shot and Omicron Booster..Medically reviewed byRaj Dasgupta, M.D., FACP, FCCP, FAASMRaj Dasgupta, M.D. is an ABIM quadruple board-certified physician specializing in internal medicine, pulmonology, critical care, and sleep medicine. He practices at the University of Southern California, where he is an associate professor of clinical medicine, assistant program director of the Internal Medicine Residency Program, and the associate program director of the Sleep Medicine Fellowship. Dr. Dasgupta is an active clinical researcher and has been teaching around the world for more than 20 years.Advertisement - Continue Reading BelowCold & Flu Season7 Ways to Get Over the Flu Faster16 Best Foods to Eat When You Feel SickSigns Your Cold Might Be Getting BetterHow to Check for a Fever Without a ThermomerAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowCan Mucinex Help You Get Pregnant?FDA Approves New Home Flu VaccineCDC Warns About Flu Deaths in KidsSo, When Is the Best Time for a Flu Shot?Natural Ways to Ease NauseaHow to Get Rid of a Lingering CoughGenius Home Remedies to Soothe a Sore Throat ASAPHow to Break a Fever ASAPAdvertisement - Continue Reading BelowAbout Prevention.comNewsletterPress RoomGive A GiftCommunity GuidelinesSubscribeMedia KitAdvertise OnlineOther Hearst SubscriptionsCustomer ServiceA Part of Hearst Digital MediaWe may earn commission from links on this page, but we only recommend products we back.©2024 Hearst Magazines, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Privacy NoticeCA Notice at CollectionYour CA Privacy Rights/Shine the LightDAA Industry Opt OutTerms of UseSite MapCookies ChoicesOmaha’s Zoo and Aquarium Closes Simmons Aviary, Lied Jungle and Desert Dome Due to Avian Influenza Death Today's Hours About Donate Tickets Visit Hours and Admission Become a Member Holiday Gift Ideas Visitor Experiences Attractions Lozier Giant Screen Theater® Stingray Beach Alaskan Adventure Sue's Carousel Train Tram Skyfari Giraffe Encounter Know Before You Go Group Rates Zoo Map Exhibits Hubbard Orangutan Forest Asian Highlands Owen Sea Lion Shores Scott African Grasslands Bay Family Children's Adventure Trails Dick and Mary Holland Meadowlark Theater Desert Dome Mahoney Kingdoms of the Night Lied Jungle Suzanne and Walter Scott Aquarium Berniece Grewcock Butterfly and Insect Pavilion Hubbard Expedition Madagascar Hubbard Gorilla Valley Other Exhibits Education On-Site Programs and Camps Classes Family Programs Day Camps Scout and Youth Organizations Field Trips & Studies Virtual Field Trips Bring the Zoo to You Sleeping Bag Safaris Virtual Field Trips Conservation Hero City Nature Challenge Educator's Corner Professional Learning Free Educational Resources Schools at the Zoo Little Lions Preschool Zoo Academy Omaha STEM Ecosystem Science Olympiad Events Special Events Private Events Make an Event Inquiry Conservation Support the Mission Amazon Wish List Become a Member Become a Zoo Parent Omaha Zoo Foundation Bring on the Browse Going Green at the Zoo Zoowide Initiatives Track Our Progress What Can You Do Conservation Genetics Nutritional Sciences Reproductive Sciences Citizen Science SECORE Connect About Us Where to Find Us In the News Download Our App Work Here Volunteer Join a Club Community Support Photo and Video Policy Utility Nav Memberships Gift Cards Tickets Donate Footer Links About Us Where to Find Us In the News Work Here Volunteer Join a Club Visit Hours and Admission Become a Member Holiday Gift Ideas Visitor Experiences Attractions Lozier Giant Screen Theater® Stingray Beach Alaskan Adventure Sue's Carousel Train Tram Skyfari Giraffe Encounter Know Before You Go Group Rates Zoo Map Exhibits Hubbard Orangutan Forest Asian Highlands Owen Sea Lion Shores Scott African Grasslands Bay Family Children's Adventure Trails Dick and Mary Holland Meadowlark Theater Desert Dome Mahoney Kingdoms of the Night Lied Jungle Suzanne and Walter Scott Aquarium Berniece Grewcock Butterfly and Insect Pavilion Hubbard Expedition Madagascar Hubbard Gorilla Valley Other Exhibits Education On-Site Programs and Camps Classes Family Programs Day Camps Scout and Youth Organizations Field Trips & Studies Virtual Field Trips Bring the Zoo to You Sleeping Bag Safaris Virtual Field Trips Conservation Hero City Nature Challenge Educator's Corner Professional Learning Free Educational Resources Schools at the Zoo Little Lions Preschool Zoo Academy Omaha STEM Ecosystem Science Olympiad Events Special Events Private Events Make an Event Inquiry Conservation Support the Mission Amazon Wish List Become a Member Become a Zoo Parent Omaha Zoo Foundation Bring on the Browse Going Green at the Zoo Zoowide Initiatives Track Our Progress What Can You Do Conservation Genetics Nutritional Sciences Reproductive Sciences Citizen Science SECORE Connect About Us Where to Find Us In the News Download Our App Work Here Volunteer Join a Club Community Support Photo and Video Policy Utility Nav Memberships Gift Cards Tickets Donate Footer Links About Us Where to Find Us In the News Work Here Volunteer Join a Club Memberships Gift Cards Tickets Donate In the News 1 About Us Where to Find Us In the News Download Our App Work Here Volunteer Join a Club Community Support Photo and Video Policy Friday, Oct 14, 2022 Omaha’s Zoo and Aquarium Closes Simmons Aviary, Lied Jungle and Desert Dome Due to Avian Influenza Death The Simmons Aviary, Lied Jungle, and the Desert Dome at Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo and Aquarium will be closed to guests beginning Saturday, October 15, 2022, due to the death of a Pink backed pelican from Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI). These exhibits will be closed for at least 10 days. The rest of the Zoo, including Mahoney Kingdoms of the Night, will remain open. The pelican died yesterday, October 13, and was tested as part of the Zoo’s continued surveillance for Avian influenza. A second pelican became ill today and was euthanized. The Zoo’s pelicans currently live outside, and while they can come into contact with wild waterfowl, they have no contact with other Zoo birds. Wild waterfowl carry the HPAI virus, often without becoming sick, and detections of HPAI have increased across the country over the past few weeks due to the fall migration pattern. No other Zoo birds have shown any symptoms or required testing. “It is very important that Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo and Aquarium immediately tighten our protocols to protect our birds and guard against any potential spread of Avian influenza,” said Dr. Sarah Woodhouse, Director of Animal Health for Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo and Aquarium. “As discussed back in the spring, the Zoo has a prevention and response plan in place. We were operating at a level 2 response given some recent cases in the western part of Nebraska, but now that we know there are infected wild birds in the area, we have gone immediately to level 5. This is important both to prevent infection of other Zoo birds, and to prevent the virus from being dispersed off Zoo grounds.” “The major way that HPAI is transmitted is from the feces of infected wild birds. This can happen as wild birds fly overhead, or by someone stepping in infected wild bird feces and carrying the infection with them on their shoes,” said Dr. Woodhouse. “In addition to closing the Zoo’s bird areas, precautions have been put in place for staff including foot baths, limited access, and protective clothing.” “We wanted to get the information about the exhibit closures to the public as quickly as possible’ continued Dr. Woodhouse. “We are working with the USDA and the Nebraska State Veterinarian, and we will keep the public updated if anything changes.” The Simmons Aviary was previously closed between March 3 and June 23 as a precaution against HPAI. During that time, none of the birds living at Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo and Aquarium or at the Wildlife Safari Park were infected by Avian influenza. Posted by Diane Kohout at 19:59 Omaha's Henry Doorly Zoo and Aquarium Featured Lied Jungle Desert Dome Omaha's Zoo avian flu pelican Simmons Aviary « Join Us for Fall Fun at Omaha’s Zoo and Aquarium and Wildlife Safari Park Lee G. Simmons Wildlife Safari Park Extends 2022 Season » Go on an Adventure! Plan your visit Connect With Us 3701 S 10th St, Omaha, NE 68107 402.733.8401 Memphis Web Design by Speak | SitemapWhat Is the Incubation Period for the Flu This Year? Skip to content Menu Health A-Z COVID-19 Arthritis Type 2 Diabetes Heart Disease Digestive Health Multiple Sclerosis View All Prevention & Treatment Diet & Nutrition First Aid Surgery Health Care Health Insurance Public Health Patient Rights Disability Caregivers & Loved Ones End of Life Concerns View All News COVID-19 Health News Tools & Resources Thyroid Test Analyzer Doctor Discussion Guides Hemoglobin A1c Test Analyzer Lipid Test Analyzer Complete Blood Count (CBC) Analyzer What to Buy About Us Editorial Process Meet Our Medical Expert Board Search Search GO Health A-Z COVID-19 Arthritis Type 2 Diabetes Heart Disease Digestive Health Multiple Sclerosis View All Prevention & Treatment Diet & Nutrition First Aid Surgery View All Health Care Health Insurance Public Health Patient Rights Disability Caregivers & Loved Ones End of Life Concerns View All News COVID-19 Health News View All More in Health News The Aging Well Issue The Preventive Health Issue Tools & Resources Thyroid Test Analyzer Doctor Discussion Guides Hemoglobin A1c Test Analyzer Lipid Test Analyzer Complete Blood Count (CBC) Analyzer What to Buy About Us Editorial Process Privacy Policy Contact Us Verywell Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Ⓒ 2024 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved NEWS Health News What Is the Incubation Period for the Flu This Year? By Amy Isler, RN, MSN, CSN Published on October 11, 2022 Fact checked by Nick Blackmer Print PeopleImages/Getty Images Close Key Takeaways The incubation period for the flu is the time between when a person is infected and when they start feeling sick.The incubation time for the flu ranges from 1 to 4 days, with an average of 2 days.Experts are predicting a more severe flu season in 2022, but getting a flu vaccine and taking antivirals soon after you get sick can help. In the United States, flu season typically starts in October and peaks in February. Health experts are predicting that the 2022–2023 flu season could be more severe than the last couple of years when COVID-19 precautions helped lessen the burden of influenza. That said, a bad flu season is not completely different from a typical one. While it’s true different flu strains go around from year to year (and some are “worse” than others), there are some aspects of the flu that tend to be consistent in any flu season. One example? The incubation period for the flu. Dean Winslow, MD, a professor of medicine in the Divisions of Hospital Medicine and Infectious Diseases at Stanford University, told Verywell that the incubation period is the time from when a person is exposed to the flu virus to when they start to have symptoms. According to Winslow, the flu’s incubation period is 1 to 4 days with an average of 2 days, and it shouldn’t be different year to year. Winslow also explained that the incubation period for the flu and COVID do not seem to vary much depending on the strain. What can vary is how sick people get—and we’ve seen that with both the flu and COVID. Study: Newer COVID-19 Variants Have Shorter Incubation Periods Why Does Flu Incubation Time Matter? It’s hard for experts to predict which flu strains will be the most prominent during a given season, but understanding the incubation period helps them guide the public in preventing severe illness, decreasing symptoms, and slowing the spread of the virus. Infectious disease experts use incubation periods in the surveillance, control, and setting of quarantine guidelines for contagious illnesses like the flu, COVID, and even the common cold. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the flu incubation period is typically consistent across all strains, but the periods of contagiousness can vary depending on a person’s age and risk factors: People with the flu are most contagious 3 to 4 days after becoming ill Some healthy adults are able to spread the flu one day before the start showing symptoms and for up to seven days after the illness begins Children and people with weakened immune systems might be able to infect others for longer than the typical contagious period Brace Yourself. Flu Season Is Coming Fast Can You Interrupt the Flu Incubation Period? In some cases, there are steps you can take in the time between when you were exposed to the flu virus but haven’t started to feel sick yet that could make a difference in how the illness plays out. For example, Winslow said that certain at-risk people—such as older adults in nursing homes where a flu outbreak is happening—“can be given prophylactic antiviral medications such as Tamiflu (oseltamivir) or Xofluza (baloxavir).” According to Winslow, these medications are “most effective if given earlier in the incubation period,” but they can still help with “reducing the severity of infection and duration of symptoms even if given in the first 48 hours after symptoms have started.” The CDC lists four antivirals available to treat suspected or confirmed cases of uncomplicated flu symptoms and also decrease illness severity: Oral oseltamivir (Tamiflu)Inhaled zanamivir (Relenza)Intravenous peramivir (Rapivab)Oral baloxavir (Xofluza) Getting your annual flu vaccination can also interrupt the incubation period and reduce your chances of needing medical care if you do get sick by 40% to 60%. How Flu Shots Work and Why They Sometimes Don't Why Is This Year’s Flu Season Going to Be Worse? The last two years were comparatively mild flu seasons, but that’s not what we’re expecting this year. The U.S. tries to make predictions about the upcoming flu season by reviewing the severity of the flu season in the Southern Hemisphere, which runs from June to September. According to early reports, this year was Australia’s worst flu season in five years. There are several factors that can make a flu season more severe, including: Lower immunity due to COVID isolation Removal of COVID precautions (e.g., masking, social distancing). People returning to their pre-pandemic activities Increased flu cases mixed with rising COVID cases (a “twindemic”) Low vaccine uptake (a recent survey found that only 49% of Americans plan to get a flu shot this year) In a recent press release, William Schaffner, MD, the medical director for the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases (NFID), said that based on what experts have seen in the Southern Hemisphere, the flu has the potential to hit us hard this year. “[But] on a positive note, we have more preventive behaviors in our toolbox than we did before the COVID-19 pandemic,” Schaffner added. “We are more accustomed to wearing masks and staying home when sick.” Experts Say You Really Need a Flu Shot This Year How to Stay Healthy This Flu Season In any flu season, but especially ahead of a bad one, getting a flu shot is one of the first and most important steps that you can take to protect yourself and the people around you. In partnership with the NFID, the CDC recently rolled out its 2022-2023 Flu Vaccination Campaign in which it stressed the importance of getting a flu vaccine to help slow the spread and severity of the illness. The campaign also announced three specific flu vaccines that are preferentially recommended for people aged 65 and older. These vaccines have been shown to be more effective for high-risk populations: Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent vaccine Flublok Quadrivalent recombinant flu vaccine Fluad Quadrivalent adjuvanted flu vaccine If You're Over 65, a High-Dose Flu Shot May Offer Best Protection In addition to getting vaccinated, the CDC also recommends taking other practical steps to prevent the flu such as: Avoiding close contact with sick people Staying home when you are sick Covering your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze Washing your hands properly and often Avoiding touching your eyes, nose, and mouth Cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces in your home or workspace What This Means For You This year’s flu season is predicted to be more severe than the last few years, but the incubation period for the flu is the same. Most people will start having flu symptoms 1 to 4 days after they are exposed to the virus. The best way to protect yourself is to get a flu vaccine by the end of October. 7 Sources Verywell Health uses only high-quality sources, including peer-reviewed studies, to support the facts within our articles. Read our editorial process to learn more about how we fact-check and keep our content accurate, reliable, and trustworthy. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Flu season. Gussow AB, Auslander N, Wolf YI, Koonin EV. Prediction of the incubation period for COVID-19 and future virus disease outbreaks. BMC Biol. 2020;18(1):186. doi:10.1186/s12915-020-00919-9 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Key facts about influenza (flu). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Influenza antiviral medications: summary for clinicians. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vaccine effectiveness: how well do flu vaccines work? National Foundation for Infectious Diseases. 2022 National survey: attitudes about influenza and pneumococcal disease, and the impacts of COVID-19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2022-2023 Flu vaccination campaign kickoff. By Amy Isler, RN, MSN, CSN Isler is a registered nurse with over six years of patient experience. She is a credentialed school nurse in California. See Our Editorial Process Meet Our Medical Expert Board Share Feedback Was this page helpful? Thanks for your feedback! What is your feedback? Other Helpful Report an Error Submit Related Articles Training Your Smell May Improve Memory and Cognitive Function, Research Shows How Rucking Can Turn Your Walks into a Full-Body Workout Study Finds Raynaud’s Symptoms Can Flare Up in Hot Weather Too This Supplement Pairing May Help Reduce Stress and Anxiety What Is Pink Cocaine? The New Designer Drug Linked to Liam Payne's Death This Simple Tip Can Help You Adjust to the Daylight Saving Time Change How to Use the Heart Rate Zone Method to Maximize Your Workouts Taylor Rousseau Grigg's Death Highlights the Importance of Understanding Addison's Disease Abortion Rights Measures Pass in 7 of 10 States GLP-1 Drug Shortage Is Over. Why Might These Drugs Soon Be Costlier and Harder to Access? Why Listeria Seems to Be Everywhere Now, According to Food Safety Experts These 6 Common Infections May Increase Dementia Risk, Study Shows Pulse Oximeters Are Less Accurate on Darker Skin—And There's No Good Alternative These Plant Compounds May Slow Aging and Improve Immunity, Research Shows Walking Pneumonia Cases Are Spiking: How to Spot the Symptoms New Guidelines May Help Lower Your Stroke Risk: Key Updates You Need to Know Daily Health Tips to Your Inbox Email Address Sign Up You're in! Thank you, {{form.email}}, for signing up. There was an error. Please try again. Health A-Z Prevention & Treatment Health Care News Meet Our Medical Expert Board About Us Editorial Process Diversity Pledge Privacy Policy In the News Advertise Terms of Service Careers Contact Follow Us Verywell Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Ⓒ 2024 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved Verywell Health is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.A universal flu vaccine might not look very universal | Drug Discovery NewsSubscribe today!Research AreasResearch AreasNeuroscienceCancer ResearchImmunologyInfectious Disease & VaccinesHematologyOphthalmologyRare & Genetic DiseasesDermatologyInternal MedicineAll Research AreasNewsMagazineMultimediaMultimediaWebinarseBooksPodcastsPostersVideosAdvertorialsMilestones - ArticlesExplainers - ArticlesIndustry PerspectivesAll MultimediaResearch AreasResearch AreasNeuroscienceCancer ResearchImmunologyInfectious Disease & VaccinesHematologyOphthalmologyRare & Genetic DiseasesDermatologyInternal MedicineAll Research AreasNewsMagazineMultimediaMultimediaWebinarseBooksPodcastsPostersVideosAdvertorialsMilestones - ArticlesExplainers - ArticlesIndustry PerspectivesAll MultimediaSubscribe!Subscribe Today!Home / ImmunologyA universal flu vaccine might not look very universalNew research on vaccines that cover multiple influenza viruses arrives frequently, but biological, evolutionary, and communications challenges remain.A Navy officer receives an intranasal flu vaccine mist.Credit: public domainA universal flu vaccine might not look very universalNew research on vaccines that cover multiple influenza viruses arrives frequently, but biological, evolutionary, and communications challenges remain.| 6 min readDan Samorodnitsky, PhDDan Samorodnitsky, PhDDan earned a PhD in biochemistry from SUNY Buffalo and completed postdoctoral fellowships at the USDA and Carnegie Mellon University. He is a freelance writer whose work has appeared in Massive Science, The Daily Beast, VICE, and GROW. Dan is most interested in writing about how molecules collaborate to create body-sized phenomena.View Full Profile.Learn about our Editorial Policies.Download PDFRegister for free to listen to this articleListen with Speechify0:006:00Breakthroughs don’t happen overnight. Years of research, millions of dollars, and uncountable work hours go into even seemingly overnight successes. For example, the COVID-19 mRNA vaccines went from sequence to injected into arms in a lightning-fast year, but they stood on the shoulders of decades of work. Influenza, on the other hand, has managed to dodge the vaccine strategies that researchers have used to target other viruses, despite having lingered in human lungs for thousands of years. Every year, flu vaccines need to be updated since the virus mutates at such a rapid clip that each successive year’s vaccine is rendered mostly ineffective by the following season. Using data from infection patterns in various parts of the world, virologists and epidemiologists make educated estimates of the type of influenza virus to vaccinate against. This is difficult guesswork for the biologists, a logistical challenge for vaccine manufacturers who must produce billions of doses every year, and a game of whack-a-mole for healthcare workers who struggle to get 40% of the US to take the vaccine, blunting its effectiveness even further.A universal flu vaccine that could be used for years without requiring updates would solve many of these problems. In June, a group of researchers led by Jeffrey Taubenberger of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) announced in Science Translational Medicine a successful test of a vaccine in mice and ferrets that protected against a wide variety of influenza subtypes (1).Flu viruses are broadly sorted into two categories based on the type of hemagglutinin protein (HA or H) and the type of neuraminidase protein (NA or N) they carry. HA proteins dot the outside of the virus on the head of a stalk, like a sunflower, and help the virus attach to target cells. NA destroys the receptor that the virus uses on the way into a cell, which helps newly created virus particles burst out to infect new cells (2). Since these proteins are the most visible to the immune system, they are under the most evolutionary pressure to mutate and evade detection. HA and NA are also encoded on different parts of the virus’s segmented genome, allowing each of the 18 different HAs and 11 different NAs to mix and match. On top of that, influenza’s RNA polymerase is famously inaccurate and constantly introduces mutations into new viruses. These factors all contribute to the flu’s constantly shifting identity: H1N1, the 1918 pandemic flu, H5N8, an avian flu that rarely infects humans, and H5N1, another avian flu that frequently infects humans. are a few of the variants commonly in the news. For the NIAID vaccine, Taubenberger’s team used specifically chosen subtypes with the hope of generating immune responses against viruses with different H- and N-types. The team created a cocktail of inactivated viruses containing the viral subtypes H1N9, H3N8, H5N1, and H7N3, all inactivated using beta-propiolactone, a common preparation for creating inactivated viral vaccines. They then tested the ability of this cocktail to protect mice and ferrets against a variety of genetically dissimilar viral subtypes and monitored other markers of health such as weight loss, lung damage, and detectable viral RNA.H5N8, an avian influenza variant, killed 10% of the test animals that received the vaccine intramuscularly and 30% that received it intranasally. Other than that, all animals survived all other viral challenges for the 14-day duration of the trial, including an H2N7 strain that shared only about 45% of the HA sequence with any strains in the vaccine, and an H3N2 strain that only shared 43% of the vaccine’s NA sequences. Vaccinated test subjects were also far more likely to maintain weight after being infected. During the course of their illness, most animals dropped at most 10% of their initial weight, and most returned to a healthy weight by the end of the test round, although animals infected with an H10N7 strain or an H6N1 strain lost between 15-20% of their weight. Even those animals had a 100% survival rate. Vaccinated animals had 90-100% less detectable viral RNA in their blood than animals that were inoculated with buffer without a vaccine. Unvaccinated animals sustained damage to their lungs when infected. For example, H1N1, the 1918 pandemic flu strain, produced visible swaths of necrotized bronchioles and pulmonary edema. In comparison, immunized animals showed “minimal histopathological changes, including mild, focal bronchiolitis, an absence of alveolitis, and no viral antigen in alveolar epithelial cells,” according to the authors.The influenza surface proteins targeted by vaccines can be seen on the outside of viral particles, like in this colorized transmission electron micrograph of swine flu, H1N1.Credit: NIAIDBuoyed by these results, researchers conducting a Phase I clinical trial have begun using a vaccine similar to the one tested by Taubenberger’s group in mice and ferrets. The trial is expected to be complete in March 2023. But what happens if the results are positive? Will a universal human flu vaccine become available?“A universal flu vaccine could be anything, right?” said Richard Webby, a virologist at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Tennessee and the director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Studies on the Ecology of Influenza in Animals who wasn’t involved with the study. “When the term was first floated, it was really meaning something you got once and it protected you from everything. That was always sort of the Holy Grail.“But flu is a very, very different virus than those where vaccines are one and done in terms of how it changes, in terms of the protective efficacy, in terms of how fast it replicates. So, I think that's still a very, very tall ask. And I haven't seen anything that would suggest we’re close to having a vaccine like that.”Current vaccines are potent, offering strong antibody-based protection when they match the correct H- and N-subtypes of that season’s viruses. Since those targets frequently change, other universal vaccine approaches have tried targeting more stable regions of the virus, a common one being the stalk region that holds the HA protein. Unfortunately, the stalk is simply harder for the immune system to spot so the vaccines just don’t work as well. “Most of the universal approaches that target something else in the virus come with a little bit of drop of potency,” said Webby.With these challenges, some researchers are reconsidering what it means for a vaccine to be universal. Given the frequently shifting nature of influenza viruses, asking just one vaccine, even one that can protect against multiple strains, to cover every possible patient at every point during life might be asking too much.“There're lots of different strains of influenza,” said Nicholas Heaton, a virologist at the Duke University School of Medicine who was not involved with the study. “There're people who have different exposure histories. There are types of vaccines that brand new babies need, versus young adults, versus the elderly. Those are probably all different populations that all need different vaccines based on their exposure histories, based on the status of their immune responses, based on the strains that are circulating at that time.”Since influenza is so variable and many different viruses cause flu-like diseases, another illness could make an apt comparison. “Maybe the best analogy I can give you is the ‘cure for cancer,’” said Heaton. The phrase “cure for cancer” has been thrown about since Richard Nixon was president, with seemingly each successive administration promising a “cure” or a “moonshot.”“The idea was we could cure cancer. And the reality is that there're different types of cancers with different types of mutations and different people. And it's probably not a one-size-fits-all-solution. And I think those types of ideas are going to apply to influenza vaccines.”Calling a vaccine universal or simply better or stronger matters. Vaccine uptake hovers around 40% of the population in the US, when 80% should be getting it (3). So even creating a 100% protective influenza vaccine would still not really achieve universality. A better goal, according to Heaton, may be to stop aiming for moonshots and simply aim for better.“We would hate to set ourselves up for a situation where we make a flu vaccine that’s 10 times better than what we have now. It's still not universal, and then that's seen as a failure,” he said. ReferencesPark, J. et al. An inactivated multivalent influenza A virus vaccine is broadly protective in mice and ferrets. Science Translational Medicine 14, (2022). Gamblin, S. J. & Skehel, J. J. Influenza hemagglutinin and neuraminidase membrane glycoproteins. Journal of Biological Chemistry 285, 28403–28409 (2010). Vardavas, R., Breban, R. & Blower, S. A universal long-term flu vaccine may not prevent severe epidemics. BMC Research Notes 3, (2010). Download PDFAbout the AuthorDan Samorodnitsky, PhDDan earned a PhD in biochemistry from SUNY Buffalo and completed postdoctoral fellowships at the USDA and Carnegie Mellon University. He is a freelance writer whose work has appeared in Massive Science, The Daily Beast, VICE, and GROW. Dan is most interested in writing about how molecules collaborate to create body-sized phenomena.Related TopicsInfectious Disease & Vaccines,Immunology,flu vaccine effectiveness,News,seasonal flu,spanish flu,swine flu,virologyPublished InVolume 18 - Issue 10 | October 2022October 2022October 2022Loading Next Article...Loading Next Article...Subscribe to our eNewslettersStay connected with all of the latest from Drug Discovery News.SubscribeSponsoredCell therapy's next frontiersAs cell therapy evolves rapidly, what advancements are on the horizon? EbooksReversing rejection: gene therapy in modern transplantationEmerging gene editing approaches pave the way for safer, more successful transplants.PostersIdentifying druggable therapeutic targetsEffective target identification is central to drug discovery, but finding the right drug target is not as simple as it may seem in theory. Tools & TechniquesLatest IssueVolume 20 • Issue 6 • November 2024November 2024November 2024 IssueExplore this issueAbout UsContact UsAdvertise with DDNPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyTerms & ConditionsEditorial Policies© 2024 Drug Discovery News. All rights reserved.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the GooglePrivacy PolicyandTerms of Serviceapply.Task Force on Countermeasures against Dual Outbreaks of COVID-19 and Influenza (The Prime Minister in Action) | Prime Minister's Office of Japan Please activate JavaScript function on your browser Top News The Prime Minister in Action October 2022 Task Force on Countermeasures against Dual Outbreaks of COVID-19 and Influenza #COVID19 #COVID19Vaccine #MedSystemStrengthening Task Force on Countermeasures against Dual Outbreaks of COVID-19 and Influenza October 13, 2022 Tweet Photograph of the Prime Minister making a statement (1) Photograph of the Prime Minister making a statement (2) Photograph of the Prime Minister making a statement (3) Photograph of the Prime Minister making a statement (4) [Provisional translation] On October 13, 2022, Prime Minister Kishida held a meeting of the task force on countermeasures against dual outbreaks of COVID-19 and influenza at the Prime Minister’s Office. More Related Link Japanese Tweet Archives (Archived entries for the 98th through 100th prime ministers) The 100th Prime MinisterOpenClose 2021 The 99th Prime MinisterOpenClose 2021 2020 The 98th Prime MinisterOpenClose 2020 2019 2018 2017 Tag ListView All Related Pages Return to the Prime Minister in ActionAssociate Professor Sophie Valkenburg | Doherty Website Search Please do not fill-in this field About Our Work Services & Facilities People Education Careers News & Events Support COVID-19 Research Searchss A joint venture between The University of Melbourne and The Royal Melbourne Hospital Search About Overview Laureate Professor Peter Doherty Governance Reports & Publications Brochures Venue Hire Support our work Advocacy Contact Us Our Work Institute Themes Immunology Viral Infectious Diseases HIV Hepatitis Influenza Emerging Infections COVID-19 Antimicrobial Resistance Bacterial and Parasitic Infections Malaria Tuberculosis Buruli Ulcer Cross-Cutting Disciplines Discovery Research Public Health Clinical and health systems research Global Health Education & Professional Development Indigenous Health Computational Science and Genomics Services & Facilities Services Facilities People Education Study at the Doherty Institute Research Projects PhD Clinician Graduate Research Training Meet our graduate researchers Prospective Student Information Session Contacts Careers News & Events News Events Setting it Straight Podcast: Infection and Immunity - Evidence Explained Publications Support COVID-19 Research Associate Professor Sophie Valkenburg Twitter Associate Professor Sophie Valkenburg 03 8344 7465 | sophie.v@unimelb.edu.au Position: Laboratory Head Theme(s):COVID-19, Immunology, Viral Infectious Diseases, Public Health, Influenza Discipline(s):Public Health, Clinical and health systems research Unit(s):Department of Microbiology and Immunology (DMI) Lab Group(s): Valkenburg Lab Associate Professor Sophie Valkenburg is a laboratory head of viral vaccine immunology based at the Doherty Institute, University of Melbourne since 2022. Sophie remains an honorary Assistant Professor at the University of Hong Kong (HKU) and maintains a joint research program. She is a long-term alumnus of the Department of Microbiology and Immunology at the University of Melbourne, completing her PhD with Professor Katherine Kedzierska in 2012. She spent 10 years in Hong Kong, and was a post-doctoral fellow with Professor Leo Poon, and went on to become an independent laboratory head at the HKU-Pasteur Research Pole since 2016. Her research program is devoted to investigating correlates of protection, specifically T and B cell responses, antibody quality and function for influenza viruses and SARS-CoV-2 from patients, randomised control vaccine trials and animal models. Her program aims to define broadly reactive immune correlates from recovered patients, and how current vaccines stimulate or fail to stimulate these protective immune responses, and incorporated to next generation universal vaccines for robust immunity. Key Achievements Publications Research Groups Key Achievements The quality and impact of Sophie’s PhD was well recognised by competitive awards by Qiagen, a Victorian Premiers Award commendation, and NHMRC CJ Martin fellowship to support her post-doctoral work in Hong Kong. She has been further recognised by peer awards including: Pasteur Talent award, promising investigator award by ISIRV, has held several PI project grants, and now is an Emerging Leader level 2 NHMRC fellow. She is a co-PI on a number of program grants (CDC as a co-operative agreement, GRF TRS, and NIH) for the effects of repeated influenza vaccination with Professor Benjamin Cowling and COVID-19 immunity with Professor Leo Poon. Publications Loading ORCID data… Research Groups Valkenburg Lab The Valkenburg laboratory investigates viral immunity to emerging viruses with pandemic potential: influenza viruses and SARS-CoV-2. Our work spans randomised control vaccine trials, observational studies of infected patients and animal models to decipher immune correlates to drive novel translational outcomes for specific diagnostics, targeted therapeutics and next generation vaccines for public health impact. Lab Team Associate Professor Sophie Valkenburg Laboratory Head Ludivine Grzelak Research Officer Jessie (Wanxiaojie) Xie Research Officer Dr Anne Maria Hahn Research Officer Praboda Kuruppuarachchi PhD Student Felicia Hwa PhD Student Contact Us 792 Elizabeth Street Melbourne, 3000 Get Directions doherty-reception@unimelb.edu.au +61 3 9035 3555 Contact Us Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Keep informed Subscribe for the latest news, events and research First name Last name Email Subscribe We acknowledge the Wurundjeri people of the Kulin Nation as the traditional custodians of the land where our Institute stands. We are committed to collaboration with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities to reduce the unacceptable burden of infectious disease. We are committed to training the next generation of exceptional Indigenous leaders in infection and immunity. Copyright The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity Privacy Policy | Intranet | Site by LemonadeDoes the Flu Shot Trigger Diabetes Symptoms? HealthlineHealth ConditionsFeaturedAllBreast CancerIBD MigraineMultiple Sclerosis (MS)Rheumatoid ArthritisType 2 DiabetesSponsored TopicsArticlesAllAcid RefluxADHDAllergiesAlzheimer's & DementiaBipolar DisorderCancerCrohn's DiseaseChronic PainCold & FluCOPDDepressionFibromyalgiaHeart DiseaseHigh CholesterolHIVHypertensionIPFOsteoarthritisPsoriasisSkin Disorders and CareSTDsDiscoverWellness TopicsAllNutritionFitnessSkin CareSexual HealthWomen's HealthMental Well-BeingSleepProduct ReviewsAllVitamins & SupplementsSleepMental HealthNutritionAt-Home TestingCBDMen’s HealthOriginal SeriesAllFresh Food FastFood hacks to make eating healthier, easier.Diagnosis DiariesReal diagnosis stories from people who get it.You’re Not AloneStories from real people that destigmatize mental health conditions.Present TenseReal-world mindfulness for busy people.Video SeriesAllYouth in FocusMental health challenges facing our youth.Healthy HarvestMeet your food, from farm to table.Through An Artist's EyeA breast cancer story told through art.Future of HealthInnovations shaping the future of health.PlanHealth ChallengesMindful EatingSugar SavvyMove Your BodyGut HealthMood FoodsAlign Your SpineFind CareAllPrimary CareMental HealthOB-GYNDermatologistsNeurologistsCardiologistsOrthopedistsLifestyle QuizzesWeight ManagementAm I Depressed? A Quiz for TeensAre You a Workaholic?How Well Do You Sleep?Tools & ResourcesHealth NewsFind a DietFind Healthy SnacksDrugs A-ZHealth A-ZConnectFind Your Bezzy CommunityBezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.AllBreast CancerInflammatory Bowel DiseaseCOPDMigraineMultiple SclerosisPsoriasisFollow us on social mediaCan't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.SubscribeParenthoodStagesBecoming a ParentPregnancyPostpartumBabyToddlerFertilityHealth & WellnessConditions & ConcernsRelationshipsProductsDoes the Flu Shot Trigger Diabetes Symptoms?Medically reviewed by Marina Basina, M.D. — Written by Mike Hoskins on October 13, 2022Official diabetes recommendationFlu seasonBest type for diabetesBlood sugar impactSymptomsBest time for flu shotWhat if I already had the flu?FAQsBottom lineShare on PinterestArman Zhenikeyev/Getty ImagesWhenever a nip of cold is in the air, and coughs and sneezes ring out in public places, you know it’s flu season again. If you live with diabetes, you’re probably being prodded to go get a flu shot and related vaccines. People with diabetes (PWDs) face a higher risk of severe illness any infection, including influenza. That’s why it is so important that those with diabetes get their flu shot each season — especially during pandemic times when COVID-19 remains a public health threat in particular for people with chronic conditions.This article will explain more about why PWDs should consider the flu shot each season, when the best time for that vaccination may be, and what possible impacts it may have on blood sugars and diabetes management.Do all people with diabetes need a flu shot?The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that everyone with diabetes get a flu shot. This includes type 1 and type 2 diabetes, LADA (latent autoimmune diagnosis in adults), and gestational diabetes during pregnancy.Likewise, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) also recommends annual flu shots for all PWDs and their families, as do the other diabetes organizations and medical professional groups.Contracting the flu can weaken the immune system, leading to fluctuating and higher glucose levels — which puts PWDs at elevated risk for severe infection as well as a higher risk for COVID-19, and its effects on the body. Studies since 2020 have shown largely that PWDs are more likely — even 3 times more likely — to see more severe COVID-19 illness, compared to those without diabetes.According to the CDC, about 30% of the adults hospitalized with flu in recent seasons lived with a type of diabetes. This 2017 study states that PWDs are at increased risk for developing severe complications from the flu, and this 2022 research points out that’s even more pronounced for adults 65 years and older who face more severe flu illness if they live with diabetes.That is why a shot is recommended every year because there’s a different strain of flu circulating every year.Defining influenzaFlu is a highly contagious respiratory illness caused by a family of quickly evolving influenza viruses.What makes flu challenging is that it’s caused by a virus, making it difficult to treat. Diseases caused by bacteria can be treated more easily with antibiotics, but our antiviral tools are more limited. Truly, the best way to fight the flu is to avoid getting it in the first place.Just before COVID-19 started, the CDC’s annual figures show an estimated 35 million flu illnesses during the 2019-2020 season. That includes 380,000 hospitalizations for the flu, 16 million related medical visits, and 20,000 flu-related deaths.The 2021 season was unusually low because of COVID-19. Many people’s pandemic-related preventive measures (face masks, social distancing, different routines) helped lower flu rates. However, many public health experts and the CDC have warned that the 2022-2023 flu season could return with a vengeance.Marina Basina MD, an endocrinologist at Stanford Medlain, said it’s important for everyone with diabetes to get a flu shot because of the higher risk of severe illness and its implications on diabetes management.“If a person with diabetes gets the flu, it becomes much more difficult to manage blood sugars,” she told Healthline. “Any infection will elevate blood sugars and increase variability in the readings and resistance to insulin.”She added that flu symptoms can also lead to low blood sugars and dangerous diabetes ketoacidosis (DKA) even when blood sugars are not significantly elevated.When is flu season?Timing may vary each season.But the CDC points out that flu viruses are most common in the United States during the fall and winter months. Influenza activity often begins to increase in October and November. Most of the time, it peaks between December and February — though flu season can go into early May.The CDC reported that the flu season from Oct. 1, 2018, to May 4, 2019, was actually the longest-stretching one in a decade at that time, starting strong early on before abating and then followed by another strain of flu kicking in later in the season.Of course, with COVID-19, the 2020 and 2021 seasons saw unusually low flu rates because of the increased pandemic precautions and more people getting flu shots.Many public health experts believe that the 2022-23 flu season will bring more cases of the flu than the United States has seen in recent years.Is there a preferred flu vaccine type for people with diabetes?As background, there are several different types of influenza vaccine:Inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV): This is considered the traditional flu shot, usually given as a shot in the upper arm.Elderly flu shot: For the older crowd, there are high dose shots, as well as one formulated with an adjuvant, an ingredient that boosts the immune system response to the vaccine.Recombinant flu vaccine: This vaccine has a short shelf life, so you’re not as likely to see it.Nose-snort flu vaccine: It’s an alternative called LAIV, which stands for live attenuated influenza, approved for nonpregnant people 2 to 49 years old without certain underlying medical conditions. Diabetes isn’t specifically listed as one of those underlying conditions, although the list includes “people with weakened immune systems” — which certainly does include PWDs.Xofluza: Approved by the FDA in the 2018-2019 flu season, this new medication was the first flu antiviral OK’d in almost 20 years. It’s for those 12 years and older who’ve only been showing flu-like symptoms for a maximum of 48 hours. For the 2019-20 flu season, the FDA expanded the indication for use of Xofluzo to those 12 years or older who are at high risk of developing flu-related complications, such as those with diabetes.Despite all of the info above, the CDC advises that PWDs should get injectable dead-virus fluvaccinations, thanks to the “long-established safety record” for this kind of vaccination in people with diabetes. Will a flu shot raise my blood sugar?It might.Your arm often aches right after getting a flu shot, because that special vaccine liquid has gone right into your muscle. Until it’s fully absorbed, any kind of pain can cause your blood sugar to spike.The body’s immune system may be reacting to the vaccine. This initial burst of immune system response causes inflammation from the antigen reaction, and that can trigger a blood sugar spike the same way illnesses do.The flu can cause your body to release the stress hormones adrenalin or cortisol, which reduce the effectiveness of insulin, meaning you might see higher glucose levels as a result.There is little actual research on how flu shots can lead to higher blood sugars.According to the national vaccine safety monitoring database called the Vaccine Adverse Effect Reporting System, there have been more than 361 reports of hyperglycemia after a flu shot. This 2022 study included 34 adults with diabetes during the 2018 to 2020 flu seasons, examining their blood sugars in the first 24 hours after they’d gotten a flu shot. Higher blood sugars were found in the first day after the flu shot and returned to pre-vaccination levels by the second day.Aside from that research, only one other case report highlights higher blood sugars after the flu shot. This 2018 research analysis article mentions a 41-year-old man with type 2 diabetes, who reported “feeling fatigued and groggy” within 2 hours of a flu shot and having a blood sugar of 264 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) about 6 hours later.That person’s healthcare team could not pinpoint a specific reason for the glucose rise, nor did they indicate it was caused directly by the flu shot itself.Analyzing that example, the study authors stated: “The purpose of this case report is to alert healthcare professionals about this potential effect, which is not described in vaccine package inserts or commonly used drug databases. We agree with the vaccination recommendations for people with diabetes and believe that the benefit outweighs the risk of transient, acute hyperglycemia. Patient knowledge and involvement remain the cornerstones of diabetes management. Therefore, it is important to educate patients and alleviate concerns that may arise during their routine (blood sugar management), while emphasizing the importance of vaccines.”The study authors continued, “We do not recommend changes in pharmacotherapy or SMBG frequency after vaccination because such changes would place an unnecessary burden on patients. Our hope is that future research may shed more light on this phenomenon and enhance understanding vaccination in people with diabetes for both patients and healthcare professionals.”If your blood sugars rise after a flu shotThis is what most diabetes doctors and endocrinologists advise relating to glucose level changes after a flu shot:Correct any elevated blood sugars with fast-acting insulin or (for those using an insulin pump) an increased background basal rate.Avoid increasing any long-acting blood sugar control medications, as there’s no predicting how long the elevated blood sugar from the flu shot might last.How do I tell whether I have the flu or common cold?Both the flu and the common cold result from viruses, but the flu packs much more of a punch. You may have similar symptoms at times, but some are more distinct for the flu or a common cold.Official flu symptoms may include:body aches (these tend to be a key warning sign for most people that they have the flu, rather than a cold)fevercoughsore throatrunny or stuffy noseheadachechillsfatiguevomitingdiarrheaMeanwhile, for a common cold, symptoms may include:gradual onset of symptomssneezingstuffy or runny nosecough or chest discomfortslight achesfatigue or weaknesssore throatRemember that any cold or illness striking someone with diabetes can cause your blood sugars to spike.The result can be dangerous diabetes ketoacidosis (DKA), which can rise to the level of a medical emergency. Testing for ketones is important. This can be done using an at-home urine testing kit widely available at drug stores without a prescription.For those who’ve not been diagnosed with diabetes, it’s also important to remember that flu-like symptoms frequently appear as a telltale sign of newly onset diabetes — especially type 1 diabetes. It can get deadly, very quickly. So make sure to know the warning signs of diabetes and be ready to handle this whether it’s actually the flu or not.What’s the best time to get a flu shot this season?The CDC recommends getting the flu vaccine before flu begins spreading in your community. This is because it takes about 2 weeks after vaccination for the flu shot to start working in the body. So it makes the most sense to get vaccinated early in fall before flu season kicks into full swing. Specifically, the CDC recommends that people get a flu vaccine by the end of October.Some years, the flu may begin early and then ebb for a while before another strain kicks in. Getting vaccinated later, however, can still be beneficial and vaccination typically continues to be offered throughout flu season, even into January or later.Children who need two doses of vaccine to be protected should start the vaccination process sooner because the two doses must be given at least 4 weeks apart.What if I get the flu before I get my shot?You should still get a flu shot even if you’ve already experienced illness from influenza that season.Because the vaccine protects against several “circulating” strains, it offers you protection against any other strains of flu you might get in the coming months. Without the shot, you could come down with another strain and be sick twice in a year.If you do get sick, make sure you consult your doctor or healthcare team whether you’ve had a flu shot or not.PWDs are candidates for antiviral drugs, which are most effective if started within 48 hours of the onset of symptoms. They won’t make you feel better overnight, but they can shorten the length of a bout of flu and greatly reduce the risk of serious complications.Frequently asked questions (FAQs)Does the flu shot cause type 1 diabetes?No, it does not. Scientists do not know what specifically causes type 1 diabetes (T1D), but there is no evidence that flu shots, nor any routine childhood immunizations to protect against other diseases (measles, polio, etc), cause this autoimmune condition. Here are just a handful of studies proving that lack of a link:A 2016 meta-analysis of 23 previous studies found no link between routine vaccinations and an increased risk of developing T1D.A 2021 study looking at medical data for more than 500,000 children in the United States found no connection between the recommended timing for childhood immunizations and the risk of developing T1D.In Norway, a research group compared people younger than 30 who received the vaccine to protect against the “swine” flu with those who did not get the vaccine. The risk of T1D did not increase after being vaccinated.A long-term study published in 2018 involved children in Sweden and Finland, who were identified as having a higher genetic risk for T1D. Researchers found no difference in that diabetes development between the kids who did and did not receive the vaccine for swine flu in 2009.Can the flu or other illnesses trigger type 1 diabetes?While researchers do not know what exactly causes T1D, major illnesses like the flu are believed to play a role in the development of this autoimmune condition. It doesn’t exactly “cause” the T1D, but speeds up the onset. Many researchers are studying the effects of viruses on T1D development, including whether COVID-19’s effects influence the onset of this autoimmune condition.How does the flu shot help people with diabetes?While the clear benefit of a flu shot is to protect against the flu, some research shows other benefits for people with diabetes who get this annual vaccine.In this 2020 nationwide study involving more than 240,000 people with diabetes, the researchers determined that the influenza vaccination was tied to a reduced risk of heart attack, stroke, cardiovascular death, and death overall from all causes. In fact, the flu shot may improve overall health outcomes, including diabetes-related complications often heightened as a result of someone having the flu, the research concluded.Bottom linePeople with diabetes face a higher risk of severe illness from any infection, including influenza. That’s why it is so important that those with diabetes get their flu shot each season. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, along with all diabetes organizations, advise a flu shot each year, and it’s recommended for everyone by the end of October.How we reviewed this article:SourcesHistoryHealthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.A chronic health condition can increase your risk. (2022).https://www.cdc.gov/flu/highrisk/chronic-conditions/index.htmComprehensive medical evaluation and assessment of comorbidities: Standards of medical care in diabetes. (2022).https://diabetesjournals.org/care/article/45/Supplement_1/S46/138926/4-Comprehensive-Medical-Evaluation-and-AssessmentDallagiacoma G, et al. (2021). Type 1 diabetes patients’ practice, knowledge, and attitudes towards influenza immunization.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8310009/Erena S. (2020). Diabetes, infection risk, and COVID-19.https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212877820301186Flu and people with diabetes. (2022).https://www.cdc.gov/flu/highrisk/diabetes.htmGlaess SS, et al. (2018). Acute hyperglycemia after influenza vaccination in a patient with type 2 diabetes.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5951235/Glanz JM, et al. (2021). The childhood vaccination schedule and the lack of association with type 1 diabetes.https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/148/6/e2021051910/183391/The-Childhood-Vaccination-Schedule-and-the-Lack-ofGregory JM, et al. (2021). COVID-19 severity is tripled in the diabetes community: A prospective analysis of the pandemic’s impact in type 1 and type 2 diabetes.https://diabetesjournals.org/care/article/44/2/526/35515/COVID-19-Severity-Is-Tripled-in-the-DiabetesHulsizer AL, et al. (2022). Hyperglycemia post-influenza vaccine in patients with diabetes.https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35652701/Larsson HE, et al. (2018). Pandemrix® vaccination is not associated with increased risk of islet autoimmunity or type 1 diabetes in the TEDDY study children.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5774660/Modin D, et al. (2020). Influenza vaccination is associated with reduced cardiovascular mortality in adults with diabetes: A nationwide cohort study.https://diabetesjournals.org/care/article/43/9/2226/35908/Influenza-Vaccination-Is-Associated-With-ReducedMorgan E, et al. (2016). Vaccinations and childhood type 1 diabetes mellitus: A meta-analysis of observational studies.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4705121/Owusu D, et al. (2022). Rates of severe influenza-associated outcomes among older adults living with diabetes: Influenza hospitalization surveillance network (FluSurv-NET), 2012–2017.https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article/9/5/ofac131/6549739?login=falseRuiz PL, et al. (2018). Pandemic influenza A H1N1 vaccination and subsequent risk of type 1 diabetes in Norway.https://journals.lww.com/epidem/Fulltext/2018/01000/Pandemic_Influenza_A_H1N1_Vaccination_and.22.aspxShare this articleMedically reviewed by Marina Basina, M.D. — Written by Mike Hoskins on October 13, 2022Read this nextWhat Ingredients Are in the Flu Shot?Medically reviewed by Meredith Goodwin, MD, FAAFPThe flu shot has been found to be safe for most people. Learn more about the ingredients in the vaccine.READ MOREIs It OK to Get a Flu Shot While Sick?Medically reviewed by Alana Biggers, M.D., MPHThe flu shot helps protect against three or four strains of the seasonal flu virus, and most people should get the vaccine. But can you get it when…READ MOREWhat’s the Best Time of the Year to Get a Flu Shot?Medically reviewed by Deborah Weatherspoon, Ph.D., MSNGetting vaccinated can lower your chances of getting the flu. Although you can get a flu shot any time during flu season, the timing does matter. Find…READ MORETips for Picking the Perfect AvocadoMedically reviewed by the Healthline Medical NetworkProfessional chef Jen Gomez reviews what to look for when trying to pick the perfect avocado.READ MORE14 Evidence-Backed Tips to Lower Blood Sugar LevelsMedically reviewed by the Healthline Medical NetworkYou may need to manage your blood sugar levels if you're living with a health condition like diabetes. Here are 14 evidence-backed tips to help you…READ MOREGangrene and Diabetes: Know the FactsMedically reviewed by Tyler Walker, MDREAD MOREWhat Are the 3 P’s of Diabetes?Medically reviewed by Marina Basina, M.D.The three P's of diabetes refer to the most common symptoms of the condition. Those are polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia. High blood glucose can…READ MOREWhat to Know About the Dexcom Glucose Monitor from Nick Jonas Super Bowl AdSinger Nick Jonas, who has type 1 diabetes, debuted a new blood glucose monitoring device during a Super Bowl television commercialREAD MOREAbout UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsSitemapMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzyThe influenza season began in October | Government installation profile Sorry, you need to enable JavaScript to visit this website. Skip to main content Accessibility Help SotsiaalministeeriumTerviseameti registrid Accessibility Help ESTENGRUS HomeHealthcareInformation for patientsWhat is family physician care?Languages spoken by family physciciansFiling a complaint about healthcare servicesCommunicable DiseasesCOVID-19 information siteCommunicable Disease BulletinsChemical, product safetyBiocidal productsPlacing biocidal products on marketChemical Weapons ConventionClassification, Labelling and Packaging (CLP)Data for Section 1.4 of Safety Data SheetDetergentsExport/import of hazardous chemicalsREACHSafety of Cosmetic ProductsToys: production, import and distributionMedical devicesContacts: Medical DevicesLegislative framework for medical devicesRegulatory controls for medical devicesLaboratoriesCentral LaboratoryKohtla-Järve laboratoryLaboratories of Health BoardHealth BoardAbout Health BoardKriis.eekriis.ee You are hereHome Uudised The influenza season began in October The influenza season began in October 14.10.2022 The middle of October saw the beginning of the new influenza season. Two new influenza A cases were identified in week 40. Week 40 saw a total of 3,906 people fall ill with acute respiratory infections, of whom 30% were children. The average number of cases out of every 100,000 people was 288.7. There were no significant differences between the Estonian counties in terms of the number of new infection cases. Based on information which had been logged during a targeted survey of acute upper respiratory tract infections (with this survey being known as ‘Sentinel Monitoring’), the intensity of the spread of diseases is low. The majority of cases involved children who were under the age of five. For the moment at least, the new cases are mainly being caused by rhinoviruses. The percentage of such cases amongst other viruses has increased to 31.8%. The symptoms of rhinoviruses include sneezing, a runny nose, and also a sore throat. A cough and a fever may also be added in the case of children who catch it. The course of the virus is mild, with a low-grade fever usually being experienced and with no other significant symptoms. Parainfluenza viruses formed 22.7% of the total number of cases last week, while SARS-CoV-2 viruses formed 18.2%. No extensive spread of influenza viruses has yet been observed amongst the general population, with just a few cases having been registered. Laboratory analyses confirmed two influenza A cases in week 40. In general, the influenza season in Estonia runs from October to May. Even though people can get themselves immunised against influenza throughout this entire period, the most reliable form of protection is guaranteed through vaccination before the virus reaches the high point of its scope (between October and December). Vaccination is required especially in the case of the elderly, or in anyone who has chronic health conditions, or anyone who comes into contact with at-risk individuals. Vaccination against influenza is available free of charge from the last week of October for anyone who is normally in receipt of general and special care services, plus anyone who is over the age of sixty, pregnant women, children up to the age of seven, and all minors who are included in any risk groups. Members of the public can get themselves vaccinated at their family physician’s surgery or at a pharmacy. Vaccination at pharmacies is available through the Health Board’s contractual partners. Further information about getting a vaccination via a pharmacy can be found at the following address: www.vaktsineeriapteegis.ee/gripp. Vaccination is contraindicated in the event of hypersensitivity to egg protein or other vaccine ingredients, or during an acute illness which generates a fever. All news Veel uudiseid samal teemal 30.08.2024 FAQ: What should you know about monkeypox? Although monkeypox continues to spread globally and in Europe, there have been no new cases reported in Estonia since 2022. However, the risk of introducing the disease still exists. 17.02.2023 In total, 347 new influenza cases and 1,221 COVID-19 cases were added this week In week six of the new year, a grand total of 3,642 people fell ill with acute respiratory infections. Overall, 41.8% of all of the new cases involved children. In total, 347 new influenza cases were registered. A total of 1,221 new COVID-19 cases were also added. Terviseamet | Paldiski mnt 81, 10614 Tallinn | Telephone: (+372) 794 3500 | E-mail: [email protected] Facebook Youtube NewslettersKids at higher risk of catching flu this season, experts warn | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Kids at higher risk of catching flu this season, experts warn | CBC News LoadedHealthKids at higher risk of catching flu this season, experts warnRelatively low circulation of the flu over the past two years, fewer pandemic measures and reduced vaccination uptake puts young children at greater risk than usual of catching it this fall and winter, experts say.Lower flu circulation during pandemic could leave kids more susceptible to future spreadCassandra Szklarski · The Canadian Press · Posted: Oct 12, 2022 3:37 PM EDT | Last Updated: October 12, 2022Relatively low circulation of the flu over the past two years, fewer pandemic measures and reduced vaccination uptake puts young children at greater risk than usual of catching it this fall and winter, experts say. (George Rudy/Shutterstock)Social SharingRelatively low circulation of the flu over the past two years puts young children at greater risk than usual of catching it this fall and winter, say experts who also fear fewer pandemic measures and reduced vaccination uptake will further spread.To a lesser extent, adult resistance to influenza is also lower than it otherwise might be because fewer people received the immune boost of a recent winter infection, says infectious diseases specialist Dr. Susy Hota, stressing the added importance of flu shots this season."Our immune responses get boosted to some degree when we see these viruses more frequently," said Hota, the medical director of infection prevention and control at the University Health Network. "We haven't really had that over the last two years. So people could get more symptomatic and pick up these infections and notice them more the next couple of years."The DoseWhat do I need to know about this year's flu shot?Pandemic measures to limit COVID-19 spread led to just 69 confirmed flu cases during the 2020-2021 season and only sporadic cases in 2021-2022, according to a recent update from National Advisory Committee on Immunization, which advises the Public Health Agency of Canada on vaccine use.The pool of potential flu patients this fall and winter is greater, just as masks and distancing rules have dropped, says immunologist Dawn Bowdish of Hamilton's McMaster University."As a population we are ripe for influenza," she said. "One of the reasons it seems to be spreading a little bit earlier than it would be in a sort of a pre-COVID year is because there's just so many susceptible people who can harbour this infection."Health officials offer free flu shots to dampen potential fall influenza and COVID-19 surgeLike Hota, she says the potential rise in circulation in the coming months is "a really big problem" for children under two who are being exposed for the first time and are more susceptible to serious illness.The same is likely true for kids aged three and four who otherwise might have gotten flu when they were babies or toddlers but were spared because of COVID-19 mitigation strategies, she adds."Because we are dealing with a whole bunch of kids who haven't had a lot of stimulation ... we can expect that it could be really problematic in young kids this year," said Bowdish.WATCH | Is it COVID or the flu? How to tell the difference:Is it COVID or the flu? A doctor explains2 years agoDuration 2:03Dr. Samir Gupta reminds the public to be aware of COVID symptoms and how to properly test as we enter flu season following Thanksgiving gatherings.She notes a similar scenario played out last summer when a surge of respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, sent infants, toddlers and preschoolers to hospital and strained pediatric health-care resources.While myriad other pressures continue to strain the health-care system — including ongoing COVID-19 infections that many experts fear will also rise — it's especially important to get the flu shot this year, Bowdish adds.As far as flu risk to the population as a whole, infectious disease expert Matthew Miller does not expect one missing flu season will make us vastly more susceptible than previous years.AnalysisWe're close to cold and flu season. So, what does that look like with COVID-19 in the mix?Miller, the director of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster, says many adults can count on some level of immunity generated by a lifetime of exposure to seasonal influenza, including seniors who don't generally mount as strong of an immune response as younger age groups.That immunity can last years and even decades if someone encounters a flu strain that is closely related to something they've seen before."During the swine flu pandemic, seniors were disproportionately protected from dying because that virus looked a lot like the virus that caused the 1918 Spanish flu," said Miller, also an associate professor of biochemistry and biomedical sciences at McMaster."People who were very old and were exposed to the 1918 Spanish flu and viruses that were similar to it that circulated in the year shortly thereafter actually still had protection all the way up in 2009."Quebec could be in for a severe flu season, officials and experts sayThere have been occasions where the same strain will recirculate for several years but if it changes, that pre-existing immunity becomes a lot less effective, says Miller.Thanks to pandemic measures that also shielded most people from flu infection, Bowdish says the types of influenza now circulating are quite different than before the COVID-19 outbreak."Because of all the social distancing (and) the masking, many lineages of the flu virus have actually gone extinct," she said.WATCH | Experts preparing for busy flu season without pandemic restrictions:Doctors brace for busy flu season without pandemic restrictions2 years agoDuration 2:48Schools, offices and doctors are bracing for a busy cold and flu virus season this fall now that most Canadians have resumed pre-pandemic activities. Scientists aren’t sure what to expect, but they say Australia’s latest flu season might provide some insight.Clues to this season's dominant strain can be found in what circulated in the Southern Hemisphere, says Miller, noting we can most often expect to see the same version emerge in Canada."But it's not always what happens in practice, because, of course, between the Australian season and our season there are gaps and the dominant virus can change in the interim," he said.Still, Miller said it's likely that someone who fell ill in 2019 will have some protections this season, believing any changes to this year's flu will be "modest."Doctors advise Ontarians to keep up with vaccines ahead of fall flu season, possible COVID-19 surgeWhile countries including Australia, New Zealand and South Africa were hit particularly hard, Bowdish says it's not clear if that's because the virus itself developed particularly problematic mutations, because vaccination rates fell short, or because the vaccine didn't match the strain very well.Danielle Paes of the Canadian Pharmacists Association points to a survey of 1,500 adults in August that found only 50 per cent of respondents said they would get a shot this year, down six points from a survey in 2021. The margin of error is plus or minus 2.53 percentage points, 19 times out of 20.Paes says waning interest in the flu shot could also exacerbate the flu's impact this season.A survey of 1,500 Canadian adults in August that found only 50 per cent of respondents said they would get a shot this year, down six points from a survey in 2021. (Leah Hennel)Hota points to the resumption of many pre-pandemic activities as a main factor driving flu infections this season, noting that mask mandates have dropped, people have resumed travel and are gathering again indoors."In previous years, we've had public health measures and some kind of restriction in the movement of people or socialization or the ability of people to congregate," she said."It's definitely different this year."CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated StoriesThe Dose What do I need to know about this year's flu shot?Analysis We're close to cold and flu season. So, what does that look like with COVID-19 in the mix? Doctors advise Ontarians to keep up with vaccines ahead of fall flu season, possible COVID-19 surgeAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canow3 things you need to know about flu season | Stories Skip to main content placeholder < Sites Menu Northern Health Social Media Menu Facebook X Instagram YouTube LinkedIn / Stories Menu Stories Utility Menu About Us Contact News and Media Home Topics Authors Communities Search Breadcrumb Home All stories 3 things you need to know about flu season 3 things you need to know about flu season Northern Health October 14, 2022 SHARE THIS PAGE With other respiratory illnesses like COVID-19 going around this fall, it’s important to protect yourself and others in your community by getting a flu shot As of October 11, flu season has officially kicked off. Here’s what you need to know when getting your flu shot this year. Flu shots are free and recommended for everyone 6 months and older With other respiratory illnesses like COVID-19 going around this fall, it’s important to protect yourself and others in your community by getting a flu shot – especially those who could get very sick, like young children and elderly people. The flu shot is free and recommended for everyone 6 months and older. New this year: Use the Get Vaccinated system to book a flu shot appointment If you’re registered with the Get Vaccinated system (the same system that’s used to book COVID-19 shots), you should receive a notification and link to book your flu shot appointment. If you haven’t received your booking link by text message or email, call the Provincial call centre at 1-833-838-2323 and ask to book a flu shot appointment at a pharmacy near you. Please don’t call your local pharmacy. Depending on what community you live in, drop-in flu shots may be an option. To guarantee that you’ll get a flu shot that day, we strongly encourage booking an appointment. You can get a COVID-19 vaccine at the same time as your flu shot Flu shots can safely be given at the same time or any time before or after any other vaccine including COVID-19. Some Northern Health clinics may be offering flu and COVID-19 vaccines at the same time. For more information on flu or COVID-19, visit northernhealth.ca. For more information How to stay healthy during flu season (HealthLinkBC) Book a COVID-19 or flu vaccine (Get Vaccinated system) Health awareness Flu prevention Flu season Flu shot Influenza Northern HealthSpirit is proud to represent healthy living in the North, as Northern Health's mascot since 2015. Learn more about him in this YouTube video.…All posts (190) Comments You must have JavaScript enabled to use this form. Comment Display Name? Name Email Leave this field blank Latest stories Our people Sharing the hidden gems of the North: #SnapsByStaff Our people Northern Health celebrates Allied Health Professionals Day Child and youth health Prenatal hand expression: A chat with Dr. Jacobus Strydom Child and youth health “We’re doing it!” One remote Northern family’s experience feeding their tongue-tied baby Our people Showcasing the hidden gems of the North: #SnapsByStaff Our people GoHealth BC nurse provides education opportunities to the Stewart Community Communications, technology, and infrastructure New energy upgrades enhance comfort and efficiency at Gateway Lodge Communications, technology, and infrastructure GoHealth BC campaign wins two awards Communications, technology, and infrastructure Children aged 11 and younger can now be signed up for HealthElife: Mom of two shares her experience Our people NH Dietitian Erin Branco awarded Marie Taylor Award Innovation Jago Award recipient: Innovation - Helen Styles Health awareness Talking to teens about energy drinks More Stories Categories Stories by topic Stories by community All stories Social Media Menu Facebook X Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Main navigation Home Topics Authors Communities Footer Utility News and media About us Contact Legal Privacy © 2024 Northern Health Home Topics Authors Communities#GetYourFluShot: The flu shot is as vital as ever | Doctors of BC Skip to main content Doctors of BC Login Contact Us Become a Member Account Login Managing your Practice View Overview CompensationFee Guide Business Cost Premium Contract Offerings Family physician compensation New payment model: A choice for family physicians Grants & Funding Billing & AuditsMini Practice Profiles The Audit Process Explained Avoiding an Audit Tips & Resources Frequently Asked Questions Business PathwaysStarting In Practice Managing Your Office Closing Your Practice Business Corner Virtual Events Business Advisors Contact Us Doctors Technology Office (DTO)Virtual Care Enhance Your Clinic's Security Managing your EMR Using AI Scribe Technologies Provincial Attachment SystemHow to access the PAS Panel Registry Attaching patients with the PAS Information on submitting and updating panel lists PAS FAQs Quality ImprovementPractice Support Program (PSP) Physician Quality Improvement Initiative Practice SupportsPrivacy Toolkit Practice Toolkits UpToDate Medical Records – Issues & Guidelines Programs for Rural Physicians Resources Member Announcement Consultations, Referrals, and Re-Referrals External Links Virtual Care Check out guides and resources to help you better use virtual care and technology to support patients. Learn More. Your Benefits View Overview InsuranceInsurance by Career Stage Insurance by Product Type My Insurance Forms Contact Us Insurance & Benefits During COVID-19 Negotiated BenefitsCMPA Rebate Continuing Medical Education Fund CPRSP Rural Education Action Plan Parental Leave Program Forms My Negotiated Benefits Physician Health & SafetyPhysician Health Program Memorandum of Agreement Discount ProgramsClub MD Telus Scotiabank + MD Financial Management Join UsStudents Resident Physicians Physicians Member Renewal Annual Dues My Dues Introducing the ultimate Club MD experience From work to play, and everything in between, we provide you with access to hundreds of deals from recognizable, best-in-class brands, elevating every facet of your life – from practice supports to entertainment, restaurants, electronics, travel, health and wellness, and more. Your Club MD membership ensures that these deals are exclusive to you, eliminating the need to search or negotiate. Welcome to the ultimate Club MD experience. Your membership, your choices, your journey. Explore now. Advocacy & Policy View Overview AdvocacyAdvocating for Solutions to Health Care Crisis The Health Professions and Occupations Act - Bill 36 COVID-19 Resources Integrated Activity Agreement Physician Health and Wellness Regional Advisors and Advocates NegotiationsAgreements & Contracts Physician Master Agreement EngagementMember Surveys Health Authority Engagement Surveys Have your Say Consultations Policy Database Health Promotion CampaignsWalk with your Doc Find a Doctor Open Mind BC Digital Health Advocacy & GovernanceDigital Health Governance Digital Health Policies Information Sharing Health Information Legislation Health Information Standards Engaging with you on Digital Health Advocacy and Initiatives Promoting Good Health Advocating for better health and improved safety on behalf of British Columbians. Learn more Collaboration View Overview Joint Collaborative CommitteesLeadership Training Project Funding Divisions of Family Practice Medical Staff Associations Guidelines and Protocols WorkSafeBC Liaison Committee Doctors of BC - ICBC Committee Medical Services Commission Working Together In partnership with the BC government, we are working to make a difference through collaborative programs. Learn more. News & Events View Overview NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewsletters President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Stay Informed Stay up to date with important information that impacts the profession and your practice. Doctors of BC provides a range of newsletters that target areas of interest to you. Subscribe to the President's Letter Subscribe to Newsletters About Us View Overview About Us Representing Our MembersHow We Work The BoardContact your Board Our Board Culture Representative AssemblyContact your RA Board & RA Reports Our President Leadership Committees Sections & Societies Equity, Diversity & Inclusion Cultural Safety & Humility Green Initiatives at Doctors of BC Careers AwardsDr David M. Bachop Gold Medal Dr Don Rix Award for Physician Leadership Doctors of BC Silver Medal of Service Award Changemaker Awards Health Promotion Awards Doctors of BC Scholarship Awards Dr Cam Coady Medal of Excellence CMA Honorary Membership Award Report to Members BC Health Care Organizations Constitution and Bylaws History Our Strategic Plan Our strategic plan guides us in our work to transform the health care system and improve patient care. Learn More. You are hereHomeNews & Events View Overview NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewsletters President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Stay Informed Stay up to date with important information that impacts the profession and your practice. Doctors of BC provides a range of newsletters that target areas of interest to you. Subscribe to the President's Letter Subscribe to Newsletters NewsTogether for Health#GetYourFluShot: The flu shot is as vital as ever Increase Decrease Current Size: 100% You are hereHomeNews & Events View Overview NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewsletters President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Stay Informed Stay up to date with important information that impacts the profession and your practice. Doctors of BC provides a range of newsletters that target areas of interest to you. Subscribe to the President's Letter Subscribe to Newsletters NewsTogether for Health#GetYourFluShot: The flu shot is as vital as ever Together for Health News & Events View Overview NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewsletters President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Stay Informed Stay up to date with important information that impacts the profession and your practice. Doctors of BC provides a range of newsletters that target areas of interest to you. Subscribe to the President's Letter Subscribe to Newsletters NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewslettersIn Circulation Newsletters - Past Issues President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Upcoming Events more events Executive Directors Learning Session November 12, 2024 For event details please contact events@doctorsofbc.ca. Event Details #GetYourFluShot: The flu shot is as vital as ever October 13, 2022 Together for Health With the province bracing for what’s predicted to be a bad flu season, British Columbians are strongly encouraged to protect themselves and those around them by getting a flu shot. In fact, getting vaccinated against influenza is especially vital this year as our immunity against the virus has waned after two years of low influenza rates. This, combined with back-to-school season and relaxed public COVID-19 health restrictions, has BC officials concerned about the onset of one of the worst flu seasons in years. Flu shots are now available British Columbians are now eligible to get their flu shot, which is again free to anyone six months and older. New this year, all seniors 65 years and older are being offered an enhanced influenza vaccine for free which provides better protection than a standard dose for those most at risk of severe illness and complications due to a natural weakening of the immune system with age. Also new this year, those registered with the provincial Get Vaccinated system will automatically be sent an invitation to book their influenza vaccine online. While this is the most efficient way to access an influenza vaccine, walk-in appointments at some pharmacies are also available, or you can call 1-833-838-2323 to make an appointment. To find your nearest flu clinic or community pharmacy use the Find a Flu Clinic tool. How to prepare for your vaccination If you have a fever, cough, sore throat or feel unwell, do not go to the clinic or other vaccination location. If you have made an appointment, call to reschedule. Wear a mask to the appointment and if possible, a short-sleeve shirt. Children 2-17 years of age can receive the influenza vaccine by nasal spray. Let the health care provider know if you have had a previous reaction to the flu vaccine. Plan to stay at the clinic for 15 minutes after getting your shot in case of the very rare possibility (less than 1 in a million) of an allergic reaction. Combining COVID-19 vaccinations with the flu shot To make it even easier this year, the province is making it possible for people to get their influenza and COVID-19 fall booster at the same time. According to the Public Health Agency of Canada, it is safe for people aged 12 or older to get the flu shot at the same time as a COVID-19 vaccine, though the National Advisory Council on Immunization recommends children aged five to 11 have a 14-day interval between a COVID-19 shot and other vaccines. The pandemic precautions basically eliminated the last two flu seasons leaving British Columbians without the same level of influenza antibodies they would have otherwise developed if the flu virus had circulated – and leaving us all more susceptible to influenza infection. To protect yourself, those you love, and the healthcare system, #GetYourFluShot. More information about the flu can be found at the B.C. Centre for Disease Control website. View all Together for Health Contact Us 115 - 1665 W. Broadway Vancouver, BC V6J 5A4 +1 604 736 5551 or +1 800 665 2262 Monday to Friday 8:30am to 4:30pm PST Contact Us FAQs Disclaimer Privacy Policy Constitution and Bylaws Endorsement Policy Code of Conduct © Doctors of BC All Rights Reserved Doctors of BC acknowledges that our organization is located on the traditional, ancestral, and unceded territories of the Coast Salish peoples, including the Musqueam, Squamish, and Tsleil-Waututh Nations, whose strong relationship with their territories continues today. Our employees, who are located throughout BC, work and live on many different Indigenous territories throughout the province. Acknowledging that we are on the traditional territories of First Nations communities is an expression of cultural humility and involves recognizing our duty and desire to support the provision of culturally safe care to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis people in BC. Back to top ⬆Some confusion as B.C. influenza vaccine program rolls out Island News in one click. Be the first to know with a daily rundown and news alerts sent straight to your inbox Sign up Close Stream on Chek+ Search for: Search News Open dropdown menu News Open dropdown menu Island News B.C. News National and World News CHEK Recent Newscasts CHEK+ Streaming Service Voices News Features Open dropdown menu Drive Wisely Inspiring Island Women Island Rewind Order Up! Pet CHEK Rob Shaw: Political Capital The Upside VIBE Vital People This Week in History News Tips Open dropdown menu CHEK Point Poll Submit Pictures or Video Submit a birthday or anniversary Submit a News Tip Sports Open dropdown menu Local Sports Camosun Chargers Schedule Pacific FC Game Schedule UVic Vikes Schedule Victoria Grizzlies Schedule Victoria Royals Schedule Victoria HarbourCats Schedule Watch Open dropdown menu CHEK Originals Open dropdown menu News Videos Cookin’ on the Coast Donnie and Dhali – The Team The Dome Cooking Show Kaeshammer’s Kitchen Recipes The Upside This is VANCOLOUR TV Schedule CHEK Podcasts Open dropdown menu Amy McGeachy’s House Guests Bread and Butter Chamber Chats The CHEK News Podcast COAST Talks Podcast Donnie and Dhali – The Team Every Visitor Counts: A Podcast by Destination Greater Victoria Indigenous Prosperity Podcast MicCHEK Our Native Land Political Capital with Rob Shaw Rising Economy Podcast Run for It Podcast Sorenson’s Speed Talk This is VANCOLOUR Vital Victoria Podcast Podcast Studio Rental Livestreams Open dropdown menu CHEK Livestream CHEK Recent Newscasts CHEK 24/7 Harbour Cams CHEK+ Streaming Service Weather Events About CHEK Open dropdown menu About CHEK Open dropdown menu Career Opportunities CHEK Accessibility Feedback CHEK News Ethics, Standards and Corrections Policy Contact CHEK Diversity and Inclusion Mobile Apps News Personalities Our Story Programming Proposals Advertise Open dropdown menu Advertise with CHEK Video/Commercial Production Community Open dropdown menu An Upside Christmas CHEK Drive Thru 2024 Community Sponsorship Contests Trend Facility Rentals Open dropdown menu Podcast Studio Rental Studio & Green Screen Rental Contact Us Traffic Near Me CHEK Livestream Newsletter Sign-Up Facebook Page X Threads Instagram YouTube Close Skip to content CHEK Livestream Traffic Near Me CHEK Livestream Newsletter Sign-Up Facebook Page X Threads Instagram YouTube CHEK Independent and employee owned – local news stories, weather, sports, events and more News Open dropdown menu News Open dropdown menu Island News B.C. News National and World News CHEK Recent Newscasts CHEK+ Streaming Service Voices News Features Open dropdown menu Drive Wisely Inspiring Island Women Island Rewind Order Up! Pet CHEK Rob Shaw: Political Capital The Upside VIBE Vital People This Week in History News Tips Open dropdown menu CHEK Point Poll Submit Pictures or Video Submit a birthday or anniversary Submit a News Tip Sports Open dropdown menu Local Sports Camosun Chargers Schedule Pacific FC Game Schedule UVic Vikes Schedule Victoria Grizzlies Schedule Victoria Royals Schedule Victoria HarbourCats Schedule Watch Open dropdown menu CHEK Originals Open dropdown menu News Videos Cookin’ on the Coast Donnie and Dhali – The Team The Dome Cooking Show Kaeshammer’s Kitchen Recipes The Upside This is VANCOLOUR TV Schedule CHEK Podcasts Open dropdown menu Amy McGeachy’s House Guests Bread and Butter Chamber Chats The CHEK News Podcast COAST Talks Podcast Donnie and Dhali – The Team Every Visitor Counts: A Podcast by Destination Greater Victoria Indigenous Prosperity Podcast MicCHEK Our Native Land Political Capital with Rob Shaw Rising Economy Podcast Run for It Podcast Sorenson’s Speed Talk This is VANCOLOUR Vital Victoria Podcast Podcast Studio Rental Livestreams Open dropdown menu CHEK Livestream CHEK Recent Newscasts CHEK 24/7 Harbour Cams CHEK+ Streaming Service Weather Events About CHEK Open dropdown menu About CHEK Open dropdown menu Career Opportunities CHEK Accessibility Feedback CHEK News Ethics, Standards and Corrections Policy Contact CHEK Diversity and Inclusion Mobile Apps News Personalities Our Story Programming Proposals Advertise Open dropdown menu Advertise with CHEK Video/Commercial Production Community Open dropdown menu An Upside Christmas CHEK Drive Thru 2024 Community Sponsorship Contests Trend Facility Rentals Open dropdown menu Podcast Studio Rental Studio & Green Screen Rental Contact Us Stream on Chek+ Open Search Search for: Search Stream on Chek+ Menu Posted inNews Some confusion as B.C. influenza vaccine program rolls out by April Lawrence October 11, 2022 6:44 pm Share this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on X (Opens in new window)Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)Click to print (Opens in new window)Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)MoreClick to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)Click to share on Pocket (Opens in new window)Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) It’s the first day you can roll up your sleeve for the influenza vaccine in B.C. and pharmacists say the demand is high. While the Shoppers Drug Mart on Fort Street had 300 people through its doors Tuesday for vaccines, it turns out that getting an appointment is proving a bit confusing for some. “It’s very confusing and it’s all new for all of us so it’s an online booking tool and it’s all done through the health authority,” said Kim Myers, an Associate Pharmacist with Shoppers Drug Mart. Unlike last year when you booked directly through your local pharmacy, this year you’re urged to wait for an invite to book through the Get Vaccinated system — the same system that alerts you to book your COVID-19 vaccinations. “It’s been absolutely crazy in terms of the phone calls that we’ve received,” said Hans Bawa, owner of Fort Royal Pharmacies. “I think today is the first day and we’re all trying to get a handle on how the system works.” Some pharmacies are taking walk-ins while others are offering the flu shot to anyone already coming in for a COVID-19 booster shot. “If people have their COVID-19 booster booked at our pharmacy and they come in and they want a flu vaccine we also give them the flu vaccine,” said Bawa. Pharmacists say while there’s plenty of supply to go around, they’re just urging people to be patient as the invites are sent out. “The weather’s still good, flu season lasts for a few months so as long we’re getting it up until mid-November is a good time to get it,” said Myers. Health officials are anticipating an earlier and more severe flu season than has been experienced since the start of the pandemic. READ MORE: B.C. expecting surge in hospitalizations due to increased COVID-19, flu infections Editorial Policies Report an Error Tagged: covid vaccine, Flu shots, Get vaccinated, influenza vaccine April Lawrence April has been working as a journalist since 2005 after graduating from the BCIT Broadcast Communciations program. Prior to that she earned a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of British Columbia.... More by April Lawrence Search for: Search RECENT STORIES Two coho salmon found in Bowker Creek could mean returning population November 10, 2024 6:22 pmNovember 10, 2024 6:23 pm ‘They can’t believe I’m here’: Nanaimo avalanche survivor shares what saved him November 10, 2024 6:08 pmNovember 10, 2024 6:09 pm BC Ferries warns of potential sailing cancellations between Campbell River, Quadra Island due to adverse weather November 10, 2024 5:43 pmNovember 10, 2024 5:43 pm Home News Weather Sports Events Contests Shows Video/Commercial Production CHEK Now Newsletter Contact CHEK Mobile Apps Career Opportunities Advertise with CHEK Accessibility Search Newsletter Sign-up © 2024 CHEK Media Powered by Newspack Privacy Policy Facebook Page X Threads Instagram YouTubeB.C. now offering flu shots as well as COVID-19 boosters | Vancouver SunSkip to Content Mix up your morning routine! Try PUZZMO, a twist on traditional puzzles >> Mix up your morning routine! Try PUZZMO, a twist on traditional puzzles >> SectionsSearch Search vancouversun.com Perform search Vancouver Sun Share Share this Story : B.C. now offering flu shots as well as COVID-19 boosters Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Subscribe for $0.50/week User My Account Search vancouversun.com Perform search Subscribe FAQ My Account Manage My Subscriptions Our Offers News Local News Politics Health Local Health National True Crime Crime World Education Weather Podcasts BC Public Sector Salaries Database Archives Contact the Newsroom Sports Vancouver Canucks NHL PWHL More Hockey BC Lions CFL NFL Vancouver Whitecaps Soccer Baseball Basketball NBA Golf MMA Curling Tennis Auto Racing Arts Local Arts Music Theatre Festivals Books Celebrity Movies Television TV Listings Life Travel Local Travel Travel Canada Travel USA Travel International Cruises Travel Essentials Food Local Food Reviews Recipes Wine Country Salut! Diet & Fitness Fashion & Beauty Vancouver Sun Run Vancouver Sun Run: Sign up & event info Parenting Relationships Advice Horoscopes Contests National Contests Special Sections International Women's Day 2024 Vancouver Fall Home Show Opinion Columnists Letters Op-Ed Business Local Business Energy Real Estate Mortgages Commercial Real Estate Technology Gaming Internet Retail FP Markets Small Business BC Top Employers Shopping Home Living Tech Style & Beauty Kitchen & Dining Personal Care Entertainment & Hobbies Gift Guide Deals Travel Guide Outdoor Living Homes Buying & Selling Condos Decorating Gardening Renovating Out of Town Properties Westcoast Homes & Design Magazine Westcoast Homes & Design Previous Issues Puzzmo Diversions Puzzles New York Times Crossword Comics Healthing Driving Vehicle Research Reviews News Gear Guide Remembering Place an Obituary Place an In Memoriam Classifieds Place an Ad Celebrations Real Estate Marketplace Pet Posts & Adoptions Working Business Ads This Week's Flyers Auction ePaper Newsletters Manage Print Subscription Profile Settings My Subscriptions Saved Articles Newsletters Customer Service FAQ Sign Out News Sports Arts Life Opinion Business Shopping Homes Puzzmo Healthing Driving Remembering ePaper Newsletters Manage Print Subscription Advertisement 1This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below. Share this Story : B.C. now offering flu shots as well as COVID-19 boosters Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Breadcrumb Trail LinksHealthLocal HealthSeniorsNewsLocal NewsB.C. now offering flu shots as well as COVID-19 boostersB.C. health officials strongly recommend people get both a flu shot and bivalent booster against the latest coronavirus variantsAuthor of the article: Joseph Ruttle Published Oct 12, 2022 • Last updated Oct 12, 2022 • 3 minute read Join the conversation You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account.RN Grace Oloresisimo gives a shot to Lillian May at a flu and COVID vaccine clinic at UBC in Vancouver, BC Wednesday, October 12, 2022. Photo by Jason Payne /PNGArticle contentCOVID-19 is far from the only threat to your health — and the health-care system’s overall capacity — heading into fall and winter.We apologize, but this video has failed to load.Try refreshing your browser, ortap here to see other videos from our team.B.C. now offering flu shots as well as COVID-19 boosters Back to video We apologize, but this video has failed to load.Try refreshing your browser, ortap here to see other videos from our team.Play VideoB.C. health officials are strongly recommending people get a flu shot as well as a bivalent booster against the latest coronavirus variants.“Getting vaccinated is the best way to protect ourselves and our communities, and we’ve made it easier for British Columbians to do so,” says Health Minister Adrian Dix on Tuesday, as the first supplies of flu shots became available to the public.Advertisement 2Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.THIS CONTENT IS RESERVED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLYSubscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account.Get exclusive access to the Vancouver Sun ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on.Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists.Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists.Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.SUBSCRIBE TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLESSubscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.Unlimited online access to articles from across Canada with one account.Get exclusive access to the Vancouver Sun ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition that you can share, download and comment on.Enjoy insights and behind-the-scenes analysis from our award-winning journalists.Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists.Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.REGISTER / SIGN IN TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLESCreate an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.Access articles from across Canada with one account.Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments.Enjoy additional articles per month.Get email updates from your favourite authors.THIS ARTICLE IS FREE TO READ REGISTER TO UNLOCK.Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.Access articles from across Canada with one accountShare your thoughts and join the conversation in the commentsEnjoy additional articles per monthGet email updates from your favourite authorsSign In or Create an AccountEmail AddressContinueor View more offersIf you are a Home delivery print subscriber, unlimited online access is included in your subscription. Activate your Online Access NowArticle content“We’re continuing to offer everyone free flu shots, and seniors can now get more protection with an enhanced vaccine. To make it even easier, many people will be able to get their influenza and COVID-19 vaccines at the same time.”After two years of low rates of influenza in B.C. because of restrictions on travel and socializing and widespread masking, health officials predict a surge in flu cases this fall and winter. It’s also expected COVID-19 cases will ramp up as more people gather indoors and travel.Recommended from Editorial B.C. prepares for fall influenza, COVID surge Avian flu detected at Chilliwack farm Time for a flu shot is nowStarting Oct. 11, flu vaccines are widely available at no charge at participating pharmacies, health clinics and at some doctors’ offices. Seniors and those at high risk of severe illness have been able to get their shot since Oct. 3.If you’re registered in the Get Vaccinated system, you should automatically get an invitation to book a flu shot, a COVID booster, or both. Walk-ins are also available, or you can call 1-833-838-2323 to make an appointment.SunriseStart your day with a roundup of B.C.-focused news and opinion.There was an error, please provide a valid email address.Sign UpBy signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc.Thanks for signing up!A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder.The next issue of Sunrise will soon be in your inbox.We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try againArticle contentAdvertisement 3Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article contentProvincial health officer Dr. Bonnie Henry notes flu vaccines are more important than ever after two years of health restrictions that limited people’s exposure to the nasty bug.“Getting vaccinated against influenza is especially important this year as our immunity against the virus has waned following two years of low influenza rates,” says Henry.Officials north of the equator watch what happens during the fall and winter in the Southern Hemisphere to help predict the type and severity of flu season here. That evidence shows the season started earlier and was more widespread this fall-winter than it was in 2020 or 2021.An enhanced flu shot — the Fluad trivalent adjuvanted vaccine — is available to all people 65 years and older for free. It provides better protection than a standard dose for those most at risk of severe illness and complications due to a natural weakening of the immune system with age.B.C. will have available 1.8 million doses of flu vaccine in 2022-23, including more than 660,000 of the enhanced doses.“Almost 1,300 community pharmacies across British Columbia are offering flu shots,” says Jamie Wigston, president of the B.C. Pharmacy Association. “With both the COVID-19 vaccine and flu, we anticipate pharmacists will deliver three million vaccinations to British Columbians this season.”Advertisement 4Story continues belowThis advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.Article contentMore information about the flu can be found at the B.C. Centre for Disease Control website.RelatedB.C. prepares for fall influenza, COVID surgeAvian flu detected at Chilliwack farmMore news, fewer ads: Our in-depth journalism is possible thanks to the support of our subscribers. For just $3.50 per week, you can get unlimited, ad-lite access to The Vancouver Sun, The Province, National Post and 13 other Canadian news sites. Support us by subscribing today: The Vancouver Sun | The Province.For more health news and content around diseases, conditions, wellness, healthy living, drugs, treatments and more, head to Healthing.ca – a member of the Postmedia Network.Article contentShare this article in your social network Share this Story : B.C. now offering flu shots as well as COVID-19 boosters Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr CommentsYou must be logged in to join the discussion or read more comments.Create an AccountSign in Join the Conversation Postmedia is committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion. Please keep comments relevant and respectful. Comments may take up to an hour to appear on the site. You will receive an email if there is a reply to your comment, an update to a thread you follow or if a user you follow comments. Visit our Community Guidelines for more information.Trending Vancouver officials seek owner of $3.8M house with dangerous collapsing garage News Travel insurer denies B.C. resident's $175,000 ambulance bill from 2022 Europe trip News U.S. to expand B.C.’s Pacific Highway border crossing next year Local News Who owns the B.C. properties linked to Canada's largest synthetic drug lab? Crime What's open and closed on Remembrance Day in Metro Vancouver News Latest National StoriesFeatured Local Savings Subscribe for $0.50/week Categories News Sports Arts Life Opinion Business Shopping ePaper SubscribeFollow Vancouver Sun Secondary Links Advertise With Us Digital Ad Registry Site Map Contact Privacy Policy Terms of Use FAQ Copyright My Account Manage My Print Subscription Manage My Tax Receipt 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4© 2024 Vancouver Sun, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly prohibited.Notice for the Postmedia NetworkThis website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.OKYou've reached the 20 article limit.You can manage saved articles in your account. Subscribe for $0.50/week and save up to 100 articles!Looks like you've reached your saved article limit!You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article.MOLDPRES News Agency - Moldova receives consignment of 188,000 doses of influenza vaccine ro ru en StateNewsAgency Authorization Toogle Dropdown Incert e-mail: Incert password: Remember me Authentication Forgot your password? Link for resetting your password will be sent to the e-mail address Incert e-mail: Password recovery Cancel For payment Home Official Social Political Economic Interview, Event Referendum 2024 Tourist Moldova Culture Sport Regional International Products and services News subcriptions Service photo Monitorul Oficial Press center Archive documents Monitorul Oficial PHOTO & VIDEO Photo reports Video News archive About us About the institution The Leadership The Chart Contacts HomeAll newsSocialMoldova receives consignment of 188,000 doses of influenza vaccine Moldova receives consignment of 188,000 doses of influenza vaccine 17:59 | 10.10.2022 Category: Social Chisinau, 10 October /MOLDPRES/ - Moldova today received a consignment of 188,000 doses of GCFLU tetravalent influenza vaccine, sources of the National Health Insurances Company (CNAM) have reported. According to the National Public Health Agency (ANSP), the vaccines were stocked in conditions of the refrigerating chain at the ANSP’s National Warehouse of Vaccines. The vaccines are to be carried and distributed to the territorial public health centres for the vaccination of the professional contingents and the groups with high risk of falling sick. Physicians remind that the immunization with anti-flu vaccine is the safest and the most efficient way of preventing the falling ill of influenza and avoiding complications and recommend that people from the categories with high risk of falling sick get vaccinated. Just as in the previous flu season, physicians recommend the concomitant vaccination against flu and the COVID-19 infection. Photo: ANSP Any material published on the website of the Public Institution ââA.I.S. Moldpresââ (Moldpres News Agency) is intellectual peoperty of the Agency, protected by the copyright. The taking over or/and use of these materials will be made only with the Agencyâs agreement and with compulsory reference to source. Facebook Twitter 22007597 Top 10 news Moldovan president summoned Supreme Security Council... Andrei SpÃ®nu steps down from Moldovan government, Action and Solidarity Party... Moldovan head of state has discussions with European Union leaders ... Moldovan PM has discussions with residents from central Moldova district ... Moldovan president says European leaders repeatedly reaffirm support for Moldova... Moldovan president meets European Council President in Budapest ... PHOTO Expo Mobila 2024 opened at Moldexpo centre... Moldovan president attends EPC summit... Moldovan deputy premier for European integration, civil society discussed EU en... MPs meet in plenary session on Friday... Photo Launch of Museum Outside installation at National History Museum of Moldova Inauguration of Expo Mobila Chisinau 2024 News from partners EUR: 19.3313 MDL ↑ USD: 17.9259 MDL ↑ RUB: 0.1839 MDL ↑ RON: 3.8855 MDL ↑ UAH: 0.4343 MDL ↑ CAD: 12.8982 MDL ↓ CHF: 20.5832 MDL ↑ GBP: 23.2427 MDL ↑ Meteo Ã®n Moldovameteo2.md Home About us News archive Contacts Products and services News subcriptions Service photo Monitorul Oficial Press center Archive documents Â© 2000-2024 "I.P. MOLDPRES A.I.S." Maintenance by amigo.studio Adress: Republica Moldova, Chisinau, str.Puskin, 22 Tel.: +373 22 23-23-72, +373 22 23-34-28 Fax: +373 22 23-26-98 E-mail: anticamera@moldpres.gov.md E-mail: inform@moldpres.gov.mdPres game postponed after influenza outbreak | Loop Trinidad & Tobago LoginTrinidad & Tobago Jamaica Barbados Cayman Islands Haiti St. Lucia Caribbean NewsLoopTT MenuNewsVideosT&T NewsCrimeEnvironmentPoliticsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsEntertainmentCarnivalLifestyleTravelFoodBusinessEnergySportCPLMatch CentreLoop NoticiasMonday Nov 11 0°CNews (current)VideosTopicsLoopTT MenuNewsVideosT&T NewsCrimeEnvironmentPoliticsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsEntertainmentCarnivalLifestyleTravelFoodBusinessEnergySportCPLMatch CentreLoop NoticiasLocationTrinidad & TobagoJamaicaBarbadosCayman IslandsHaitiSt. LuciaCaribbean NewsMy LoopSign InForgot Password?Create AccountBreaking News TSC stakeholder engagement planned for 2025Teen dies nearly two weeks after accidentMan left in critical condition after drive-by shooting in NewtownCops need help identifying body found in Sangre GrandeLaventille man gunned down, 20 spent shells recoveredMan shot dead in Rio Claro attempting to leave bar'Venom: The Last Dance' tops box office againActor Tony Todd, known for his role in the movie Candyman, dies at 69Man washing van runs to escape bulletsSiparia bar fight ends in choppingMonday Nov 11 0°C Sport2 min readPres game postponed after influenza outbreakVidia RamphalOctober 14, 2022 07:58 PM ETPresentation College (San Fernando). (Photo credit - SSFL Media)The Presentation College (San Fernando) match against San Juan in the Secondary Schools Football League, scheduled for Saturday has been postponed due to an outbreak of influenza.San Juan was due to host the 2019 National Intercol champions in Game 54 of the 2022 SSFL season but the Presentation team and staff are in the grip of influenza.Both teams are unbeaten in Group B of the Premier Division and the outcome could have a direct influence on the destination of the National League title.The SSFL in a media release stated on Friday, "Game 54 has been postponed due to the players and the technical staff members of Presentation College, San Fernando, currently being affected by a strong influenza strain which is highly contagious.""Symptoms being experienced by the individuals include severe headaches, fever, difficulty in breathing, and body aches," the release added.The SSFA stated that based on medical advice given to Presentation College, it was recommended that all team members and reserves who were in training, stay away from physical play for a period of four days."It is in this regard, the Secondary Schools Football League, out of an abundance of caution has decided to postpone the match. This measure will safeguard both the affected players as their immune system could be further compromised, as well as the opposing team members, whose health by way of contact play and intermingling, can be compromised," the SSFL stated.In addition, the SSFL announced that two other games would be rescheduled to a date and time to be determined.The affected games are Carapichaima East Secondary vs St Anthony's College and Speyside High School against Pleasantville Secondary.Further, the important Group A clash between St Benedict's College and Naparima College will be staged at the Hasely Crawford Stadium on Saturday.St Augustine Secondary will also face Fatima College at Warner Street, St Augustine on Saturday.Both games begin at 3:30 pm. Loop is better in the app. Customize your news feed, save articles for later, view your reading history and more. Click the links below to download the app for Android and IOS. Related Articles SportSt Benedict's College on top of PremiershipOctober 13, 2022 07:16 PM SportSSFL reschedules Premier Division gamesOctober 7, 2022 12:26 AM SportSan Juan North stay unbeaten in 2022 SSFLOctober 2, 2022 11:41 AMRecent Articles T&T NewsTSC stakeholder engagement planned for 2025 CrimeTeen dies nearly two weeks after accident CrimeMan left in critical condition after drive-by shooting in NewtownMore From EnergyNP refutes employees’ claims; says company is stable The National Petroleum (NP) Company is refuting two articles published in different newspapers which claim that the company is ‘unstable’ and that the employees are ‘calling for the removal of the CEO BusinessRhand Credit Union opens first ‘Smart Branch’ in San Fernando Rhand Credit Union marked a new chapter in its mission to empower members by opening its first branch in San Fernando. This milestone event was part of Rhand’s continued commitment to progress and 40:19 CrimeMan washing van runs to escape bullets Police are investigating a shooting in Port of Spain. The incident took place around 12:30pm yesterday along Minarchy Alley in East Dry River. The victim told police he was washing a panel T&T NewsTobago kicks off cruise season with The Ex Ploris One Tobago has announced the launch of the 2024/2025 cruise season. A media release for the island’s Division of Culture noted that the first call at the Port of Scarborough happened on Tuesday, Novemb T&T NewsGonzales to again act as Attorney General Public Utilities Minister Marvin Gonzales has been given another opportunity to act as Attorney General. This as Attorney General Reginald Armour is out of the country on private business from tod CrimeSiparia bar fight ends in chopping Two men are being treated at the San Fernando General Hospital for chop wounds following a bar fight in Siparia. According to police reports, at 2:30am yesterday, the victims, ages 43 and 42, were Sponsored StoriesRhand Credit Union opens first ‘Smart Branch’ in San Fernando Rhand Credit Union marked a new chapter in its mission to empower members by opening its first branch in San Fernando. This milestone event was part of Rhand’s continued commitment to progress and Brought To You ByRhand Credit UnionStandard stocks up: How to find all your Christmas essentials Decorating for Christmas can be a lot to handle, but Standard is making it easier on their customers with the launch of their Christmas Village at the Mt Hope location. They’ve stocked up on all th Brought To You ByStandard Distributors LtdLEX The Label caters to Caribbean women with new East Gates location Created with every version of the female form in mind, LEX The Label has opened their new location at East Gates Mall in Trincity. LEX’s priority remains key – representing every version of the Car Brought To You ByLex The LabelUnderstanding credit unions: Catering to the nation's diverse needs Whether you need to save, invest or take a loan, Rhand Credit Union has options tailored to your specific needs. In this episode, you'll learn how Rhand ensures that your specific needs are m Brought To You ByRhand Credit Union The Caribbean’s Most Downloaded News AppSign Up For Our NewsletterStay Connected Facebook Twitter Instagram Loop News Advertise with us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Comments Policy About Us Contact Us Submit an Article Cookie PolicyCOPYRIGHT 2020 BY DIGICEL | ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDMinistry: 346 confirmed flu cases over past 3 months - Trinidad Guardian Trinidad and Tobago Guardian Online JavaScript is disabled in your web browser or browser is too old to support JavaScript. Today almost all web pages contain JavaScript, a scripting programming language that runs on visitor's web browser. It makes web pages functional for specific purposes and if disabled for some reason, the content or the functionality of the web page can be limited or unavailable. Advertise With UsAbout UsListen Watch Login / Subscribe HomeNewsBusinessSportE-PaperFeaturesEnvironmentOpinionTraffic CamerasLifeClassifiedsDeath NoticesCommunityReal EstateAbout UsContact Us HomeNewsSportE-paperBusinessClassifiedsTraffic CamerasOtherEditorial Policies Death Notices Environment Features Opinion Games Subscriptions Real Estate Ministry: 346 confirmed flu cases over past 3 months by2022100810355220221008The Influenza Virus. Image by PIRO from Pixabay.The Min­istry of Health is re­port­ing that some 346 cas­es of the In­fluen­za Virus were con­firmed in Trinidad and To­ba­go be­tween Ju­ly and Oc­to­ber this year.An of­fi­cial state­ment is­sued by the Min­istry to­day notes that the 346 case rep­re­sent 48% males and 52% fe­males.Ac­cord­ing to the min­istry, these are the flu signs and symp­toms to watch out for:–Fever –Run­ny Nose–Cough –Sore throat–Headache –Malaise–Chills –Body pain or mus­cle pains“The pub­lic is ad­vised that the In­fluen­za virus may be more se­vere than the com­mon cold,” the health min­istry warns.It is urg­ing mem­bers of the pub­lic to seek im­me­di­ate med­ical care should they ex­pe­ri­ence short­ness of breath or any oth­er se­vere symp­tom.The health min­istry al­so is en­cour­ag­ing the pub­lic to take the fol­low­ing nec­es­sary per­son­al health pre­cau­tions to pro­tect them­selves and their fam­i­lies from con­tract­ing the In­fluen­za virus and oth­er cir­cu­lat­ing virus­es:–Wash hands of­ten with soap and wa­ter. If soap and wa­ter are not avail­able, use an al­co­hol-based hand sani­tis­er;–Avoid touch­ing the eyes, nose and mouth. Germs spread this way;–Clean and dis­in­fect sur­faces and ob­jects that may be con­t­a­m­i­nat­ed with germs;–Where pos­si­ble, avoid close con­tact with sick peo­ple;–While sick, lim­it con­tact with oth­ers as much as pos­si­ble to keep from in­fect­ing them;–Cov­er the nose and mouth with a tis­sue when cough­ing or sneez­ing. Af­ter us­ing a tis­sue, throw it in the bin and wash hands thor­ough­ly.More in­for­ma­tion on the In­fluen­za virus can be ob­tained via the Min­istry of Health’s so­cial me­dia pages, as well as its web­site at www.health.gov.tt Click HERE to Login Want FREE access to all our content? Sign up HERE!Tagged in: Ministry of HealthInfluenzaRelated articles Sponsored Weather PORT OF SPAIN WEATHER Sponsored Trending RBC defends its credit card limitsIMF wants Govt to end forex restrictionsThree teens injured in Ariapita Avenue shootingT&T’s Brain DrainElderly women struggling with illness, hardship seek urgent helpThree men held for robbing circus in OctoberOne man gunned down, one injured in Rio ClaroImbert defends forex restrictions as IMF urges greater flexibilityTwo men chopped in bar brawlLow turnout at Memorial Day Parade in Port-of-Spain Today's GuardianViewSubscribePublications A duet by Marvin Smith and Vanessa Bushe.Edison BoodoosinghA duet by Marvin Smith and Vanessa Bushe.Edison BoodoosinghMemorable performances in Versi d’Amore 20241111003511Tutor Zaheer Mohammed, left, with trainee Cristiano Benjamin, CCC operations manager Nicole Kistow, VMCOTT CEO Natasha Prince, trainee Jada Belgrave, and CCC programme co-ordinator Lt Curt Jones pose for a photo during the graduation ceremony. Photo courtesy Vanessa Moon Tutor Zaheer Mohammed, left, with trainee Cristiano Benjamin, CCC operations manager Nicole Kistow, VMCOTT CEO Natasha Prince, trainee Jada Belgrave, and CCC programme co-ordinator Lt Curt Jones pose for a photo during the graduation ceremony. Photo courtesy Vanessa Moon 33 auto mechanics graduate from CCC20241103210020Junnel LewisJunnel LewisJunnel Lewis painting her dreams20241027101858Makeda CharlesMakeda CharlesMakeda Charles Using her story to touch survivors of abuse 20241027113816 Created by potrace 1.15, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2017 NewsBusinessSportsLifeOpinionTobago TodayClassifiedsDeath NoticesSubscriptionsReal EstateCategoriesNewsBusinessSportFeaturesOpinionTraffic CamerasDeath NoticesINFORMATIONAbout UsContact UsAdvertise With UsPrivacy PolicySubscriptionsTerms of ServicesDigital MediaThe Big Board Company.Real EstateClassifiedsTELEVISIONCNC3 TelevisionRADIO951 RemixSangeet 106.1 FMSky 99.5FMSlam 100.5 FMVibe CT 105 FMMix 90.1 FM (Guyana)Freedom 106.5 FMAbout Us Guardian Media is the premier provider of multimedia solutions and authoritative insight on news, politics, business, finance, sports, and current affairs. Our brand portfolio includes CNC3, Guardian, TBC Radio Network and The Big Board Company. Contact us Send us an e-mail here or call us at +1-(868)-225-4465 / +1-(868)-235-5668Follow usDefra confirm 3 more cases of bird flu in Norfolk - Agriland.co.uk Defra confirm 3 more cases of bird flu in Norfolk - Agriland.co.uk Agriland Logo Latest News Dairy Beef Arable Sheep Machinery Forestry Ireland Search for: Latest News Beef Dairy Sheep Pig/Poultry Farm Focus Arable Farm Building Forestry Grass Technical Machinery Rural Life Schemes Other Information Contact Advertising About Agriland.co.uk Opinion Search for: News Latest News Dairy Beef Arable Sheep Pig/Poultry Machinery Agri-Business Opinion Featured Farm Focus Rural Life Forestry Environment Government Grass Information About Agriland.co.uk Contact Advertising Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Balmoral Show Agriland App Download Our App Latest News Dairy Beef Arable Sheep Machinery Forestry Ireland Search for: Latest News Beef Dairy Sheep Pig/Poultry Farm Focus Arable Farm Building Forestry Grass Technical Machinery Rural Life Schemes Other Information Contact Advertising About Agriland.co.uk Opinion Defra confirms 3 more cases of bird flu in Norfolk Eva Osborne-Sherlock October 13, 2022 9:37 am Three new cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza (bird flu) have been confirmed in Norfolk. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) yesterday (Wednesday, October 13) gave details of the new outbreaks. The H5N1 strain of the disease was found in commercial housed poultry at an eleventh site near Attleborough, Breckland in Norfolk. It was also confirmed in non-commercial and other captive birds at a second premises near Witham, Braintree, Essex and was in commercial housed poultry at a premises near Sleaford, North Kesteven, Lincolnshire. Advertisement A 3km Protection Zone and a 10km Surveillance Zone will be put in place around each site, and all poultry on the infected premises will be humanely culled. Bird flu in the UK Since October 1, 2022, there have been 31 cases of the H5N1 strain of bird flu confirmed in England. In total, there have been 187 cases in England since the outbreak began in October of 2021. Cases of the disease have also been confirmed in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, as the UK continues to battle its biggest ever outbreak. Advertisement Mandatory housing measures for all poultry and captive birds in Norfolk, Suffolk and parts of Essex came into force yesterday (Wednesday, October 12). The housing order legally requires all bird keepers in these hotspots to keep their birds indoors and to follow stringent biosecurity measures to help protect their flocks from the disease. Defra is urging bird keepers to consult the interactive map to check if they are impacted and to then read the regional AIPZ with housing measure declaration which sets out the requirements in the hotspot locations. AVIAN INFLUENZA BIRD FLU DEFRA LOADING NEXT STORY Trending News Machinery Newark: World record attempt for gathering of MF 135 tractors Machinery Mid-range Massey Ferguson 5M tractors top out at 145hp Machinery Machinery: Reality bites as CNH income tumbles in Q3 N.Ireland DAERA warns poultry sector of winter bird flu spread New Jobs Agricultural Field TechnicianCollege machinery teacherSales & Technical ManagerTechnical sales advisorRuminant Nutritionist & Business Development Manager See More Jobs Latest News Agri-Business Research project aims to genetically reduce methane emissions in beef cattle Beef Cookstown herd takes 4 titles at NI Angus club calf show Dairy Autumn calving: Achieving 100 SCC in the first 100 days Agri-Business Cattle methane vaccine project receives $9.4m in funding Environment Scotland pledges continued leadership during COP29 Latest News Agri Politics Agri-Business Environment Forestry Rural Life Beef Dairy Sheep Arable Pig/Poultry Other Machinery Farm Building Schemes Opinion Featured Grass Contact Agriland About Agriland.co.uk Advertising Agriland App Balmoral Show Government JOIN OUR NEWSLETTER Submit Latest News Agri Politics Agri-Business Environment Forestry Rural Life Beef Dairy Sheep Arable Pig/Poultry Other Machinery Farm Building Schemes Opinion Featured Grass Contact Agriland About Agriland.co.uk Advertising Agriland App Balmoral Show Government FOLLOW US Cookie Settings | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Advertising © Copyright 2024 Agriland Media UK Ltd.More cases confirmed by Defra as bird flu crisis continues More cases confirmed by Defra as bird flu crisis continues Agriland Logo Latest News Dairy Beef Arable Sheep Machinery Forestry Ireland Search for: Latest News Beef Dairy Sheep Pig/Poultry Farm Focus Arable Farm Building Forestry Grass Technical Machinery Rural Life Schemes Other Information Contact Advertising About Agriland.co.uk Opinion Search for: News Latest News Dairy Beef Arable Sheep Pig/Poultry Machinery Agri-Business Opinion Featured Farm Focus Rural Life Forestry Environment Government Grass Information About Agriland.co.uk Contact Advertising Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Balmoral Show Agriland App Download Our App Latest News Dairy Beef Arable Sheep Machinery Forestry Ireland Search for: Latest News Beef Dairy Sheep Pig/Poultry Farm Focus Arable Farm Building Forestry Grass Technical Machinery Rural Life Schemes Other Information Contact Advertising About Agriland.co.uk Opinion More cases confirmed by Defra as bird flu crisis continues Eva Osborne-Sherlock October 14, 2022 12:00 pm Two new cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza (bird flu) have been confirmed by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) and the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA). The disease was confirmed in commercial housed poultry at a second site near Kelvedon, Braintree in Essex and in commercial housed poultry at a fourth premises near Mundford, Breckland in Norfolk yesterday (October 13). 3km Protection Zones and 10km Surveillance zones have been declared around the infected premises. All poultry on the sites will also be humanely culled. Since the start of the month, there have been 33 confirmed cases of the H5N1 strain of bird flu in England. Advertisement In total, there have been 191 cases of the disease in England since the outbreak started in October of 2021. Amendments A site near Sleaford, North Kesteven in Lincolnshire has had the 3km Protection Zone and 10km Surveillance zone around it amended. The premises had a confirmed case of bird flu on Wednesday (October 12). Commercial poultry tested positive for the disease at a premises near Bridlington, East Riding of Yorkshire on August 28, 2022. Following successful completion of disease control activities and surveillance in the zone, part of the Protection Zone has ended and the area forms part of the Surveillance Zone. APHA AVIAN INFLUENZA BIRD FLU DEFRA LOADING NEXT STORY Trending News Machinery Newark: World record attempt for gathering of MF 135 tractors Machinery Mid-range Massey Ferguson 5M tractors top out at 145hp Machinery Machinery: Reality bites as CNH income tumbles in Q3 N.Ireland DAERA warns poultry sector of winter bird flu spread New Jobs Agricultural Field TechnicianCollege machinery teacherSales & Technical ManagerTechnical sales advisorRuminant Nutritionist & Business Development Manager See More Jobs Latest News Agri-Business Research project aims to genetically reduce methane emissions in beef cattle Beef Cookstown herd takes 4 titles at NI Angus club calf show Dairy Autumn calving: Achieving 100 SCC in the first 100 days Agri-Business Cattle methane vaccine project receives $9.4m in funding Environment Scotland pledges continued leadership during COP29 Latest News Agri Politics Agri-Business Environment Forestry Rural Life Beef Dairy Sheep Arable Pig/Poultry Other Machinery Farm Building Schemes Opinion Featured Grass Contact Agriland About Agriland.co.uk Advertising Agriland App Balmoral Show Government JOIN OUR NEWSLETTER Submit Latest News Agri Politics Agri-Business Environment Forestry Rural Life Beef Dairy Sheep Arable Pig/Poultry Other Machinery Farm Building Schemes Opinion Featured Grass Contact Agriland About Agriland.co.uk Advertising Agriland App Balmoral Show Government FOLLOW US Cookie Settings | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Advertising © Copyright 2024 Agriland Media UK Ltd.B.C.'s COVID-19, flu booking system glitching | CityNews Vancouver skip to main content Vancouver Calgary Edmonton Halifax Kitchener Montreal Ottawa Toronto Vancouver Winnipeg About About Us Our Team Where to Find Us Careers Contact Contact Us Submit News Tip Advertise With Us Newsletters News Insiders Watch Live Listen Live News All Local Canada World Lifestyle Business Entertainment Sports Watch All Livestream Latest Videos Listen All Listen Live Latest Traffic Report Latest Business Report The Big Story Podcast Seekr Audio App All Shows Weather Traffic Contests & Events All Contests General Contest Rules Events Vancouver AllVancouver Calgary Edmonton Halifax Kitchener Montreal Ottawa Toronto Vancouver Winnipeg About All About Us Our Team Where to Find Us Careers Contact All Contact Us Submit News Tip Advertise With Us Newsletters News Insiders Watch Live Listen Live B.C.’s COVID-19, flu booking system suffers glitches A person draws out Moderna vaccine during a drive through COVID-19 vaccine clinic at St. Lawrence College in Kingston, Ont., on Jan. 2, 2022. THE CANADIAN PRESS/Lars Hagberg By Sonia Aslam Posted October 13, 2022 7:37 am. Last Updated October 13, 2022 7:38 am. It’s been two days since the provincial government rolled out its new online system to book appointments for the COVID-19 booster and flu shot, but it doesn’t seem to be going well. Many people are reporting issues and it all hinges on a special code. The way the new system works is you get emailed or texted a reminder that it’s time to book your shot(s) and along with it, you get a special code you have to use to secure an appointment. The problem is the code only works once, meaning, if you use it to book one shot and not the other, you’re out of luck. One Vancouver man, who doesn’t want to be identified, tells CityNews he used his code to get his flu shot this past weekend. He didn’t book his COVID booster shot because he’s waiting for Pfizer’s bivalent vaccine to be made available, but without a valid code, he says he’s becoming increasingly overdue for his shot. I’m hearing this system isn’t working all that well. The code/link you get from the province doesn’t work if you don’t book both flu/COVID shots at the same time. One health authority says the invite isn’t needed for the flu shot. What’s your experience? Send me a DM/email pls. https:/.coO9SkcPl5H — Sonia Aslam (@SoniaSAslam) October 12, 2022 “It’s frustrating because basically, I’m in limbo now. I think they need to sort out their system. It needs to be better. It needs to be more user-friendly and I’m not sure I like the idea of having to book the flu shot when in previous years we could just do it on our own,” he said. He called the provincial call centre for help and was told they’re not able to give him a new code because the system would not allow it. “They said, ‘Maybe just wait and hopefully somehow the system will recognize the fact that you’re due and maybe you’ll get another text or email,'” he said. When registering for COVID 4th, there was no option to select flu or both. I contacted the pharmacy I’m going to for my COVID after and they said I have to book thru BC gov website. My work is offering flu shot the next day so just going that route instead. — James (@jimmybee604) October 12, 2022 Walked in to a local Pharmasave. Was told I would have to wait for an invite. I’ve already had my Covid booster. Tried to use that old invite for flu shot, but it, too, told me I’d have to wait for an invite. Sigh. — Give me my effin flu shot (@kathlibt235) October 12, 2022 His wife is also having issues. He says she got her COVID booster recently but while at the pharmacy, he says she was told she could not get the flu shot because she did not use the new booking system. “She thought that when she got there, they would just give it to her but basically, they refused her because they said, ‘Nope, you actually have to have a booking.’ She went back online to try and get a booking for her flu shot and she’s having the same problem as me — she can’t get back into the system. She was on hold with the hotline for an hour… and then they disconnected her.” CityNews also spoke to a man who lives in Richmond who’s also facing some confusion navigating this new system. He says he recently went to a pharmacy in Steveston that had a sign posted saying it was accepting walk-in customers for the flu shot. Related Articles: British Columbians to register for flu shots this year Province readies for fall surge of COVID-19 and flu cases Health Canada approves Pfizer’s bivalent Omicron vaccine for anyone 12+ He tried and was turned away because they said he had to have an official invite from the province. He also called the provincial call centre and was left without a solution. “I waited 45 minutes and they told me the same thing too — I have to wait until I get an invite in order to get my flu shot,” he said. This upsets him because his wife is immunocompromised, and he wants to help protect her. “I’m very worried. It is what it is, but I can’t do anything about it.” He says he doesn’t want to get frustrated. “It is what it is. If I have to get [an invite], I will get one at some point in time, whether it be now or next week or next two weeks, I know my time will come.” Related Video: The Ministry of Health admits to CityNews the system is not working perfectly but maintains most people should be able to book both shots at the same time. It also clarifies, using the booking system for the flu shot is not mandatory but is recommended, adding walk-in appointments continue to be available at pharmacies province-wide. “Single appointments, that include both a COVID-19 booster and influenza vaccine, are available to be booked in the GetVaccinated system. However, it is not possible to have two separate open appointments at the present time. Rest assured, if you show up to a COVID-19 booster appointment at a pharmacy, and if the pharmacy has available influenza vaccine stock, they can offer it to you,” says a ministry spokesperson in an email. It goes on to say its ImmunizationBC team is making real-time updates to the system to ensure people are able to book their shots. If you’re having any issues, no longer have a valid code or need help, you’re being told to call the provincial call centre at 1-833-838-2323. Submit a Correction Accessibility Feedback Top Stories Remembrance Day ceremonies in the Lower Mainland this year There are many events and ceremonies around the Lower Mainland for people to mark the occasion and pay their respects. 11h ago American immigration lawyer predicts many waiting for status in U.S. will turn to Canada instead The RCMP and the feds are already bracing for an influx of asylum seekers into Canada, fearing Donald Trump's vow to throw out illegal migrants. 11h ago Port workers' union accuses BC Maritime Employers Association of ending talks early A labour dispute continues to paralyze cargo shipping at B.C. ports, and the workers' union is accusing employers of abruptly ending contract talks early. 8h ago Canadian Army veterans traumatized from service connect with horses in therapy Canadian Army veterans are healing their psychological wounds with some help from equine friends. 10h ago Live Radio Connect with CityNews Trending Now Bookshelf: New book charts history of Vancouver independent beer scene Search party underway for missing teen in Surrey park Remembrance Day ceremonies in the Lower Mainland this year Special weather statement issued for Metro Vancouver, Fraser Valley Weekend talks scheduled between both sides in B.C.'s port dispute Top Stories Remembrance Day ceremonies in the Lower Mainland this year There are many events and ceremonies around the Lower Mainland for people to mark the occasion and pay their respects. 11h ago American immigration lawyer predicts many waiting for status in U.S. will turn to Canada instead The RCMP and the feds are already bracing for an influx of asylum seekers into Canada, fearing Donald Trump's vow to throw out illegal migrants. 11h ago Port workers' union accuses BC Maritime Employers Association of ending talks early A labour dispute continues to paralyze cargo shipping at B.C. ports, and the workers' union is accusing employers of abruptly ending contract talks early. 8h ago Canadian Army veterans traumatized from service connect with horses in therapy Canadian Army veterans are healing their psychological wounds with some help from equine friends. 10h ago Most Watched Today 2:59 B-25 Bomber to join Lancaster for Remembrance Day flight On November 11th, Canada's only flying Lancaster traditionally makes a flight over local ceremonies. This year's flight will be especially impactful as the iconic plane is joined by another heavyweight in the sky. David Zura meets the plane's pilot. 12h ago 1:41 Volunteers plant native shrubbery in Stanley Park to help restore forest Braving the rain on Saturday, over 40 volunteers -- with the assistance of the Stanley Park Ecology Society -- are planting some 500 shrubs in the park's Lost Lagoon area. 12h ago 2:08 Search party held in Surrey as 18-year-old remains missing; RCMP asks public for health After the Surrey RCMP asked for public assistance in the search of a missing 18-year-old, over 70 people gathered with his friends and family to help. 12h ago 1:58 Langara College instructors' union concerned about increasing layoffs The union representing instructors at Langara College says its qualified instructors are at risk of losing their positions as the result of a decrease in revenue from the new international student enrolment cap. 1:57 Class-action lawsuit certified over deadly Winters Hotel fire A court has certified a class-action lawsuit against Atira, BC Housing, and the City of Vancouver over the deadly Winters Hotel fire in 2022. Kier Junos hears from the lead plaintiff in the case, who is a former resident. More Videos Get the CityNews AppNow New and Improved! Listen to NewsRadio Vancouver live anytime and get up-to-the-minute breaking-news alerts, traffic, weather and video from CityNews Vancouver anywhere you are – across all Android and iOS devices. Apple Store Google Play About Us News Policy Contact Us Advertise With Us Watch Citytv Ad Choices Privacy Policy Accessibility Feedback Political Ads Registry Terms of Service Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube 2440 Ash St. Vancouver, BC V5Z 4J6 © 2002 - 2024 Rogers Media. All rights reserved.