Safety and immunogenicity of a ferritin nanoparticle H2 influenza vaccine in healthy adults: a phase 1 trial | Nature Medicine Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature medicine articles article Safety and immunogenicity of a ferritin nanoparticle H2 influenza vaccine in healthy adults: a phase 1 trial Download PDF Download PDF Article Published: 03 February 2022 Safety and immunogenicity of a ferritin nanoparticle H2 influenza vaccine in healthy adults: a phase 1 trial Katherine V. Houser ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2147-186X1 na1, Grace L. Chen1 na1, Cristina Carter1, Michelle C. Crank1, Thuy A. Nguyen1, Maria Claudia Burgos Florez1, Nina M. Berkowitz1, Floreliz Mendoza1, Cynthia Starr Hendel1, Ingelise J. Gordon1, Emily E. Coates1, Sandra Vazquez1, Judy Stein1, Christopher L. Case2, Heather Lawlor1, Kevin Carlton1, Martin R. Gaudinski1,3, Larisa Strom1, Amelia R. Hofstetter ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4113-54731, C. Jason Liang4, Sandeep Narpala1, Christian Hatcher1, Rebecca A. Gillespie ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5741-36991, Adrian Creanga ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3087-83971, Masaru Kanekiyo ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5767-15321, Julie E. Raab1, Sarah F. Andrews ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2583-19491, Yi Zhang1, Eun Sung Yang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3161-16241, Lingshu Wang1, Kwanyee Leung1, Wing-Pui Kong1, Alec W. Freyn5, Raffael Nachbagauer ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5568-54206, Peter Palese ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0337-58235,6, Robert T. Bailer1, Adrian B. McDermott ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0616-91171, Richard A. Koup1, Jason G. Gall1, Frank Arnold1, John R. Mascola1, Barney S. Graham1, Julie E. Ledgerwood1 & the VRC 316 Study TeamShow authors Nature Medicine volume 28, pages 383–391 (2022)Cite this article 13k Accesses 89 Citations 10 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusProtein vaccines AbstractCurrently, licensed seasonal influenza vaccines display variable vaccine effectiveness, and there remains a need for novel vaccine platforms capable of inducing broader responses against viral protein domains conserved among influenza subtypes. We conducted a first-in-human, randomized, open-label, phase 1 clinical trial (NCT03186781) to evaluate a novel ferritin (H2HA-Ferritin) nanoparticle influenza vaccine platform. The H2 subtype has not circulated in humans since 1968. Adults born after 1968 have been exposed to only the H1 subtype of group 1 influenza viruses, which shares a conserved stem with H2. Including both H2-naive and H2-exposed adults in the trial allowed us to evaluate memory responses against the conserved stem domain in the presence or absence of pre-existing responses against the immunodominant HA head domain. Fifty healthy participants 18–70 years of age received H2HA-Ferritin intramuscularly as a single 20-μg dose (n = 5) or a 60-μg dose either twice in a homologous (n = 25) prime-boost regimen or once in a heterologous (n = 20) prime-boost regimen after a matched H2 DNA vaccine prime. The primary objective of this trial was to evaluate the safety and tolerability of H2HA-Ferritin either alone or in prime-boost regimens. The secondary objective was to evaluate antibody responses after vaccination. Both vaccines were safe and well tolerated, with the most common solicited symptom being mild headache after both H2HA-Ferritin (n = 15, 22%) and H2 DNA (n = 5, 25%). Exploratory analyses identified neutralizing antibody responses elicited by the H2HA-Ferritin vaccine in both H2-naive and H2-exposed populations. Furthermore, broadly neutralizing antibody responses against group 1 influenza viruses, including both seasonal H1 and avian H5 subtypes, were induced in the H2-naive population through targeting the HA stem. This ferritin nanoparticle vaccine technology represents a novel, safe and immunogenic platform with potential application for pandemic preparedness and universal influenza vaccine development. Similar content being viewed by others Phase 1 dose-escalation trial evaluating a group 2 influenza hemagglutinin stabilized stem nanoparticle vaccine Article Open access 17 September 2024 A single residue in influenza virus H2 hemagglutinin enhances the breadth of the B cell response elicited by H2 vaccination Article 03 February 2022 Immunogenicity of standard, high-dose, MF59-adjuvanted, and recombinant-HA seasonal influenza vaccination in older adults Article Open access 16 February 2021 MainSeasonal influenza epidemics and the threat of pandemic influenza outbreaks are perennial global public health challenges. In an average year, seasonal influenza epidemics cause 3–5 million cases of severe illness and 300,000–650,000 deaths worldwide1,2, with pandemics capable of much greater morbidity and mortality3. Vaccination is an essential tool for seasonal influenza control; however, currently licensed influenza vaccines require annual reformulation and immunization due to their specificity for the variable circulating strains4. Influenza viruses are diverse, with many antigenically unique strains of each seasonal subtype circulating simultaneously in the human population. Even when the circulating viruses are well matched to the strains within the vaccine, the effectiveness of seasonal vaccines typically ranges from 40% to 60%, likely due to the lack of adjuvants in the vaccines and the pre-existing immunity to the seasonal subtypes in the population1.Influenza A hemagglutinin (HA) glycoproteins, which mediate binding and entry of host cells, are phylogenetically categorized into two groups: group 1 (for example, H1, H2, H5, H6 and H9) and group 2 (for example, H3, H7 and H10). The H1 and H3 subtypes are currently responsible for the seasonal epidemics, whereas several other group 1 and group 2 subtypes display pandemic potential5. Currently licensed seasonal influenza vaccines predominantly elicit antibody responses directed toward the immunodominant globular head domain of HA6. The HA head is highly prone to mutations, and vaccine responses against this domain are generally strain specific. However, substantive evidence has emerged that eliciting antibodies against the highly conserved HA stem domain would yield a universal influenza vaccine capable of broad protection within and across group 1 and group 2 viruses, including subtypes with pandemic potential7,8,9,10. Promising technologies are being developed to predominantly target the HA stem domain to overcome the current limitations of seasonal influenza vaccines, with the goal of developing an improved influenza vaccine11,12,13.An ideal vaccine design strategy would result in an influenza vaccine platform that is also capable of being rapidly implemented during an emerging pandemic. To address this need, we developed a ferritin nanoparticle-based vaccine platform11. Ferritin is a ubiquitous iron storage protein capable of self-assembling into octahedral particles. The presence of three-fold axes on the particle surface allows for the orderly display of trimeric viral antigens, including influenza HA glycoproteins11. Because the ferritin subunits self-assemble, the ferritin nanoparticle-based vaccine can be manufactured recombinantly without relying on virus propagation in embryonated eggs. This allows for expedited production timelines, which are a considerable benefit during a pandemic response. In preclinical studies, this platform was safe and immunogenic and elicited neutralizing antibodies to conserved antigenic sites in both the HA head and stem11.In this phase 1 clinical trial, we evaluated an influenza HA ferritin (H2HA-Ferritin) vaccine in healthy adults between 18 and 70 years of age. The H2HA-Ferritin vaccine is composed of the ectodomain of the HA from the H2N2 pandemic strain A/Singapore/1/57 genetically fused to the ferritin subunit derived from Helicobacter pylori11. The assembled vaccine displays eight antigenically intact influenza H2 HA trimers in an orderly array on the nanoparticle surface. The H2N2 subtype (comprising H2 HA and N2 neuraminidase) emerged as a pandemic virus in 1957 and circulated in humans until 1968 (ref. 14). H2 influenza viruses persist in avian reservoirs and, therefore, retain strong pandemic potential14,15. Since the H2N2 subtype stopped circulating in humans in 1968, both immunologically naive and experienced individuals exist in the present population. This presented a unique opportunity to evaluate a novel vaccine platform in two distinct exposure populations within the same trial. This first-in-human, dose-escalation, phase 1 clinical trial was designed to assess the safety, tolerability and vaccine-induced antibody response of two doses of H2HA-Ferritin in both H2-naive adults (born after 1969, after H2 influenza stopped circulating in humans) and H2-exposed adults (born before 1966, while H2 influenza circulated). We excluded individuals born between 1966 and 1969 in an attempt to clearly separate the potential historical exposure to H2N2 influenza in the enrolled groups. We also evaluated the utility of this vaccine platform in both homologous and heterologous prime-boost regimens by including a matched H2 HA DNA prime in a subset of participants. Inclusion of a DNA prime in previous phase 1 influenza trials showed that DNA priming can lead to improved heterologous responses16. The breadth and potency of vaccine-induced antibody responses were assessed up to 40 weeks after vaccination.ResultsClinical trial design and participantsTo evaluate the safety and vaccine-induced antibody response after H2HA-Ferritin administration, we vaccinated both H2-naive and H2-exposed adults in either homologous or heterologous prime-boost regimens (Fig. 1). For the homologous prime-boost regimen, participants received two 60-μg doses of H2HA-Ferritin approximately 16 weeks apart. In the heterologous prime-boost regimen, participants received a 4-mg H2 DNA prime encoding the matched full-length H2 HA protein administered 16 weeks before vaccination with 60 μg of H2HA-Ferritin. A subset of H2-naive participants received a single dose of 20-μg H2HA-Ferritin in the dose-escalation portion of the study. These 20-μg-dose participants provided valuable safety data for the vaccine platform but were not the focus of the immunological analyses, and, therefore, the results from those participants are summarized in Extended Data Fig. 1.Fig. 1: CONSORT diagram for the clinical trial.Participants 18–47 years of age (born after 1969) were considered ‘H2-naive’, and those 52–70 years of age (born before 1966) were considered ‘H2-exposed’, based on potential historical exposure to H2N2 influenza. The interval between prime and boost vaccinations was 16 weeks. Participants who had altered or discontinued vaccination schedules were monitored for safety and were included in the immunogenicity analysis until their vaccination schedules were changed.Full size imageFifty healthy adults were enrolled into the trial between 25 October 2017 and 26 November 2018. The final study visit occurred on 3 September 2019. The 25 (50%) male and 25 (50%) female participants had median ages of 34 years (H2-naive adults) and 59 years (H2-exposed adults) (Supplementary Table 1). Most participants (82%) had received at least three seasonal influenza vaccines in the 5 years before the trial (Supplementary Table 2). Forty-six participants completed the protocol, and 44 completed all scheduled vaccinations (Fig. 1), for a total of 69 H2HA-Ferritin and 20 H2 DNA administrations. Slower enrollment in the H2-exposed cohort resulted in two enrollments occurring late in the accrual period. To limit the variation in environmental influenza exposure during the influenza season in the participants, the booster vaccination for these two participants (one H2-exposed participant in each prime-boost regimen) was not administered. Both participants remained active in the study for safety and immunogenicity evaluations related to their initial vaccination. One H2-naive participant in the heterologous prime-boost regimen did not receive the second vaccination due to an intercurrent illness but remained active in the study. Three participants moved or were lost to follow-up (one H2-naive participant in the heterologous prime-boost regimen and two H2-naive participants in the homologous prime-boost regimen), and one H2-naive participant in the homologous prime-boost regimen voluntarily withdrew due to time commitment.SafetyThe primary objective of the clinical trial examined the safety and tolerability of the H2HA-Ferritin and H2 DNA vaccines. Local reactogenicity after H2HA-Ferritin or H2 DNA vaccination was mild, with more reports of mild pain after H2 DNA needle-free administration (n = 12, 60%) compared to H2HA-Ferritin administration via needle and syringe (n = 7, 10%) (P < 0.001) (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 3). Most systemic reactogenicity of both vaccines was mild to moderate, with the most common symptom reported being mild headache after both H2HA-Ferritin (n = 15, 22%) and H2 DNA (n = 5, 25%) administration. One report of a severe fever occurred in an H2-naive participant who received the homologous prime-boost regimen 2 d after the first H2HA-Ferritin vaccination (Supplementary Table 3). This fever coincided with one of the two influenza-like illnesses (ILIs) reported during the trial (Supplementary Table 2). The other ILI occurred in an H2-naive participant in the heterologous prime-boost regimen at 81 d after the H2HA-Ferritin vaccination. Neither ILI was laboratory confirmed as influenza. Six mild to moderate adverse events (AEs) were attributed to vaccination during the trial; all resolved without sequelae (Supplementary Table 4). One serious adverse event (SAE) occurred during the trial but was unrelated to vaccination based on temporality, biological plausibility and alternative causes. On the basis of these results, we determined that these vaccines were safe and well tolerated in this phase 1 clinical trial.Fig. 2: Maximum local and systemic solicited reactogenicity.Percent of participants (x axis) who reported a local or systemic symptom (y axis) in the 7 d after prime (week 0) or boost (week 16) vaccination. Participants 18–47 years of age (born after 1969) were considered ‘H2-naive’, and those 52–70 years of age (born before 1966) were considered ‘H2-exposed’, based on potential historical exposure to H2N2 influenza. *Local solicited symptoms of swelling or redness were not observed after vaccination.Full size imageResponse to H. pylori ferritinAs viral antigen display on H. pylori-derived ferritin particles represents a novel vaccine platform, participants were monitored for immunological responses to the ferritin platform throughout the trial. Although H. pylori ferritin is highly divergent from mammalian ferritin, we assessed antibody reactivity against both H. pylori and human ferritins in an exploratory objective. We detected increases against H. pylori-derived ferritin after vaccination in the trial participants, similarly to observations from preclinical models (Extended Data Fig. 2)11,17. Notably, no significant increase in antibodies was observed against human ferritin in any participant compared to baseline, indicating that there was no cross-reactive antibody response after one or two doses of H2HA-Ferritin (Extended Data Fig. 2). Additionally, there was no observed effect of H2HA-Ferritin vaccination on monitored hematologic parameters of participants, which included iron levels, hemoglobin levels, hematocrit, white blood cell counts and neutrophil counts.Vaccine-induced antibody responses against H2The secondary objective of the clinical trial examined the vaccine-induced antibody response after H2HA-Ferritin administration by hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assay at baseline, 4 weeks after the prime vaccination and 2 weeks after the boost vaccination. As expected, we did not observe notable levels of baseline antibody responses against H2N2 influenza in H2-naive adults (born after 1969), whereas we detected baseline responses against H2N2 influenza in approximately half of participants representing those who lived through the H2 pandemic (H2-exposed, born before 1966) (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Fig. 3a). These antibodies were observed in the H2-exposed participants after the first dose of H2HA-Ferritin (Fig. 3a). In H2-naive adults, both doses were needed to detect responses by HAI assay in most participants. We observed seroconversion rates between 31% and 89% and at least a four-fold increase in geometric mean HAI assay titers over baseline at 2 weeks after the boost in all vaccination regimens (Fig. 3a,b).Fig. 3: Vaccine-induced binding antibodies are observed by HAI assay after H2HA-Ferritin vaccination.Sera from H2-naive (blue circles) and H2-exposed (green circles) participants who received H2HA-Ferritin in either homologous (closed circles) or heterologous (open circles) prime-boost regimens were analyzed with an HAI assay with H2N2 A/Singapore/1/57. a, Individual results, group geometric means and geometric mean fold changes over baseline are shown. b, The seroconversion rate for each group is displayed as a percentage, with the number of participants per group seroconverting included above. Whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Dotted lines indicate the lower limit of detection; arrows indicate vaccination time points. Negative samples were reported and calculated as half the limit of detection. The number of participant sera analyzed at each time point is summarized in Supplementary Table 7. GMT, geometric mean titer.Full size imageVaccine-induced binding antibody responses against HA stemTo specifically investigate the vaccine-induced antibody response directed against the HA stem, HA stem antibody binding levels were measured by a Meso Scale Discovery electrochemiluminescence immuno assay (ECLIA) as an exploratory objective. We evaluated antibody responses to HA antigens from diverse group 1 influenza subtypes, including H1, H2, H5 and H6, as well as a group 2 subtype represented by H7. The H2 stem antigen was included to assess the response against the homologous virus; the H5 stem antigen was included as the subtype that is a relevant potential avian pandemic threat; the H6 ectodomain antigen was included as a more distantly related subtype within the viruses possessing group 1 HAs; the H1 stem antigen was included for comparison to a seasonal subtype; and the H7 stem antigen was included to look for potential cross-group, stem-specific antibody binding. Because H7 stem-specific responses are poorly elicited by seasonal H3 vaccinations, the background titers to H7 stem are low in the population18. In the H2-naive adults, we observed a vaccine-induced increase in binding to the group 1 stem antigens after the first vaccination with H2HA-Ferritin (Fig. 4a–d) that remained for at least 6 months after the boost vaccination (Supplementary Table 5). Across the group 1 subtypes, this geometric fold increase in stem-directed antibodies ranged from 1.5-fold to 2.1-fold after the homologous prime-boost regimen and 1.7-fold to 3.7-fold after the heterologous prime-boost regimen. Similar increases were not observed against the group 2 H7 stem (Fig. 4e). In the H2-exposed adults, no increase in HA-stem binding was observed against any of the proteins evaluated after vaccination, although levels of stem-directed antibodies at baseline trended higher for these participants compared to the H2-naive participants (Fig. 4 and Extended Data Fig. 3b–f).Fig. 4: H2HA-Ferritin vaccine platform induces heterosubtypic group 1 HA stem-targeting antibodies in H2-naive adults.Sera from H2-naive (blue circles) and H2-exposed (green circles) participants who received H2HA-Ferritin in either homologous (closed circles) or heterologous (open circles) prime-boost regimens were analyzed for HA stem-binding antibodies against both group 1 and group 2 influenza HA antigens. Individual results, group geometric means and geometric mean fold changes over baseline are shown for group 1 HA stabilized stem (ss) or full-length (FL) antigens, including H2ss (a), H5ss (b), H6FL (c), H1ss (d) and the group 2 viruses represented by H7ss (e). Whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Dotted lines indicate the lower limit of detection for each assay; arrows indicate vaccination time points. The number of participant sera analyzed at each time point is summarized in Supplementary Table 7. AUC, area under the curve; GMT, geometric mean titer.Full size imageVaccine-induced neutralizing antibody responses against H2We also assessed the neutralizing activity of the vaccine-induced antibodies against the matched H2N2 virus by a reporter microneutralization assay as an exploratory objective. As expected, we observed higher baseline levels of neutralization activity in the H2-exposed adults (Fig. 5 and Extended Data Fig. 3g). We observed an increase in neutralizing activity in both H2-naive and H2-exposed adults after the first vaccination with H2HA-Ferritin (Fig. 5a). In the H2-naive adults who received two doses of H2HA-Ferritin, a further increase was observed after the boost, resulting in a 13-fold increase in geometric mean over baseline. In the H2-naive heterologous prime-boost recipients, a minimal increase in neutralizing activity was observed after the H2 DNA prime; however, a 25-fold increase in geometric mean over baseline was observed after the H2HA-Ferritin boost. For the H2-exposed adults, the homologous and heterologous prime-boost regimens resulted in 4.4-fold and 6.6-fold increases in geometric mean over baseline, respectively. The increase in neutralizing activity remained durable up to the last time point examined at 6 months after the boost vaccination (Supplementary Table 5). These trends were also corroborated with an exploratory pseudotyped lentiviral neutralization assay at key time points (Extended Data Figs. 3j and 4a).Fig. 5: H2HA-Ferritin vaccination induces broadly neutralizing antibodies against group 1 viruses in H2-naive adults.Sera from H2-naive (blue circles) and H2-exposed (green circles) participants who received H2HA-Ferritin in either homologous (closed circles) or heterologous (open circles) prime-boost regimens were analyzed for neutralizing activity (IC80) by a reporter-based microneutralization assay. Individual values, group geometric means and geometric mean fold changes over baseline are shown for H2N2 A/Singapore/1/57 (a) and H5N1 A/Vietnam/1203/04 (b) viruses. Whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Dotted lines indicate the lower limit of detection for each assay; arrows indicate vaccination time points. Negative samples were reported and calculated as half the limit of detection. The number of participant sera analyzed at each time point is summarized in Supplementary Table 7. GMT, geometric mean titer.Full size imageEffect of participant age on neutralizing antibody responseBecause we included such a wide participant age range in this trial and observed a differential vaccine-induced antibody response between the age groups based on H2 exposure status, we sought to rule out the possible effect of immunosenescence in our trial participants. To do this, we conducted a post hoc comparison between the vaccine-induced H2N2 neutralizing antibody titers at 2 weeks after the boost vaccination and the age of participants at the time of enrollment. We observed potential correlations between the neutralizing antibody titers and the age of participants in this small population, with a negative correlation in the H2-naive adults and a positive correlation in the H2-exposed adults (Extended Data Fig. 5). This pattern of increasing neutralizing titers with age in the H2-exposed adults indicates that immunosenescence is not affecting the antibody response in these participants.Breadth of vaccine-induced neutralizing antibody responsesTo assess whether the expanded breadth of stem-binding antibody responses after vaccination resulted in increased neutralizing breadth across group 1 viruses in an exploratory objective, we analyzed additional group 1 influenza subtypes with the reporter microneutralization assay, including H5N1 and H6N1. For the H2-naive participants, increases in neutralizing antibodies were observed against H5N1 after the first vaccination with H2HA-Ferritin (Fig. 5b and Extended Data Fig. 3h). After the boost vaccination, 4.4-fold and 16-fold increases in geometric means were observed in the homologous and heterologous prime-boost groups, respectively. The H2-exposed participants did not display an increase in neutralization activity compared to baseline, regardless of prime-boost regimen. These trends were substantiated at 2 weeks after the boost with the more antigenically distant subtype H6N1 (Supplementary Table 6 and Extended Data Fig. 3i) and by an exploratory pseudotyped lentivirus neutralization assay against H5N1 at key time points (Extended Data Figs. 3k and 4b).To confirm that the broad neutralizing activity observed against the heterosubtypic viruses was targeting the HA stem specifically, we performed a neutralization assay in the presence of competitor antigens on sera at 2 weeks after the boost as an exploratory objective (Fig. 6). Competing antigens, including a full-length H2 HA and an H2 stem antigen, were added to participant sera before incubation with the H5N1 virus. If the antibodies present in the serum bind to the competing antigen, the neutralization of the H5N1 virus will be inhibited, allowing us to define the specificity of the antibody response. As expected, the full-length H2 HA antigen resulted in almost complete inhibition of neutralizing activity against the H5N1 virus in all groups, whereas a negative control antigen (DSCav-1) inhibited only between 6% and 13% of the neutralization activity against H5N1 (Fig. 6). These trends were confirmed through inhibition of the neutralization activity against an H2N2 virus (Extended Data Fig. 6). The H2 stem antigen was able to inhibit most neutralizing activity against both the H5N1 and H2N2 viruses, indicating that the HA stem is a major target of H2HA-Ferritin vaccine-induced broadly neutralizing antibodies.Fig. 6: The neutralizing H2HA-Ferritin vaccine-induced antibodies are directed against the HA stem.Sera from H2-naive (blue circles) and H2-exposed (green circles) participants who received H2HA-Ferritin in either homologous (closed circles) or heterologous (open circles) prime-boost regimens were evaluated by a competition microneutralization assay against heterologous H5N1 A/Vietnam/1203/04 virus at 2 weeks after the boost vaccination (week 18). Competing antigens include the full-length H2 HA, H2 HA stem and a negative control (DSCav-1). Lines represent group geometric means, and whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Dotted lines indicate the lower limit of detection for the assay.Full size imageHA stem-specific Fc-mediated antibody activityIn addition to neutralizing activity, stem-directed antibodies have been reported to exhibit Fc-mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity19. To assess HA stem-specific Fc-mediated activity as an exploratory objective, we used an ADCC reporter assay with a chimeric HA containing a head region from an antigenically distant group 1 subtype (H6) and a stem region from a seasonal group 1 subtype (H1)20. Corresponding with our HA stem-directed neutralizing antibody results, we detected an increase in Fc-mediated ADCC activity in H2-naive adults after vaccination with H2HA-Ferritin (Extended Data Figs. 3l and 7). At 4 weeks after the boost vaccination, the H2-naive adults who received homologous and heterologous prime-boost regimens displayed 2.8-fold and 14.4-fold increases in geometric means over baseline, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 7). The baseline Fc-mediated ADCC activity in H2-exposed adults was unaffected by vaccination. Overall, these trial results indicate that the H2HA-Ferritin vaccine platform elicits broadly neutralizing responses in H2-naive adults through the production of antibodies against the conserved HA stem and that these antibodies have both neutralizing and Fc-mediated activity.DiscussionThis phase 1 clinical trial of a novel ferritin nanoparticle-based influenza vaccine shows that H2HA-Ferritin is safe, well tolerated and immunogenic in healthy adults. This represents the first-in-human evaluation of this ferritin nanoparticle-based vaccine platform and is a proof of concept for a new generation of vaccines that display orderly arrays of antigens on self-assembling nanoparticles. We found the H2HA-Ferritin vaccine to be immunogenic, resulting in increased neutralizing activity in all participants. Notably, H2HA-Ferritin also induced broadly neutralizing antibodies directed against the conserved HA stem in H2-naive adults. Owing to the breadth of response induced, these results indicate a potential use for this ferritin nanoparticle-based antigen display platform in pandemic vaccine preparedness and for universal influenza vaccine development10,21.Vaccination with H2HA-Ferritin led to increases in HAI assay activity in all participants in this trial. The HAI reciprocal titers observed in this trial were equivalent to or higher than previous clinical trials investigating H2-inactivated or live-attenuated vaccines in H2-naive adults22,23,24. Interestingly, we did not observe an increase in reciprocal HAI assay titers after the second dose of H2HA-Ferritin in the H2-exposed adults. Previous studies indicated that repeated vaccinations against the same influenza antigen can result in smaller increases in HAI assay titers or even decreased HAI titers25. Post-vaccination responses in individuals who receive multiple vaccinations can display smaller fold rises and similar final HAI assay titers compared to individuals who received a single vaccination25. These phenomena might explain the trends in HAI antibody levels that we observed in the H2-naive and H2-exposed adults in this trial. Thus, the prime-boost interval used, based on previous trials involving DNA primes26, might not be optimal for the ferritin nanoparticle platform in immunologically primed individuals. Furthermore, we cannot rule out the possibility that previously H2-exposed individuals with baseline responses are immunologically clearing vaccine particles before they can elicit an increase in HAI assay antibody levels.27In comparing the two vaccination regimens evaluated in this trial, the heterologous prime-boost vaccine regimen consistently elicited improved heterologous responses compared to the homologous prime-boost regimen, consistent with previous DNA priming trials16,28. At 2 weeks after the boost, the H2-naive participants primed with DNA showed the highest HA stem-specific titers as well as the greatest geometric mean fold increases of neutralizing activity and ADCC activity. However, this improvement appeared temporary, as the group geometric mean neutralizing activity did not differ between regimens by 6 months after the boost. Together, these results show that the H2HA-Ferritin vaccine can be used in both heterologous and homologous prime-boost regimens, with a transient modest improvement in antibody responses with the addition of a DNA prime.Notably, we observed the induction of neutralizing antibodies in all trial participants. Remarkably, this response was observed after the initial H2HA-Ferritin vaccination in both H2-naive and H2-exposed adults. Unadjuvanted protein-based influenza vaccines typically require multiple injections to result in a consistent response in seronegative individuals29. It is possible that the addition of an adjuvant could further improve the H2HA-Ferritin response and could be included in future evaluations of this novel platform30. The observed neutralizing antibody response in the trial participants was durable, and remained for at least 6 months after the boost vaccination (Supplementary Table 5).A key aim for improved influenza vaccine development is to generate broadly neutralizing antibody responses against conserved viral epitopes10,21,31. Our unique trial design involving the age stratification of participants and the use of H2N2 influenza allowed us to assess a novel candidate vaccine using an influenza subtype with pandemic potential in two distinct immunological populations: those alive while H2 influenza circulated in humans (H2-exposed, born before 1966) versus those born after H2 influenza stopped circulating (H2-naive, born after 1969). Although vaccination with H2HA-Ferritin did induce neutralizing antibodies against the H2 subtype in all participants, we observed key differences in the antibody response between the H2-naive and H2-exposed participants. Notably, we elicited responses to conserved epitopes in the H2-naive participants in this trial and identified responses directed against the conserved HA stem. Such HA stem-directed antibodies have been shown to neutralize a wide range of influenza viruses in vitro and have been proven to provide protection in both animal model viral challenges and human infections17,32,33. The HA stem-directed antibodies elicited in this trial also exhibited Fc-mediated ADCC activity, suggesting that these antibodies could facilitate both neutralization and cell-mediated protection against a range of group 1 influenza viruses10,31. Although HA stem-directed antibodies were observed in the H2-exposed adults, the vaccine-induced increase in these participants was limited. These results are consistent with previous vaccine studies showing immunodominance of the head domain in recall responses, contrasting with stem-directed responses in individuals where an HA head-dominated antibody response has not been established34,35,36,37,38,39. Although the head-dominated responses were a limitation of the full-length HA antigen used in this trial, we have also designed stabilized stem formats of this ferritin-based nanoparticle vaccine platform17 that lack the immunodominant head domain of the HA protein. These stem-only antigens are currently being evaluated in phase 1 trials (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03814720 and NCT04579250) and might overcome the HA head immunodominance to provide additional opportunities for vaccine development.Beyond annual epidemics with seasonal influenza strains, influenza pandemics continue to emerge in the human population at unpredictable intervals3. The H2N2 subtype evaluated with this vaccine circulated in humans between 1957 and 1968 and retains strong pandemic potential14. The pandemic potential of H2N2 influenza is likely higher than other non-endemic subtypes, because H2N2 viruses have previously transmitted efficiently among humans and still circulate in avian reservoirs, and a large segment of the population is currently immunologically H2-naive. As such, there remains an unmet public health need for vaccine development for this subtype14. Current research indicates that the H2 HA stem is more amenable to boosting cross-reactive HA stem-directed antibody responses compared to other group 1 subtypes, such as H5 (Andrews et al., accepted at Nature Medicine). The production of neutralizing antibodies induced by H2HA-Ferritin vaccination in the trial participants irrespective of their previous H2 exposure highlights the utility in the broad population of this platform for pandemic preparedness and response.This phase 1 trial has limitations, and these aspects deserve greater consideration in future evaluations of this vaccine platform. In this trial, the immunological analysis performed was mainly descriptive. Future analyses of this platform should evaluate the protective capacity of the vaccine-induced antibodies. We observed a limited effect of the boost on HAI assay titers, and future trials should include additional prime-boost intervals with the goal of improving these responses. Ongoing trials evaluating nanoparticle vaccines expressing seasonal influenza HA subtypes will also help determine if these response patterns are specific to H2 influenza. We detected a strong response against the H. pylori ferritin backbone after vaccination in this trial. In preclinical models, a pre-existing response to H. pylori ferritin was not found to impede responses to boost vaccinations11. As with many phase 1 trials, the application of these results is limited by the small number of participants, but the results show that this novel vaccine platform warrants further clinical evaluation.Remarkably, the H2HA-Ferritin vaccine evaluated in this trial elicited broad heterosubtypic neutralizing HA stem-directed antibodies in all H2-naive participants after a single dose. In addition to this platform’s favorable immunogenic properties, its design and construction can be rapidly initiated with HA sequence alone, does not require live virus or eggs in the manufacturing process and is compatible with most genetic delivery platforms, including mRNA40. The ferritin nanoparticle platform has been licensed non-exclusively for future clinical development. These trial results underscore the opportunity for this platform to improve seasonal influenza virus vaccines, to prepare and respond to pandemics and to advance the field toward a more universal influenza vaccine approach.MethodsStudy designVRC 316 was a phase 1, open-label, dose-escalation, randomized trial (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03186781) to examine the H2HA-Ferritin vaccine in both homologous and heterologous prime-boost regimens in healthy adults aged 18–70 years, excluding those born between 1966 and 1969 in an attempt to enroll two distinct cohorts based on potential historical H2N2 exposure. Inclusion criteria required general good health determined by laboratory tests, medical history and physical examination, with receipt of at least one licensed influenza vaccine since 2014. Exclusion criteria included previous receipt of a licensed influenza vaccine within 6 weeks, or H2N2 influenza vaccine at any time, before trial enrollment. A complete list of inclusion and exclusion criteria can be found in the trial protocol (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ProvidedDocs/81/NCT03186781/Prot_SAP_ICF_000.pdf). Volunteers were recruited from the greater Washington, DC, area by institutional review board (IRB)-approved written and electronic media. The study was conducted at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Center by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC) Clinical Trials Program, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), NIH, in Bethesda, Maryland. The trial protocol was reviewed and approved by the NIAID IRB. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants before enrollment. The trial provided compensation for participant time and travel.The H2HA-Ferritin (VRC-FLUNPF081-00-VP) and H2 DNA (VRC-FLUDNA082-00-VP) vaccines were manufactured under Good Manufacturing Practice at the VRC Pilot Plant operated under contract by Vaccine Clinical Materials Program, Leidos Biomedical Research. H2HA-Ferritin is composed of the A/Singapore/1/1957 HA genetically fused to the H. pylori-derived ferritin protein. The H2 HA construct in H2HA-Ferritin contains amino acids 1–514, with a Y98F mutation to abolish non-specific binding to sialic acid (based on H3 numbering). The H2HA-Ferritin vaccine displays eight HA trimers on the surface of each self-assembled ferritin particle. The H2 DNA vaccine is a single closed circular plasmid that encodes the matched full-length transmembrane-anchored A/Singapore/1/1957 HA. All study injections were administered intramuscularly in the deltoid muscle. The H2HA-Ferritin vaccine was administered via needle and syringe, whereas the H2 DNA vaccine was administered via the needle-free Stratis device (PharmaJet).ProceduresThis trial evaluated a dose escalation of H2HA-Ferritin for safety and evaluated H2HA-Ferritin in both homologous and heterologous prime-boost regimens (Fig. 1). Participants in the single-dose group received a 20-μg dose of H2HA-Ferritin at week 0. Participants in the homologous prime-boost regimen groups received a 60-μg dose of H2HA-Ferritin at weeks 0 and 16. Participants in the heterologous prime-boost regimen groups received a 4-mg dose of H2 DNA at week 0 and a 60-μg dose of H2HA-Ferritin at week 16. Enrollment opened for the dose-escalation and prime-boost regimens after protocol-specified interim safety reviews by the Protocol Safety Review Team. Participants were evaluated for 40 weeks after the first vaccination.Laboratory tests were obtained before vaccine administration and throughout the study to assess safety. Hematological monitoring of participant sera included iron levels, hemoglobin levels, hematocrit, white blood cell counts and neutrophil counts. Participants also recorded solicited symptoms for 7 d after each vaccination, and a clinician assessed the site of vaccination on the day of administration, the next day and 1 week later. All unsolicited AEs were recorded for 28 d after each administration, whereas ILIs, SAEs and new chronic medical conditions were recorded throughout the duration of the study. Participant safety data were reviewed weekly by the Protocol Safety Review Team up to 4 weeks after the final vaccine administration and then monthly through the completion of the final study visit.Serum samples were collected throughout the trial to evaluate antibody responses at baseline and after each vaccination. Serum samples were evaluated repeatedly and in duplicate or more for the HAI assays, HA stem-binding ECLIAs, reporter-based microneutralization assays, pseudotyped lentiviral neutralization assays and ADCC reporter assays and for antibodies against ferritin proteins as described in the supplementary appendix. Investigators were blinded to group allocation until sample testing was complete. All unique materials used in this study are available from the authors upon reasonable request.RandomizationParticipants were age-stratified and randomized 1:1 in the prime-boost regimens during the vaccine regimen evaluation portion of the trial. The randomization sequence was prepared in advance by the study statistician using block sizes of six or eight and was provided to the study site pharmacy and data management center. Study clinicians enrolled participants, and vaccinations were administered open-label.Outcomes and statistical analysesThe primary outcome of this phase 1 trial examined the safety and tolerability of H2HA-Ferritin and H2 DNA in healthy adults. The secondary outcome evaluated the vaccine-induced antibody response of each vaccination regimen at baseline, 4 weeks after the prime vaccination and 2 weeks after the boost vaccination.All participants who received at least one vaccination were analyzed for safety and reactogenicity, and all participants were included in the immunogenicity analysis until their vaccination schedule was discontinued or changed. Sample size for this trial was based on the primary endpoint of safety, and the calculations are detailed in the trial protocol. These calculations for safety were predetermined and expressed in terms of the ability to detect SAEs. Sample sizes were chosen so that, in the dose-escalation portion of the trial, there was a 90% chance to observe at least one SAE if the true rate was at least 0.369 and over a 90% chance to observe no SAE if the true rate was less than 0.021. In the vaccine regimen evaluation portion of the trial, there was over a 90% chance to observe at least one SAE if the true rate was at least 0.206 and over a 90% chance to observe no SAE if the true rate was no more than 0.010. The study was not designed to detect small immunogenic differences between groups but was designed to detect large immunogenic differences between groups. Adjustments for multiple comparisons were not performed. Groups 2 and 4A were combined for the immunological analysis because they received the same vaccination regimen with identical age ranges. Seroconversion rates for the HAI assay were determined per the US Food and Drug Administration definition of either a baseline HAI assay titer of <1:10 and a post-boost HAI assay titer of ≥1:40 or a baseline HAI assay titer of ≥1:10 and a minimum four-fold rise from baseline41. Comparisons between treatment groups were made using two-sample t-tests after log10 or log2 transformations of the raw titers (when applicable). Correlations were quantified using Spearman’s ρ. Fold change summaries were reported using raw titers. All statistical tests were two sided. For all assays, negative samples were reported, and geometric mean titers were calculated using half the limit of detection.Reporting SummaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability Data generated in this study are available as de-identified data on ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03186781). The study protocol, statistical analysis plan and informed consent form are available on ClinicalTrials.gov (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ProvidedDocs/81/NCT03186781/Prot_SAP_ICF_000.pdf). Individual participant data that underlie the results reported in this article are available, after de-identification, in the Supplementary Information immediately after publication with no end date. Additional data may be made available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author for investigators whose proposed use of the data has been approved by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases institutional review board. ReferencesWorld Health Organization. Seasonal influenza. http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/communicable-diseases/influenza/seasonal-influenza (2021).Iuliano, A. D. et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet 391, 1285–1300 (2018).Article Google Scholar Taubenberger, J. K., Kash, J. C. & Morens, D. M. The 1918 influenza pandemic: 100 years of questions answered and unanswered. Sci. Transl. Med. 11, eaau5485 (2019).Article Google Scholar Wei, C. J. et al. Next-generation influenza vaccines: opportunities and challenges. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 19, 239–252 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Joyce, M. G. et al. Vaccine-induced antibodies that neutralize group 1 and group 2 influenza A viruses. Cell 166, 609–623 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Grohskopf, L. A. et al. Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with vaccines: recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices—United States, 2020–21 influenza season. MMWR Recomm. Rep. 69, 1–24 (2020).Article Google Scholar Sui, J. et al. Structural and functional bases for broad-spectrum neutralization of avian and human influenza A viruses. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 265–273 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Ekiert, D. C. et al. A highly conserved neutralizing epitope on group 2 influenza A viruses. Science 333, 843–850 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Corti, D. et al. A neutralizing antibody selected from plasma cells that binds to group 1 and group 2 influenza A hemagglutinins. Science 333, 850–856 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Nabel, G. J. & Fauci, A. S. Induction of unnatural immunity: prospects for a broadly protective universal influenza vaccine. Nat. Med. 16, 1389–1391 (2010).Article CAS Google Scholar Kanekiyo, M. et al. Self-assembling influenza nanoparticle vaccines elicit broadly neutralizing H1N1 antibodies. Nature 499, 102–106 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Nachbagauer, R. et al. A chimeric haemagglutinin-based influenza split virion vaccine adjuvanted with AS03 induces protective stalk-reactive antibodies in mice. NPJ Vaccines 1, 16015 (2016).Impagliazzo, A. et al. A stable trimeric influenza hemagglutinin stem as a broadly protective immunogen. Science 349, 1301–1306 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Nabel, G. J., Wei, C. J. & Ledgerwood, J. E. Vaccinate for the next H2N2 pandemic now. Nature 471, 157–158 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Jones, J. C. et al. Risk assessment of H2N2 influenza viruses from the avian reservoir. J. Virol. 88, 1175–1188 (2014).Article Google Scholar Ledgerwood, J. E. et al. DNA priming and influenza vaccine immunogenicity: two phase 1 open label randomised clinical trials. Lancet Infect. Dis. 11, 916–924 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Yassine, H. M. et al. Hemagglutinin-stem nanoparticles generate heterosubtypic influenza protection. Nat. Med. 21, 1065–1070 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Krammer, F. et al. H3 stalk-based chimeric hemagglutinin influenza virus constructs protect mice from H7N9 challenge. J. Virol. 88, 2340–2343 (2014).Article Google Scholar Vanderven, H. A., Jegaskanda, S., Wheatley, A. K. & Kent, S. J. Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and influenza virus. Curr. Opin. Virol. 22, 89–96 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar DiLillo, D. J., Tan, G. S., Palese, P. & Ravetch, J. V. Broadly neutralizing hemagglutinin stalk-specific antibodies require FcγR interactions for protection against influenza virus in vivo. Nat. Med. 20, 143–151 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Sangesland, M. & Lingwood, D. Antibody focusing to conserved sites of vulnerability: the immunological pathways for ‘universal’ influenza vaccines. Vaccines (Basel) 9, 125 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Hehme, N., Engelmann, H., Kunzel, W., Neumeier, E. & Sanger, R. Pandemic preparedness: lessons learnt from H2N2 and H9N2 candidate vaccines. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. 191, 203–208 (2002).Article CAS Google Scholar Talaat, K. R. et al. An open-label phase I trial of a live attenuated H2N2 influenza virus vaccine in healthy adults. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 7, 66–73 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Isakova-Sivak, I. et al. H2N2 live attenuated influenza vaccine is safe and immunogenic for healthy adult volunteers. Hum. Vaccin. Immunother. 11, 970–982 (2015).Article Google Scholar Belongia, E. A. et al. Repeated annual influenza vaccination and vaccine effectiveness: review of evidence. Expert Rev. Vaccines 16, 1–14 (2017).Article Google Scholar Ledgerwood, J. E. et al. Prime-boost interval matters: a randomized phase 1 study to identify the minimum interval necessary to observe the H5 DNA influenza vaccine priming effect. J. Infect. Dis. 208, 418–422 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Zarnitsyna, V. I., Lavine, J., Ellebedy, A., Ahmed, R. & Antia, R. Multi-epitope models explain how pre-existing antibodies affect the generation of broadly protective responses to Influenza. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005692 (2016).Article Google Scholar DeZure, A. D. et al. An avian influenza H7 DNA priming vaccine is safe and immunogenic in a randomized phase I clinical trial. NPJ Vaccines 2, 15 (2017).Article Google Scholar Wong, S. S. & Webby, R. J. Traditional and new influenza vaccines. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 26, 476–492 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Darricarrere, N. et al. Broad neutralization of H1 and H3 viruses by adjuvanted influenza HA stem vaccines in nonhuman primates. Sci. Transl. Med. 13, eabe5449 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Krammer, F., Garcia-Sastre, A. & Palese, P. Is it possible to develop a ‘universal’ influenza virus vaccine? Potential target antigens and critical aspects for a universal influenza vaccine. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 10, a028845 (2018).Ng, S. et al. Novel correlates of protection against pandemic H1N1 influenza A virus infection. Nat. Med. 25, 962–967 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Wu, N. C. & Wilson, I. A. Structural insights into the design of novel anti-influenza therapies. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 25, 115–121 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Nachbagauer, R. et al. A chimeric hemagglutinin-based universal influenza virus vaccine approach induces broad and long-lasting immunity in a randomized, placebo-controlled phase I trial. Nat. Med. 26, 106–114 (2020).Bernstein, D. I. et al. Immunogenicity of chimeric haemagglutinin-based, universal influenza virus vaccine candidates: interim results of a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 1 clinical trial. Lancet Infect. Dis. 20, 80–91 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Andrews, S. F., Graham, B. S., Mascola, J. R. & McDermott, A. B. Is it possible to develop a ‘universal’ influenza virus vaccine? Immunogenetic considerations underlying B-cell biology in the development of a pan-subtype influenza A vaccine targeting the hemagglutinin stem. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 10, a029413 (2018).Article Google Scholar Stadlbauer, D. et al. Vaccination with a recombinant H7 hemagglutinin-based influenza virus vaccine induces broadly reactive antibodies in humans. mSphere 2, e00502–e00517 (2017).Article Google Scholar Nachbagauer, R. et al. Hemagglutinin stalk immunity reduces influenza virus replication and transmission in ferrets. J. Virol. 90, 3268–3273 (2015).Article Google Scholar Ellebedy, A. H. et al. Induction of broadly cross-reactive antibody responses to the influenza HA stem region following H5N1 vaccination in humans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 13133–13138 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Kanekiyo, M. & Graham, B. S. Next-generation influenza vaccines. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 11, a038448 (2020).US Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: clinical data needed to support the licensure of seasonal inactivated influenza vaccines. https://www.fda.govegulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/clinical-data-needed-support-licensure-seasonal-inactivated-influenza-vaccines (2007).Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank the trial participants for their involvement as well as PharmaJet for the use of the needle-free Stratis device in this clinical trial. This work was supported by intramural funding from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) through the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Intramural Research Program (K.V.H., G.L.C., C.C., M.C.C., T.A.N., M.C.B.F., N.M.B., F.M., C.S.H., I.J.G., E.E.C., S.V., J.S., C.L.C., H.L., K.C., M.R.G., L.S., A.R.H., C.J.L., S.N., C.H., R.A.G., A.C., M.K., J.E.R., S.F.A., Y.Z., E.S.Y., L.W., K.L., W-P.K., R.T.B., A.B.M., R.A.K., J.G.G., F.A., J.R.M., B.S.G. and J.E.L.). This work was partially funded by the NIAID-funded Centers of Excellence for Influenza Research and Response (75N93021C00014, to A.W.F., R.N. and P.P.), by NIAID grant P01 AI097092-07 (to A.W.F., R.N. and P.P.), by NIAID grant R01 AI145870-03 (to A.W.F., R.N. and P.P.) and by the Collaborative Vaccine Innovation Centers contract 75N93019C00051 (to A.W.F., R.N. and P.P.). The Vaccine Research Center (VRC) and its investigators had complete control over study conceptualization and design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish and preparation of this manuscript. Study team representative: Floreliz Mendoza, VRC, NIAID, NIH (email: floreliz.mendoza@nih.gov; phone: 301-451-8715).Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Katherine V. Houser, Grace L. Chen.Authors and AffiliationsVaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAKatherine V. Houser, Grace L. Chen, Cristina Carter, Michelle C. Crank, Thuy A. Nguyen, Maria Claudia Burgos Florez, Nina M. Berkowitz, Floreliz Mendoza, Cynthia Starr Hendel, Ingelise J. Gordon, Emily E. Coates, Sandra Vazquez, Judy Stein, Heather Lawlor, Kevin Carlton, Martin R. Gaudinski, Larisa Strom, Amelia R. Hofstetter, Sandeep Narpala, Christian Hatcher, Rebecca A. Gillespie, Adrian Creanga, Masaru Kanekiyo, Julie E. Raab, Sarah F. Andrews, Yi Zhang, Eun Sung Yang, Lingshu Wang, Kwanyee Leung, Wing-Pui Kong, Robert T. Bailer, Adrian B. McDermott, Richard A. Koup, Jason G. Gall, Frank Arnold, John R. Mascola, Barney S. Graham, Julie E. Ledgerwood, Joseph Casazza, Lasonji Holman, Abidemi O. Ola, Pamela Costner, Jennifer Cunningham, Brenda Larkin, Laura Novik, Jamie Saunders, William Whalen, Xiaolin Wang, Aba Mensima Eshun, Alison Taylor, K. C. Cheng, Carolyn Laurencot, Josephine H. Cox, Sandra Sitar, Lam Le, Iris Pittman, Olga Vasilenko, Ro Shauna Rothwell, Galina Yamshchikov, Eugenia Burch, Somia Hickman, Olga Trofymenko, Catina Boyd, Preeti Apte, Cora Trelles Cartagena, Renunda Hicks, Pernell Williams, Zana Blaku & Colin TranVaccine Clinical Materials Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD, USAChristopher L. CaseCommissioned Corps, U.S. Public Health Service, Rockville, MD, USAMartin R. GaudinskiBiostatistics Research Branch, Division of Clinical Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAC. Jason LiangDepartment of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAAlec W. Freyn & Peter PaleseDepartment of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USARaffael Nachbagauer & Peter PaleseAuthorsKatherine V. HouserView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGrace L. ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCristina CarterView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMichelle C. CrankView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarThuy A. NguyenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMaria Claudia Burgos FlorezView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNina M. BerkowitzView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFloreliz MendozaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCynthia Starr HendelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIngelise J. GordonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEmily E. CoatesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSandra VazquezView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJudy SteinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChristopher L. CaseView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHeather LawlorView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKevin CarltonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMartin R. GaudinskiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLarisa StromView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAmelia R. HofstetterView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarC. Jason LiangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSandeep NarpalaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChristian HatcherView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRebecca A. GillespieView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdrian CreangaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMasaru KanekiyoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJulie E. RaabView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSarah F. AndrewsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYi ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEun Sung YangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLingshu WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKwanyee LeungView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWing-Pui KongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlec W. FreynView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRaffael NachbagauerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPeter PaleseView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRobert T. BailerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdrian B. McDermottView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRichard A. KoupView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJason G. GallView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFrank ArnoldView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJohn R. MascolaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBarney S. GrahamView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJulie E. LedgerwoodView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarConsortiathe VRC 316 Study TeamJoseph Casazza, Lasonji Holman, Abidemi O. Ola, Pamela Costner, Jennifer Cunningham, Brenda Larkin, Laura Novik, Jamie Saunders, William Whalen, Xiaolin Wang, Aba Mensima Eshun, Alison Taylor, K. C. Cheng, Carolyn Laurencot, Josephine H. Cox, Sandra Sitar, Lam Le, Iris Pittman, Olga Vasilenko, Ro Shauna Rothwell, Galina Yamshchikov, Eugenia Burch, Somia Hickman, Olga Trofymenko, Catina Boyd, Preeti Apte, Cora Trelles Cartagena, Renunda Hicks, Pernell Williams, Zana Blaku & Colin TranContributionsStudy design (G.L.C., M.C.C., M.C.B.F., N.M.B., S.V., J.S., C.L.C., H.L., K.C., R.A.K., J.G.G., F.A., J.R.M., B.S.G. and J.E.L.); Data collection (G.L.C., C.C., M.C.C., T.A.N., F.M., C.S.H., I.J.G., J.S., C.L.C. and M.R.G.); Data analysis (K.V.H., G.L.C., C.C., M.C.C., E.E.C., L.S., A.R.H., C.J.L., S.N., C.H., R.A.G., A.C., M.K., J.E.R., S.F.A., Y.Z., E.S.Y., L.W., K.L., W-P.K., A.W.F., R.N., P.P., R.T.B. and A.B.M.); Data interpretation (K.V.H., G.L.C., C.C., M.C.C., E.E.C., A.R.H., M.K., S.F.A., A.B.M., R.A.K., J.R.M., B.S.G. and J.E.L.); and Writing (K.V.H., G.L.C., M.C.B.F., N.M.B., E.E.C., L.S., A.R.H. and J.E.L.), with review and comments from all coauthors.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Katherine V. Houser.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare the following competing interests: M.K., B.S.G. and J.R.M. are named inventors of US patent 9,441,019, titled Influenza Hemagglutinin Protein-based Vaccines, and of several pending applications on related technologies filed by the Department of Health and Human Services (National Institutes of Health). The remaining authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Medicine thanks Richard Webby, Minhee Kang and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Editor recognition statement: Alison Farrell was the primary editor on this article and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the editorial team. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Extended dataExtended Data Fig. 1 Summary of 20 μg H2HA-Ferritin immunogenicity results.Sera from H2-naïve participants who received a single dose of H2HA-Ferritin (red circles) were analyzed for vaccine-induced antibody responses. Individual participant results are displayed for (a) hemagglutination inhibition assay (HAI), (b-f) HA stem-binding ECLIAs, (g,h) reporter microneutralization assays, and (I) Fc-mediated antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity ADCC reporter assays. n = 5 for each assay. Dotted lines indicate the lower limit of detection for each assay, arrows indicate vaccination timepoints. Negative samples were reported and calculated as half the limit of detection.Extended Data Fig. 2 H2HA-Ferritin vaccination did not result in notable antibody development against human ferritin, despite developing a response to H. pylori ferritin.Participant sera were tested by ELISA for antibodies against human ferritin (heavy and light chains) as well as H. pylori ferritin at baseline and four weeks after each vaccination. Sera from four NHPs (cynomolgus macaques) vaccinated with an influenza ferritin vaccine at weeks 0, 4, and 10 were included in the H. pylori analysis as positive controls. Arrows indicate vaccination time points.Extended Data Fig. 3 Statistical comparison between groups at key timepoints following H2HA-Ferritin vaccination.Sera from H2-naïve (blue circles) and H2-exposed (green circles) participants who received H2HA-Ferritin in either homologous (closed circles) or heterologous (open circles) prime-boost regimens were compared at select timepoints, including baseline, four weeks after the prime vaccination, two weeks after the boost vaccination (four weeks after the boost for the ADCC assay), and at 40 weeks after the prime vaccination. Results are shown for (a) hemagglutination inhibition assays (HAI), (b-f) HA stem-binding ECLIAs, (g-i) reporter microneutralization assays, (j-k) pseudotyped lentivirus neutralization assays, and (l) Fc-mediated antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) reporter assays. Values displayed represent the group geometric mean titers, with whiskers indicating the 95% confidence intervals. Dotted lines indicate the lower limit of detection. Negative samples were reported and calculated as half the limit of detection. Comparisons between treatment groups were made using two-sided two-sample t-tests, after log10 (for the neutralization and ADCC assays) transformations of the raw titers. Number of participant sera analyzed at each time point is summarized in Supplementary Table 7.Extended Data Fig. 4 H2HA-Ferritin vaccination induces broadly neutralizing antibodies in H2-naïve adults.Sera from H2-naïve (blue circles) and H2-exposed (green circles) participants who received H2HA-Ferritin in either homologous (closed circles) or heterologous (open circles) prime-boost regimens were analyzed with a pseudotyped lentivirus neutralization assay. Individual results, group geometric means, and geometric mean fold increases over baseline are shown for A) H2N2 A/Singapore/1/57 and B) H5N1 A/Vietnam/1203/04. Whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Dotted lines indicate the lower limit of detection, arrows indicate vaccination timepoints. Negative samples were reported and calculated as half the limit of detection. Number of participant sera analyzed at each time point is summarized in Supplementary Table 7.Extended Data Fig. 5 Preexisting and vaccine-induced antibody titers against H2N2 virus compared to age.The neutralizing antibody titers from the reporter microneutralization assay at two weeks after the boost (week 18) for H2-naïve (blue circles, n = 13) and H2-exposed (green circles, n = 9) participants that received two doses of H2HA-Ferritin were compared to the age of the participants at time of enrollment. Two-sided Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (ρ) and p values for all age groups were ρ=0.39 and p = 0.064. For the H2-naïve adults only, the values were ρ=−0.52 and p = 0.072. For the H2-exposed adults only, the values were ρ=0.6 and p = 0.067.Extended Data Fig. 6 The neutralizing H2HA-Ferritin vaccine-induced antibodies are directed against the HA stem.Sera from H2-naïve (blue circles) and H2-exposed (green circles) participants who received H2HA-Ferritin in either homologous (closed circles) or heterologous (open circles) prime-boost regimens were evaluated by a competition microneutralization assay against homologous H2N2 A/Singapore/1/57 virus at two weeks after the boost vaccination (week 18). Competing antigens include the H2 HA stem and a negative control (DSCav-1). Lines represent group geometric means and whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Dotted lines indicate the lower limit of detection for each assay.Extended Data Fig. 7 The vaccine-induced antibodies display Fc-mediated antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity.Sera from H2-naïve (blue circles) and H2-exposed (green circles) participants who received H2HA-Ferritin in either homologous (closed circles) or heterologous (open circles) prime-boost regimens were analyzed for Fc-mediated antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity. Group geometric means, geometric mean fold increases over baseline, and individual values are shown for against the recombinant H6/1N5 virus. Whiskers indicate 95% confidence intervals. Dotted lines indicate the lower limit of detection for each assay, arrows indicate vaccination time points. Number of participant sera analyzed at each time point is summarized in Supplementary Table 7.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationSupplemental Methods, Supplemental Tables 1–6, Trial Protocol and CONSORT ChecklistReporting SummarySupplementary DataSource datasets for the de-identified participants for all immunological analysesRights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleHouser, K.V., Chen, G.L., Carter, C. et al. Safety and immunogenicity of a ferritin nanoparticle H2 influenza vaccine in healthy adults: a phase 1 trial. Nat Med 28, 383–391 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01660-8Download citationReceived: 22 April 2021Accepted: 14 December 2021Published: 03 February 2022Issue Date: February 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01660-8Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Laser-activable murine ferritin nanocage for chemo-photothermal therapy of colorectal cancer Jinmei ChengJiaxin LiXiaopin Duan Journal of Nanobiotechnology (2024) Recombinant ferritin-based nanoparticles as neoantigen carriers significantly inhibit tumor growth and metastasis Wei ZhengShixiong LiZhangyong Hong Journal of Nanobiotechnology (2024) The quest for nanoparticle-powered vaccines in cancer immunotherapy Zhe SunHui ZhaoDongsheng Zhang Journal of Nanobiotechnology (2024) Vaccine design via antigen reorientation Duo XuJoshua J. CarterPeter S. Kim Nature Chemical Biology (2024) Advanced technologies for the development of infectious disease vaccines Akash GuptaArnab RudraDaniel G. Anderson Nature Reviews Drug Discovery (2024) Download PDF Associated content A single residue in influenza virus H2 hemagglutinin enhances the breadth of the B cell response elicited by H2 vaccination Sarah F. AndrewsJulie E. RaabAdrian B. McDermott Nature Medicine Article 03 Feb 2022 Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Podcasts Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Journal Metrics About the Editors Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Statistical Advisory Panel Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Editorial Policies Content Types Web Feeds Contact Publish with us Submission Guidelines For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Medicine (Nat Med) ISSN 1546-170X (online) ISSN 1078-8956 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingCelebrating 70 years of GISRS (the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System) Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English العربية 中文 Français Русский Español Português Donate Donate Home Health Topics All topicsABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Resources Fact sheets Facts in pictures Multimedia Podcasts Publications Questions and answers Tools and toolkits Popular Dengue Endometriosis Excessive heat Herpes Mental disorders Mpox Countries All countriesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Regions Africa Americas Europe Eastern Mediterranean South-East Asia Western Pacific WHO in countries Data by country Country presence Country strengthening Country cooperation strategies Newsroom All news News releases Statements Campaigns Events Feature stories Press conferences Speeches Commentaries Photo library Headlines Emergencies Focus on Cholera Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Greater Horn of Africa Israel and occupied Palestinian territory Mpox Sudan Ukraine Latest Disease Outbreak News Situation reports Weekly Epidemiological Record WHO in emergencies Surveillance Operations Research Funding Partners Health emergency appeal International Health Regulations Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee Data Dashboards Triple Billion Progress Health Inequality Monitor Delivery for impact COVID-19 dashboard Data collection Classifications SCORE Surveys Civil registration and vital statistics Routine health information systems Harmonized health facility assessment GIS centre for health Reports World Health Statistics UHC global monitoring report About WHO About WHO Partnerships Committees and advisory groups Collaborating centres Technical teams Organizational structure Who we are Our work Activities Initiatives General Programme of Work WHO Academy Funding Investment in WHO WHO Foundation Accountability External audit Financial statements Internal audit and investigations Programme Budget Results reports Governance Governing bodies World Health Assembly Executive Board Member States Portal Home/ News/ item/ Celebrating 70 years of GISRS (the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System) Celebrating 70 years of GISRS (the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System) 3 February 2022 News release Geneva Reading time: Founded in 1952, the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System, or GISRS, is celebrating 70 years of success as a worldwide network founded to protect people from the threat of influenza, reviewing its added value to other respiratory virus threats including COVID-19, and setting its sights to the future.GISRS is a proven global network that has provided a first line of defence against influenza for 70 years.WHO Director-General, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus Influenza is a serious global health problem that impacts all countries: every year, there are an estimated one billion cases of seasonal Influenza causing three to five million severe cases including up to 650 000 influenza-related respiratory deaths globally. Moreover, new influenza viruses are constantly emerging – these can cause pandemics that lead to widespread societal disruption and millions of deaths.Influenza viruses constantly evolve into new variants and spread rapidly, similar to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. GISRS operates as a network of over 150 laboratories in 127 countries, areas or territories that continuously monitor influenza viruses and diseases globally. Millions of specimens are tested and hundreds of thousands of viruses are exchanged within GISRS every year. GISRS has made some giant leaps. To list just some of these:When GISRS was established in 1952, only 25 countries had some influenza surveillance in place and were able to report data to WHO. Now, more than 127 countries, areas and territories contribute to GISRS.As of January 2022, GISRS has grown to include 148 National Influenza Centres (NICs), seven WHO Collaborating Centres (CCs), four Essential Regulatory Laboratories, and 13 H5 Reference Laboratories. It continues growing, and all these institutions form an interactive and complementary global operation.Between 2014 and 2019, GISRS tested an average of 3.4 million specimens every year. This surged to 6.7 million tests annually for influenza and 44.2 million tests for SARS-CoV-2 in 2020 and 2021.GISRS members share around 20 000 influenza virus samples every year to WHO CCs and regularly update the weekly influenza situation based on laboratory and disease surveillance reporting through the FluNet and FluID systems, thus allowing WHO to distribute timely risk assessments and alerts to countries. Based on GISRS surveillance, WHO has been recommending suitable viruses for inclusion in annual seasonal vaccines since 1973. Since 1998, GISRS has made biannual recommendations for seasonal influenza vaccine compositions for the northern and southern hemispheres.GISRS operates throughout the year, which enables it to function as a global alert for the emergence of novel influenza viruses and other respiratory viruses of public health significance. It demonstrated its capacity and capability in the rapid detection and response to avian influenza A(H5N1) in 1997 and its re-emergence in 2003, SARS-CoV-1 in 2002, and pandemic influenza A(H1N1) in 2009, in partnership with organizations in the animal sector and other international agencies. Although GISRS was built to address influenza, it also serves as a critical resource for countries handling non-influenza emergencies. For the COVID-19 pandemic, GISRS has made significant contributions from the start. For example, GISAID, a long-term partner of GISRS, published the first SARS-CoV-2 sequence data hours after it became available. In many countries, NICs readily became primary hubs for national COVID-19 testing and response. Importantly, GISRS has been conducting integrated sentinel surveillance of influenza and SARS-CoV-2 to guide public health response to the two viruses and associated diseases at the same time.The GISRS network today is a tribute to several generations of scientists throughout the world who have dedicated themselves to influenza surveillance, preparedness and response. It is also a tribute to many governments that have committed their political, financial and administrative support to the network over the years. WHO has been working with countries to develop a roadmap to further expand GISRS into GISRS+: an enhanced network, built upon existing influenza infrastructure, to achieve integrated surveillance and response systems to influenza and a range of other respiratory viruses with epidemic or pandemic potential. This exciting prospect will be the next great leap, as we look to the future. Regions Africa Americas Eastern Mediterranean Europe South-East Asia Western Pacific Policies Cybersecurity Ethics Information disclosure Permissions and licensing Preventing sexual exploitation Terms of use About us Careers Frequently asked questions Library Newsletters Procurement Publications Contact us Report misconduct Privacy policy © 2024 WHOThe molecular determinants of antigenic drift in a novel avian influenza A (H9N2) variant virus | Virology Journal | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search Virology Journal Home About Articles Sections Submission Guidelines Submit manuscript The molecular determinants of antigenic drift in a novel avian influenza A (H9N2) variant virus Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 05 February 2022 The molecular determinants of antigenic drift in a novel avian influenza A (H9N2) variant virus Yiqing Zheng1, Yanna Guo1, Yingfei Li1, Bing Liang1, Xiaoyuan Sun2, Shijia Li1, Huizhi Xia1 & …Jihui Ping1 Show authors Virology Journal volume 19, Article number: 26 (2022) Cite this article 3728 Accesses 11 Citations 3 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundIn early 2020, a novel H9N2 AIV immune escape variant emerged in South China and rapidly spread throughout mainland China. The effectiveness of the current H9N2 vaccine is being challenged by emerging immune escape strains. Assessing key amino acid substitutions that contribute to antigenic drift and immune escape in the HA gene of circulating strains is critical for understanding virus evolution and in selecting more effective vaccine components.MethodsIn this study, a representative immune escape strain, A/chicken/Fujian/11/2020 (FJ/20), differed from current H9N2 vaccine strain, A/chicken/Anhui/LH99/2017 (AH/17) by 18 amino acids in the head domain in HA protein. To investigate the molecular determinants of antigenic drift of FJ/20, a panel of mutants were generated by reverse genetics including specific amino acids changes in the HA genes of FJ/20 and AH/17. The antigenic effect of the substitutions was evaluated by hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay and antigenic cartography.ResultsFujian-like H9N2 viruses had changed antigenicity significantly, having mutated into an antigenically distinct sub-clade. Relative to the titers of the vaccine virus AH/17, the escape strain FJ/20 saw a 16-fold reduction in HI titer against antiserum elicited by AH/17. Our results showed that seven residue substitutions (D127S, G135D, N145T, R146Q, D179T, R182T and T183N) near the HA receptor binding sites were critical for converting the antigenicity of both AH/17 and FJ/20. Especially, the combined mutations 127D, 135G, 145N, and 146R could be a major factor of antigenic drift in the current immune escape variant FJ/20. The avian influenza A (H9N2) variant virus need further ongoing epidemiological surveillance.ConclusionsIn this study, we evaluated the relative contributions of different combinations of amino acid substitutions in the HA globular head domain of the immune escape strain FJ/20 and the vaccine strain AH/17. Our study provides more insights into the molecular mechanism of the antigenic drift of the H9N2 AIV immune escape strain. This work identified important markers for understanding H9N2 AIV evolution as well as for improving vaccine development and control strategies in poultry. BackgroundIn recent year, novel avian influenza viruses (AIVs) have emerged as a major threat to animal and human [1]. The focus of global pandemic preparedness is H5 and H7 AIVs [2, 3]. However, the pandemic threat posed by other subtypes of avian influenza viruses, especially the H9 subtype, should not be overlooked. H9N2 AIVs are widely spread in poultry worldwide and causes severe economic losses to poultry industries [4]. H9N2 AIV has gradually become the most prevalent subtype of AIVs in mainland China since 1994 [5, 6]. Available evidence has demonstrated that H9N2 viruses isolated naturally from poultry have acquired the ability to preferentially bind to the human-type receptor [7, 8]. Due to sporadic cases of human infection, and by providing reassortant internal genes to human-infecting subtypes such as H5N1, H5N6, H7N9, and H10N8 [9,10,11,12], H9N2 AIV is posing a significant threat to public health with potential pandemic risk. Although conventional inactivated vaccines were used in many countries for disease control, the virus continues to circulate in vaccinated chicken farms, which is possibly due to antigenic drift [13]. Antigenic drift is mediated by the gradual accumulation of mutations in haemagglutinin (HA) glycoprotein, which results in viruses that escape from prior antibodies produced by natural infection or vaccination. Therefore, HA is the focus of influenza virus surveillance and a major component of currently licensed vaccines. Understanding the antigenic property of circulating viruses is essential for updating matched vaccine strains to control the circulation of H9N2 in poultry.In previous studies, a certain number of escape mutations in the HA gene of H9N2 virus have been confirmed by using a common monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) escape mutant method [14,15,16], and several residues were assigned to two discrete antigenic sites, ‘H9-A’ and ‘H9-B antigenic epitopes [17]. These residues identified by mAbs were important for understanding the viral antigenicity; however, many residues are completely conserved among circulating viruses. While one or two amino acid changes can cause sufficient antigenic drift in some situations, simultaneous substitutions linked with unselected mutations at several sites is most generally observed [18,19,20]. Hence, an improved understanding of the molecular basis of antigenic differences between two related strains could ultimately facilitate the selection of more effective vaccine components to control the circulation of influenza in poultry.The novel H9N2 AIV immune escape variant had been circulating in Fujian province, China since early 2020. The current H9N2 vaccine strain did not antigenically match the circulating Fujian-like viruses, which caused a H9N2 outbreak across almost the entire country soon afterwards. In this study, we selected a representative antigenic escape strain A/chicken/Fujian/11/2020 (FJ/20) and the vaccine strain A/chicken/Anhui/LH99/2017 (AH/17) as models through standard Hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assays and antigenic cartography to explore the molecular determinant of antigenic variation of FJ/20. The 18 sites in the globular head domain of HA, sites where FJ/20 and AH/17 expose different amino acids, were combined into groups according to their proximity on the membrane-distal surface of the HA protein. Subsequently, the specific amino acid combinations were introduced into the two HA genes and all viruses were generated by reverse genetics in A/PR/8/34 (PR/8, H1N1) backbone. The HI assay, with relevant monovalent chicken antisera, and antigenic cartography were employed to identify the minimal amino acid substitutions were responsible for the immune evasion of FJ/20. To better understand the evolution, variability and relative prevalence of key antigenic sites of influenza A(H9N2) in China, additional bioinformatics analysis of the published H9 sequences was also performed.Our study elucidated the antigenic effects of specific amino acid substitutions in a novel H9N2 AIV immune escape variant, and provided an improved understanding of the antigenic drift and evolution of circulating H9N2 influenza viruses. Our work will facilitate a rational approach for selecting matched vaccine strains to control the circulation of influenza in poultry and to reduce the potential for zoonotic viruses to emerge.MethodsViruses and cellsThe following six H9N2 vaccine strains and one immune escape representative strain were used in this study: A/chicken/Henan/HP/1998 (HN/98), A/chicken/Shandong/6/1996 (SD/96), A/chicken/Guangxi/55/2005 (GX/05), A/chicken/Jiangsu/WJ57/2012 (JS/12), A/chicken/Jiangsu/325/2018 (JS/18), A/chicken/Anhui/LH99/2017 (AH/17), and escape representative A/chicken/Fujian/11/2020 (FJ/20).The immune escape strain A/chicken/Fujian/11/2020 (FJ/20) was a representative antigenic escape strain, isolated from vaccinated chickens in Fujian province of southeast China in 2020, which was collected as samples of routinely ongoing surveillance. The viral subtype was identified by a standard Hemagglutination inhibition (HI) test and reverse-transcription polymerase-chain reaction (RT-PCR). The virus was purified via three rounds limiting dilution in 9–11-day specific-pathogen-free (SPF) embryonated chicken eggs. And the entire genome of FJ/20 was amplified by RT-PCR using segment-specific primers and confirmed by Sanger sequencing.Human embryonic kidney (293 T) cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Biological Industries), penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 μg/ml) at 37 °C with 5% CO2.Phylogenetic analysisThe published HA sequences of Chinese H9N2 influenza A virus (2017–2019) and reference strains used in phylogenetic analysis were acquired from GISAID database (https://www.gisaid.org).The 15 classical H9N2 reference strains were as following: Aurkey/Wisconsin/1/1966, A/chicken/Heilongjiang/35/00, A/shorebird/Delaware/9/96, A/quail/Arkansas/29209-1/93, A/duck/Hong Kong/Y439/97, A/chicken/Korea/38349-p96323/96, A/quail/Hong Kong/G1/97, A/chicken/Henan/2/98, A/duck/Hong Kong/Y280/97, A/chicken/Shanghai/B469/2011, A/chicken/Guangdong/FZH/2011, A/chicken/Shanghai/F/98, A/chicken/Guangxi/55/2005, A/chicken/Shandong/6/96, A/chicken/Guangxi/55/2005. GenBank accession numbers for all analyzed sequences are listed in Additional file 1: Table S1.The resulting sequences were aligned by using MAFFT version 7 [21], manually adjusted to correct frame-shift errors, and subsequently translated. The Maximum likelihood (ML) tree was constructed with the MEGA (7.0) software [22] under the Jones-Taylor-Thornton (JTT) model with 1000 bootstraps. The ML tree was visualized alongside amino-acid alignments using Evolview2.0 [23].A time-scaled phylogeny of H9N2 HA was analyzed using the Nextstrain platform [24] (https://github.comextstrain/avian-flu). The HA sequences of avian H9N2 in China from 1994 to 2020 were obtained from GISAID database (https://www.gisaid.org). Excluding homologous and duplicate sequences, a total of 6454 sequences were used for data analysis. In brief, the sequences were aligned by MAFFT version 7 [21], a phylogeny was constructed using IQTree [25] using a generalized time-reversible (GTR) model and a time-scaled phylogeny was inferred using TreeTime [26]. To facilitate discussion of genetic diversity, we identified sequences in different clusters on the basis of the presence of amino acid substitutions. And then the HA sequences without definite sampling locations from the above 6454 sequences were removed, the filtered 6201 sequences in the subtrees were counted towards the geographic distribution represented in the pie charts in extended Data (Fig. 7).Generation of 6:2 recombinant viruses by reverse geneticsThe HA and NA genes of AH/17 and FJ/20 were cloned into vRNA expressing vector, pHH21. The specific amino acid combinations were introduced into the AH/17 and FJ/20 HA by PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis. Primer sequences are available upon request. All the constructs were completely sequenced to ensure the absence of unwanted mutations.The recombinant viruses were generated in the A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (PR8, H1N1) backbone, harboring the HA and NA genes of AH/17 or FJ/20, as previously described by the “twelve-plasmid” reverse genetics system [27]. Briefly, 1 µg of each of the four protein-expressing plasmids and 0.2 µg of each of the vRNA expressing plasmids transfected into 70–80% confluent 293 T cells using Lipofectamine™ 2000 Transfection Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). After incubation for 6 h at 37 °C, the transfection mixture was replaced by Opti-MEM (Gibco, USA) and 24 h later 0.5 μg/ml TPCK-treated trypsin were added. At 48 h post-transfection, the cell supernatants were inoculated into 10-day-old SPF embryonated chicken eggs for virus propagation. The HA gene of rescued viruses was sequenced to verify that additional mutations did not arise.Generation of H9N2 virus mono-specific antiserumThe allantoic fluid containing different strains was inactivated by adding 0.2% formalin(v/v) for 24 h at 37 °C. Inactivation was confirmed by the absence of detectable infectivity after two blind passages of formalin-treated allantoic fluid in embryonated eggs. The inactive allantoic fluid was mixed with Tween-80 in a homogenizer and then emulsified with two parts of commercial white oil (v/v). The mono-specific antisera of reference viruses and mutated viruses were generated by using six-week-old SPF chickens, two chicken per group. Each chicken was injected with 500 μL of oil emulsion inactivated vaccine. Chicken blood was collected at 21 days after inoculation to separate the mono-specific anti-sera and the antisera was stored at − 20 °C. The information of mono-specific anti-sera generated in this study is listed in Additional file 1: Table S2.HI assay and antigenic cartographyThe hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay was performed in 96-well microtiter plates as previously described [28], with an initial serum dilution of 1:2. Briefly, each serum sample was serially diluted and added to 8 hemagglutination units (HAU) of each recombinant virus. After incubation for 30 min at room temperature, 1% chicken erythrocytes were added to all wells and the plate was gently agitated to mix. Agglutination was read out after incubation for 30–45 min at room temperature. The HI titer was expressed as the reciprocal of the highest antibody dilution that completely inhibited hemagglutination. And then the HI titers are mathematically transformed to generate a table of antigen distances that were used for antigenic cartography.Antigenic cartography is a computational method that enables high-resolution quantitative analyses and visualizations of HI assay data, and was previously used for Human (H3), swine (H3), equine (H3), and avian (H7) influenza A virus [29,30,31,32]. The antigenic map quantifies and displays antigenic differences as interrelated distances between viruses. The distance between viruses is measured by antigenic units (AU), and 1 AU is equivalent to a 2-fold dilution in the HI assay. Antigenic maps of the viruses were obtained by using Antigenic Cartography software (http://www.antigenic-cartography.org/).Structural and data analysisThe 3D structure of the FJ/20 HA protein was obtained via homology modeling, by using SWISS-MODEL [33]. The Amino acid positions were plotted on the surface of HA molecules using Pymol software (Schrödinger).For bioinformatic analysis, all H9 HA amino acid sequences of China (as of November 2019) were downloaded from GISAID database (https://www.gisaid.org) and aligned using MAFFT version 7 [21]. The distribution of amino acids at each antigenic residue was then assessed.ResultsMolecular characters and phylogenetic analysesSince 2017, we have contentious monitored and isolated avian H9N2 IAVs from live poultry markets and chicken farms. On the early 2020, we isolated one H9N2 virus, named as A/chicken/Fujian/11/2020 (FJ/20) from South China, and found that it had a significantly different antigenicity with previous H9N2 AIVs. After then, a large number of Fujian/20-like H9N2 viruses was identified from the clinical samples in South China, East China and many other provinces. Therefore, in this study, Fujian/20-like representative virus A/chicken/Fujian/11/2020 (FJ/20) and the current H9N2 vaccine strain A/chicken/Anhui/LH99/2017 (AH/17) were selected as models to reveal the molecular basis of antigenic drift and vaccination failure. The HI assay between AH/17 and FJ/20 revealed a typical pattern of influenza virus antigenic drift, with a 16-fold reduction in HI titers compared to AH/17 homologous antisera (Table 1). After sequencing, the amino acid (AA) sequence of the HA1 region showed 29 residues differences between AH/17 and FJ/20 (Fig. 1). The substitutions on the membrane surface of HA protein globular head domain could be the most responsible for affecting the recognition and neutralization of antibodies produced by previous vaccination, leading to antigenic mismatch and vaccination failure [34]. Therefore, we focused on the 18 AA substitutions located on the HA globular head region (Fig. 2A) to further evaluate their contributions to the evolution and antigenic drift of FJ/20.Table 1 The hemagglutinin inhibition assay (HI) between AH/17 and FJ/20Full size tableFig. 1The amino acid differences between FJ/20 and vaccine strain AH/17 in the HA1 proteinFull size imageFig. 2Sequence variation at the mutant sites in HA1 of H9N2 influenza A viruses. A Homotrimers of FJ/20 HA showing the amino acid difference between FJ/20 and AH/17. The mutations are shown as red with H9 numbering. B Maximum likelihood (ML) phylogeny of the H9N2 influenza virus HA amino acid sequence. The HA gene sequences from reference H9N2 viruses were downloaded from GISAID’s EpiFlu Database. The ML tree was constructed with the MEGA (7.0) software under the Jones–Taylor–Thornton (JTT) model with 1000 bootstraps. Vaccine strain AH/17 is in the red sub-clade. The blue sub-clade contains FJ/20. Amino-acid identity is shown by color, grouped by side-chain property, according to the legendFull size imageThe genetic variation of the FJ/20 was assessed by maximum likelihood algorithms in an HA gene phylogenetic tree and the amino acid identity at the 18 HA positions was shown by color and grouped by side chain property (Fig. 2B). We found the vaccine strain AH/17 and the immune escape strain FJ/20 belonged to two different sub-clades, colored by red and blue, respectively. In addition, significant differences among most of the 18 sites in the two subclades, such as positions of 48, 73, 74, 127, 135, 146, 149, 150, 153, 179 and 182, suggested that these sites may contribute to virus evolution and immune evasion. Collectively, the above data indicated that Fujian-like H9N2 viruses had changed antigenicity significantly, having mutated into an antigenically distinct sub-clade, which could be responsible for the increasing prevalence of H9N2 outbreaks in vaccinated chickens.Chimeric viruses rescue for antigenic analysisTo reveal the molecular basis of the antigenic drift and vaccination failure, the targeted 18 AA substitutions were grouped into four combinations according to antigenic epitopes and spatial location, and called them chimeras (Fig. 3A). Each chimera contains 6 to 7 substitutions. To further confirm the key substitutions leading to significant antigenic change observed from a specific chimeric HI result, the multiple AA substitutions were divided into several subgroups and the subgroups were further reorganized into pairs. The set of mutations in each chimeric HA was reciprocally exchanged between the FJ/20 and AH/17 HA genes via PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis. Subsequently, the recombinant viruses were rescued in a backbone of A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (PR8, H1N1), harboring the HA (wild-type, chimeric, or mutant) and NA genes of AH/17 or FJ/20. Unfortunately, with more than three rounds virus rescue attempts, five recombinant viruses could not be generated. In total, twenty-one rescued viruses were used to evaluate the impact of these amino-acid substitutions on the antigenic drift (Fig. 3B).Fig. 3Schematic diagram of AH/17 and FJ/20 chimeras and mutants. A Amino acid substitutions in four chimeric viruses. Four types of chimeras were divided and grouped according to the position of different amino acids on the surface of HA protein. B Schematic illustration of the rescued chimeras and mutants by reverse genetics. Amino acid substitutions were introduced into the AH/17 and FJ/20 HA genes by PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis and viruses were generated by 6:2 reverse genetics systemFull size imageThe substitutions in the Chimera_III were crucial for FJ/20 antigenic driftThe chimeras, mutants, and reference viruses were examined via HI assay. Mono-specific chicken antisera was produced by immunizing SPF chickens with wild types and mutant viruses. The HI titers were then analyzed using antigenic cartography. The antigenic distances among different viruses on the antigenic map were measured with antigenic units (AU), and 1 AU corresponds to a twofold dilution of antiserum in the HI assay. An antigenic distance of two AUs is generally considered significant and may warrant an update of the human seasonal vaccine strain [35]; therefore, an antigenic distance of 2 AUs can be considered as antigenic difference. The reference vaccine strains and the four pairs of AH/17- and FJ/20-chimeric viruses were shown in the antigenic map (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Three-dimensional (3D) antigenic maps of AH/17 and FJ/20 chimeras and reference viruses. The scale bar in each map represents 1 antigenic unit (1 antigenic unit corresponds to a twofold dilution of antiserum in the HI assay). A The antigenic distance between AH/17 and FJ/20, AH/17_Chim_III. B The antigenic distance between FJ/20 and FJ/20_Chim_III, AH/17_Chim_III, AH/17 and FJ/20_Chim_IIIFull size imageThe three chimeras of AH/17 had different degrees of antigenic change, with antigenic distances from the AH/17 parent ranging from 2.1 to 4.1 AU (Fig. 4A, Table 2). The mutants AH/17_48Q/72E/73E/112K/246H and AH/17_48Q/264T/265K were generated as a means to simulate the unrescuable AH/17_Chim_I; the relative antigenic positions were shown in Additional file 2: Fig. S1. The changes induced by these two mutants were both around 1.5 AU relative to AH/17, and so they did not strictly reach a significant antigenic threshold (Table 2).Table 2 Antigenic distance information of AH/17, FJ/20 and their mutantsFull size tableThe antigenic changes found in the four chimeras of FJ/20 ranged from 0.4 AU to 2.6 AU relative to their parent FJ/20. Chimeras FJ/20_Chim_I and FJ/20_Chim_IV had only minor antigenic changes compared to its parent virus. However, the chimera_II design for both AH/17 and FJ/20 induced a moderate level of antigenic change, with distances of 3.3 and 1.9 AU respectively. This nearly reciprocal result suggests that the substitutions found in the chimera_II design may have significant antigenic impact. Remarkably, the chimera_III design for both AH/17 and of FJ/20 showed the greatest antigenic drift, with distances of 4.1 AU and 2.8 AU relative to their parental viruses (Fig. 4A). Although the antigenic difference between AH/17_Chim_III and FJ/20 is 2.6 AU, the distance between FJ/20_Chim_III and AH/17 is much less, placing it only 0.6 AU away from the wild type AH/17 virus. In this way, FJ/20_Chim_III is now rendered a close match to the current vaccine strain. Thus, the mutations found in the chimera_III design are critical for conferring the antigenic property of AH/17 onto FJ/20 (Fig. 4B).Residues at positions 127, 135, 145 and 146 had the greatest impact on antigenic alterationTo further determine which sites were most responsible for the antigenic change, we divided the sites from chimera_III into several sub-groups according to their positions on the surface of the HA protein. The recombinant sub-grouped viruses for both AH/17 and FJ/20 were cloned and rescued (Fig. 3B).Compared with the other two site combinations, including HA-145/146, or HA-179/182/183 mutations, the recombinant virus carrying 127 and 135 mutations, had the most pronounced effect on the antigenicity whether the backbone was AH/17 or FJ/20 (Table 2). That the chimera_II designs achieved moderate antigenic differences could be seen as consistent with the chimera_III results due to the overlap in their designs at sites 127 and 135. Due to the residue in position 145 being quite conserved, the AH/17_145N/146R might require other compensatory mutations for successful virus rescue. For this reason, the effect of 145N and 146R on antigenicity could not be evaluated at this time. Compared with AH/17_179D/182R/183T, it seemed that the substitutions at position 127 and 135 had a greater impact on antigenicity, achieving a distance between AH/17_127D/135G and AH/17 WT of 3.4 AU (Fig. 5A). Moreover, the proximity of AH/17_127D/135G to AH/17_Chim_III on the antigenic map demonstrates that these two sites contributed much of the distance (Fig. 5A).Fig. 5Three-dimensional (3D) antigenic maps of AH/17 and FJ/20 chimeras and mutants. A The antigenic map of AH/17, AH/17_127D/135G, AH/17_179D/182R/183T and AH/20_Chim_III. B The antigenic map of FJ/20 and its mutants FJ/20_127S/135D, FJ/20_145T/146Q, FJ/20_179T/182T/183N. C The antigenic map of AH/17 and its mutants AH/17_127D/135G/145N/146R, AH/17_127D/135G/179D/182R/183T, AH/17_145N/146R/179D/182R/183T. D The antigenic map of FJ/20 and FJ/20_145T/146Q/179T/182T/183NFull size imageThe three mutants, FJ/20_127S/135D, FJ/20_145T/146Q and FJ/20_179T/182T/183N drifted from wild type by 1.3, 0.9 and 0.6 AU, respectively (Fig. 5B). Then we evaluated the antigenicity of AH/17_127D/135G/145N/146R, AH/17_127D/135G/179D/182R/183T, AH/17_145N/146R/179D/182R/183T and FJ/20_145T/146Q/179T/182T/183N. Surprisingly, there were two noticeable pairs of viruses whose antigenicity were similar: the first pair being AH/17_127D/135G and AH/17_127D/135G/179D/182R/183T, and the second pair being AH/17_127D/135G/145N/146R and AH/17_Chim_III (Fig. 5C). This indicated that 127D and 135G were the major determinants of antigen change in AH/17_127D/135G/179D/182R/183T. The result also suggested that these four substitutions (127D, 135G, 145N and 146R) have the similar impact on antigenicity as the seven substitutions (127D, 135G, 145N, 146R, 179D, 182R and 183T) found in AH/17_Chim_III. Therefore, the data showed that S127D, D135G, T145N and N146R were the minimal amino acid substitutions that lead to significant changes in antigenic property of AH/17, resulting in a 3.9 AU antigenic change.When the antigenicity of FJ/20_145T/146R/179T/182T/183R and FJ/20_Chim_III were compared, it was determined that simply substituting two amino acids, S127D and D135G, was sufficient to produce antigenic variants with approximately sixfold difference in HI titer (Fig. 5D). Notably, the four substitutions (S127D, D135G, T145N, N146R) caused a 2.5 AU distance between FJ/20_Chim_III and FJ/20_179T/182T/183R (Fig. 5D); however, that the antigenicity of FJ/20_179T/182T/183R was similar to FJ/20 serves as further support for the idea that these four amino acid substitutions also contributed significantly to antigenic change in FJ/20_Chim_III. These results suggested that the reciprocally substituted chimeric residues of AH/17 and FJ/20 were not equally contributing to the antigenic change. This can be seen where residues exchanged from FJ/20 could induce a more significant impact on AH/17 antigenicity than vice versa. In addition, the simultaneous substitutions of 127D and 135G might contribute significantly to antigenic change. Substitution with only 127D, 135G, 145N, and 146R was sufficient to induce significant antigenic changes in both AH/17 and FJ/20_Chim_III. These four sites could be the major molecular determinants of the antigenic changes in the current immune escape variant FJ/20, and could be related to the evolution of other circulating H9N2 viruses.Bioinformatical analysis of the seven residues in chimera_III virusesTo better understand the evolutionary context of the antigenic variation of H9N2 viruses, genetic mutations at the HA positions of 127, 135, 145, 146, 179, 182 and 189 were analyzed (Fig. 6). We used the GISAD database to collect a total of 7098 HA sequences from all H9N2 chicken isolates in China from 1994 to 2019. Excluding duplicate sequences, a total of 6436 sequences were used for data analysis. We found a gradual increase in the amount of the S127D, D135G, T146R, T182R and N183D mutations occurred in China starting in 2012; however, these novel substitutions did not completely replace the previous residues. Soon after, S127D, D135G, T146R and T182R mutations tended to decrease after 2016 and co-circulated with strains harboring the original residues. Notably, the amino acid at site 145 was quite conserved in the H9N2 HA up until the end of November 2019, but the FJ/20 strain tested in this study had a T145N mutation, which may be partly responsible for the antigenic drift of the immune escape variant. In this study, the major substitutions that were responsible for the FJ/20 antigenic variation were mapped to 127D, 135G, 145N and 146R (DGNR), while the vaccine strain AH/17 contained 127S, 135D, 145T and 146Q (SDTQ), suggesting that these four mutations may reduce the immunization efficacy of the current vaccine and lead to more FJ/20-like outbreaks in China.Fig. 6Evolution of residues 127, 135, 145, 146, 179, 182 and 183 in HA gene of the H9N2 AIV in China from 1994 to 2019. All H9 HA amino acid sequences of China isolates (as of November 2019) were downloaded from GISAID (https://www.gisaid.org) and aligned using MAFFT. Excluding homologous and duplicate sequences, the prevalence of amino acids at each antigenic residue was then assessedFull size imageNext, a phylogenetic analysis was performed using the 6454 sequences of avian H9N2 in China from 1994 to 2020 to examine whether amino acids at four positions (127, 135, 145 and 146) occurred simultaneously at fixed patterns and whether they were associated with genetic clades (Fig. 7). Herein, we called the combination of amino acids in these four positions as an antigenic motif. More than 60 antigenic motifs at these four positions were identified in all 6436 HA genes, and we selected the 12 most prevalent motifs for phylogenetic analysis. The recombination of four residues (127, 135, 145 and 146) mainly appears as the SDTQ and DGTR motifs from 1994, as shown in Fig. 7. After 2010, H9N2 isolates containing the NDTR, NGTQ, SGTR, SDTR and DGTR antigenic motifs rapidly emerged. Then, viruses containing the DGTR motif circulated simultaneously with strains including the previous SDTQ motif and increased significantly after 2014. Interestingly, viruses containing DGNR were rare in published sequences and emerged around 2016. In this study, FJ/20 contains DGNR. It is unknown whether viruses containing DGNR will gradually become dominant or co-circulate with other motifs need further ongoing epidemiological surveillance.Fig. 7copyright Google, INEGI (2021)Phylogenetic overview of H9N2 HA in China from1994 to 2020. Left, shows a time-scaled phylogeny of H9N2 HA sequences sampled in China up to the end of June 2020, colored by the motif type in sites 127,135,145 and 146 of HA. The approximate position of vaccine strains is marked with different colored arrows (purple: A/chicken/Shandong/6/1996 (SD/96), green: A/chicken/Guangxi/55/2005 (GX/05), black: A/chicken/Jiangsu/WJ57/2012 (JS/12), red: A/chicken/Anhui/LH99/2017 (AH/17), blue: A/chicken/Fujian/11/2020). Right, the proportion of those same HA sequences containing the different types of motifs in different regions of China. Tree and visualization were generated using the Nextstrain platform (see Methods). Map data Full size imageDiscussionUnderstanding the molecular basis by which circulating H9N2 strains escape from the pre-existing antibodies produced by vaccination is important for virus surveillance and appropriate vaccine selection and development. In this study, the immune escape strain A/chicken/Fujian/11/2020 (FJ/20) was examined using HI assays and antigenic cartography. We assessed the contributions of different AA substitutions in the HA protein to understand the antigenic drift and to improve future vaccine development. Our results showed that the residue substitutions in the positions 127, 135, 145, 146, 179, 182 and 183 were critical for converting the antigenicity of both AH/17 and FJ/20. Most importantly, the combination of 127D, 135G, 145N and 146R (DGNR) could be a major factor of antigenic drift in the immune escape variant FJ/20.Anti-HA antibodies are able to neutralize influenza virus infectivity. Neutralizing antibodies usually bind to highly exposed epitopes of the HA head domain to inhibit virus-cell binding; as a consequence, substitutions in the HA globular head domain are usually required for the generation of variants with epidemic potential. Therefore, we focused on the 18 amino acids of the head domain that differed between FJ/20 and AH/17. The antigenicity of the chimera_III designs for both AH/17 and FJ/20 viruses indicated that seven AA substitutions—positions 127, 135, 145, 146, 179, 182 and 183—are primarily involved in the detected antigenic drift. While these mutations make the antigenicity of FJ/20_Chim_III similar to AH/17 (Fig. 4B), AH/17_Chim_III still has an antigenic distance of 2.6 AU away from FJ/20. This effect could be attributed to the other 22 different residues in the HA1 regions that remained. It is interesting that six out of seven key amino acid substitutions in chimera_III (positions 127, 145, 146, 179, 182 and 183) are located in the corresponding H3 antigenic sites A and B [36], and that they are all near the receptor binding sites. The five sites (135, 145, 146, 179 and 183) in the chimera_III design were strikingly equivalent to five of the key seven antigenic determination-sites recently identified in seasonal human H3N2 influenza viruses circulating from 1968 to 2003 (145, 155, 156, 189, and 193, H3 numbering) [29]. Our results suggest that the antigenic drift of the H9N2 novel variant FJ/20 is mainly driven by simultaneous amino acid substitutions at antigenic sites adjacent to receptor binding sites. The importance of a small number of amino acid positions immediately adjacent to the receptor binding site in shaping antigenic evolution has also been shown for human influenza (H1, H2, and H3) [19, 37], swine H3 [31], and avian H5 [38] influenza A viruses. In addition, the sites 127 and 179 are located in the 130 loop and 190 helix of the HA receptor binding sites, respectively [19, 39]. This suggested that these two substitutions may also influence receptor-binding avidity of H9N2 viruses and lead to antigenic drift [40]. Since recombinant viruses generated in this study did not introduce any additional N-linked glycosylation motif, another studied mechanism of antigenic drift [41, 42], these substitutions in chimera_III might alter the antigenicity of epitopes directly or influence receptor-binding affinity to diminish antibody neutralization.Our results indicated that the seven substitutions introduced in the chimera_III design were necessary for the antigenic drift from FJ/20 to AH/17. Among those, the combination of 127D/135G/145N/146R (DGNR) was the most responsible for altering its antigenic properties. For FJ/20, the substitution of two or three sites from the chimera_III design had only minor antigenic effects, but all seven mutations from chimera_III together changed the antigenicity of FJ/20 to closely match the AH/17 cluster (Fig. 5B). However, for AH/17 mutant viruses, obvious antigenic drift occurred whenever two or three amino acids introduced individually or by four or five, and the degree of antigenic drift gradually changed with the increasing number of the mutations (Fig. 5C). Collectively, the reciprocally substituted forms of AH/17 and FJ/20 did not mirror the antigenic impact of the other; residues from FJ/20 could more significantly impact the antigenicity of AH/17, but residues from AH/17 had lesser effects on FJ/20. In addition, due to the residue in position 145 being quite conserved and the FJ/20_Chim_III (contacting127S/135D/145T/146Q/179T/182T/183N mutations) were able to be generated by reverse genetics, the FJ/20_127S/135D/145T/146Q, FJ/20_127S/135D/146Q and FJ/20_127S/135D/179T/182T/183N might require additional compensatory mutations for successful virus rescue, and the similar reason as the failure of generation of viable AH/17_Chim_1 and AH/17_145N/146R. This suggested that viral evolution may have occurred with positive selection of antigenic sites and compensatory mutations. Since the putative antigenic motif mainly appears as SDTQ and DGTR forms, AH/17_127D/135G/146R was generated to evaluate the effect of different motifs on antigen change. AH/17_127D/135G/146R had a 12-fold antigenic cross-reactivity reduction with antiserum of vaccine strain AH/17, and there is only 0.7 AU difference between AH/17_127D/135G/146R and AH/17_127D/135G/145N/146R (Additional file 2: Fig. S2). It is unknown whether DGNR-containing viruses will gradually become dominant or continue co-circulating with other motifs and needs ongoing epidemiological surveillance.Peacock et al. evaluated the binding effect of H9N2 monoclonal antibody escape mutants on chicken antisera, and found that some mutants tend to show little or no inhibition by polyclonal antiserum from immunized chickens [43]. The mutants identified by monoclonal antibodies are important for understanding H9 antigenic diversity, but some mutations identified by monoclonal antibodies are rare or highly conserved in circulating strains. Although some of the HA sites identified in our study have been reported as antigenic sites, the amino acid residues we found differ significantly from those screened by monoclonal antibodies. In most cases, antigenic drift generally relies upon the accumulation of multiple antigenic- and compensatory mutations [18]. For this reason, the effect of simultaneous amino acid substitutions at several key sites on antigenicity was tested. A comprehensive understanding of the antigenicity of circulating H9N2 strains and the early detection of antigenic variations with epidemic and pandemic potential are key to the continued effectiveness of vaccine strains. In this study, we evaluated the relative contributions of different combinations of amino acid substitutions in the HA globular head domain of the immune escape strain FJ/20 and the vaccine strain AH/17. The antigenic changes were then examined using a panel of specific mono-chicken anti-sera obtained from inactivated mutant virus immunization. Studying FJ/20 is of great importance toward our understanding the antigenic properties of circulating H9N2 strains.ConclusionsIn conclusion, our study demonstrates that S127D, D135G, T145N and N146R mutations in the HA gene caused significant antigenic change when introduced to AH/17, and that these substitutions could be the most responsible for the antigenic drift seen in FJ/20, the vaccine escape mutant. Failure of vaccine protection in FJ/20-like strains resulted in serious outbreaks in China since 2020. The results of this work will be useful for future surveillance efforts in identifying newly sequenced viruses with high potential for immune evasion. Our study could provide further understanding of the evolution and antigenic diversity of H9N2, and these substitution combinations could be key molecular markers for early warning and control of H9N2 outbreaks. Availability of data and materials All relevant information is provided in this current manuscript. If required, the data presented in this work can be shared by e-mail. AbbreviationsIAVs: Influenza A viruses HA: Hemagglutinin HI: Hemagglutination inhibition mAbs: Monoclonal antibodies ReferencesCui P, Zeng X, Li X, Li Y, Shi J, Zhao C, Qu Z, Wang Y, Guo J, Gu W, et al. Genetic and biological characteristics of the globally circulating H5N8 avian influenza viruses and the protective efficacy offered by the poultry vaccine currently used in China. Sci China Life Sci. 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11427-021-2025-y.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li C, Chen H. H7N9 influenza virus in China. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2021;11:a038349.PubMed Google Scholar Li C, Bu Z, Chen H. Avian influenza vaccines against H5N1 “bird flu.” Trends Biotechnol. 2014;32:147–56.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Carnaccini S, Perez DR. H9 influenza viruses: an emerging challenge. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2020;10:a038588.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Li C, Yu K, Tian G, Yu D, Liu L, Jing B, Ping J, Chen H. Evolution of H9N2 influenza viruses from domestic poultry in Mainland China. Virology. 2005;340:70–83.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bi Y, Li J, Li S, Fu G, Jin T, Zhang C, Yang Y, Ma Z, Tian W, Li J, et al. Dominant subtype switch in avian influenza viruses during 2016–2019 in China. Nat Commun. 2020;11:5909.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li X, Shi J, Guo J, Deng G, Zhang Q, Wang J, He X, Wang K, Chen J, Li Y, et al. Genetics, receptor binding property, and transmissibility in mammals of naturally isolated H9N2 Avian Influenza viruses. PLoS Pathog. 2014;10:e1004508.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Guo J, Wang Y, Zhao C, Gao X, Zhang Y, Li J, Wang M, Zhang H, Liu W, Wang C, et al. Molecular characterization, receptor binding property, and replication in chickens and mice of H9N2 avian influenza viruses isolated from chickens, peafowls, and wild birds in eastern China. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021;10:2098–112.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cui Y, Li Y, Li M, Zhao L, Wang D, Tian J, Bai X, Ci Y, Wu S, Wang F, et al. Evolution and extensive reassortment of H5 influenza viruses isolated from wild birds in China over the past decade. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2020;9:1793–803.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dai J, Zhou X, Dong D, Liu Y, Gu Q, Zhu B, Wu C, Cai H. Human infection with a novel avian-origin influenza A (H7N9) virus: serial chest radiographic and CT findings. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127:2206–11. Google Scholar Shi J, Deng G, Kong H, Gu C, Ma S, Yin X, Zeng X, Cui P, Chen Y, Yang H, et al. H7N9 virulent mutants detected in chickens in China pose an increased threat to humans. Cell Res. 2017;27:1409–21.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Deng G, Shi J, Wang J, Kong H, Cui P, Zhang F, Tan D, Suzuki Y, Liu L, Jiang Y, et al. Genetics, receptor binding, and virulence in mice of H10N8 influenza viruses isolated from ducks and chickens in live poultry markets in China. J Virol. 2015;89:6506–10.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pu J, Wang SG, Yin YB, Zhang GZ, Carter RA, Wang JL, Xu GL, Sun HL, Wang M, Wen C, et al. Evolution of the H9N2 influenza genotype that facilitated the genesis of the novel H7N9 virus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015;112:548–53.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kaverin NV, Rudneva IA, Ilyushina NA, Lipatov AS, Krauss S, Webster RG. Structural differences among hemagglutinins of influenza A virus subtypes are reflected in their antigenic architecture: analysis of H9 escape mutants. J Virol. 2004;78:240–9.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ping J, Li C, Deng G, Jiang Y, Tian G, Zhang S, Bu Z, Chen H. Single-amino-acid mutation in the HA alters the recognition of H9N2 influenza virus by a monoclonal antibody. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008;371:168–71.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhu Y, Yang D, Ren Q, Yang Y, Liu X, Xu X, Liu W, Chen S, Peng D, Liu X. Identification and characterization of a novel antigenic epitope in the hemagglutinin of the escape mutants of H9N2 avian influenza viruses. Vet Microbiol. 2015;178:144–9.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Peacock T, Reddy K, James J, Adamiak B, Barclay W, Shelton H, Iqbal M. Antigenic mapping of an H9N2 avian influenza virus reveals two discrete antigenic sites and a novel mechanism of immune escape. Sci Rep. 2016;6:18745.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shih AC, Hsiao TC, Ho MS, Li WH. Simultaneous amino acid substitutions at antigenic sites drive influenza A hemagglutinin evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007;104:6283–8.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Koel BF, Burke DF, Bestebroer TM, van der Vliet S, Zondag GCM, Vervaet G, Skepner E, Lewis NS, Spronken MIJ, Russell CA, et al. Substitutions near the receptor binding site determine major antigenic change during influenza virus evolution. Science. 2013;342:976–9.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Fan M, Liang B, Zhao Y, Zhang Y, Liu Q, Tian M, Zheng Y, Xia H, Suzuki Y, Chen H, Ping J. Mutations of 127, 183 and 212 residues on the HA globular head affect the antigenicity, replication and pathogenicity of H9N2 avian influenza virus. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021. https://doi.org/10.1111bed.14363.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Katoh K, Misawa K, Kuma K, Miyata T. MAFFT: a novel method for rapid multiple sequence alignment based on fast Fourier transform. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002;30:3059–66.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kumar S, Stecher G, Tamura K. MEGA7: molecular evolutionary genetics analysis version 7.0 for bigger datasets. Mol Biol Evol. 2016;33:1870–4.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar He Z, Zhang H, Gao S, Lercher MJ, Chen WH, Hu S. Evolview v2: an online visualization and management tool for customized and annotated phylogenetic trees. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016;44:W236-241.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hadfield J, Megill C, Bell SM, Huddleston J, Potter B, Callender C, Sagulenko P, Bedford T, Neher RA. Nextstrain: real-time tracking of pathogen evolution. Bioinformatics. 2018;34:4121–3.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nguyen LT, Schmidt HA, von Haeseler A, Minh BQ. IQ-TREE: a fast and effective stochastic algorithm for estimating maximum-likelihood phylogenies. Mol Biol Evol. 2015;32:268–74.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sagulenko P, Puller V, Neher RA. TreeTime: maximum-likelihood phylodynamic analysis. Virus Evol. 2018;4:vex042.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Neumann G, Watanabe T, Ito H, Watanabe S, Goto H, Gao P, Hughes M, Perez DR, Donis R, Hoffmann E, et al. Generation of influenza A viruses entirely from cloned cDNAs. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999;96:9345–50.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pedersen JC. Hemagglutination-inhibition test for avian influenza virus subtype identification and the detection and quantitation of serum antibodies to the avian influenza virus. In: Spackman E, editor. Avian influenza virus. Humana Press; 2008. p. 53–66. Google Scholar Smith DJ, Lapedes AS, de Jong JC, Bestebroer TM, Rimmelzwaan GF, Osterhaus AD, Fouchier RA. Mapping the antigenic and genetic evolution of influenza virus. Science. 2004;305:371–6.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lewis NS, Daly JM, Russell CA, Horton DL, Skepner E, Bryant NA, Burke DF, Rash AS, Wood JL, Chambers TM, et al. Antigenic and genetic evolution of equine influenza A (H3N8) virus from 1968 to 2007. J Virol. 2011;85:12742–9.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lewis NS, Anderson TK, Kitikoon P, Skepner E, Burke DF, Vincent AL. Substitutions near the hemagglutinin receptor-binding site determine the antigenic evolution of influenza A H3N2 viruses in U.S. swine. J Virol. 2014;88:4752–63.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yin X, Deng G, Zeng X, Cui P, Hou Y, Liu Y, Fang J, Pan S, Wang D, Chen X, et al. Genetic and biological properties of H7N9 avian influenza viruses detected after application of the H7N9 poultry vaccine in China. PLoS Pathog. 2021;17:e1009561.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Waterhouse A, Bertoni M, Bienert S, Studer G, Tauriello G, Gumienny R, Heer FT, de Beer TAP, Rempfer C, Bordoli L, et al. SWISS-MODEL: homology modelling of protein structures and complexes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018;46:W296–303.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Knossow M, Gaudier M, Douglas A, Barrere B, Bizebard T, Barbey C, Gigant B, Skehel JJ. Mechanism of neutralization of influenza virus infectivity by antibodies. Virology. 2002;302:294–8.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Russell CA, Jones TC, Barr IG, Cox NJ, Garten RJ, Gregory V, Gust ID, Hampson AW, Hay AJ, Hurt AC, et al. Influenza vaccine strain selection and recent studies on the global migration of seasonal influenza viruses. Vaccine. 2008;26(Suppl 4):D31-34.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wiley DC, Wilson IA, Skehel JJ. Structural identification of the antibody-binding sites of Hong Kong influenza haemagglutinin and their involvement in antigenic variation. Nature. 1981;289:373–8.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Linster M, Schrauwen EJA, van der Vliet S, Burke DF, Lexmond P, Bestebroer TM, Smith DJ, Herfst S, Koel BF, Fouchier RAM. The molecular basis for antigenic drift of human A/H2N2 influenza viruses. J Virol. 2019;93:e01907-e1918.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Koel BF, van der Vliet S, Burke DF, Bestebroer TM, Bharoto EE, Yasa IW, Herliana I, Laksono BM, Xu K, Skepner E, et al. Antigenic variation of clade 21 H5N1 virus is determined by a few amino acid substitutions immediately adjacent to the receptor binding site. MBio. 2014;5:e01070-e1014.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xiong X, McCauley JW, Steinhauer DA. Receptor binding properties of the influenza virus hemagglutinin as a determinant of host range. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2014;385:63–91.PubMed Google Scholar Hensley SE, Das SR, Bailey AL, Schmidt LM, Hickman HD, Jayaraman A, Viswanathan K, Raman R, Sasisekharan R, Bennink JR, Yewdell JW. Hemagglutinin receptor binding avidity drives influenza A virus antigenic drift. Science. 2009;326:734–6.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Abe Y, Takashita E, Sugawara K, Matsuzaki Y, Muraki Y, Hongo S. Effect of the addition of oligosaccharides on the biological activities and antigenicity of influenza A/H3N2 virus hemagglutinin. J Virol. 2004;78:9605–11.CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gu C, Zeng X, Song Y, Li Y, Liu L, Kawaoka Y, Zhao D, Chen H. Glycosylation and an amino acid insertion in the head of hemagglutinin independently affect the antigenic properties of H5N1 avian influenza viruses. Sci China Life Sci. 2019;62:76–83.CAS PubMed Google Scholar Peacock TP, Harvey WT, Sadeyen JR, Reeve R, Iqbal M. The molecular basis of antigenic variation among A(H9N2) avian influenza viruses. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2018;7:176.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Robert Presler for scientific editing, Dr. Yoshihiro Kawaoka (University of Wisconsin-Madison) for the gifts of the pHH21 vector, and Dr. Earl G Brown (University of Ottawa) for the gifts of “eight-plasmids” reverse genetics system of A/PR/8/34 virus.FundingThis work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Number: 31772775), State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology (Grant Number: SKLVBF202103) and the Specialized Fund for the Basic Research Operating Expenses Program of Central College (Grant Number: KYYJ202103).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsMOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety, Engineering Laboratory of Animal Immunity of Jiangsu Province, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, ChinaYiqing Zheng, Yanna Guo, Yingfei Li, Bing Liang, Shijia Li, Huizhi Xia & Jihui PingSchool of Industrial Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, 214122, ChinaXiaoyuan SunAuthorsYiqing ZhengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYanna GuoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYingfei LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBing LiangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXiaoyuan SunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShijia LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHuizhi XiaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJihui PingView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsDesigned experiments and critically revised the manuscript: YZ, YG, JP. Performed experiments: YZ, YL, HX. Analyzed data: YZ, XS, BL, SL. Drafted manuscript: YZ, YG. Review and editing: YZ and JP. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Jihui Ping.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable. Consent for publication All authors consent to the publication of the manuscript. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationAdditional file 1: Table S1. GenBank accession numbers. Table S2. The information of mono-specific chicken antisera generated in this study. Table S3. The hemagglutinin inhibition assay (HI) of the several current vaccine strains and the circulating Fujian/20 virus.Additional file 2: Fig. S1. The overall three-dimensional (3D) antigenic maps. Fig. S2. The antigenic map of AH/17, AH/17_127D/135G, AH/17_127D/135G/146R and AH/20_127D/135G/145N/146R.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleZheng, Y., Guo, Y., Li, Y. et al. The molecular determinants of antigenic drift in a novel avian influenza A (H9N2) variant virus. Virol J 19, 26 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-022-01755-9Download citationReceived: 23 December 2021Accepted: 23 January 2022Published: 05 February 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-022-01755-9Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsAvian influenza virusH9N2Hemagglutinin (HA) geneAntigenic driftAntigenic map Download PDF Associated content Section Influenza viruses Advertisement Virology Journal ISSN: 1743-422X Contact us Submission enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.A single residue in influenza virus H2 hemagglutinin enhances the breadth of the B cell response elicited by H2 vaccination | Nature Medicine Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature medicine articles article A single residue in influenza virus H2 hemagglutinin enhances the breadth of the B cell response elicited by H2 vaccination Download PDF Download PDF Article Published: 03 February 2022 A single residue in influenza virus H2 hemagglutinin enhances the breadth of the B cell response elicited by H2 vaccination Sarah F. Andrews ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2583-19491, Julie E. Raab1 na1, Jason Gorman ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3775-65601 na1, Rebecca A. Gillespie ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5741-36991 na1, Crystal S. F. Cheung1 na1, Reda Rawi1 na1, Lauren Y. Cominsky1, Jeffrey C. Boyington1, Adrian Creanga ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3087-83971, Chen-Hsiang Shen1, Darcy R. Harris1, Adam S. Olia1, Alexandra F. Nazzari1, Tongqing Zhou ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3935-4637, Katherine V. Houser ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2147-186X1, Grace L. Chen1, John R. Mascola1, Barney S. Graham1, Masaru Kanekiyo ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5767-15321, Julie E. Ledgerwood1, Peter D. Kwong ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3560-232X1 & …Adrian B. McDermott ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0616-91171 Show authors Nature Medicine volume 28, pages 373–382 (2022)Cite this article 7965 Accesses 19 Citations 7 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Immunological memoryInfluenza virus AbstractConserved epitopes on the influenza hemagglutinin (HA) stem are an attractive target for universal vaccine strategies as they elicit broadly neutralizing antibodies. Such antibody responses to stem-specific epitopes have been extensively characterized for HA subtypes H1 and H5 in humans. H2N2 influenza virus circulated 50 years ago and represents a pandemic threat due to the lack of widespread immunity, but, unlike H1 and H5, the H2 HA stem contains Phe45HA2 predicted to sterically clash with HA stem-binding antibodies characterized to date. To understand the effect of Phe45HA2, we compared the HA stem-specific B cell response in post hoc analyses of two phase 1 clinical trials, one testing vaccination with an H2 ferritin nanoparticle immunogen (NCT03186781) and one with an inactivated H5N1 vaccine (NCT01086657). In H2-naive individuals, the magnitude of the B cell response was equivalent, but H2-elicited HA stem-binding B cells displayed greater cross-reactivity than those elicited by H5. However, in individuals with childhood H2 exposure, H5-elicited HA stem-binding B cells also displayed high cross-reactivity, suggesting recall of memory B cells formed 50 years ago. Overall, we propose that a one-residue difference on an HA immunogen can alter establishment and expansion of broadly neutralizing memory B cells. These data have implications for stem-based universal influenza vaccination strategies. Similar content being viewed by others Phase 1 dose-escalation trial evaluating a group 2 influenza hemagglutinin stabilized stem nanoparticle vaccine Article Open access 17 September 2024 Safety and immunogenicity of a ferritin nanoparticle H2 influenza vaccine in healthy adults: a phase 1 trial Article 03 February 2022 Pandemic influenza virus vaccines boost hemagglutinin stalk-specific antibody responses in primed adult and pediatric cohorts Article Open access 06 December 2019 MainStudies estimating the worldwide influenza-associated mortality between 1999 and 2015 show that yearly influenza virus epidemics are associated with 290,000–650,000 deaths annually1. H1N1, H3N2 and H2N2 influenza subtypes have caused pandemics over the past 100 years, including the 1918 H1N1 influenza pandemic, which led to 20–50 million deaths. H2N2 influenza virus entered the human population in 1957 through reassortment with avian H2N2 and human H1N1, causing a pandemic that led to 1–4 million deaths worldwide. H2N2 stopped circulating in the human population in 1968 when a reassortment event with H3 viruses replaced it with human H3N2.HA, comprising a head and stem domain, is the most abundant glycoprotein on the influenza virus surface and can be divided phylogenetically into 18 subtypes, which segregate into two major groups: group 1 and group 2. Protection against influenza infection correlates with titers of HA-binding antibodies that block viral attachment and infection of cells. Current yearly seasonal influenza vaccines primarily induce an antibody response directed against the immunodominant but continually diversifying HA head region. These antibody responses provide protection against the vaccinating strain but little cross-protection against other strains or subtypes. As a result, there has been a concerted effort to develop immunogens that elicit broadly neutralizing immune responses focused on subdominant, but more conserved, epitopes, such as those on the HA stem domain, that might protect against viruses of pandemic threat, including H2, H5, H6 and H9 subtypes.In response to H1 or H5 viral infection or vaccination, most HA stem-specific responses comprise a convergent class of immunoglobulins with VH1-69 heavy chains capable of broadly neutralizing group 1 HA subtypes2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10, but the B cell response to the H2 HA stem domain has not been evaluated. Human H2N2 influenza strains are the only strains to have a bulky phenylalanine in HA at residue 45HA2 located near the hydrophobic pocket targeted by VH1-69-class antibodies, and this residue is predicted to sterically clash with these antibodies11. Indeed, several broadly binding HA stem-binding monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have selectively low binding to H2 HA6,12,13,14,15,16, and introduction of a glycan at residue 45HA2 knocks out most HA stem binding17,18. In light of the central role of HA residue 45HA2 in antibody binding, we hypothesized that the nature of the HA stem-binding immunoglobulin repertoire induced by H2 HA might be different than that induced by other group 1 HAs.To evaluate the effect of Phe45HA2 on H2 HA-specific humoral immune responses, we compared the magnitude and cross-reactivity of the HA stem-binding cellular and serological B cell responses elicited by H5 versus H2 vaccination. Altogether, we conclude that presence of the bulky phenylalanine at residue 45HA2 on H2 HA selects for B cells with greater breadth of immunoglobulin binding and neutralization across group 1 subtypes. Moreover, analysis of the HA stem response in individuals exposed to H2 50 years ago suggests that an H2 immunogen can lead to a long-term HA stem-specific memory repertoire capable of providing broad protection across the lifetime of an individual. Based on these findings, we propose that incorporating H2 instead of H1 or H5 in an HA stem-based vaccine design might provide broader protection against potential group 1 pandemic threats.ResultsStudy designUnlike most other influenza subtypes, the HA proteins from human H2N2 influenza strains have a phenylalanine at 45HA2 predicted to sterically clash with many HA stem-binding mAbs described to date, including VH1-69-class mAbs, which dominate the group 1 HA stem-specific response (Fig. 1a,b)16. To test the effect of Phe45HA2 on H2 HA in humans, we compared the HA stem-specific memory B cell response upon vaccination with H5 versus H2 in individuals naive to both HA subtypes in two phase 1 clinical trials. In the first trial (NCT01086657), individuals were primed with A/Indonesia/05/2005 H5 DNA or matched H5N1 monovalent inactivated vaccine (H5 protein), followed by a boost with the H5N1 monovalent inactivated vaccine administered 16–24 weeks later (Fig. 1c)19. In the second trial (NCT03186781), individuals were primed with A/Singapore/2/1957 H2 DNA or an H2 HA ferritin nanoparticle (H2 protein) vaccine, followed by a boost with the H2 HA ferritin nanoparticle vaccine 16 weeks later (Fig. 1c).Fig. 1: Phe45HA2 is unique in human H2N2 isolates.a, Comparison of residues in HA2 proteins from different group 1 and group 2 subtypes as indicated. Residue 45HA2 and H2N2 strains are highlighted with red boxes. HA strains shown are the following: A/Brevig Mission/1/1918 (H1N1 BM18), A/NewCaledonia/20/1999 (H1N1 NC99), A/California/04/2009 (H1N1 CA09), A/Singapore/1/1957 (H2N2 SI57), A/AnnArbor/6/1960 (H2N2 AA60), A/Canada/720/2005 (H2N2 CAN05), A/Indonesia/05/2005 (H5N1 IN05), A/Taiwan/1/2013 (H6N1 TW13), A/Guangxi-Xiangshan/11522/2018 (H9N2 GX18), A/Perth/16/2009 (H3N2 PE09), A/Shanghai/2/2013 (H7N9 SH13) and A/Jiangxi-Donghu/346/2013 (H10N8 JD13). Strains in bold were used for the vaccine trials described in c. b, Ribbon diagrams showing the crystal structure of mAb CR6261 in complex with H1 A/Brevig Mission/1/1918 HA (PDB, 3GBN) with the wild-type Ile45 residue (top) or modeled with Phe45 instead (bottom). CR6261 is colored purple; HA is colored teal or gray. Residue clashes are illustrated with red plates. c, Schematic showing vaccine regimens and time points analyzed for the H5 and H2 phase 1 vaccine trials. H5 protein is from a monovalent influenza subunit virion (MIV), and H2 protein is from an H2 HA ferritin nanoparticle. W, week.Full size imageH2 vaccination elicits memory B cells with greater breadthWe first used flow cytometry to determine the magnitude and cross-reactivity of the HA stem-specific memory B cell response in 15 individuals in each trial 2 weeks after the vaccine boost (Fig. 1c). H5 has never circulated in humans in North America, and we limited analysis to individuals from each trial who were born after 1970 to ensure that all individuals were naive to both H5 and H2 (Supplementary Table 1). We gated on CD19+CD20+IgG+ memory B cells and used a combination of fluorescently labeled HA trimers and stabilized HA stem-only trimers to detect memory B cells able to bind the stem region of H1, H2 or H5 HA (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 1a)10,20,21. Although responses were variable, little evidence of a difference in the total vaccine-specific memory B cell HA response was observed between trials, whether individuals were primed with DNA or protein (Fig. 2b). The proportion of the memory B cell HA vaccine response that recognized the HA stem region was also not significantly different between the two vaccine trials, although it varied with the prime (Fig. 2c). DNA-primed individuals in both trials had a higher proportion of HA stem-binding B cells than protein-primed individuals (Fig. 2c). We next compared the cross-reactivity of the HA stem-specific responses by determining the percentage of HA stem-specific memory B cells that cross-reacted with the H1 HA stem domain and the vaccinating HA (H2 or H5) or bound all three (H1, H2 and H5) (Fig. 2a). We limited the analysis to group 1 subtypes as we observed very little cross-reactivity to group 2 HA subtypes (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Within the population negative for binding to the H1 HA stem domain, we also looked for cells that bound the H2 and/or H5 stem domain and found that almost all HA stem-specific B cells elicited by H2 or H5 vaccination were cross-reactive with H1 (Fig. 2d). Interestingly, whether individuals were primed by DNA or protein, the proportion of stem-specific memory B cells that bound all three subtypes—H1, H2 and H5—was significantly higher after H2 vaccination than after H5 vaccination (Fig. 2d). Although, on average, over 85% of HA stem-specific memory B cells generated by H2 vaccination also cross-reacted with H5, only about 65% of HA stem-specific memory B cells elicited by H5 vaccination also bound H2 in addition to H1 (Fig. 2d). This difference in cross-reactivity was unique to HA stem-specific memory B cells. We detected no discernable difference in the cross-reactivity of HA head-binding memory B cells between the two trials (Supplementary Fig. 1c,d). To test whether Phe45HA2 on the H2 HA stem was responsible for reduced cross-reactivity to H2 after H5 vaccination, we mutated Phe45 on H2 to isoleucine (H2 F45I) to match H5. Indeed, close to 90% of H5 vaccine-elicited HA stem-binding memory B cells could bind the H2 F45I-stabilized stem mutant (Fig. 2e). Overall, these data indicate that vaccination with H5 HA elicits memory B cells with varied ability to bind H2 HA, whereas H2 vaccination preferentially expands memory B cells capable of recognizing H2, H5 and H1 HAs.Fig. 2: Memory B cells expanded by H2 vaccination have greater breadth.a, PBMCs isolated 2 weeks after boost after either H5 (top) or H2 (bottom) vaccination were stained with antibodies to detect B cell surface markers and fluorescently labeled HA probes. CD19+CD20+IgG+ B cells were gated, and the reactivity of memory B cells to H2 HA, H5 HA, H1 stem, H5 stem and H2 stem was determined as indicated. b, The percentage of CD19+CD20+IgG+ B cells that bound the vaccinating HA—H5 HA (H5+) after H5 vaccination and H2 HA (H2+) after H2 vaccination—2 weeks after the vaccine boost. Individuals are divided according to whether they were primed with a DNA vaccine (left) or a protein vaccine (right). c, The proportion of B cells binding H5 HA or H2 HA that also bound the corresponding HA stem. d, The proportion of B cells binding the HA stem that were triple reactive, binding H1H5H2; were double reactive, binding H1H5; H1H2 or H5H2; or were single reactive, binding H5 or H2 only. Data are shown separately for individuals who were primed with a DNA vaccine (left) or a protein vaccine (right). e, Proportion of HA stem-binding B cells from each vaccine study at the same time point that were cross-reactive with H5, H1 and either wild-type (WT) H2 or the F45I H2 stem mutant as indicated. For b–e, each dot represents one individual, with the line indicating the mean. n = 15 individuals vaccinated with H2 (eight DNA prime and seven protein prime) and 15 individuals vaccinated with H5 (11 DNA prime and four protein prime). Data are representative of two independent experiments using different combinations of HA probes. Statistical significance was determined for b–d using the two-sided Mann–Whitney test and for e using the two-sided Wilcoxon matched-pairs rank test.Source dataFull size imageH2 vaccination results in greater serological breadthTo see whether this difference in memory B cell reactivity corresponds to differences in the antibody serological response, we compared the H2 and H5 serological binding and neutralization levels in H2- and H5-vaccinated individuals 2 weeks after the vaccine boost. Total H2 and H5 serological binding to the vaccinating subtype was not significantly different between the two trials (P = 0.9, Mann–Whitney test) (Fig. 3a). Serological binding to the vaccinating HA was highest in each vaccine group, but the difference between H2 and H5 binding in H2-vaccinated individuals was smaller than for H5-vaccinated individuals (Fig. 3a,b). When we measured H2 and H5 neutralization titers, we saw a similar trend. Although H5 neutralization titers were only slightly lower than H2 neutralization titers in H2-vaccinated individuals, H2 neutralization titers were substantially lower in H5-vaccinated individuals (Fig. 3c,d). We also noted that H2 neutralization titers were lower upon H2 vaccination than H5 neutralization titers in H5-vaccinated individuals (Fig. 3c), possibly due to differences in neutralization sensitivity between the two viruses, as we observed high H2 binding titers in H2 vaccinees (Fig. 3a). Both HA head- and stem-specific antibodies can contribute to serological neutralization, so, to evaluate HA stem-specific responses, we measured serological H2, H5 and H1 HA stem binding with the same stabilized stem probes used in flow cytometry. Although we detected a difference between H2 and H5 stem binding in both trials (Fig. 3e), the difference was significantly greater in H5-vaccinated individuals than in H2-vaccinated individuals (Fig. 3f). Binding to H2 F45I stem was equivalent to H5 HA stem binding, again indicating that this residue is the key factor explaining reduced H2 stem binding in H5-vaccinated individuals (Fig. 3e,f). We noted overall lower HA stem-binding levels in protein-primed individuals than in DNA-primed individuals, but, in both vaccine prime groups, H2 and H5 HA stem binding were more similar in H2-vaccinated individuals than in H5-vaccinated individuals (Supplementary Fig. 2a–d). We conclude that vaccination with H2 leads to greater breadth in serological binding and neutralization than with H5 vaccination.Fig. 3: Sera from H2-vaccinated individuals show greater breadth of binding.a,b, Sera were tested for binding to full-length H2 or H5 HA. Shown is the area under the curve (AUC) of serological binding as determined by MSD (a) or the log2 ratio of AUC between H5 and H2 binding (b) in each individual plotted separately for each vaccine group. c,d, Sera were tested for the capacity to neutralize H2 or H5 virus in a microneutralization assay. Shown is the 80% inhibitory concentration (IC80) (c) or ratio of H2 to H5 IC80 (d) in each vaccine group. e,f, Sera were tested for binding to H5, H2 WT, H2 F45I or H1 HA stem. Shown is the AUC of binding in each vaccine group (e) or the log2 ratio of binding as indicated (f). All sera tested were from 2 weeks after the H2 or H5 vaccine boost (n = 15 per vaccine group). All data are representative of two or three replicates. Bars in b, d and f represent the mean. Statistical significance was determined by the two-sided Wilcoxon matched-pairs rank test (a, c, e) or the two-sided Mann–Whitney test (b, d, f); n.s., not significant.Source dataFull size imageVH1-69 usage dominates the HA stem-binding immunoglobulin responseTo investigate whether the immunoglobulins produced by HA stem-reactive memory B cells elicited by the two vaccines are genetically different, we performed single-cell sorting of HA stem-specific IgG+ memory B cells from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) collected 2 weeks after the vaccine boost from 12 H5-vaccinated individuals and 13 H2-vaccinated individuals and sequenced the paired heavy and light chains. This analysis included a mix of individuals primed with the DNA and protein vaccines (Supplementary Table 1). We first observed that VH1-69 usage equally dominated the immunoglobulin variable heavy chain (VH) repertoire, with over 50% of all HA stem-reactive memory B cell immunoglobulins expressing this VH gene in both trials (Fig. 4a), whether individuals were primed with a DNA vaccine or a protein vaccine (Supplementary Fig. 3a,b). We then proceeded with a more in-depth analysis of the HA stem-specific memory B cell immunoglobulin repertoire. With index sorting, we were able to assign HA specificity to each sorted B cell, allowing us to compare the immunoglobulin repertoires of triple-positive (H2H5H1) cells elicited by H2 (n = 638) and H5 (n = 973) vaccination, as well as double-positive (H5H1) cells (n = 451) induced by H5 vaccination. Few double-positive H2H1 or H2H5 memory B cells were detected after H2 vaccination, and these cells were thus excluded. We first calculated the average clone size of the HA stem-specific repertoire across all individuals and found it to be significantly lower after H5 vaccination (1.6 and 2.1 for the H5 and H2 vaccine trials, respectively), suggesting a more clonally diverse response (Supplementary Fig. 3c). We further plotted the generalized Hill diversity index (qD) over a range of diversity orders (q)22,23, which takes into account both clonal size and number of unique clonotypes. We found that HA stem-specific memory B cells after H5 vaccination were more clonally diverse than after H2 vaccination independently of specificity, even when we equalized the number of cells analyzed from each trial or limited analysis to only VH1-69 immunoglobulins (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Fig. 3d,e). The average VH mutation percentage, however, was not significantly different among HA stem-binding memory B cells isolated from each trial, whether or not they bound H2 (Fig. 4c). We also observed similar VH usage among cells of different specificity, with VH1-69 usage making up 50–60% of that for both H5H1H2 and H5H1 stem-reactive memory B cells (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Fig. 3f). Thus, although the proportion of HA stem-binding memory B cells with a VH1-69-encoded immunoglobulin did not differ between the two trials, the cross-reactivity of the VH1-69 immunoglobulins was different. Whereas 95% of the VH1-69 immunoglobulins expressed by memory B cells elicited by H2 vaccination were able to bind H1, H2 and H5, 30% of VH1-69 HA stem-specific memory B cells expanded by H5 vaccination were unable to bind H2 by flow cytometry (Fig. 4e).Fig. 4: VH1-69 usage dominates the HA stem response to H5 and H2 vaccination.a, VH gene usage for all single sorted HA stem-reactive B cells in each vaccine study as indicated (n = 1,426 from 12 H5-vaccinated individuals and 677 heavy chain sequences from 13 H2-vaccinated individuals). b, Hill diversity index (qD) over a range of diversity orders (q) for HA stem-specific B cells from the H2 vaccine trial (orange) or the H5 vaccine trial (blue), with the indicated specificity. The curves show the mean from 1,000 bootstraps, and the bands indicate 95% confidence intervals. c, Percent VH mutation of immunoglobulins from HA stem-binding B cells isolated after vaccination, with the indicated specificity. Each dot is the mean VH mutation percentage for all stem-binding immunoglobulin sequences isolated from a given individual, with the bar indicating the mean of each group. No statistically significant difference was observed in percent VH mutation between HA stem-binding immunoglobulins from the H2 versus H5 vaccine trial by two-sided Mann–Whitney test or between H5H1- and H5H2H1-specific cells isolated from the same individual after H5 vaccination by two-sided Wilcoxon matched-pairs rank test. d, VH gene usage for HA stem-specific B cells from the H2 vaccine trial (orange) or the H5 vaccine trial (blue), with the indicated specificity. e, Proportion of VH1-69-expressing HA stem-binding B cells detected after H2 or H5 vaccination, with triple or double reactivity as indicated. f, Twenty-one mAbs isolated from VH1-69 stem-binding B cells sorted from H5-vaccinated individuals were tested for binding by MSD (left, in blue) and neutralization (right, in orange) for group 1 HA subtypes as indicated. For neutralization, mAbs were tested for the capacity to neutralize virus strains at four concentrations as indicated and the color corresponds to the smallest concentration at which there was a 50% or greater reduction in viral titer. The names of mAbs from B cells detected as negative for H2 binding by flow cytometry are in blue. g, Binding AUC and neutralization potency of 21 mAbs isolated from VH1-69 H2 HA stem-binding B cells detected in PBMCs after H2 vaccination. Asterisks in f and g indicate mAbs used in structural analysis.Source dataFull size imageTo confirm specificity determined by flow cytometry, we cloned and expressed 21 VH1-69 HA stem-binding mAbs isolated after H5 vaccination from seven different individuals. We set a median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of 1,000 as the cutoff between H2 HA-binding and non-H2-binding B cells by flow cytometry and expressed 11 mAbs above and 10 mAbs below this cutoff (Supplementary Fig. 4a). We confirmed with a Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) binding assay that the ten mAbs expressed by B cells lacking binding to H2 HA in flow cytometry had no to low binding to H2 HA (Fig. 4f, in blue, and Supplementary Fig. 4a,b). One additional mAb (44-2F08) isolated from a B cell detected as binding to H2 also showed no binding to H2. These non-H2-binding mAbs, however, were able to bind the H2 F45I HA mutant, and all but 44-2F08 had reduced or no binding to an H5 I45F HA mutant (Supplementary Fig. 4b). Non-H2-binding mAbs were largely broadly binding across other group 1 subtypes, including H5, H1, H6 and H9 (Fig. 4f). H2 stem-binding VH1-69 mAbs isolated from H2-vaccinated individuals were also generally broadly binding across group 1 subtypes tested (Fig. 4g and Supplementary Fig. 4c). Neutralization of H1N1 and H5N1 viruses was equivalent between H2-binding and non-H2-binding mAbs, but fewer non-H2-binding mAbs were able to neutralize H6N1 (P = 0.04, Fisher’s t-test) or H9N2 (P = 0.02, Fisher’s t-test) viruses (Fig. 4f,g). Overall, we conclude that a subset of VH1-69-encoded HA stem-binding immunoglobulins elicited by H5 vaccination cannot accommodate the Phe45HA2 residue in H2 HA, and this is associated with lower breadth of neutralization for group 1 subtypes H6 and H9.Structure of HA stem recognition by VH1-69 antibodiesTo understand the structural basis for differences in H2 binding among VH1-69 antibodies, we determined the structures for two of the mAbs described above with key VH1-69 class characteristics, including a CDRH2 Phe54, a CDRH3 Tyr98 and a kappa light chain, but with differing ability to bind and neutralize H2. We obtained the structure of the non-H2-binding 30-1D06 Fab in complex with H1 (A/NewCaledonia/20/1999, NC99) HA and H2-binding 310-1B11 Fab in complex with H2 (A/Canada/720/2005, CAN05) HA by single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) (Supplementary Fig. 5 and Supplementary Table 2). We found that both mAbs displayed the canonical recognition of VH1-69-derived antibodies involving heavy chain residues 53 and 54 (Fig. 5a,b)24,25,26. Specifically, we observed that the critical Ile45HA2-NC99 or Phe45HA2-CAN05 in the HA stem region of the epitope was recognized by a hydrophobic patch on the Fab heavy chain comprising Met53 (30-1D06) or Ile53 (310-1B11) and Phe54 (Fig. 5c). However, the two antibodies showed a 9° shift in orientation relative to each other (Fig. 5d), resulting in a shift of the 310-1B11 heavy chain residue Ile53HC away from HA and, thereby, accommodating the larger bulk of Phe45HA2-CAN05 versus the smaller Ile45HA2-NC99 (Fig. 5e). In addition, in 30-1D06, the germline heavy chain residue Ile53 was mutated somatically to a larger and longer methionine residue, which is able to pack more snugly with Ile45HA2 on H5 or H1 HAs but clashes with Phe45 on H2 HAs (Fig. 5e). To verify the effect of Met53HC on 30-1D06 binding to H2, we created 30-1D06 variants with the wild-type Met53HC residue altered to alanine, isoleucine and valine. Reverting Met53HC to the germline Ile53HC led to a small decrease in affinity to H1 and H5 HAs but, most notably, allowed binding of 30-1D06 to H2 HA (Kd of 16 nM) (Fig. 5g and Supplementary Fig. 6a,b). This indicates that the Ile53MetHC somatic mutation is a critical factor in preventing 30-1D06 from binding H2 strains.Fig. 5: Structural analysis of recognition by VH1-69-derived antibodies of H2 HA.a, Cryo-EM density is shown for binding of 030-1D06 Fab (blue and cyan) with the NC99 H1 HA trimer (protomers in gray; particles 32/154, left) and 310-1B11 Fab (orange and yellow) with the CAN05 H2 HA trimer (protomers in gray; particles 115/114, right). Color-coding in a is used for b–f. b, Surface representations of the bound HAs showing the 5-Å footprint of the Fab-binding site colored as in a with an outline of the alternate Fab shown for comparison. c, Detailed view of the binding epitopes surrounding residue 45. d, Overlay of the two antibodies showing a 9° difference in the approach angles from residue 45. Purple and green inset boxes are shown in greater detail in e and f, respectively, which are rotated ~20° for clarity. e, Phe45HA2 clashes with Met53 of the 30-1D06 heavy chain but not Ile53 of 310-1B11. f, A hydrophobic pocket at the HA1/HA2 interface is displayed with the trimer surface colored by electrostatic charge. The two Fab fragments engage the pocket through somatic mutation Il28HC of 310-1B11 (orange) overlayed with somatic mutation Phe74HC of 30-1D06 (blue). The germline residues are labeled the color of the Fab, with the mutated residues labeled in red. g, Binding of 30-1D06 with WT Met53 and Ile53, Val53 and Ala53 variants to H2 WT, H2 F45I, H5 and H1 HA by MSD. Shown is the mean value ± s.d. of mAbs tested in duplicate. Data are representative of two independent experiments. ECL, electrochemiluminescence. h, Manhattan plot of sequence-binding association analysis using 1,042 H2-binding and 251 non-H2-binding sequences. Amino acids below an adjusted P value of 0.01 are colored. Adjusted P values were determined by Fisher’s exact test and adjusted for multiple tests with Holm’s method. i, Table showing residues with an adjusted P value below the 0.01 cutoff with odds ratio, residue position in the heavy chain sequence and whether the residue is a germline mutation (yes) or a somatic mutation (no). Odds ratio >1 (blue) indicates association with H2 non-binding; odds ratio <1 (orange) indicates association with H2 binding.Source dataFull size imageSome VH1-69-class antibodies capable of binding H2 HA, however, had a methionine at heavy chain residue 53 (Supplementary Fig. 7), indicating that this somatic mutation does not universally prevent accommodation of H2 Phe45HA2. To gain insight into other residue differences that might be associated with binding or not binding H2, we analyzed VH1-69-encoded heavy chain sequences obtained from 1,042 H2-binding B cells and 251 non-H2-binding B cells, as detected by flow cytometry. Sequence-feature association analysis (SeqFeatR) of these sequences provided detailed insight into amino acid position combinations significantly associated with H2 binding or non-binding (Fig. 5h,i). Several residues identified were present in 310-1B11 and 30-1D06, including Met53HC and two others (Ser74PheHC and Thr28IleHC), which fill a second hydrophobic pocket on HA with opposite association to H2 binding (Fig. 5f and Supplementary Fig. 6c). This hydrophobic pocket is also filled by Phe74HC on two published VH1-69 mAbs with limited ability to neutralize H2 (refs. 13,15). Other residues identified have also been shown to have prevalent somatic mutations associated with increased affinity to the HA stem27,28. Overall, these data reveal the capacity of VH1-69 germline residues Ile53 and Phe54 to accommodate either Ile45HA2 or Phe45HA2 on the HA stem. However, somatic mutations can permit H2 binding or lead to clashes with H2 Phe45HA2, as in the case of Met53HC on 30-1D06. This also shows that multiple factors can lead to loss of binding to H2 HA and such loss of binding is more likely a combinatorial effect than the result of a single residue change.H2 exposure enhances cross-reactivity of the H5 vaccine responseAll individuals included in our analysis thus far were born after 1970 and, thus, naive to H2. However, we wondered whether pre-exposure to H2N2 virus 50 years ago might change the response to H5 vaccination. To investigate this, we analyzed the response to H5 vaccination in all individuals born before 1966 (n = 11, after excluding one vaccine non-responder) and compared it to that in individuals born after 1973 (n = 17) in matched vaccine groups (Supplementary Table 1). Analysis of H2 binding in sera before H5 vaccination showed that individuals born before 1966 did, for the most part, have higher levels of serum antibodies to H2 HA than individuals born after 1973 (Fig. 6a). The two individuals with lower H2-binding levels were born in 1965 and likely had less exposure to H2 before it stopped circulating in 1968 (Fig. 6b).Fig. 6: Exposure to H2N2 virus 50 years ago leads to a more broadly reactive memory B cell response to H5 vaccination.a,b, Sera collected before H5 vaccination in individuals born before 1966 or after 1973 were tested for reactivity to H2 HA or the H2 stem domain by MSD. Shown are the AUC of serological binding for the two age groups (a) and the AUC of H2 binding versus the year of birth (YOB) of all individuals (b). The vertical dotted line in b indicates the year H2N2 stopped circulating in the human population (1968). Data are representative of two or three independent experiments. c–e, Memory B cells from PBMCs collected 2 weeks after the H5 vaccine boost were tested by flow cytometry to measure the HA-specific response in the two age cohorts. Shown are the proportion of IgG+ B cells binding H5 HA (c) and the H5 stem domain (d) and the proportion of B cells binding the H5 stem domain with different specificities as indicated (e). f, Correlation between pre-vaccination H2 stem-binding serological levels and the proportion of HA stem-binding memory B cells that were H5, H2 and H1 cross-reactive 2 weeks after H5 vaccination. Statistical significance was determined using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. g,h, H5 stem-reactive B cells were isolated by single-cell sorting, and immunoglobulin genes were sequenced. Shown are the proportion of H5 stem-binding B cells in each individual that used VH1-69 (g) and the specificity as detected by flow cytometry of the VH1-69 H5 stem-binding B cells in the two age groups (h). i–l, Sera collected before vaccination and 2 weeks after boost were tested for binding levels to H5, H2 WT and H2 F45I stem proteins. Shown are the AUC of binding in each vaccine group (i,k) and the log2 ratio of H2 stem binding versus H5 stem binding (j,l). Data are representative of two independent experiments. Serum binding and B cell analysis in all panels was performed with the same individuals (n = 17 born after 1973 and n = 11 born before 1966). Statistical significance was determined by the two-sided Mann–Whitney test for a, c–e, j and l. The two-sided Wilcoxon matched-pairs rank test was used for i and k. Bars in a, c–e, g and i–l represent the mean.Source dataFull size imageWe first compared the IgG+ memory B cell response to H5 vaccination in individuals from the two age cohorts 2 weeks after the H5 boost. The total H5 HA-specific and H5 HA stem-specific IgG+ memory B cell frequencies were quite variable, with no statistical difference between the two age groups (Fig. 6c,d). However, on average, 80% of H5 HA stem-specific memory B cells in individuals born before 1966 were cross-reactive with H1 and H2 (Fig. 6e), and the proportion of H5H1H2 cross-reactive memory B cells correlated with the pre-vaccination H2 stem serological binding levels (Fig. 6f). We did not detect a significant difference in VH1-69-expressing H5 HA stem-specific memory B cells between the two age cohorts (Fig. 6g), but, as in the case of H2 vaccine-elicited HA stem-specific memory B cells, 95% of VH1-69 stem-binding B cells from H5-vaccinated individuals born before 1966 were able to bind H5, H1 and H2 compared to 70% in individuals born after 1973 (Fig. 6h).We also compared serological H2 HA stem-binding antibody levels between the two age cohorts in the H5 vaccine trial. Sera collected before H5 vaccination showed decreased H2 stem-binding levels in both age groups compared to H5 or H1 stem binding, but the reduction in H2 stem binding was significantly greater in the younger cohort naive to H2 (Fig. 6i,j). As H5 influenza virus has not circulated in the US population, H5 stem specificity detected before vaccination in either cohort would be primarily from cross-reactive antibodies generated by H1 exposure in younger individuals and H1 and/or H2 exposure in older individuals. Upon H5 vaccination, HA stem-binding antibody levels increased in both age cohorts (Fig. 6k), but the fold decrease in H2 stem-binding levels compared to H5 stem binding remained significantly greater in H2-naive individuals than in the older cohort (Fig. 6l). We propose that H5 vaccination is largely boosting pre-existing stem-directed memory B cells with differing levels of H2 cross-reactivity determined by influenza exposure early in life.DiscussionHere we show that, by immunizing with H2, which naturally contains Phe45HA2, we can selectively expand memory B cells with greater breadth of reactivity and neutralization without compromising the magnitude of the total HA stem-specific memory B cell response. One difference between the H2 and H5 vaccine trials was the use of different protein immunogens. However, we think it is unlikely that this difference in the protein immunogen accounts for our results. We observed no difference in the overall magnitude or VH repertoire of the HA-specific responses, and the proportion of HA stem-binding memory B cells was very similar between the two trials.We were somewhat surprised that the VH1-69 immunoglobulin class dominated the HA stem-specific memory B cell response after H2 vaccination, given the centrality of the bulky Phe45HA2 residue in the primary HA stem-binding epitope and multiple reports of otherwise broadly reactive HA stem-binding antibodies failing to recognize H2 (refs. 13,14,16). The cryo-EM structure of a VH1-69 antibody in complex with H2 HA indicated that the germline Ile53-Phe54 residues in the VH1-69 CDRH2 that make contact with the HA stem around Phe45HA2 can accommodate the bulky phenylalanine aromatic residue with a minor change in the Fab approach orientation. Other germline residues important for binding, such as Phe29HC, Phe54HC and Tyr98HC, were also not significantly different between H2-binding and non-H2-binding B cells. This suggests that initial engagement of VH1-69 germline HA stem-binding immunoglobulins with H2 HA is similar to that for H1 or H5 HA. However, somatic mutations that optimize the interface between an immunoglobulin and an HA with Ile45HA2 can lead to reduced binding to H2 HA.The increased breadth that we observed with H2 vaccination extended to the entire HA stem-specific B cell response, not just the VH1-69 response. Addition of Phe45HA2 selects for memory B cells with immunoglobulins that have the most flexibility for accommodating residue changes, without compromising the magnitude or potency of the memory B cell response. Notably, the antibody response to an HA stem immunogen with Phe45HA2 might be more resistant to viral antibody escape mutants. H3 Ile45PheHA2 escape mutants have been identified in antibody resistance screens with the very broadly reactive antibodies CR9114 and FI6v3 (ref. 11), and we show that H5 Ile45PheHA2 abolishes binding of some HA stem-specific B cells. The emergence of H2N2 in the human population in 1957 might have been facilitated by the presence of Phe45HA2.In 1960, Thomas Francis Jr. first proposed that the initial influenza virus strain(s) that a person is exposed to as a child establish an antibody repertoire that governs subsequent antibody responses to influenza strains throughout life. This concept has been validated in multiple studies29,30,31,32,33. One study looking at avian-origin H5N1 infections in Asia showed that childhood exposure to group 1 H1N1 or H2N2, but not group 2 H3N2, was associated with protection from serious group 1 H5N1 disease34. This group-level protection is postulated to be mediated, in part, by HA stem-specific antibodies established early in life. However, direct evidence that the HA stem-specific repertoire in adults is shaped by childhood influenza exposure has not been shown. Here we show distinct differences in the HA stem-specific response to H5 vaccination depending on childhood exposure to H2 or H1 influenza subtypes. In individuals exposed to H2 as children, despite exposure to H1 for many years subsequently, both the cellular and serological HA stem-specific responses to H5 vaccination had greater cross-reactivity to H2 than in individuals born when H1 and/or H3 were circulating in the human population.Although we show that childhood exposure can establish a lifelong B cell repertoire compatible with Phe45HA2, it is unclear whether immunization of adults with H2 will also lead to the establishment of long-lasting memory B cells recognizing the H2 HA stem domain. Long-term follow-up of younger adults who participated in our H2 vaccine trial will be needed to understand whether immunization in adults can have lasting effects on the HA stem-binding B cell repertoire. All together, these data suggest a benefit from using H2 HA as an HA stem-based immunogen for eliciting the greatest breadth of reactivity across group 1 subtypes. If used in combination with a group 2 immunogen, this could lead to broad protection against influenza A.MethodsVaccine study designThe H5 vaccine study17,19 (NCT01086657) and the H2 vaccine study (NCT03186781) were conducted at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Center by the Vaccine Research Center Clinical Trials Program of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). The trial protocols were reviewed and approved by the NIAID institutional review board. Informed consent was obtained from every enrolled individual and complied with all relevant ethical regulations. Compensation was given for time and effort related to participation in the clinical trial. Both studies were phase 1, open-label, randomized clinical trials in healthy adults designed to study the safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of prime–boost vaccination regimens. In the H5N1 vaccine study, individuals were vaccinated with a recombinant DNA plasmid that encodes H5 A/Indonesia/05/2005 or a monovalent influenza subunit virion (MIV; A/Indonesia/05/2005) vaccine manufactured by Sanofi Pasteur. All individuals were then boosted 4–24 weeks later with the MIV vaccine. Only individuals with a prime–boost interval of 16 or 24 weeks were included in the comparison with the H2 vaccine study. In the H2 vaccine study, individuals were vaccinated with a recombinant DNA plasmid that encodes H2 A/Singapore/1/1957 or an H2 HA ferritin nanoparticle. All individuals were then boosted 16 weeks later with the H2 HA ferritin nanoparticle. Only individuals aged 18–47 (year of birth, 1970–1999) from this trial were included.Flow cytometry and single-cell sortingCryopreserved PBMCs from blood collected 2 weeks after the boost from trial individuals were stained with anti-human monoclonal antibodies to CD3 (1:400 dilution), CD56 (1:200 dilution), CD14 (1:200 dilution) and CD20 (1:400 dilution) from BioLegend; IgG (1:100 dilution) and IgM (1:40 dilution) from BD Biosciences; and CD19 (1:50 dilution) from Beckman Coulter. HA probes were expressed, biotinylated and labeled with fluorochromes, as described previously10. Aqua dead cell stain was added for live/dead discrimination (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Stained samples were run on a FACSAria II (BD Biosciences) running BD FACSDiva software 8.0, and data were analyzed using FlowJo version 10 (TreeStar). CD3−CD14−CD56−CD19+CD20+IgG+IgM− memory B cells were gated, and HA-binding memory B cells were single-cell sorted into 96-well plates. Addition of multiple HA probes with different fluorochromes and the ability of the FACSAria to detect and record the MFI of each fluorochrome individually for each sorted cell (index sorting) were used to determine the binding of each sorted B cell to HAs of multiple subtypes simultaneously. The following soluble fluorochrome-labeled HAs were used: H2 A/Singapore/2/1957 ectodomain and stabilized stem; H2 A/Singapore/2/1957 F45I mutant ectodomain and stabilized stem; H5 A/Indonesia/05/2005 ectodomain and stabilized stem; H1 A/NewCaledonia/20/1999 ectodomain and stabilized stem; and H1 A/Michigan/45/2015 ectodomain.Single-cell immunoglobulin amplification and sequencing and mAb productionReverse transcription was performed on sorted cells, and multiplexed PCR was used to amplify immunoglobulin heavy and light chain genes, as described previously35,36. We obtained paired heavy and light chain immunoglobulin sequences from an average of 70% of the single cells on which we performed PCR. PCR products were sequenced by Beckman Coulter or GENEWIZ.Heavy and light chain sequences were synthesized and cloned by GenScript into IgG1 kappa or lambda expression vectors. To produce mAbs recombinantly, Expi293 cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. A14527) were transfected with plasmids encoding immunoglobulin heavy and light chain pairs with ExpiFectamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Monoclonal antibodies were purified from the cell supernatant using Protein A Sepharose (Pierce).Immunoglobulin sequence analysisHeavy and light chain sequences from single-cell PCR were aligned to germline sequences and annotated using IMGT to determine gene usage and VH mutation frequency37. Clonally related sequences were determined using the Immcantation Change-O package, using the DefineClones function with a Hamming distance of 0.15 (ref. 38). To determine the clonal diversity, the ‘alphaDiversity’ function from Alakazam version 1.0.1 used q values 1–5 sampled at intervals of 0.1. To correct for varying sequencing depths between the vaccine and HA stem specificity groups, 1,000 bootstraps were performed to repeatedly and uniformly subsample all the sequences23.HA binding assayMSD 384-well streptavidin-coated SECTOR Imager 6000 reader plates were blocked with 5% MSD Blocker A for 30–60 min and then washed six times with the wash buffer (PBS + 0.05% Tween). The plates were then coated with biotinylated HA protein (same protein as was used for flow cytometry) for 1 h, and washed. mAbs were diluted in 1% MSD Blocker A to 1 μg ml−1, serially diluted threefold and added to the coated plates. Sera were diluted 1:100 in 1% MSD Blocker A and serially diluted threefold before addition to coated plates. After a 1-h incubation, plates were washed and incubated with SULFO-TAG-conjugated anti-human IgG for 1 h. After washing, the plates were read using 1× MSD Read Buffer using an MSD SECTOR Imager 600. Binding curves were plotted, and the AUC was determined using Prism 8. The same HA strains listed for flow cytometry were used for binding assays, with the addition of H6 A/Taiwan/1/2013 (TW13) ectodomain, H9 A/Guangxi-Xiangshan/11522/2018 (GX18) ectodomain and A/California/04/2009 (CA09) ectodomain.Biolayer interferometryAnalyses of binding kinetics of HA to antibodies were carried out using a ForteBio Octet HTX instrument. Assays with agitation set at 1,000 r.p.m. in PBS were performed at 30 °C in solid black tilted-bottom 384-well plates (Geiger Bio-One). Histidine-tagged HA trimer protein (30 μg ml−1) was captured on NTA sensor tips (ForteBio) for 180 s to a final mean signal level of 0.8–1.2 nm. After loading, the sensor tips were incubated in PBS for 60 s for baseline adjustment. Then, the trimer-coated tips were dipped into eight concentrations (500 nM, 250 nM, 125 nM, 62.5 nM, 31.25 nM, 15.625 nM, 7.8125 nM and 0 nM) of IgG diluted in PBS for association for 300 s, followed by dissociation for 300 s in PBS. A 1:1 curve fitting model was used to determine the apparent Kd using Octet software version 12.0.MicroneutralizationGeneration of replication-restricted reporter (R3) viruses was described previously39. In brief, the viral genomic RNA encoding functional HA (R3ΔHA viruses) or PB1 (R3ΔPB1 viruses) was replaced with a gene encoding a fluorescent protein and viruses were then rescued and propagated in cell lines stably expressing the corresponding HA (R3ΔHA viruses) or PB1 (R3ΔPB1 viruses) by the reverse genetics technique. Viral stocks were titered by determining the number of fluorescent foci. MDCK-SIAT1 cells (Millipore Sigma, cat. no. 05071502) expressing PB1 were seeded at a density of 10,000 cells per well in a 384-well black plate with a transparent bottom (Greiner) 24 h before infection and incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere. Viruses were diluted using Opti-MEM supplemented with TPCK-treated trypsin (Sigma) and then added to pre-washed cell monolayer wells in quadruplicate. The final concentration of TPCK-treated trypsin was 1 μg ml−1. Plates were incubated for 18–22 h at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere. Fluorescent foci were then counted using a Celigo Image Cytometer (Nexcelom) with a customized red filter to detect mKate2/TdKatushka2 reporter signals. A/Singapore/1/1957 (H2N2 SI57) and A/Indonesia/05/2005 (H5N1 IN05) were R3ΔHA viruses, and A/California/04/2009 (H1N1 CA09), A/Taiwan/1/2013 (H6N1 TW13) and A/Guangxi-Xiangshan/11522/2018 (H9N2 GX18) were R3ΔPB1 viruses.For microneutralization assays on sera, one part of serum samples was mixed with three parts of diluted receptor-destroying enzyme II (RDE II, Denka Seiken) and treated at 37 °C for 16–18 h, followed by heat inactivation at 56 °C for 40 min. RDE-treated sera were serially diluted in Opti-MEM and mixed 1:1 with R3ΔHA viruses (~80,000 fluorescent foci per milliliter) diluted in Opti-MEM supplemented with TPCK-treated trypsin (Sigma). The final concentration of TPCK-treated trypsin was 1 μg ml−1. After incubation at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere for 1 h, serum–virus mixtures were added to pre-washed cell monolayers in a 384-well plate as described above. Plates were incubated and counted as described above. The percent neutralization was calculated by constraining the virus control (virus + cells) as 0% and the cell control (cells only) as 100% and plotted against serum concentration. A curve fit was generated by a four-parameter nonlinear fit model in Prism (GraphPad). IC80 values were obtained from the curve fit for each serum sample.To determine the neutralization capacity of the mAbs, each mAb was diluted in Opti-MEM to 20 μg ml−1, serially diluted and mixed 1:1 with viruses as described above. Three tenfold dilutions were made to test neutralization at 10 μg ml−1, 1 μg ml−1, 0.1 μg ml−1 and 0.01 μg ml−1. We report the concentration at which there was a 50% or greater reduction in virus levels compared to the no-antibody control cells.Production of influenza HA proteins and Fab fragments for cryo-EMDNA constructs encoding the HA ectodomains of H1 A/NewCaledonia/20/1999 (NC99) and H2 A/Canada/720/2005 (CAN05) with a C-terminal thrombin cleavage sequence, followed by a T4 fibritin trimerization motif and a hexa-histidine (6×His) affinity tag, were cloned into a pVRC8400 expression plasmid as previously described10. Two cysteine mutations were introduced at positions 30HA1 and 47HA2 in both the NC99 and CAN05 constructs to stabilize trimer formation by formation of an inter-protomer disulfide bond40. Additionally, a 6R furin cleavage site was added to enable efficient HA1 and HA2 processing. For expression, 700 mg L−1 of HA plasmid and 300 mg L−1 of furin construct were co-transfected into HEK293F cells using Turbo293 Transfection Reagent (Speed BioSystems) and cells were incubated at 37 °C for 6 d.After cell culture collection, the supernatant was loaded onto cOmplete His-Tag Resin (Roche) and purified by gravity flow. HA protein was eluted from the column in PBS containing 300 mM imidazole and was later concentrated and further purified on a Superdex 200 16/60 size exclusion column (GE Healthcare).To produce Fab fragments, the mAbs produced as described above were cleaved by LysC enzyme (1:4,000 wt/wt) (Roche) at 37 °C overnight. The enzymatic digestion was stopped by addition of protease inhibitor (Roche). The digestion mixture was then passed through a Protein A column to separate the Fc fragment from the Fab fragment. The Fab fragment was further purified with a Superdex 200 16/60 column in PBS.Cryo-EMDisulfide-stabilized HA trimers of strains H1 NC99 and H2 CAN05 were each incubated with twofold molar excess of Fab fragments of 030-1D06 and 310-1B11, respectively. Complexes were concentrated to 2 mg ml−1, and 2.3 µl of each was deposited on C-flat 1.2/1.3 grids (https://www.protochips.com/). Grids were vitrified in ethane with an FEI Vitrobot Mark IV plunger with a wait time of 30 s, blot time of 3 s and blot force of 1. Data collection was performed on a Titan Krios electron microscope with Leginon version 3.4 (ref. 41) using Gatan K2 Summit and Gatan K3 direct detection devices. Exposures were collected in movie mode for 10 s with the total dose of 70.13 e– per Å2 fractionated over 50 raw frames for the 030-1D06 complex and 2 s with a total dose of 51.16 e– per Å2 fractionated over 40 raw frames for the 310-1B11 complex. Images were pre-processed using Appion version 3.4 (refs. 42,43); frame alignments and dose weightings were performed using MotionCor2 (ref. 44). CTFFind4 (refs. 45,46) was used to estimate the initial CTF. cryoSPARC version 3.1 (ref. 47) was used for patch CTF estimation, particle picking, 2D classifications, ab initio 3D reconstruction, homogeneous refinement and nonuniform 3D refinement. Initial 3D reconstruction was performed using C1 symmetry, confirming three Fab molecules per trimer. Final refinements were performed using C3 symmetry.Coordinates from PDB ID 3KU3 (ref. 48) were used for initial HA fit to the reconstructed maps. This was followed by simulated annealing and real-space refinement in Phenix version 1.19.2 (ref. 49) using the sharpened map from cryoSPARC version 3.1 and the density-modified map from Resolve in Phenix version 1.19.2 (ref. 50). The coordinates were then iteratively fit in Coot version 0.9 (ref. 51) and refined in Phenix version 1.19.2. Geometry and map fitting were evaluated throughout the process using Molprobity52 and EMRinger53 in Phenix version 1.19.2. PyMOL version 2.4.2 (www.pymol.org) and ChimeraX version 1.3 (ref. 54) were used to generate figures.SeqFeatRVH1-69-encoded immunoglobulin heavy chain sequences from single sorted B cells from individuals vaccinated with H2 or H5 were divided into H2-binding or non-H2-binding immunoglobulins as determined by flow cytometry. An in-house version of the R package SeqFeatR (https://seqfeatr.zmb.uni-due.de)55 was used to determine which heavy chain residues were associated with H2 binding and non-binding. In brief, for each residue position, we created a contingency table based on amino acid occurrence in H2-binding or non-H2-binding sequences and evaluated the association using Fisher’s exact test. The resulting P values were corrected using Holm’s multiple-testing method. The adjusted P values estimated for each amino acid position pair are represented in a Manhattan plot.Statistical analysisStatistical analysis was performed with Prism 8.0. Specific details of statistical analysis are indicated in the figure legends and the Results section. P values less than or equal to 0.05 were considered significant. Normality tests were conducted on all data to determine the appropriate statistical test. All statistical tests used were two tailed.Reporting SummaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability Cryo-EM maps and fitted coordinates were deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank with accession codes 23098 and 23816 and in the Protein Data Bank with IDs 7L0L and 7MFG. Immunoglobulin sequences are available in GenBank under accession numbers OK669229–OK670607. Source data for Figs. 2–6 and Supplementary Figs. 1–4 and 6 are included as supplementary files. Any additional data are available upon reasonable request from the corresponding authors. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesIuliano, A. D. et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet 391, 1285–1300 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar Ellebedy, A. H. et al. Induction of broadly cross-reactive antibody responses to the influenza HA stem region following H5N1 vaccination in humans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 13133–13138 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, G. M. et al. Pandemic H1N1 influenza vaccine induces a recall response in humans that favors broadly cross-reactive memory B cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 9047–9052 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wrammert, J. et al. Broadly cross-reactive antibodies dominate the human B cell response against 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza virus infection. J. Exp. Med. 208, 181–193 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Andrews, S. F. et al. Immune history profoundly affects broadly protective B cell responses to influenza. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 316ra192 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Andrews, S. F. et al. Preferential induction of cross-group influenza A hemagglutinin stem-specific memory B cells after H7N9 immunization in humans. Sci. Immunol. 2, eaan2676 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Avnir, Y. et al. IGHV1-69 polymorphism modulates anti-influenza antibody repertoires, correlates with IGHV utilization shifts and varies by ethnicity. Sci. Rep. 6, 20842 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cortina-Ceballos, B. et al. Longitudinal analysis of the peripheral B cell repertoire reveals unique effects of immunization with a new influenza virus strain. Genome Med. 7, 124 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wheatley, A. K. et al. H5N1 vaccine-elicited memory B cells are genetically constrained by the IGHV locus in the recognition of a neutralizing epitope in the hemagglutinin stem. J. Immunol. 195, 602–610 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Whittle, J. R. et al. Flow cytometry reveals that H5N1 vaccination elicits cross-reactive stem-directed antibodies from multiple Ig heavy-chain lineages. J. Virol. 88, 4047–4057 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, N. C. et al. Different genetic barriers for resistance to HA stem antibodies in influenza H3 and H1 viruses. Science 368, 1335–1340 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Corti, D. et al. A neutralizing antibody selected from plasma cells that binds to group 1 and group 2 influenza A hemagglutinins. Science 333, 850–856 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Dreyfus, C. et al. Highly conserved protective epitopes on influenza B viruses. Science 337, 1343–1348 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Joyce, M. G. et al. Vaccine-induced antibodies that neutralize group 1 and group 2 influenza A viruses. Cell 166, 609–623 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lang, S. et al. Antibody 27F3 broadly targets influenza A group 1 and 2 hemagglutinins through a further variation in VH1-69 antibody orientation on the HA stem. Cell Rep. 20, 2935–2943 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Throsby, M. et al. Heterosubtypic neutralizing monoclonal antibodies cross-protective against H5N1 and H1N1 recovered from human IgM+ memory B cells. PLoS ONE 3, e3942 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ledgerwood, J. E. et al. DNA priming and influenza vaccine immunogenicity: two phase 1 open label randomised clinical trials. Lancet Infect. Dis. 11, 916–924 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wei, C. J. et al. Induction of broadly neutralizing H1N1 influenza antibodies by vaccination. Science 329, 1060–1064 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ledgerwood, J. E. et al. Prime-boost interval matters: a randomized phase 1 study to identify the minimum interval necessary to observe the H5 DNA influenza vaccine priming effect. J. Infect. Dis. 208, 418–422 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yassine, H. M. et al. Hemagglutinin-stem nanoparticles generate heterosubtypic influenza protection. Nat. Med. 21, 1065–1070 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Corbett, K. S. et al. Design of nanoparticulate group 2 influenza virus hemagglutinin stem antigens that activate unmutated ancestor B cell receptors of broadly neutralizing antibody lineages. MBio 10, e02810–18 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hill, M. O. Diversity and evenness: a unifying notation and its consequences. Ecology 54, 427–432 (1973).Article Google Scholar Stern, J. N. et al. B cells populating the multiple sclerosis brain mature in the draining cervical lymph nodes. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 248ra107 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ekiert, D. C. et al. Antibody recognition of a highly conserved influenza virus epitope. Science 324, 246–251 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lingwood, D. et al. Structural and genetic basis for development of broadly neutralizing influenza antibodies. Nature 489, 566–570 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sui, J. et al. Structural and functional bases for broad-spectrum neutralization of avian and human influenza A viruses. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 265–273 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Avnir, Y. et al. Molecular signatures of hemagglutinin stem-directed heterosubtypic human neutralizing antibodies against influenza A viruses. PLoS Pathog. 10, e1004103 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pappas, L. et al. Rapid development of broadly influenza neutralizing antibodies through redundant mutations. Nature 516, 418–422 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lessler, J. et al. Evidence for antigenic seniority in influenza A (H3N2) antibody responses in southern China. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002802 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, Y. et al. Immune history shapes specificity of pandemic H1N1 influenza antibody responses. J. Exp. Med. 210, 1493–1500 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Miller, M. S. et al. Neutralizing antibodies against previously encountered influenza virus strains increase over time: a longitudinal analysis. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 198ra107 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Carter, D. M. et al. Sequential seasonal H1N1 influenza virus infections protect ferrets against novel 2009 H1N1 influenza virus. J. Virol. 87, 1400–1410 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Linderman, S. L. & Hensley, S. E. Antibodies with ‘original antigenic sin’ properties are valuable components of secondary immune responses to influenza viruses. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005806 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gostic, K. M., Ambrose, M., Worobey, M. & Lloyd-Smith, J. O. Potent protection against H5N1 and H7N9 influenza via childhood hemagglutinin imprinting. Science 354, 722–726 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tiller, T. et al. Efficient generation of monoclonal antibodies from single human B cells by single cell RT–PCR and expression vector cloning. J. Immunol. Methods 329, 112–124 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Doria-Rose, N. A. et al. New member of the V1V2-directed CAP256-VRC26 lineage that shows increased breadth and exceptional potency. J. Virol. 90, 76–91 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Brochet, X., Lefranc, M. P. & Giudicelli, V. IMGT/V-QUEST: the highly customized and integrated system for IG and TR standardized V-J and V-D-J sequence analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, W503–W508 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gupta, N. T. et al. Change-O: a toolkit for analyzing large-scale B cell immunoglobulin repertoire sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31, 3356–3358 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Creanga, A. et al. A comprehensive influenza reporter virus panel for high-throughput deep profiling of neutralizing antibodies. Nat. Commun. 12, 1722 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, P. S., Zhu, X., Yu, W. & Wilson, I. A. Design and structure of an engineered disulfide-stabilized influenza virus hemagglutinin trimer. J. Virol. 89, 7417–7420 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Suloway, C. et al. Automated molecular microscopy: the new Leginon system. J. Struct. Biol. 151, 41–60 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Voss, N. R., Yoshioka, C. K., Radermacher, M., Potter, C. S. & Carragher, B. DoG Picker and TiltPicker: software tools to facilitate particle selection in single particle electron microscopyand TiltPicker: software tools to facilitate particle selection in single particle electron microscopy. J. Struct. Biol. 166, 205–213 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lander, G. C. et al. Appion: an integrated, database-driven pipeline to facilitate EM image processing. J. Struct. Biol. 166, 95–102 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zheng, S. Q. et al. MotionCor2: anisotropic correction of beam-induced motion for improved cryo-electron microscopy. Nat. Methods 14, 331–332 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rohou, A. & Grigorieff, N. CTFFIND4: fast and accurate defocus estimation from electron micrographs. J. Struct. Biol. 192, 216–221 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, K. Gctf: real-time CTF determination and correction. J. Struct. Biol. 193, 1–12 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Punjani, A., Rubinstein, J. L., Fleet, D. J. & Brubaker, M. A. cryoSPARC: algorithms for rapid unsupervised cryo-EM structure determination. Nat. Methods 14, 290–296 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Xu, R., McBride, R., Paulson, J. C., Basler, C. F. & Wilson, I. A. Structure, receptor binding, and antigenicity of influenza virus hemagglutinins from the 1957 H2N2 pandemic. J. Virol. 84, 1715–1721 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Adams, P. D. et al. Recent developments in the PHENIX software for automated crystallographic structure determination. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 11, 53–55 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Terwilliger, T. C., Ludtke, S. J., Read, R. J., Adams, P. D. & Afonine, P. V. Improvement of cryo-EM maps by density modification. Nat. Methods 17, 923–927 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Emsley, P. & Cowtan, K. Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics. Acta Crystallogr. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 60, 2126–2132 (2004).Article PubMed Google Scholar Davis, I. W., Murray, L. W., Richardson, J. S. & Richardson, D. C. MOLPROBITY: structure validation and all-atom contact analysis for nucleic acids and their complexes. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, W615–W619 (2004).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Barad, B. A. et al. EMRinger: side chain-directed model and map validation for 3D cryo-electron microscopy. Nat. Methods 12, 943–946 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pettersen, E. F. et al. UCSF ChimeraX: structure visualization for researchers, educators, and developers. Protein Sci. 30, 70–82 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Budeus, B., Timm, J. & Hoffmann, D. SeqFeatR for the Discovery of Feature-Sequence Associations. PLoS ONE 11, e0146409 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank D. Ambrozak for help with flow cytometry sorting. Support for this work was provided by the Intramural Research Programs of the Vaccine Research Center and the Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health. Some of this work was performed at the Simons Electron Microscopy Center and the National Resource for Automated Molecular Microscopy, located at the New York Structural Biology Center, supported by grants from the Simons Foundation (SF349247) and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (GM103310), with additional support from NYSTAR and the New York State Assembly Majority. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Julie E. Raab, Jason Gorman, Rebecca A. Gillespie, Crystal S. F. Cheung, Reda Rawi.Authors and AffiliationsVaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USASarah F. Andrews, Julie E. Raab, Jason Gorman, Rebecca A. Gillespie, Crystal S. F. Cheung, Reda Rawi, Lauren Y. Cominsky, Jeffrey C. Boyington, Adrian Creanga, Chen-Hsiang Shen, Darcy R. Harris, Adam S. Olia, Alexandra F. Nazzari, Katherine V. Houser, Grace L. Chen, John R. Mascola, Barney S. Graham, Masaru Kanekiyo, Julie E. Ledgerwood, Peter D. Kwong & Adrian B. McDermottAuthorsSarah F. AndrewsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJulie E. RaabView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJason GormanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRebecca A. GillespieView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCrystal S. F. CheungView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarReda RawiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLauren Y. CominskyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeffrey C. BoyingtonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdrian CreangaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChen-Hsiang ShenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDarcy R. HarrisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdam S. OliaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlexandra F. NazzariView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTongqing ZhouView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKatherine V. HouserView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGrace L. ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJohn R. MascolaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBarney S. GrahamView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMasaru KanekiyoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJulie E. LedgerwoodView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPeter D. KwongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdrian B. McDermottView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsConceptualization, S.F.A.; methodology, S.F.A. and A.C.; formal analysis, S.F.A., R.R., C.-H.S. and J.C.B.; investigation, S.F.A., J.E.R., J.G., R.A.G., C.S., F.C., L.Y.C., A.C., D.R.H., A.S.O., A.N. and T.Z.; resources, K.V.H., G.L.C. and J.E.L.; writing—original draft, S.F.A.; writing—review and editing, S.F.A., J.C.B., K.V.H., M.K., J.R.M., P.D.K. and A.B.M.; visualization, S.F.A. and J.G.; supervision, S.F.A., G.L.C., J.R.M., B.S.G., M.K., J.E.L., P.D.K. and A.B.M.; funding acquisition, A.B.M.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Sarah F. Andrews or Adrian B. McDermott.Ethics declarations Competing interests J.C.B., B.S.G., J.R.M., M.K. and P.D.K. are named inventors of US patents 9,441,019, 10,137,190 and 10,363,301 on influenza hemagglutinin nanoparticle vaccines and stabilized hemagglutinin stem trimers and of several pending applications on related technologies filed by the Department of Health and Human Services (National Institutes of Health). Peer review information Nature Medicine thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Alison Farrell was the primary editor on this article and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the editorial team. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationSupplementary Figs. 1–7 and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2.Reporting SummarySupplementary Table 1Statistical source data for Supplementary Fig. 1.Supplementary Table 2Statistical source data for Supplementary Fig. 2.Supplementary Table 3Statistical source data for Supplementary Fig. 3.Supplementary Table 4Statistical source data for Supplementary Fig. 4.Supplementary Table 5Statistical source data for Supplementary Fig. 6.Source dataSource Data Fig. 2Statistical source data.Source Data Fig. 3Statistical source data.Source Data Fig. 4Statistical source data.Source Data Fig. 5Statistical source data.Source Data Fig. 6Statistical source data.Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleAndrews, S.F., Raab, J.E., Gorman, J. et al. A single residue in influenza virus H2 hemagglutinin enhances the breadth of the B cell response elicited by H2 vaccination. Nat Med 28, 373–382 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01636-8Download citationReceived: 22 April 2021Accepted: 19 November 2021Published: 03 February 2022Issue Date: February 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01636-8Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Vaccine design via antigen reorientation Duo XuJoshua J. CarterPeter S. Kim Nature Chemical Biology (2024) CD4 T cell epitope abundance in ferritin core potentiates responses to hemagglutinin nanoparticle vaccines Sean A. NelsonKatherine A. RichardsAndrea J. Sant npj Vaccines (2022) Exploring the landscape of immune responses to influenza infection and vaccination Sophie A. ValkenburgLeo L. M. Poon Nature Medicine (2022) Download PDF Associated content Safety and immunogenicity of a ferritin nanoparticle H2 influenza vaccine in healthy adults: a phase 1 trial Katherine V. HouserGrace L. Chenthe VRC 316 Study Team Nature Medicine Article 03 Feb 2022 Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Podcasts Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Journal Metrics About the Editors Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Statistical Advisory Panel Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Editorial Policies Content Types Web Feeds Contact Publish with us Submission Guidelines For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Medicine (Nat Med) ISSN 1546-170X (online) ISSN 1078-8956 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingPediatric Nasal Spray Influenza Vaccine Study - The Elm Skip to navigation Skip to content The Elm is a publication of the University of Maryland, Baltimore The Elm Announcements Submit to The Elm Topics Schools Calendar Gallery Elm Stories Announcements Voices & Opinions Accolades News Hub Dentistry Graduate Studies Law Medicine Nursing Pharmacy Social Work Topics Elm Stories Announcements Voices & Opinions Accolades News Hub Schools Dentistry Graduate Studies Law Medicine Nursing Pharmacy Social Work Calendar Gallery Submit to The Elm Pediatric Nasal Spray Influenza Vaccine Study February 02, 2022 This University of Maryland School of Medicine (UMSOM) study is recruiting healthy children to test an investigational vaccine for influenza (the “flu”). This investigational vaccine shows promise for broader protection against influenza. The current pediatric nasal spray influenza vaccine study by UMSOM's Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health will require between four to six in-person clinic visits over the study period. Participants in the study will get either one or two doses of the vaccine or placebo (salt water) by spray in the nose. Participants will also get the regular flu vaccine shot in the fall of the year they receive the investigational vaccine. Participants will have three blood draws and three nasal washes over the course of the study. Qualified Participants Must Be: Generally healthy children 6 months to 17 years old Compensation amount depends on the number of each type of visit and activity that you and your child perform throughout the study. The total amount will be approximately $470 for those receiving one intranasal vaccine dose and approximately $625 for those receiving two doses. This study will be offered at two locations: Baltimore and Frederick (for patients at The Pediatric Center of Frederick). For more information, call 410-706-7934 or email clintrial@som.umaryland.edu. Share this page Dentistry Graduate Studies Law Medicine Nursing Pharmacy Social Work Research Volunteer In the Community Recent Announcements Students, faculty, and staff, let your voice be heard! Submit Your Story. The Elm Students, faculty, and staff, let your voice be heard! If you’re interested in seeing your writing on The Elm, please submit your story using the link below. Submit Your Content Subscribe to Elm Weekly Keep Reading Topics Elm Stories Announcements Voices & Opinions Accolades News Hub Calendar Gallery Schools Dentistry Graduate Studies Law Medicine Nursing Pharmacy Social Work About The Elm The Elm is a dynamic, community-driven website where faculty, staff, students, and affiliates of the University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) can publish, engage with, and access a variety of online content. Read more about The Elm. The University of Maryland, Baltimore prohibits sex discrimination in any education program or activity that it operates. Individuals may report concerns or questions to the Title IX Coordinator. Read the UMB Notice of Non-Discrimination. © 2023-2024 University of Maryland, Baltimore Privacy Web Accessibility Non-Discrimination Core Values Content Index Elm Feedback EditIntranasal Flu Vaccine with Nanoparticles Offers Robust Protection, Researchers Find - Georgia State University News - Faculty, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Press Releases, Research, University Research - Health & Wellness Alumni Faculty & Staff Students Georgia State Menu Academic LifeAcademic CalendarsLibraryUniversity CatalogClass RegistrationRegistration InformationStudent AdvisementGrad Student ResourcesStudent SuccessLearning & Tutoring CenterMilitary OutreachGPA CalculatorPanther AnswersFinancial ServicesTuition & PaymentsTuition ClassificationScholarship InformationSearch for ScholarshipsFinancial AidLoansFAFSARefundsStudent Health InsuranceStudent EmploymentOmbudspersonStudent EngagementFind HelpStudent OrganizationsProgramsHealth & Well-beingRecreationSpotlight ProgramsCareer ServicesStudent CenterHousingStudent GovernmentStudent HandbookCode of ConductTechnologyEmailPAWSGoSOLARiCollegeDigital Learning@GSUCampus ServicesGet Emergency AlertsParking & TransportationPantherDiningBookstorePantherCard Useful Links Coronavirus News Directory (Login Required) Student A-Z Index Law Library Library Help Center Safety & Security Facilities Ethics Hotline MyHousing (STARREZ) Portal Georgia State Menu Finance & Admin.ToolkitFormsTrainingUniversity PoliciesUniversity SenateStaff CouncilBudget & PlanningDisbursement & Accts. PayablePurchasing & BusinessSpectrum ServicesRisk ManagementOmbudspersonHuman ResourcesOpen EnrollmentPayroll & W2 InformationBenefitsVacation & LeaveWork/Life ProgramsNew HiresEmployee ResourcesOneUSG TrainingManagers & HR PartnersRetired or Planning to RetireFaculty HandbookStaff HandbookCampus ServicesFacilities ManagementURSAMail ServicesPrintingPantherDining & CateringParking & TransportationTravel ReservationsPR & Marketing CommunicationsLegal ServicesInstitutional EffectivenessEmeriti AssociationTechnologyEmailSend A FilePAWSGoSOLARiCollegeOneUSG ConnectPanthermartSpectrum (requires VPN)Asset WorksTraining and LearningCETLOEDigital MeasuresStacks for State Useful Links Coronavirus News Directory (Login Required) Student A-Z Index Help Center Help Center Safety & Security Facilities Ethics Hotline Identity & Communications ToolKit College to Career News Hub Georgia State Menu Georgia State Menu Search: Georgia State Georgia State Home Main navigation News Research News Campus News Campus Safety Athletics International News College and Schools Andrew Young School News College of Arts and Sciences News College of the Arts News College of Education and Human Development News College of Law News College of Nursing and Health Professions News Honors College News Institute for Biomedical Sciences News Perimeter College News Robinson College of Business News School of Public Health News News by Category Arts & Culture Business & Economy Education & Leadership Health & Wellness Politics, Law & Society Science & Technology Magazines University Magazine Research Magazine Press Experts Calendar Georgia State Home Georgia State Home Georgia State Menu Georgia State Menu Search: Search: Georgia State Alumni Faculty & Staff Students Academic LifeAcademic CalendarsLibraryUniversity CatalogClass RegistrationRegistration InformationStudent AdvisementGrad Student ResourcesStudent SuccessLearning & Tutoring CenterMilitary OutreachGPA CalculatorPanther AnswersFinancial ServicesTuition & PaymentsTuition ClassificationScholarship InformationSearch for ScholarshipsFinancial AidLoansFAFSARefundsStudent Health InsuranceStudent EmploymentOmbudspersonStudent EngagementFind HelpStudent OrganizationsProgramsHealth & Well-beingRecreationSpotlight ProgramsCareer ServicesStudent CenterHousingStudent GovernmentStudent HandbookCode of ConductTechnologyEmailPAWSGoSOLARiCollegeDigital Learning@GSUCampus ServicesGet Emergency AlertsParking & TransportationPantherDiningBookstorePantherCard × Useful Links Coronavirus News Directory (Login Required) Staff A-Z Index Calendar Help Center Safety & Security Facilities Ethics Hotline College to Career MyHousing (STARREZ) Portal Finance & Admin.ToolkitFormsTrainingUniversity PoliciesUniversity SenateStaff CouncilBudget & PlanningDisbursement & Accts. PayablePurchasing & BusinessSpectrum ServicesRisk ManagementOmbudspersonHuman ResourcesOpen EnrollmentPayroll & W2 InformationBenefitsVacation & LeaveWork/Life ProgramsNew HiresEmployee ResourcesOneUSG TrainingManagers & HR PartnersRetired or Planning to RetireFaculty HandbookStaff HandbookCampus ServicesFacilities ManagementURSAMail ServicesPrintingPantherDining & CateringParking & TransportationTravel ReservationsPR & Marketing CommunicationsLegal ServicesInstitutional EffectivenessEmeriti AssociationTechnologyEmailSend A FilePAWSGoSOLARiCollegeOneUSG ConnectPanthermartSpectrum (requires VPN)Asset WorksTraining and LearningCETLOEDigital MeasuresStacks for State × Useful Links Coronavirus News Directory (Login Required) Staff A-Z Index News & Updates Library Help Center Safety & Security Facilities Ethics Hotline Identity & Communications ToolKit College to Career Skip to content Skip to primary sidebar Skip to primary navGeorgia State News HubMain navigationNews Research News Campus News Campus Safety Athletics International News College and Schools Andrew Young School News College of Arts and Sciences News College of the Arts News College of Education and Human Development News College of Law News College of Nursing and Health Professions News Honors College News Institute for Biomedical Sciences News Perimeter College News Robinson College of Business News School of Public Health News News by Category Arts & Culture Business & Economy Education & Leadership Health & Wellness Politics, Law & Society Science & Technology Magazines University Magazine Research Magazine Press Experts Calendar Intranasal Flu Vaccine with Nanoparticles Offers Robust Protection, Researchers FindIntranasal Flu Vaccine with Nanoparticles Offers Robust Protection, Researchers FindIntranasal Flu Vaccine with Nanoparticles Offers Robust Protection, Researchers Find February 4, 2022 Facebook X LinkedIn Print Email RedditUse Scan QR Code to copy link and share it Media ContactLaTina EmersonDirector of CommunicationsInstitute for Biomedical SciencesGeorgia State University404-413-1353[email protected] ATLANTA—An influenza vaccine administered through the nose and constructed with nanoparticles that enhance immune response offers strong protection against different influenza virus strains, according to researchers in the Institute for Biomedical Sciences at Georgia State University. The intranasal vaccine contributed to multifaceted immune responses, leading to robust cross protection against influenza in mice. The vaccine consists of PEI-HA/CpG nanoparticles. PEI (polyethyleneimine), a robust and versatile delivery system, can simultaneously carry antigens (hemagglutinin, HA) that induce an immune response in the body, and adjuvants (CpG) that enhance the body’s immune response to an antigen for optimal immunoenhancement. These comprehensive immune responses and cross protection were long lasting, exhibiting defense from influenza virus over six months after immunization. The findings are published in the journal ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces. Intranasal vaccination is an ideal approach for infectious respiratory diseases such as influenza. Seasonal influenza vaccines generally induce narrow immune responses that rapidly decline, which leaves populations vulnerable to novel influenza strains. Advancements in influenza vaccine technology are needed to protect against a wide range of influenza viruses. Intranasal vaccination can improve local mucosal immune responses by preventing influenza infection at the portal of virus entry. In the influenza virus, HA is a protein that plays a crucial role in the early stages of virus infection. Influenza HA has a head region and stalk region. Current influenza vaccines elicit immune responses against the HA head, but this head region is highly changeable and accounts for lowered efficiency against different strains. The HA stalk region is more conservative across different strains of influenza viruses. Protein antigens that are administered intranasally are usually less able to provoke an immune response, so adjuvants are needed to have highly efficient intranasal vaccines. Adjuvants, such as CpG, can enhance and manipulate immune responses, thus improving the potency and breadth of protection. “The PEI-HA/CpG nanoparticles show good potential as a cross-protective influenza vaccine candidate,” said Dr. Baozhong Wang, corresponding author of the study and a professor in the Institute for Biomedical Sciences at Georgia State. “The combination of PEI and CpG in the PEI-HA/CpG nanoparticle group contributed to the multifaceted immune responses, leading to vigorous cross protection. The incorporation of CpG and antigens into the same nanoparticle enhanced cellular immune responses. “Our results revealed that the nanoparticles significantly enhanced HA immunogenicity, or the ability to provoke an immune response, providing cross protection against different influenza virus strains. The conserved HA stalk region induced substantial antibodies in the nanoparticle immunization groups.” “Nanoparticle platforms have shown intriguing characteristics and great potentials in the development of next-generation cross-protective influenza vaccines,” said Dr. Chunhong Dong, the first author of the study and a postdoctoral fellow in the Institute for Biomedical Sciences. “However, challenges exist to the successful research and development of nanoparticle vaccines. Though no apparent adverse effects were observed in the study, a more comprehensive safety evaluation of the nanoparticle adjuvant system is needed before clinical trials.” Co-authors of the study include Baozhong Wang, Chunhong Dong (first author), Ye Wang, Wandi Zhu, Yao Ma, Joo Kim, Lai Wei and Gilbert X. Gonzalez. The study was funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) of the National Institutes of Health. To read the study, visit https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsami.1c19192. Featured Researcher Baozhong Wang Professor Institute for Biomedical Sciences Baozhong Wang is focused on the interaction of viral pathogens with the host immune system. He studies how viral antigens (particularly influenza and HIV antigens) trigger immune responses, with specific emphasis at the crossroads of vaccines and bioengineering through the use of protein nanotechnology and controlled releases in vaccine development. Chunhong Dong Postdoctoral Research Fellow Institute for Biomedical Sciences Filed Under: Health & Wellness Tagged With: home-featurePrimary Sidebar Search More results... Generic filters Hidden label Exact matches only Hidden label Hidden label Hidden label Filter by Custom Post Type Hidden label Hidden label Content from mm/dd/yy Content to mm/dd/yy Related Articles Georgia State to Expand Online Master of Public Health Opportunities, Launch New Certificate Program Research Project Cultivates Interest in Medical Career $1.5 Million Grant to Expand Mindfulness-Based Smoking Cessation Tool Developed by Georgia State Researchers Georgia State University Establishes Center on Health and Homelessness GSU Student Completes Prestigious Summer Research Program About Contact Georgia State Employment University Policies Office of the President Campus Maps Administration News & Events Student Success Admissions Degrees & Majors Graduate Programs College to Career University Library Law Library Bookstore Connections Magazine Alumni Giving Arts & Ideas Rialto Center Album 88 (WRAS-FM) Research URSA Athletics Tickets Sports Panther Athletic Club Recruits News Campus Life Student Engagement Counseling Center Health Center Housing Parking Dining Recreation Safety Georgia State University33 Gilmer Street SE Atlanta, GA 30303404-413-2000 Contact Georgia StateView legal statementPrivacy NoticesState AuthorizationEthics HotlineWebsite Feedback©2024 Georgia State University Send this to a friendYour emailRecipient emailSendCancelRepeated seasonal influenza vaccines also pro | EurekAlert! Advanced Search Home News Releases Multimedia Meetings Login Register News Release 3-Feb-2022 Repeated seasonal influenza vaccines also provide kids better protection against future flu pandemics, researchers find Peer-Reviewed Publication McMaster University image: Lead researcher Matthew Miller says children and adults are fundamentally different in their immune responses to influenza virus. view more Credit: JD Howell/McMaster University Two for one: Repeated seasonal influenza vaccines also provide kids better protection against future flu pandemics, researchers find HAMILTON, Feb. 3, 2022 — Researchers at McMaster University have found that children who receive years of season-specific flu vaccines develop antibodies that also provide broader protection against new strains, including those capable of causing pandemics. The same ability does not exist in adults. The findings, reported today in the journal Cell Reports Medicine, could inform the design of a universal influenza virus vaccine for children, who are especially vulnerable to serious complications from flu, such as pneumonia, dehydration and, in rare cases, death. “Little is known about how seasonal flu vaccination impacts the immune responses in children, who are a major source of flu transmission and a very high-risk group,” explains Matthew Miller, lead author of the study and Associate Professor at the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Diseases Research. “Understanding how seasonal vaccination and different vaccine formulations shape childhood immunity is critical for effective prevention.” Children and adults are fundamentally different in their immune responses to influenza virus, explains Miller, whose lab is part of McMaster’s Global Nexus for Pandemics and Biological Threats. Unlike small children, most adults have been infected with and vaccinated against flu many times throughout their lives. “When we give adults vaccines, they make a very specific immune response against seasonal strains,” says Miller. “Adults simply don’t generate immune responses to seasonal flu vaccines capable of protecting them from pandemic viruses like children can.” The researchers spent three years studying immune responses in children between the ages of 6 months and 17 years. They found that as the children grew older, they became less capable of producing broadly protective antibodies, because of their repeated exposure to influenza, through infection or vaccination. While COVID-19 related measures such as distancing and masking have also resulted in lower rates of influenza, Miller warns the flu will return, possibly in dangerous forms. Influenza has caused five pandemics in the last 100 years. The Spanish Flu of 1918-19 killed roughly 50 million people worldwide at a time when the global population was about 1.8 billion – less than a quarter what it is today. For the study, researchers also compared two forms of vaccine: the conventional flu shot and a nasal spray vaccine that works in the upper respiratory tract, where infection first takes hold. Both worked equally well at generating broadly protective antibodies, which is welcome news for parents seeking a painless alternative to needles. “This is an important finding because it means we have flexibility in terms of the type of vaccines we can use to make a universal vaccine for children. We now know that children’s immune systems are much more flexible than adults’ when it comes to being able to teach them how to make these broadly protective responses,” says Miller. Journal Cell Reports Medicine DOI 10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100509 Method of Research Experimental study Subject of Research People Article Title Inactivated and live-attenuated seasonal influenza vaccines boost broadly neutralizing antibodies in children Article Publication Date 3-Feb-2022 COI Statement The authors declare no competing interests Disclaimer: AAAS and EurekAlert! are not responsible for the accuracy of news releases posted to EurekAlert! by contributing institutions or for the use of any information through the EurekAlert system. Media Contact Michelle Donovan McMaster University donovam@mcmaster.ca Office: 905-525-9140 x22869 More on this News Release Repeated seasonal influenza vaccines also provide kids better protection against future flu pandemics, researchers find McMaster University Journal Cell Reports Medicine Funder Canadian Institutes of Health Research DOI 10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100509 Keywords /Health and medicine/Clinical medicine/Preventive medicine/Vaccination/Flu vaccines /Health and medicine/Diseases and disorders/Epidemics/Pandemic influenza /Scientific community/Research programs/Vaccine research/Vaccine development /Health and medicine/Medical specialties/Immunology/Antibodies Copyright © 2024 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) facebook.com/EurekAlert @EurekAlert youtube.com/EurekAlert Help / FAQ Services Eligibility Guidelines Contact EurekAlert! Terms & Conditions DMCA Privacy Policy Disclaimer Copyright © 2024 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)A Young Woman’s Notes on the 1918–19 Influenza Pandemic - Center for the Study of Women FacebookTwitterInstagramYoutubeRssUCLA Join Mailing List Request Co-Sponsorship Request to Book Meeting Space Give Now Streisand Center Streisand Center Research About History Timeline People Contact Us Annual Reports Funding For Departments and Groups For Faculty For Graduate Students For Undergraduate Students Research Gender and Water Feminist Anti-Carceral Studies Defending Self-Defense Special Circumstances Conviction Project UC Sentencing Project Sexual Violence and Intersectionality Survivors + Allies Trans Futures in Health and Scientific Knowledge Transnational Gender and Labor Working Group Black Feminism Initiative Other Center-Supported Research Research Archive News Videos Events Event Accessibility Thinking Gender Awards Celebration Resources Search Menu Menu A Young Woman’s Notes on the 1918–19 Influenza Pandemic February 4, 2022/CSWAC, Research Affiliates by webteamBy Kathleen Sheldon Some years ago, I inherited a small diary kept by my great-aunt, Sylvia Thankful Eddy. Most of the diary concerned her travel and first two years of residence in Turkey in 1919–1920, where she was a Red Cross nurse. She pursued nursing training and applied to work as a nurse overseas as an escape from the expected course of marriage and family. Recruited by the Near East Relief organization, she remained in Turkey until the 1940s as a missionary affiliated with the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. Her story adds a young woman’s ideas to our collective knowledge about the impact of the influenza epidemic one hundred years ago. As we continue to try to move forward during our own pandemic, I went back to her diary, a small pocket-sized book, where she noted daily events and occasional thoughts, beginning on January 1, 1919. I was curious about the observations of a young woman—a trained nurse—concerning the international impact of the flu. I extracted the entries that directly commented on the flu or on illness she does not identify as the flu. The entries here have been transcribed and minimally edited by me from her handwritten diary. During the first few days of 1919, Sylvia was finishing a tour of duty in Nitro, West Virginia, the location of a World War I munitions factory. The factory was closing due to the end of the war and the loss of personnel to the flu. She did not refer to any illness at this point, but a history of the town mentions the impact of the flu in accelerating the plant closure.[1] Sylvia returned to her family in Simsbury, Connecticut, and at first, she noted participating in social activities without referencing the flu. Then, she wrote, “Went to Hartford with Father and [my sister] Olive … went to the movies. Came home and found George quite sick with the ‘Flu.’ So I had to start in doing a little nursing” (January 10, 1919).[2] Throughout the two years covered in the diary, she prioritized describing social occasions rather than her nursing responsibilities. Over the next few days she continued, “Spent the day taking care of George” and “George better” (January 11 and 12, 1919). As her brother-in-law’s health improved, she moved on to care for another family in Simsbury, “Dr. Carver came and as George was better [I was] asked to go and take care of Mrs. Harry Eno. Mr. + Mrs. Eno and the boy all in bed with Flu. … Frank and Selina Daly were there keeping house” (January 13, 1919).[3] As a young woman without her own husband and children, she was available to act as a live-in nurse for family and friends. She did not mention any payment, suggesting that her nursing expertise was provided on an unpaid basis. The doctor dropped in to check on family members, but she supplied the round-the-clock care. While continuing the local nursing care, she received news that renewed her hope of leaving for the Middle East: “Still at Enos received a telegram from Red Cross asking me to go to Armenia + Syrian relief in the Near East. Wired acceptance.” She was freed to take that desired assignment, as “They got a nurse at Enos so I could come home. Slept all day” (January 14 and 15, 1919). During the following weeks, she prepared for her journey. She spent several days in New York City, where she purchased items needed for Turkey and engaged in a series of social activities. She mentioned movies and plays she attended and named restaurants where she dined out with friends. She did not at any time refer to wearing (or not wearing) facial masks, worrying about being in proximity to crowds, or any other flu-related practices or behaviors. These issues were contested during the 1919 flu epidemic just as they are in 2020–22, but she never indicated whether she agreed with such restrictions or knowingly flouted them.[4] Eventually she boarded her ship along with dozens of others traveling with the Near East Relief. While on the ship, she became ill, and that illness was incapacitating. She did not refer to her illness as the flu.[5] She wrote, “Felt sick cough etc., reported to Mr. Smith, sat on deck in steamer chair finally went to bed” (February 18, 1919). “Feeling worse taken to Sick Bay had a nice upper bunk. We passed the ‘George Washington’ with President Wilson on board. The boats exchanged rockets. I had an earache, Dr. Richards punctured the drum” (February 19, 1919).[6] She continued to make daily notes, “Still in Sick Bay;” “‘Sick Bay,’” and “A great day on board so they told me, athletic contests between Y.W.C.A. and A.C.R.N.E. [American Committee for Relief in the Near East], tugs of war etc., also various stunts by the sailors” (February 20, 21, and 22, 1919). Throughout her diary she exhibits a fun-loving personality, in this instance, even when she was unable to be present due to her severe illness. When the ship arrived in Europe, Sylvia remained very ill, and she was not allowed to disembark. As she managed to record, “Arrived at Brest early this morning as I had pneumonia, had to stay on board; got to go back to New York. Everyone came in to say good-bye and sympathize. I was too sick to care.” The next day she wrote only, “‘Sick Bay’” (February 23 and 24, 1919), though that entry was followed by a bit more excitement, “All hands busy coaling, troops coming on board [military returning from service in WWI], 10,000 27th (New York’s own) going back. I was moved to a dandy big outside stateroom on D Deck. Everyone is so lovely to me” (February 25, 1919). For the next few days, she only noted that the ship had “Left Brest at 1:30 p.m.” and was “On the Atlantic,” while she was “Still in bed” (February 26, 27, and 28, 1919). She did not add any entries for March 1, 2, or 3, and returned to her diary with this note, “On deck for a little while still feeling very shaky” (March 4, 1919). She finally began to recover, more than two weeks after she initially went to sick bay. She noted the ship’s return to the US with her usual appreciation of experiencing a lively event, “March 6 a never to be forgotten day. I was able to be dressed and on deck. At eight a.m. the airplanes, decorated tugs, ferry boats etc. started coming way down the bay to meet the ship. The bands all played ‘Hail Hail the Gangs all here,’ etc., quite thrilling especially when the boys recognized anyone on board the tugs. From every building there were crowds watching and cheering, flags flying, and confetti and streamers were much in evidence as it was 9,000 of the 27th, New York’s own, on board” (March 5, 1919). Source: Naval History and Heritage Command, Title: USS LeviathanDescription: (ID # 1326) Entering New York Harbor in March 1919, with 8,000 troops of the 27th Division on board. Photographed by Enrique Muller, Jr., New York. Courtesy of Harold B. Feile, 1970. US Naval History and Heritage Command Photograph.Catalog #: NH 70166. Thank you to Earle Spamer for locating this photograph for me. The next few weeks have few entries. She mentioned her return to Simsbury, “Arrived home 9:30; mother and dad met me in Hartford. Robert [her brother, Robert Collins Eddy], thanks to the kindness of Col. Barlett and General [George H.] McManus, met me on board the Leviathan. Still feeling shaky but able to travel home. Gen. McManus lent us a car so we missed [her friends] “Harrie” and Tom at the gate” (Mar. 6, 2019). At this point Sylvia had been ill for sixteen days. She continued to recover once she was back in Simsbury, though there are no further entries until the end of the month, likely indicating that her illness lasted for as long as six or seven weeks. She only returned to her diary to note the death of her sister-in-law, a young mother. She did not mention the flu, but that was most likely the cause of death. “Grace died early this morning. [Her two younger sons] Donald [age 6] and Julian [age 10] were here all day” (March 27, 1919).[7] She eventually recovered and traveled to Europe in June 1919. She reached her post at the American Hospital (officially the Azariah Smith Memorial Hospital) in Aintab (now Gaziantep), Turkey, in November and began her work as a nurse. Her friend, Louise Clark, another nurse, fell ill, and Sylvia described that illness as the flu, though that did not seem to warrant isolation, nor the suspension of social activities: “[French army officers] Humblot and Demeur Lenaere in for tea. Louise had the flu so we had tea in her room” (February 16, 1920). I was struck when re-reading these pages how cavalier Sylvia seemed to be, even after caring for close family members who became seriously ill and died, and her own lengthy episode of illness. I would have expected a woman with nursing training to have more to say about the major health event of her lifetime, but she was a young and somewhat light-hearted woman for most of the two years covered in this diary. Perhaps she simply felt the lack of vulnerability that many young people seem to experience. She was in Aintab during a brief but momentous conflict, and in her diary and letters she dismissed any sense of danger. Her unflappable reaction to being under fire gained her recognition from the French government, which awarded her the Croix de Guerre for her cool-headed evacuation of French soldiers during a skirmish.[8] While these notes reflect the views of one young woman, her thoughts and activities may have been routine for many of our ancestors as they dealt with the devastating influenza pandemic of a century ago. Many of them continued their usual activities, visiting family and friends, attending public social events, and even traveling internationally, despite intimate knowledge and experience of illness and death. It is concerning to see similar behavior today, as people ignore medical advice. Such actions likely prolonged the 1919 pandemic just as the desire to engage in social activities while avoiding wearing a mask is delaying our ability to control the spread of COVID today. Kathleen Sheldon has been a Research Affiliate at the Center for the Study of Women for over thirty years. Her most recent publications are African Women: Early History to the 21st Century (2017) and Historical Dictionary of Women in Sub-Saharan Africa (2nd edition, 2016), which was a co-winner of the Conover-Porter prize for an outstanding reference work, presented by the Africana Librarians Council of the African Studies Association. She is a recipient of a 2019-2020 Tillie Olsen Grant. [1] William D. Wintz, Nitro: The World War I Boom Town (South Charleston, WV: Jalamap, 1985), 45–46. [2] George was most likely her brother-in-law George Buckland, who was married to her sister Cornelia. [3] Likely Harry Phelps Eno and Mary O’Meara Eno and their 7-year-old son Chester, who all survived the flu; the Enos were a prominent family in Simsbury. [4] Alexander Navarro and Howard Markel, “Politics, Pushback, and Pandemics: Challenges to Public Health Orders in the 1918 Influenza Pandemic,” American Journal of Public Health 111, no. 3 (2021): 416–422. Navarro and Markel discuss theater closures in the fall of 1918, among other actions that should have directly impacted Sylvia Eddy’s activities. [5] The USS Leviathan was a troopship that had suffered a terrible loss to influenza just a few months earlier. As it sailed from the US to Europe in September 1918, over 2,000 of the 9,000 soldiers on board fell ill with the flu, and 91 died. See Henry A. May, “Influenza on a Troopship,” in History of the USS Leviathan (1919), reprinted in World War I and America: Told by the Americans Who Lived It (Library of America, 2017), 593–597. [6] George L. Richards, ed., The Medical Work of the Near East Relief: A Review of Its Accomplishments in 1919–1920 (New York: Near East Relief, 1923), 6. Mentions his presence on the USS Leviathan. [7] Grace Blakeman Eddy was married to Sylvia’s brother Sherman; Grace Eddy’s obituary does not mention a cause of death; see New-Church Messenger (April 23, 1919). [8] Further details in Kathleen Sheldon, “‘No more cookies or cake now, “C’est la guerre”’: An American Nurse in Turkey, 1919 to 1920,” Social Sciences and Missions 23, no. 1 (2010): 94–123. Share this entryShare on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn UCLA Center for the Study of Women|Barbra Streisand Center, 1500 Public Affairs Building, BOX 957222, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7222 The CSW|Streisand Center at UCLA acknowledges our presence on the traditional, ancestral and unceded territory of the Gabrielino/Tongva peoples. Related Sites College of Letters & Science Social Sciences Division College Magazine College Feedback LA Social Science UCLA Blue Print Campus Resources Maps, Directions, Parking Directory Contact Academic Calendar Careers Diversity University of California Terms of Use Social Sciences Division Departments Aerospace Studies African American Studies American Indian Studies Anthropology Archaeology Asian American Studies César E. Chávez Department of Chicana & Chicano Studies Communication Conservation Economics Gender Studies Geography History Military Science Naval Science Political Science Sociology © Copyright 2023 - UCLA Center for the Study of Women|Streisand Center FacebookTwitterInstagramYoutubeRss Scroll to topDo other viruses have as many variants as SARS-CoV-2? | Live Science Skip to main content Open menu Close menu Live Science Live Science Search Search Live Science Subscribe RSS Space Health Planet Earth Animals Archaeology Physics & Math Human Behavior Technology Chemistry More Science news About us Newsletter Follow us Story archive How It Works MagazineWhy subscribe?The ultimate action-packed science and technology magazine bursting with exciting information about the universeSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with checkout code 'LOVE5'Engaging articles, amazing illustrations & exclusive interviewsIssues delivered straight to your door or device From$26.49View Trending'Superheavy' elementPompeii victimsJames Webb Space TelescopeCrocodile quizBest cameras for wildlife photography Health Viruses, Infections & Disease Coronavirus Do other viruses have as many variants as SARS-CoV-2? News By Donavyn Coffey published 31 January 2022 Is COVID-19's rapid evolution unusual, or do other viruses have as many variants? When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works. An artist's impression of SARS-CoV-2 virus, which causes COVID-19. (Image credit: peterschreiber.media via Getty Images) SARS-CoV-2 seems to be constantly changing. In the span of just two years, alpha, beta, delta, lambda, mu and omicron have all made headlines. And that list doesn't include dozens of other variants that were detected but not considered high priority by the World Health Organization. Is this coronavirus's rapid evolution unusual, or do other viruses have just as many variants? We asked the experts to find out. Viruses are constantly replicating. But the replication process can have hiccups, said Suman Das, an associate professor of medicine at Vanderbilt University Medical Center who studies the evolution of viruses, including SARS-CoV-2. When viruses use host cell machinery to copy their genetic material, mistakes — random additions, removals and substitutions called mutations — happen. And while most random mutations can make the virus unviable or have no effect at all, some mutations actually give it a competitive edge. Maybe some mutations help the virus evade a vaccine or make the pathogen more transmissible. Mutations that help the virus live longer and replicate more easily are "selected" — meaning they stick around. That's how new variants come to be. Related: Why is the flu shot less effective than other vaccines?Like influenza viruses, RSV, enteroviruses, and rhinoviruses, which cause the common cold, SARS-CoV-2 carries its genetic information on a strand of RNA. And compared with other RNA viruses, "[the mutation] rate in SARS-CoV-2 is not particularly remarkable," said Katie Kistler, a postdoctoral researcher who studies viral evolution at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. In fact, it's similar to the mutation rate of other common RNA viruses, such as influenza and other common coronaviruses that cause cold-like symptoms, she told Live Science.The bottom line on mutations: SARS-CoV-2 isn't mutating at an unusually fast rate. But other factors in play, like the virus's high transmissibility, its transition from an animal host to humans, and the development of new treatments and vaccines, may have ramped up the number of SARS-CoV-2 variants we've seen over a short time. "SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, may appear to evolve more mutations due to the fact that it's much more transmissible than other common viruses, resulting in many more cases," said Jesse Erasmus, a virologist and assistant professor of microbiology at the University of Washington School of Medicine. The actual rate of mutations per infection is similar to other common viruses, if not slower. But it's continually circulating through many more people — and has been for more than two years — which gives it more opportunities to replicate and produce advantageous mutations, he told Live Science. Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter nowGet the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox.Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.The rapid changes of SARS-CoV-2 may also be related to its recent jump to humans. Until 2019, the virus was adapted to infect an animal host, most likely bats. Initially, "the virus needs to adapt to infect humans rather than bats," Kistler said. "There are a lot of beneficial mutations available to the virus during that [transition] phase." Afterward, a virus's adaptive evolution slows down a bit. RELATED MYSTERIES—Can you get 2 colds at once?—Why do we develop lifelong immunity to some diseases, but not others?—Are viruses alive? The 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic influenza virus followed this pattern. "During the initial pandemic phase, and [a] year or two following its emergence, we see that the rate of functional change is higher, and then it drops down to a more steady baseline level," she said. Scientists don't know how the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 will change as it transitions from epidemic to endemic, but based on other pandemic viruses, they hypothesize that the pace of adaptive evolution could slow down.Finally, the changes we see in SARS-CoV-2 are also partly driven by the rapid development of vaccines and treatments designed to stop it. Compared with the early days of the pandemic, there's now much more selection pressure on the virus to escape the pharmaceutical measures designed to defeat it, Das told Live Science. Now we have multiple vaccines: antibody cocktails, convalescent plasma therapy and two drugs on the market to combat COVID. That's a lot of new pressures driving selection of the virus. Some of the mutations that stick are now the ones that will help the virus avoid these challenges.Originally published on Live Science. Donavyn CoffeySocial Links NavigationLive Science ContributorDonavyn Coffey is a Kentucky-based health and environment journalist reporting on healthcare, food systems and anything you can CRISPR. Her work has appeared in Scientific American, Wired UK, Popular Science and Youth Today, among others. Donavyn was a Fulbright Fellow to Denmark where she studied molecular nutrition and food policy. She holds a bachelor's degree in biotechnology from the University of Kentucky and master's degrees in food technology from Aarhus University and journalism from New York University. More about coronavirusOlder adults should get 2 doses of the updated COVID shot, CDC saysNewfound autoimmune syndrome tied to COVID-19 can trigger deadly lung scarringLatestWe finally know why dogs shake when they're wetSee more latest ► Most PopularIcy moon of Uranus may have once hid watery secret, Voyager 2 archives revealLED device treats leading cause of vision loss with light therapy, FDA says'A flash of copper caught our attention': 4,000-year-old dagger discovered deep in Italian cave'Hawking radiation' may be erasing black holes. Watching it happen could reveal new physics.North Korea launches intercontinental ballistic missile to space, reaches record altitudeMigraine molecules may drive endometriosis pain. Existing drugs might help.Cats are better at word association than human babies are, study findsE. coli in the gut may fuel a 'chain reaction' leading to Parkinson's, early study suggestsA giant crocodilian killed the largest 'terror bird' ever found, 12 million years ago'Ridiculously smooth': James Webb telescope spies unusual pancake-like disk around nearby star Vega — and scientists can't explain itNew 'wastewater' jet fuel could cut airplane emissions by 70% LATEST ARTICLES1We finally know why dogs shake when they're wet2Armored dinosaur could withstand the impact of a high-speed car crash, thanks to the 'bulletproof vest' over its plate armor3'Crumb trails' of meteoroids could reveal potential 'planet-killer' comets years before they reach Earth4Incredibly rare, ghostly white shark discovered off Albania5Death of alien-hunting Arecibo Telescope traced to cable issues 3 years earlier, 'alarming' report finds Live Science is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookies policy Accessibility Statement Advertise with us Web notifications Careers Editorial standards How to pitch a story to us © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.Overconfidence, indifference and weariness are perhaps the biggest dangers. John M. Barry: What we can learn from how the 1918 pandemic ended Overconfidence, indifference and weariness are perhaps the biggest dangers.By John M. Barry | Special to The New York Times | Feb. 2, 2022, 5:00 p.m.Most histories of the 1918 influenza pandemic that killed at least 50 million people worldwide say it ended in the summer of 1919 when a third wave of the respiratory contagion finally subsided.Yet the virus continued to kill. A variant that emerged in 1920 was lethal enough that it should have counted as a fourth wave. In some cities, among them Detroit, Milwaukee, Minneapolis and Kansas City, Mo., deaths exceeded even those in the second wave, responsible for most of the pandemic’s deaths in the United States. This occurred despite the fact that the U.S. population had plenty of natural immunity from the influenza virus after two years of several waves of infection and after viral lethality in the third wave had already decreased.Nearly all cities in the United States imposed restrictions during the pandemic’s virulent second wave, which peaked in the fall of 1918. That winter, some cities reimposed controls when a third, though less deadly wave struck. But virtually no city responded in 1920. People were weary of influenza, and so were public officials. Newspapers were filled with frightening news about the virus, but no one cared. People at the time ignored this fourth wave; so did historians. The virus mutated into ordinary seasonal influenza in 1921, but the world had moved on well before.We should not repeat that mistake.True, right now we have every reason for optimism. First, omicron cases are declining in parts of the country. Second, nearly the entire U.S. population will soon have been either infected or vaccinated, strengthening their immune systems against the virus as we know it now. Third, although omicron is extraordinarily good at infecting the upper respiratory tract, which makes it so transmissible, it seems less able to infect the lungs than earlier variants so it is less virulent. It is entirely possible and perhaps even likely that, spurred by a better immune response, the virus will continue to decrease in lethality; indeed, there is a theory that the 1889-92 influenza pandemic was actually caused by a coronavirus called OC43, which today causes the common cold.All of which makes overconfidence, indifference or weariness, after two years of battling the virus — and one another — a danger now.Signs of weariness — or misguided hope — are everywhere. Although more than 70 percent of the adult population is fully vaccinated, progress has stagnated, and as of Jan. 27, only 44 percent had received boosters, which provide vital protection against severe illness. Although most of us, especially parents, want schools to stay open, parents have gotten only about 20 percent of children ages 5 to 11 fully vaccinated. As in 1920, people are tired of taking precautions.This is ceding control to the virus. The result has been that even though omicron appears to be less virulent, the seven-day average for daily COVID-19 deaths in the United States has now surpassed the delta peak in late September.Worse, the virus may not be finished with us. Although there’s a reasonable likelihood that future variants will be less dangerous, mutations are random. The only thing certain is that future variants, if they are to be successful, will elude immune protection. They could become more dangerous.That was the case not only in 1920 with the last gasp of the 1918 virus, but also in the 1957, 1968 and 2009 influenza pandemics. In 1960 in the United States, after much of the population had achieved protection from infection and a vaccine, a variant caused peak mortality to exceed the pandemic levels in 1957 and 1958. In the 1968 outbreak, a variant in Europe caused more deaths the second year, even though, once again, a vaccine was available and many people had been infected.In the 2009 pandemic, variants also emerged that caused breakthrough infections; one study in Britain found “greater burden of severe illness in the year after the pandemic” but “much less public interest in influenza.” Researchers blamed the government’s approach for that. In the first year, the public health response was “highly assertive,” chiefly in providing information; there were no lockdowns. In the second year, they found, “the approach was laissez-faire.” As a result, “a large number of deaths, critical care and hospital admissions occurred, many of these in otherwise healthy people of working age.”Such precedents should make us wary. Vaccines, the new antiviral drug Paxlovid and others could end the pandemic, once billions of doses become widely available globally and if the virus does not develop resistance. But the end is not going to arrive anytime soon. The immediate future still depends on the virus and how we wield our current arsenal: vaccines, masks, ventilation, the antiviral drug remdesivir and steroids and the one monoclonal treatment that still works against omicron, social distancing and avoiding crowds. As a society, we have largely abandoned the public health measures on that list. As individuals, we can still act.John M. Barry is a distinguished scholar at the Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine and the author of “The Great Influenza: The Story of the Deadliest Pandemic in History.” This article originally appeared in The New York Times.By John M. Barry | Special to The New York TimesDonate to the newsroom now. The Salt Lake Tribune, Inc. is a 501(c)(3) public charity and contributions are tax deductibleIn case you missed itRepublican Utah state school board members form caucus, will meet in closed meetingsI-15 widening: A jaw-dropping new price tag and everything else we learned from the final environmental report‘The prank was not appropriate’: Former Utah Tech University president apologizes for phallic gag giftTHE LATEST194-year-old LDS Church and 100-year-old Russell Nelson reach a milestone — in TooeleLook Ahead: Local events and things to do this week, November 10-16Big 12 Conference fines Ute AD Mark Harlan for disparaging refs after Utah-BYU gameGordon Monson: Shame on Utah AD Mark Harlan for complaining about a game that was absolutely not ‘stolen’ from his UtesPerson in hospital after being shot by police in West JordanFeatured Local SavingsCONNECT Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube RSS SUBSCRIPTIONSSubscribe to print + digitalSubscribe to digital onlyDigital access for print subscribersEmail newslettersLogin to your print accountLogin to your digital accountSubscription FAQsHelp and contact infoGift SubscriptionsABOUT USHistory and missionOur nonprofit modelBoard and advisersOfficers and staffSupportersDonors and tax filingPrivacy policyCalifornia privacyEditorial policies and ethicsMOREAdvertise with usLegal noticesStorePodcastsArchivesStory TipsSupport The TribuneDonateCookie PreferencesCommenting PolicyABOUT USTERMS OF SERVICEPRIVACY POLICYEDITORIAL POLICYADVERTISECONTACT USHELPSUPPORTWEEKLY PRINT EDITIONEMAIL NEWSLETTERSPODCASTSNEWS TIPSDONATECOOKIE PREFERENCESReport a missed paper by emailing subscribe@sltrib.com or calling 801-237-2900For e-edition questions or comments, contact customer support 801-237-2900 or email subscribe@sltrib.comsltrib.com © 1996-2024 The Salt Lake Tribune. All rights reserved.The 1918 Flu Pandemic’s Impact on Movie Theaters - JSTOR Daily Skip to content from JSTOR, nonprofit library for the intellectually curious Newsletters Become a member Membership Shared Collections on JSTOR Teaching and Learning Resources Arts & Culture Art & Art History Film & Media Language & Literature Performing Arts Education & Society Education Lifestyle Religion Social Sciences Politics & History Politics & Government U.S. History World History Social History Quirky History Science & Technology Health Natural Science Plants & Animals Sustainability & The Environment Technology Business & Economics Business Economics Contact The Editors In the Limelight The 1918 Flu Pandemic’s Impact on Movie Theaters With WWI coming to end, 1918 should have been a good year for the movies. Then along came influenza. Actors Dennis Morgan and Betty Furness rehearsing a kissing scene for their movie Mama Steps Out, 1937. Yes, this picture postdates the 1918 flu pandemic, but it's so good! via Wikimedia Commons Share Copy link Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Reddit WhatsApp Email By: Betsy Golden Kellem January 31, 2022 January 30, 2022 5 minutes The icon indicates free access to the linked research on JSTOR. With more than $700 million in revenue, Spider-Man: No Way Home is having an uncharacteristically large cinematic moment in the post-COVID world. As of this past weekend (1/23/22), Deadline reported the movie hit #6 on the global all-time box office list and had made $1.69 billion, inspiring a Saturday Night Live sketch in which the show’s Joe Biden stand-in attributes the nationwide rise in coronavirus cases to the fact that every human in the country has seen Spider-Man. Jokes aside, Spider-Man is the first movie in a long while to suggest a return to pre-pandemic box office figures and theater attendance. Movies have been hard hit by two years of pandemic pressures, resulting in hybrid releases, “theater at home” streaming arrangements, and the closure of many theaters. After the influenza pandemic of 1918-19, which similarly hit the movies hard, the film industry responded with massive structural change and a booming return to filmgoing. Will our current environment and its aftermath spur the same sort of change? As the war was coming to an end, there was every reason to expect a busy fall season in the amusement industry. The year 1918 should have been a good year for the movies. War films and newsreels had kept theaters humming (film was considered an “essential industry” in World War I America), and as the war was coming to an end, there was every reason to expect a busy fall season in the amusement industry. But, after its initial discovery among military service members in the spring, and a mild first wave of infection, influenza took hold on the east coast in September 1918. Extending westward in the sort of six- to eight-week surges that have become all too familiar to us today, the pandemic roared across the United States and caused nearly two hundred thousand deaths in the month of October alone. If attendance didn’t go down on its own as the flu raged through a given community, venue closures would eventually keep people out of the movies. According to film scholar Richard Koszarski, “Health officials would eventually order the closing of movie theaters along with other places of amusement, as well as schools, churches and (more rarely) stores.” Silent film actress Elsie Ferguson from the American drama film Under the Greenwood Tree, 1918. Flu mask our addition. via Wikimedia Commons In October 1918, the National Association of the Motion Picture Industry decided to “abandon production as far as possible, stop the release of all new feature subjects and confine exchange activities to the immediate circulation of serials and news weeklies.” The shutdown was necessary from an economic perspective as much as a public health one: the American movie industry was a chain of relationships between the studios who made films, the exhibitors who showed them, and the ticket-buying public, and the pandemic affected them all materially. If studios weren’t making movies at the usual rate, and there wasn’t anyone to pay to rent the print, much less buy a ticket, the industry was left hard up. For towns and cities in which theaters were still open, distributors were encouraging re-screenings of old films already in stock, and offered to make back-catalog features available to theater owners. In November 1918, the industry publication Motion Picture World reported that the official release of America’s Answer, a new WWI propaganda documentary produced by the Committee on Public Information, would be delayed “owing to the epidemic of influenza throughout the country and the fact that in many states the pre-release showings will be stopped by the closing of the motion picture theatres.” Things did not look good for the future of the movie business. One Boston theater owner lamented that “The five best weeks of the year are those following Labor Day. The grip ban came in the midst of this rushing business, and the loss can never be recovered.” Others in the industry worried that since people under lockdown had figured out “that they can enjoy their own fireside of evenings,” they might not even want to return to reopened theaters. Nonetheless, the industry recovered—and not only recovered, but boomed in new and unexpected ways. Benjamin Hampton, in his history of the American film industry, writes that there was only a matter of weeks for studios to ditch the war reels, start filming love stories and adventures, and capitalize on an audience of eager postwar pleasure-seekers who were either by now influenza-free, or willing to wear a mask. (Of course producer Thomas Ince complained that “[masks] interfere to a considerable extent with cigarette smoking,” but what are you going to do?). Weekly Newsletter Get your fix of JSTOR Daily’s best stories in your inbox each Thursday. Privacy Policy Contact Us You may unsubscribe at any time by clicking on the provided link on any marketing message. Δ This favored studio players with bold hearts and deep pockets. Adolf Zukor’s Paramount filled its coffers with Wall Street cash, and either bought or built first-run theaters in major cities across the nation in an effort to control films from the soundstage to the theater seat. Studios like fledgling Disney, which did not own theaters, were at a decided disadvantage in this system; and influential stars like Charlie Chaplin and Mary Pickford responded by forming their own United Artists consortium. (A 1948 lawsuit before the Supreme Court would ban this practice of “vertical integration” as placing a stranglehold on the production and distribution of movies.) In the aftermath of the 1918-19 influenza pandemic, the movie industry responded with the structural changes that became the big studio system. We may be seeing a similar industry shift in progress today, as COVID realities evolve, and hybrid streaming and experiential theater experiences become more common. What will happen precisely is hard to know, but we do know that once again, a pandemic has irrevocably shifted the nature of the industry and its relationship with audiences. Support JSTOR Daily! Join our new membership program on Patreon today. Have a correction or comment about this article? Please contact us. pandemicsFilm History Resources JSTOR is a digital library for scholars, researchers, and students. JSTOR Daily readers can access the original research behind our articles for free on JSTOR. Flu Season: "Moving Picture World" Reports on Pandemic Influenza, 1918-19 By: Richard Koszarski Film History, Vol. 17, No. 4, Unfashionable, Overlooked or Under Estimated (2005), pp. 466-485 Indiana University Press Get Our Newsletter Get your fix of JSTOR Daily’s best stories in your inbox each Thursday. Privacy Policy Contact Us You may unsubscribe at any time by clicking on the provided link on any marketing message. Δ In the Limelight Your ticket to entertainment history, from the vaudeville stage to the circus, magic shows to the television studio. Bring popcorn. Read this next Politics & History Libraries and Pandemics: Past and Present The 1918 influenza pandemic had a profound impact on how librarians do their work, transforming libraries into centers of community care. Trending Posts Suicide by Proxy Racist Humor: Exploratory Readings Why Does the Bible Forbid Tattoos? What’s so Chinese About Science Fiction from China? Call the Midwives—Assuming Any Are Left More Stories Art & Art History Becoming Beatrice Dante adored her so much that he cast her as his guide in the Divine Comedy. But who was Beatrice Portinari? Language & Literature What’s so Chinese About Science Fiction from China? Commentators have latched onto science fiction to explain all manner of social phenomena in China, from unemployment and the economy to air pollution. Language & Literature A Brief History of the Muses Scholar Alison Habens tells us more about the Greek goddesses who provided divine inspiration for ancient poets. Film & Media The War on Bugs In the 1950s, supersized insects were the villains in a rash of big-screen horror movies. What did those monstrous roaches represent, and how were they vanquished? Recent Posts High-Flying Geology Could “Rosie the Riveter” Be Chinese American? Chimney Sweeps and the Turn Against Child Labor Becoming Beatrice A Village Responds to Disaster Support JSTOR Daily Help us keep publishing stories that provide scholarly context to the news. Become a member About UsJSTOR Daily provides context for current events using scholarship found in JSTOR, a digital library of academic journals, books, and other material. We publish articles grounded in peer-reviewed research and provide free access to that research for all of our readers. About JSTOR Daily Contact The Editors Masthead Newsletters Submission Guidelines Unsubscribe The JSTOR Daily Sleuth Support JSTOR Daily on Patreon Teaching and Learning Resources Inquire about Advertising and Donations American Prison Newspapers RSS JSTOR.org Terms and Conditions of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Cookie Settings Accessibility JSTOR is part of ITHAKA, a not-for-profit organization helping the academic community use digital technologies to preserve the scholarly record and to advance research and teaching in sustainable ways. © ITHAKA. All Rights Reserved. JSTOR®, the JSTOR logo, and ITHAKA® are registered trademarks of ITHAKA. Sign up for our weekly newsletter Get your fix of JSTOR Daily’s best stories in your inbox each Thursday. Privacy Policy Contact Us You may unsubscribe at any time by clicking on the provided link on any marketing message. Δ ×Why taking fever-reducing meds and drinking fluids may not be the best way to treat flu and fever Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair Using fever reducers or drinking too much fluid while battling the flu may upset the body’s delicate balancing act. Sam Edwards/OJO Images via Getty Images Why taking fever-reducing meds and drinking fluids may not be the best way to treat flu and fever Published: February 1, 2022 1.14pm GMT Tamara Hew-Butler, Wayne State University Author Tamara Hew-Butler Associate Professor of Exercise and Sports Science, Wayne State University Disclosure statement Tamara Hew-Butler does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment. Partners Wayne State University provides funding as a member of The Conversation US. View all partners Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger As flu season progresses, so does the chorus of advice, professional and otherwise, to drink plenty of fluids and take fever-reducing medications, like acetaminophen, ibuprofen or aspirin. These recommendations, well-intentioned and firmly entrenched, offer comfort to those sidelined with fever, flu or vaccine side effects. But you may be surprised to learn the science supporting these recommendations is speculative at best, harmful at worst and comes with caveats. I am an exercise physiologist who specializes in studying how the body regulates fluids and temperature. And based on a wide body of evidence, I can tell you that increased fluid intake and taking fever reducers, whether aspirin, acetaminophen or ibuprofen, may not always help in your recovery. In fact, in some cases, it could be harmful. There’s a reason why people say fevers should be lowered when sick or after a vaccine. Both aspirin and acetaminophen, such as Tylenol, reduce fever, headaches and muscle aches. But at the same time, seminal and newer studies, including broad meta-analysis studies, show that these medications may weaken the immune response to infection or have unwanted side effects. What is a fever? First, some background: Fevers are a regulated increase in core body temperature as a response to unwanted microbial invaders. The more severe the infection, the higher the fever. Having a fever is not all bad; it’s how the body has evolved to recuperate from an infection. For many species, fevers are advantageous and beneficial for survival. But fever comes with a cost. A body temperature that’s too high can be deadly. For every increase of 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit, metabolism goes up 10%; the body begins to burn more calories than normal, temperature continues to rise and the body releases hormones to keep fever under control. Many studies demonstrate what can happen when fever reducers are thrust into this complex dance. It turns out aspirin or acetaminophen may cause infected people to feel better, but they also spread more virus while suppressing their own immune response to the infection. In one double-blind, placebo-controlled study, healthy people infected with a cold virus who took aspirin or acetaminophen for a week had a reduced immune response and an increase in viral shedding – meaning producing and expelling virus particles from the nose. Another study showed that taking aspirin effectively reduced fever symptoms but increased shedding. Although some of those traditional studies took place decades ago, their results still hold up today. A recent study warned that if everyone took fever suppressants, there would be even more flu cases and flu-related deaths. Furthermore, elevated body temperature – or fever – can help fight COVID-19 by reducing the growth of the virus within the lungs. In other words, fevers can help the body fight viruses while reducing the rate of death and disease. Drinking fluids To prevent dehydration, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends drinking more fluids when one has a fever or infection, or has received a COVID-19 vaccine. But there is scant scientific evidence to support this recommendation. Drinking fluids to excess can lead to overhydration. Dina Morozova/iStock via Getty Images Plus It’s true that drinking fluids when dehydrated is necessary to reduce fever. But not everyone with a fever is dehydrated. For those who aren’t thirsty, forcing fluids beyond thirst, which is often unpleasant, may not be advisable. [Get fascinating science, health and technology news. Sign up for The Conversation’s weekly science newsletter.] A study that evaluated the advice to “drink plenty of fluids” determined that increasing fluid intake when sick may not offer benefits, and that more high-quality studies are needed. Indeed, there was a potential risk from overhydration. For some people, three liters, or about 12 eight-ounce glasses, is too much. Overhydration can cause nausea and vomiting, headaches and cramps; in severe cases, excessive fluid intake can cause seizures or coma. Here’s why this happens. To stop dangerous escalations in fever, the body releases antidiuretic hormones. Urination is diminished, so the body retains water through the actions of the kidneys. So if someone with a fever drinks more water than necessary, water intoxication – or hyponatremia, a potentially fatal medical condition in which a patient’s blood sodium levels are too low – could follow. One study found that nearly a quarter of patients who came to the hospital with COVID-19 had hyponatremia upon admission. In that study, hyponatremia increased the need for breathing support in the form of ventilation. And another study showed that the condition can lead to poorer outcomes in COVID-19 patients. So maybe it’s time to rethink the conventional wisdom. If the fever is mild or moderate, stay warm, even use blankets, rather than try to actively reduce it. Rest, so your body can fight the fever. Conserve energy because your metabolism is already on overdrive. Use fever-reducing medications sparingly. Drink fluids, but only to tolerance, and preferably when thirsty. And one final suggestion that should be soothing: When fighting a fever or vaccine side effects, consider sipping warm liquids that contain sodium. Broths containing sodium, like bullion, may help avoid hyponatremia. And although the actual scientific evidence is sparse and conflicting, chicken soup may be a better antidote than water when fending off a fever or flu symptoms. Vaccination Headaches Flu Aspirin Colds Hydration Tylenol Flu season Fever COVID-19 COVID-19 vaccine risks Acetaminophen Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationNova Scotia confirms case of avian influenza in goose in Halifax region | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Nova Scotia confirms case of avian influenza in goose in Halifax region | CBC News LoadedNova ScotiaNova Scotia confirms case of avian influenza in goose in Halifax regionNova Scotia has confirmed a case of avian flu in a wild goose found in the community of Grand Desert in the Halifax Regional Municipality.CFIA said it is investigating 2 other 'disease situations' in the provinceVernon Ramesar · CBC News · Posted: Feb 01, 2022 9:22 AM EST | Last Updated: February 1, 2022In this Nov. 18, 2012, file photo, a Canada goose takes off from a pond in Hutchinson, Kan. Bird flu has been detected in a wild goose in Grand Desert, N.S. (Lindsey Baumanhe Hutchinson News via Associated Press)Social SharingNova Scotia's Department of Natural Resources says a case of avian influenza, also known as bird flu, has been detected in the community of Grand Desert, in the eastern part of the Halifax Regional Municipality.A news release Tuesday said the Canadian Food Inspection Agency confirmed the case in a wild goose on Friday. The provincial department said the bird was found alive, but had symptoms and died within 24 hours. Bob Petrie, the director of wildlife at the Department of Natural Resources, said in an interview that the public should exercise caution with birds.He said the virus is not a "significant health risk" as the general public do not normally handle birds. His department is communicating with Public Health, Petrie said, to help inform the response."Avian influenza poses little risk to people, but the virus is highly infectious and potentially deadly in wild and domestic birds," he said in the news release."We urge the public to avoid feeding or handling wild birds like ducks, geese, pheasants, pigeons and gulls to prevent disease spread."Avian Influenza Confirmed in Nova Scotia <a href="https:/.co/KDbAAsLla4">https:/.co/KDbAAsLla4</a> <a href="https:/.coCIFYn3TkW">pic.twitter.comCIFYn3TkW</a>&mdash;@nsgovPetrie said it is an emerging situation and his department is co-ordinating with other agencies like the Department of Agriculture and the CFIA.According to Petrie, his department is concentrating on tracking wild bird populations in order to prevent the spread.Some wild species that have the virus can infect other birds while remaining asymptomatic themselves, the release said.There are at least 15 types of avian influenza and some bird species are more likely to become very ill and die, according to the release. The public are urged to not handle live, sick or dead birds and to report sick or dead birds to the department at 1-800-565-2224.The release said avian influenza has been detected in other parts of Canada and in the United States, and the province is working with Ottawa and other agencies to "monitor and respond to the situation."CFIA identifies variantThe CFIA said in an email it is investigating a "disease situation" at two other locations in Nova Scotia and has placed both properties under quarantine as a precautionary measure. Samples taken by the CFIA have been sent to the National Centre for Foreign Animal Disease in Winnipeg for analysis, the email said.The avian influenza found in the goose was of the H5N1 variant. The CFIA said the virus is spread by direct contact with infected poultry and surfaces contaminated with fecal matter, but human infection with H5N1 is rare.According to the email, the risk to humans is low and, even if infected, human symptoms are often limited to conjunctivitis and mild respiratory disease."It is recommended that people working with poultry suspected of being infected with avian influenza, or in contact with such poultry, wear protective clothing," the email said."The CFIA reminds poultry farmers to remain vigilant and to apply strict biosecurity measures at all times."Hope Swinimer of Hope for Wildlife, an animal rehabilitation organization in Seaforth that found the infected goose in nearby Grand Desert, said the centre has safety protocols and procedures for handling diseases that can spread from animals to humans.She said she is hoping the centre can play a role in helping Nova Scotia deal with any outbreak and save the lives of animals. "What a lot of people don't realize is that one of our goals here at Home for Wildlife is research and being able to pinpoint where these cases are coming from," Swinimer said."We really hope we can be a part of the solution and help all of Nova Scotia know what's happening at any given time in our natural world."MORE TOP STORIESAcadia University faculty union on strike, classes cancelledNova Scotia reports 3 COVID-19 deaths Monday, 93 in designated hospital unitsRapid tests no longer available at N.S. airports, but return to librariesConservative caucus revolt triggers vote on Erin O'Toole's leadershipVideoSydney businesses pledging to stay open laterCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowNew Guernsey poultry laws implemented to prevent bird fluSkip to contentBritish Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveHomeNewsIsrael-Gaza WarWar in UkraineUS & CanadaUKUK PoliticsEnglandN. IrelandN. Ireland PoliticsScotlandScotland PoliticsWalesWales PoliticsAfricaAsiaChinaIndiaAustraliaEuropeLatin AmericaMiddle EastIn PicturesBBC InDepthBBC VerifyUS ElectionFull resultsKamala HarrisDonald TrumpJD VanceTim WalzSportBusinessExecutive LoungeTechnology of BusinessFuture of BusinessInnovationTechnologyScience & HealthArtificial IntelligenceAI v the MindCultureFilm & TVMusicArt & DesignStyleBooksEntertainment NewsArtsArts in MotionTravelDestinationsAfricaAntarcticaAsiaAustralia and PacificCaribbean & BermudaCentral AmericaEuropeMiddle EastNorth AmericaSouth AmericaWorld’s TableCulture & ExperiencesAdventuresThe SpeciaListEarthNatural WondersWeather & ScienceClimate SolutionsSustainable BusinessGreen LivingVideoLiveLive NewsLive SportHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherNewslettersNew Guernsey poultry laws implemented to prevent bird fluReutersThe government said holding a register of poultry keepers would help veterinary officers notify keepers of important developments and directly distribute the latest guidanceThe States of Guernsey has introduced a new law aimed at limiting the risk of avian influenza (bird flu) outbreaks.The Avian Influenza (Precautionary Measures) Order 2022 legally requires poultry to be registered with States Veterinary officers and for owners to implement "good biosecurity measures".The government said poultry are at risk of contracting bird flu from migratory wild birds.The new law follows the ongoing epidemic in the UK and Europe.It said knowing the numbers and locations of poultry on-island would help the veterinary officers in the event of an outbreak.The provisions of the order are:Owners of domestic birds must ensure wild birds cannot access bedding, litter, food and water and other things available to those domestic birdsOwners of domestic birds imported from any country or territory where there has been an outbreak (or suspected) within 30 days of importation must: (a) Return them to the territory or keep them until return becomes possible (b) cleanse, disinfect, treat, dispose or destroy anything used by them and avoid contactStates vets are authorised to inspect, test or treat any wild bird which may have travelled to Guernsey from a territory where suspected or a bird flu outbreak has occurredPremises must be kept in a manner and under conditions necessary to ensure no possible contact with wild birds can occurProhibit the holding and carrying out of any event involving a large gathering of birdsThe order will continue to January 2023, but may be revoked if the risk of local infection subsides.Follow BBC Guernsey on Twitter and Facebook. Send your story ideas to channel.islands@bbc.co.uk.Three dead chickens found 'thrown on to rocks'School chicken 'kicked to death'British Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherBBC ShopBBC in other languagesFollow BBC on:Terms of UseAbout the BBCPrivacy PolicyCookiesAccessibility HelpContact the BBCAdvertise with usDo not share or sell my infoContact technical supportCopyright 2024 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Updated CDC map shows Kansas Flu levels low Skip to contentNewsWeatherSportsLatest VideoLivestreamHonoring Our VetsSend It InHear Me See MeHomeElection ResultsPresidential Election MapKansas Interactive ResultsNewsLocalCrimeStateNationalHealthPoliticsInternationalVeteransAgricultureSubscribe to our NewsletterWeather24/7 Weather StreamClosingsRadarWeather PicsWeather MapsRisk MapsStorm CallSportsSend Us Your ScoreKansas Prep ZoneVideoScholar Athlete Nomination FormScoreboardIX at 50CollegeNationalThe DriveVideo & LivestreamNews Clips & SegmentsLivestreamLatest NewscastsVideo VaultSubmit A News TipHonoring Our VetsSignature StoriesKansas Cold CasesSalute Our HeroesGood KidsNominate a Good KidWednesday's ChildFork in the Road13 at 65Remembering Bob DoleEye on NE KansasEye on NE Kansas PodcastMorning ShowContestsMorning Show ClipsSubmit: Birthday ClubSubmit: Braggin’ WallBirthday Club/Braggin' Wall VideoFirst Tooth ContestTo The StarsFoodie FridayWith This RingHear Me See MePay it ForwardContact UsWIBW News Team13 MarketingRequest Help Promoting Your EventJobsMr. FoodCommunity CalendarTV ListingsZeam - News StreamsStay ConnectedTravel with WIBWInvestigateTVWatching Your WalletCircle CountryGray DC BureauDigital MarketingUpdated CDC map shows Kansas Influenza levels lowLive at FiveBy Tori WhalenPublished: Feb. 3, 2022 at 6:35 PM CSTEmail This LinkShare on FacebookShare on X (formerly Twitter)Share on PinterestShare on LinkedInTOPEKA, Kan. (WIBW) - Influenza levels are low in the state of Kansas.The latest CDC map shows Nebraska also low, while Colorado has minimal flu activity. However, Missouri and Oklahoma are both in the high category.Kansas does not require health care providers to report influenza cases, because it is measured through activity reported by participating health centers.Copyright 2022 WIBW. All rights reserved.Most Read TPD investigate city's 17th homicide Sunday morning Federal judge strikes down Biden immigration rule in response to Kobach lawsuit Boil water advisory lifted for Emporia, Lyon Co. districts still under advisory REPORT: Manhattan man leads high-speed chase involving helicopter Arrest made after string of Manhattan break-insChiefs move to 9-0 after late heroics save the day Kansas upsets No. 17 Iowa State to keep bowl hopes aliveKansas, North Carolina clash in a battle of the Blue BloodsLatest NewsPay it Forward: Foster The Cause Local artist records song for veterans, unknowingly impacting his background singer Nonprofit trailer loses equipment to theftLocal artist recently record a song to honor veterans but he didn't know the impact it would have on his background singerNonprofit trailer loses equipment to theftShots fired lead to 3-hour standoff in Lawrence apartment building, 1 arrestedOne person seriously injured in car accident Saturday nightTPD investigate city's 17th homicide Sunday morningWeatherNewsSportsMorning ShowContact UsCommunity CalendarWIBW631 SW Commerce Pl.Topeka, KS 66615(785) 272-6397Public Inspection Filepublicfile@wibw.com - (785) 272-6397Terms of ServicePrivacy PolicyEEO StatementFCC ApplicationsAdvertisingDigital MarketingClosed Captioning/Audio DescriptionAt Gray, our journalists report, write, edit and produce the news content that informs the communities we serve. Click here to learn more about our approach to artificial intelligence.A Gray Local Media Station © 2002-2024Associations and recovery dynamics of the nasopharyngeal microbiota during influenza-like illness in the aging population | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Associations and recovery dynamics of the nasopharyngeal microbiota during influenza-like illness in the aging population Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 03 February 2022 Associations and recovery dynamics of the nasopharyngeal microbiota during influenza-like illness in the aging population Sudarshan A. Shetty1,2, Josine van Beek1, Elske Bijvank1, James Groot1, Sjoerd Kuiling1, Thijs Bosch1, Debbie van Baarle1,2 & …Susana Fuentes1 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 12, Article number: 1915 (2022) Cite this article 2357 Accesses 5 Citations 14 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Microbial communitiesInfluenza virusMicrobiomePathogens AbstractInfluenza-like illness (ILI), a disease caused by respiratory pathogens including influenza virus, is a major health concern in older adults. There is little information on changes and recovery dynamics of the nasopharyngeal (NP) microbiota of older adults associated with an ILI. Here, we compared the NP microbiota in older adults reporting (n = 240) or not (n = 157) ILI during the 2014–2015 influenza season at different times of the ILI event. A small but significant effect of the ILI was observed on the microbiota community composition and structure when compared to controls and samples collected at recovery. Corynebacterium was negatively associated with ILI and its abundance increased after recovery. Potential pathobionts such as Haemophilus, Porphyromonas and Gemella had higher abundances during acute-ILI. Stability and changes in the NP microbial community showed individual dynamics. Key core genera, Corynebacterium, Moraxella and Dolosigranulum exhibited higher inter-individual variability in acute-ILI, but showed comparable variability to controls after recovery. Participants in the ILI group with higher core microbiota abundances at the acute phase showed higher microbiota stability after recovery. Our findings demonstrate that acute-ILI is associated with alterations in the phylogenetic structure of the NP microbiota in older adults. The variation in the core microbiota suggests imbalances in the ecosystem, which could potentially play a role in the susceptibility and recovery of the NP microbiota after an ILI event. Similar content being viewed by others Microbiome disturbance and resilience dynamics of the upper respiratory tract during influenza A virus infection Article Open access 21 May 2020 Temporal association between human upper respiratory and gut bacterial microbiomes during the course of COVID-19 in adults Article Open access 18 February 2021 The upper respiratory tract microbiome of indigenous Orang Asli in north-eastern Peninsular Malaysia Article Open access 05 January 2021 IntroductionRespiratory viral infections are a major cause for public health concern, especially due to their mode of transmission and high risk of morbidity and mortality in at risk populations such as older adults1. While vaccinations have the potential to prevent infections, their efficacy can vary based on several factors, such as ageing and the subsequent deterioration of the immune system2,3,4,5,6. Influenza-like illness (ILI) refers to a defined set of symptoms associated to the disease caused by respiratory bacterial or viral pathogens, including but not exclusively by influenza virus7. It is crucial to understand the factors that may play either a protective or pathogenic role in this respiratory disease, such as that of the commensal respiratory microbiome.The respiratory tract harbors between 102 and 106 bacteria depending on the site, with the nasopharynx (NP) consisting of ~ 103 of bacteria8. The upper respiratory tract microbiota of older adults differs from that of middle-aged healthy adults9. These differences have been associated with, among others traits of ageing, immune-senescence, i.e., a dysregulation of the immune system occurring with age suggesting a potential role of the microbiota through interaction with the local immune response9,10,11,12. Commensal NP microbiota, can play an important role in inhibiting colonization and expansion of invading pathogens by exhibiting colonization resistance similar to what occurs in other host-associated niches13. E.g. for bacterial infections, colonization of Staphylococcus lugdunensis (a lugdunin producing bacterium) was shown to reduce Staphylococcus aureus carriage and could play a role in preventing staphylococcal infections14. Studies investigating the upper respiratory tract microbiota during influenza virus infection have identified differences between infected and non-infected individuals15,16. However, to our knowledge, information on changes in the NP microbiota during the onset of ILI and its dynamics during recovery after an ILI event in the ageing population remains under explored. A better understanding of microbiota dynamics may provide clues for potential microbial markers of recovery from ILI and susceptibility to secondary bacterial infections such as pneumonia, which is of special relevance in the ageing population.We investigated the NP microbiota in older adults reporting an ILI event in comparison to NP microbiota in participants not reporting an ILI event throughout the 2014–2015 influenza season, considered as controls6. We used 16S rRNA gene sequencing to assess the composition of the NP microbiota in a subset of participants (n = 397) from the ILI cohort6. Controls were sampled throughout the season equally distributed over the different age groups at two timepoints, 14 days apart. Participants reporting an ILI event were sampled three times: at onset, at 14 days and at 7–9 weeks, considered as the recovery sampling phase. We observed differences in NP microbiota community composition between the ILI and control groups, indicating changes associated with acute infection. In longitudinal samples from ILI participants, the NP microbiota during recovery differed markedly from that observed during the acute phase. Our study highlights the need for further mechanistic and longitudinal studies to understand the role of the NP microbiota and its link with susceptibility as well as recovery from ILI in the ageing population.Material and methodsStudy design and participantsThe participants (n = 397) in this study were part of the prospective surveillance cohort of individuals with influenza-like illness (ILI) which was previously described6,17. For this study, we included all individuals that had nasopharyngeal swabs available and reported ILI symptoms once during the 2014–2015 season as well as a control group consisting of participants with no ILI reported in the same season (see Supplementary Fig. 1). Detailed information of participants in this study is provided in Table 1. The differences in sex, age and body-mass index were tested using Fisher test, t-test, sum statistic (without blocking by stratum i.e., age and sex). For characteristics such as medications, comorbidities, presence of pathogens in the cohort we used Cochran-Mantel–Haenszel test with blocking per strata, where stratum is defined as the interaction of sex and age groups (5-year range between 60 and 90 years). Ethical clearance was obtained from the regional Medical Ethical Committee Noord Holland and written informed consent was provided by the participants. All methods including sample collection, data acquisition and analysis were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. This study is registered with the Netherlands Trial Registry, number NL4666.Table 1 Baseline information from participants in this study.Full size tableSample collectionNasopharyngeal (NP) swabs were collected between Oct 1, 2014, and June 15, 2015, during the 2014–15 influenza season from participants registering an ILI event within 72 h of reporting symptoms (acute-ILI; visit-1), after 14 days (ILI-14 days; visit-2) and 7–9 weeks after the ILI event (recovery sample; visit-3). The Dutch Pel criteria was used to determine Influenza-like Illness, where having a fever (≥ 37·8 °C) with at least one other symptom such as headache, myalgia, sore throat, coughing, rhinitis, or chest pain was used to classify individuals into the ILI group6. Causative agents were identified using NP and oropharyngeal (OP) swabs by Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) or classical culture approaches (Supplementary Table 1). NP swabs were further used for microbiota profiling. Participants without any reported ILI event were used as controls and randomly sampled throughout the season (visit-1) and 14 days after their first visit (visit-2).DNA extraction and sequencingThe DNA extraction protocol for low-biomass samples that was previously demonstrated to be robust was used to extract DNA from NP swabs with slight modifications18. We used the modified Agowa Mag DNA extraction kit (LGC genomics, Berlin, Germany). For each batch of DNA extraction, the ZymoBIOMICS Microbial Community Standard (Zymo catalog number: D6300) was 1000 × diluted and 200 µl of this diluted Zymo mock was included as positive control together with two negative controls containing only the lysis buffer. The NP FLOQSwabs® in Copan’s Liquid Amies Elution were thawed on ice and 200 µl vortexed for 10 s. For each sample, 600 µl of lysis buffer containing zirconium beads (diameter 0.1 mm, Biospec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA) and 550 µl phenol (VWR International, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) were added. The bead-beating step was done twice for 2 min at 3500 oscillations/minute by bead beating (Mini-Beadbeater-24, Biospec Products). Between each bead-beating step, the tubes were transferred on ice for 2 min. The tubes were then centrifuged for 10 min at 4500 × g and the clear aqueous phase was pipetted and transferred to a new 2 ml Eppendorf tube that consisted of 1.3 ml binding buffer and 10 µl magnetic beads. The 2 ml Eppendorf tube was kept for shaking for 30 min at 900 RPM and then placed on a magnetic separation rack. The clear liquid was discarded and the magnetic beads were washed and dried for 15 min at 55 °C. The DNA was eluted in 35 µl elution buffer.The rRNA V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified by dual-index PCR using the 515F (5′-GTG CCA GCM GCC GCG GTA A-3′) and 806R (5′-GGA CTA CHV GGG TWT CTA AT-3′) primers including the Illumina adapters and sample specific barcodes19,20. For PCR, we included additional DNA mocks, ATCC-MSA-2004 and an in-house DNA mock consisting of Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes (group B), Klebsiella oxytoca, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Hemolytic Streptococcus Group A, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus aureus and Moraxella catarrhalis pooled in equal ratios based on 16S rRNA gene qPCR data. Overall, DNA blanks, non-template controls (NTC), ZymoBIOMICS Microbial Community Standard (whole cell) and gDNA mocks were included in each PCR plate and sequenced alongside the samples sequenced (2 × 250 bp) with an Illumina MiSeq instrument (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, US) using MiSeq v2 (500 cycles) reagent kit following manufacturer’s recommendations.Identification of amplicon sequence variants (ASVs)All the bioinformatic analysis were done in R (v3.6.0) and RStudio (v1.1.383), unless otherwise stated21,22. For each sequencing run, raw reads were filtered, trimmed and denoised into amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) using the dada2 R package (v1.14.1)23 using default parameters, except for filterAndTrim for which we used following parameters (truncLen = c(200,150), trimLeft = c(20,22)). The creation of the ASV table was followed by removal of chimera and ASV tables were merged from individual sequencing runs.The ASVs were assigned taxonomy using the RDP classifier and SILVA database v138 with assignTaxonomy (key parameters: minBoot = 80 and tryRC = TRUE). Species level assignments were done using the addSpecies function24,25. The resulting ASV table and taxonomic table were combined with sample data into a phyloseq (v1.30) object for downstream analysis26.Removal of potential contaminant ASVsIn order to identify and deal with contamination from exogenous sources such as reagents, of special relevance in our low biomass samples, we included several positive and negative technical controls. The technical controls were as follows: (1) DNA extraction controls (n = 32). (2) PCR non-template controls (n = 13) and three different mock communities. Genomic DNA mixtures included an ATCC mock community (n = 15), and in-house mock community (n = 10) and the ZymoBiomics mock community (n = 53) including genomic DNA as well as whole-cell mixtures. As a first step to remove contaminant ASVs we used the prevalence methods (threshold 0.5) from the decontam R package function isNotContaminant()27. In contrast to the widely used, isContaminant approach, the isNotContaminant is stricter and focuses on identifying taxa that are not likely to be contaminants27. ASVs over-abundant in negative controls compared to true samples, and those classified as Cyanobacteria, Chloroflexi and Mitochondria were removed. Next, a co-abundance approach was used, by applying a correlation-based clustering approach for the identified blank-sample ASVs in all the data (technical controls plus NP samples). Optimal number of clusters of co-occurring taxa were identified using gap statistic with 500 permutations with fviz_nbclust() function in factoextra R package (v1.0.7) using the hcut method and visualized using aheatmap() function in the NMF R package (v0.22.0)28,29. To check for consistency in the 9 clusters that were identified, we split the data into training and test data by randomly subsampling 500 samples and testing clustering with mantel test function in vegan R package (v2.5.6)30.Finally, to reduce extremely rare ASVs, we aggregated data at the phylum level and excluded the following phyla based on low abundance (< 0.02) and prevalence (< 25%) in all samples combined: Synergistota, Planctomycetota, Acidobacteriota, Spirochaetota, Bdellovibrionota, Verrucomicrobiota, Gemmatimonadota, Desulfobacterota, Myxococcota Crenarchaeota, Abditibacteriota, Euryarchaeota, Halobacterota, Armatimonadota, Fibrobacterota, Nitrospirota, Dependentiae. The Bacterial Diversity Metadatabase (BacDive; https://bacdive.dsmz.de/advsearch) was used to search for genus and species epithet for the most dominant/prevalent ASVs from Fusobacteriota and Campilobacterota to confirm the source of isolation of nearest cultured representative31. Despite being prevalent (63%) and constituting 0.15% of the reads, we removed (as a rational choice) phylum Deinococcota, because ASVs from this phylum belonged to the Deinococcus-Thermus group, identified as reagent contaminants in several studies32,33,34,35.Microbial community analysisPhylogenetic diversity, Simpson’s evenness and beta-diversity (Generalized UniFrac and unweighted Unifrac) analyses were performed on rarefied data subsampled at 1932 reads/sample (86.5% of ASVs were retained), using R packages picante (v1.8.1), microbiome (v2.1.1) and MiSPU (v1.0)36,37,38,39,40. Association between beta-diversity and health status was assessed using a non-parametric Analysis of similarities (ANOSIM, vegan R package) with 999 permutations. Within group differences in beta-diversity (divergence) and intra-individual stability (1-GUniFrac) in microbiota was calculated based on the GUniFrac with equal weights to low and high abundant ASVs (alpha = 0.5). Proportional variability (PV) in core genus relative abundances was calculated as described previously41,42. To avoid instances where values are divided by zero, due to either detection limit or true absence of taxa in samples, we add a small constant value (1% of mean relative abundance) to relative abundances of each taxon before calculating PV. For PV calculation, in the control group we selected participants with samples for both visits, and in the ILI group only participants with all three visits were included. To avoid biases resulting from differences in number of samples between groups, we sampled 80% of the samples in each group with 999 bootstrap iterations. Taxonomic compositions were visualized using microbiomeutilities (v1.00.12), pheatmap (v1.0.12) and ggplot2 (v3.3.3) R packages43,44. Between group alpha diversity, divergence and intra-individual stability were compared using the Wilcoxon tests within the stat_compare_means function in the R package ggpubr (v0.2.5)45.Associations with microbiotaAssociations between microbiota composition and variables such as ILI status, pathogen type (bacterial or viral), medications including antibiotics and co-morbidities were carried out using the procedure described in detail previously17. Briefly, ASVs were agglomerated to genus level and those genera with minimum 0.001 relative abundance in 10% of the samples were selected for testing associations mentioned above. We used sum-statistic for testing associations between genera relative abundances and variable of interests46. The R package coin (v1.3-1) was used for statistical testing47. To reduce the effect of confounding variables such as participant age and sex, these were stratified as blocks. The Benjamin-Hochberg procedure was applied for multiple testing (false discovery rate (FDR) < 20%) to each sub-study48. The age groups were defined as 5‐year range, covering ages from 60 to 90 years.Pairwise comparison of microbiota stability (1-GUniFrac) between visits was done using Wilcoxon rank-sum test corrected for multiple testing. Relationship of stability (1-GUniFrac) and phylogenetic diversity and sum of relative abundances of core microbiota were tested using Spearman’s correlation.ResultsCohort descriptionAn overview of the study design and analysis is given in Supplementary Fig. 1. 397 participants, with a mean chronological age of 70.3 (± 6.2) years were selected for this study based on availability of nasopharyngeal swabs. Of these, 157 participants (approx. 40%) did not report an ILI-event throughout the 2014–2015 influenza season, and were therefore used as controls, and 240 reported an ILI event, and were considered as the ILI group. An overview of participant information is provided in Table 1. While the majority of participants in the control (89.2%) and ILI (77.9%) groups had no additional respiratory diseases (such as asthma or COPD) at the time of sampling for this study, these were significantly higher in the ILI group.Participants from the control group had higher rates of influenza vaccination (78.3%) than the ILI group (67.1%). Comorbidities were more frequent in the ILI group, as well as use of antibiotics and analgesics (Table 1). The most common causative agents for ILI were Influenza virus (21.2%), Rhinovirus (17.5%), Haemophilus (15.4%), and coronavirus (7.9%) (Supplementary Table 1).Microbial community composition in the NP in the ageing populationTo investigate the composition of the NP microbial community of the study participants, we first removed contaminant sequences due to high prevalence of taxa previously reported as reagent contaminants, e.g., Ralstonia, Bradyrhizobium, Mesorhizobium, Comamonadaceae (Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3). After removing these contaminants, the top three most abundant phyla, namely Actinobacteriota, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria, accounted for 97.8% of the total composition in all samples (Supplementary Table 2). The top five genera, Corynebacterium, Moraxella, Dolosigranulum, Staphylococcus and Haemophilus contributed to 83.8% of the total (Supplementary Table 3). ASVs unclassified at the genus level contributed to 3.11% of the total. Based on genus relative abundance across samples, Corynebacterium was dominant in 48.9% of the samples, Moraxella in 20.5%, Staphylococcus in 13.9%, Dolosigranulum in 5.2%, and Haemophilus in 4% of the samples (Supplementary Table 4). In 47% of the samples, a single ASV was contributing to more than 50% of the total abundance. This suggests that the majority of ASVs detected in an individual’s NP microbiota were of low abundance.Effect of ILI on the NP microbiota diversity and structureTo assess differences in microbial diversity and community evenness, we compared the NP microbiota between controls and the ILI group throughout the different phases of the ILI. Comparison of phylogenetic diversity (Faith’s Phylogenetic diversity, PD) revealed higher diversity in samples 14 days after ILI (mean ± sd; 13.5 ± 5.8) when compared to controls (12.0 ± 5.6), acute-ILI (12.5 ± 6.0) and samples after recovery (12.5 ± 5.9) (Fig. 1A). We observed that the NP microbiota exhibited low evenness (Simpson’s evenness, Fig. 1A), supporting our previous observation of single ASVs dominance in the NP microbiota, with higher levels observed in controls (0.11 ± 0.08) when compared to samples from 14-day after ILI (0.08 ± 0.05). However, significance of these differences disappeared after correcting for multiple testing.Figure 1Comparison of diversity between groups. (A) Alpha diversity measures, phylogenetic diversity and evenness comparisons between groups. (B) Inter-individual variation in community composition based on generalized UniFrac distances between samples within a group. Statistical comparisons are based on Wilcoxon rank-sum test, corrected for multiple comparisons using Benjamini–Hochberg Procedure. (C) Comparison of beta-diversity between groups based on Unweighted, Generalized and Weighted UniFrac distances, with centroids and bars representing standard error across the two axis.Full size imageWithin-group variation in the overall microbiota community composition and structure was different between controls and the ILI group at all time-points (Fig. 1B). This variation was higher in samples from the acute-ILI and at 14 days after when compared to controls and samples from the recovery phase. Due to the observed unevenness in the NP microbiota (Fig. 1A), we used three distance measures, i.e. unweighted, generalized and weighted UniFrac, to account for mono-dominance and rarity in NP microbiota. The microbiota composition and structure were significantly different between the control and ILI groups (Fig. 1C, Unweighted UniFrac, ANOSIM R = 0.007, Panosim = 0.02; GUniFrac, ANOSIM R = 0.08, Panosim = 0.014; Weighted UniFrac, ANOSIM R = 0.008, Panosim = 0.016), but in-line with the observed high inter-individual variation within the groups, the low values of R statistic (< 0.1) indicate that this was a small effect. Table 2 Pairwise comparisons of community dissimilarity between the groups.Full size tableThe within-group and overall high inter-individual variation observed in the beta diversity analysis (Fig. 1B, C) led us to do pairwise comparison of community dissimilarity between the control and ILI groups, as a means to control for high variability across all samples, and to potentially identify specific differences between groups. The microbiota of samples from the ILI group at the acute phase were significantly dissimilar to controls and recovery samples (Table 2). In addition, when compared to controls and recovery samples, samples from acute-ILI and ILI-14 days had significantly higher inter-individual variation in the NP microbiota (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p.adj < 0.001, Fig. 1B). In general, in pairwise comparisons between groups, such as the control and ILI samples at the acute phase, the values of R statistic were higher than those obtained from comparisons within the ILI group, such as between recovery and acute samples (weighted Unifrac and GUnifrac). Overall, using different methods (see Table 2) these data suggest that the changes in NP microbiota during acute-ILI can be highly variable between individuals, and potentially indicative of an unstable environment, which is greatly reduced after recovery.NP microbiota associations with ILI statusTo identify compositional differences in microbial community members, we compared their relative abundances between the control and ILI groups. We observed high inter-individual variation in relative abundances of the dominant phyla, as seen in the distribution pattern for each of the groups (Fig. 2A). At the phylum level, when compared to the control group, the microbiota of acute-ILI and 14-day after ILI had lower abundance of Actinobacteriota (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p.adj < 0.05, Fig. 2A). Proteobacteria were higher in samples from acute-ILI and ILI-14 day compared to controls, while samples from the recovery phase showed no significant differences when compared to controls.Figure 2Comparison of phylum level abundances and Corynebacterium/Moraxella ratio. (A) Relative abundances of the top four phyla were compared between groups using Wilcoxon rank-sum test, corrected for multiple comparisons using Benjamini–Hochberg Procedure. (B) Corynebacterium/Moraxella relative abundance ratio was compared between groups using Wilcoxon rank-sum test, corrected for multiple comparisons using Benjamini–Hochberg Procedure.Full size imageOverall, the two most dominant genera, Corynebacterium and Moraxella showed a negative correlation (Spearman’s rho = − 0.3728436, P ≤ 2.2e−16) potentially indicative of an anti-occurrence of these groups. Comparison of the Corynebacterium/Moraxella ratio suggested a significantly higher ratio in the control group when compared to acute-ILI and ILI-14 days but not with the ILI-recovery group (Fig. 2B).We then tested for associations between the NP microbiota with having an ILI. Due to the intrinsic differences in our study groups, all associations were corrected for age and sex as potential confounders. Four genera were differentially abundant between the control samples and samples from acute-ILI. Among these, Corynebacterium showed a negative association, while Haemophilus, Gemella and Porphyromonas showed a positive association with acute-ILI (Fig. 3A, C). Corynebacterium, Haemophilus, and Gemella were not associated with other factors known to affect the upper respiratory tract microbiota, such as medication, smoking or other co-morbidities (including respiratory or cardiac disease(s), diabetes, kidney transplant, autoimmune diseases, asplenia, leukemia, lymphatic cancer and/or malignancies). However, Porphyromonas, positively associated with ILI, was negatively associated with use of alpha- & beta-blockers, other co-morbidities and respiratory diseases. Due to its association with medication and co-morbidities, its higher abundance in acute-ILI could not be directly associated with the acute-ILI event.Figure 3Genera associated with ILI status, medications and demographics. (A) Genus-level associations with an FDR < 0.05. (B) A heatmap showing prevalence of each of the genera in acute-ILI and control groups. (C) Comparison of relative abundances of four genera associated with ILI status.Full size imageHaemophilus colonization (infection assessed by positive culture) was positively associated with Haemophilus 16S rRNA gene relative abundances at the acute-ILI phase, with colonized individuals showing high abundance even at the 14-day sample, and abundances after recovery were largely reduced (Supplementary Fig. 6).NP microbiota associations with health-related parameters independent of ILIOur study population consists of older adults who are diagnosed with a variety of disease/disorders and are using medications that could potentially act as confounders. Therefore, we investigated potential associations with NP microbiota and other health related parameters and medications. Staphylococcus abundances were negatively associated with Angiotensin receptor blocker, while Anaerococcus and Prevotellaceae were negatively associated with autoimmune disease. Several genera found negatively associated with statins had low prevalence in both ILI (acute phase) and control groups (Fig. 3B). Smoking in the last 3 months was positively associated with relative abundances of Streptococcus, Vellionella, Rothia, Prevotella and Leptotrichia, however, the latter had low prevalence in both groups. These data suggest the need for investigating potential interactions between medications and NP microbiota, of especial interest in at-risk populations such as older adults, with high prevalence of co-morbidities and polypharmacy.Dynamics of the NP core microbiota during ILIIn host-associated microbial communities, members of the core microbiota can be viewed as stably-associated with the host. Since we observed high within-group variability in our study groups, we focused our analysis on the dynamics of the core-microbiota. We hypothesized that, in absence of ILI, the members of the core microbiota may exhibit lower inter-individual variability compared to acute-ILI, and can serve as a marker for recovery from the disease. For this analysis, we used paired samples of participants from the control (two visits, n = 78) and ILI group (3 visits, n = 81). This allowed us to investigate variability in core microbiota abundances between visits in each of the study groups. We identified 14 genera present in 75% of samples with at least 0.00001% relative abundance (Fig. 4A). Within the core genera members such as Anaerococcus, Peptoniphilus, Corynebacterium, Rothia and Prevotella, variation in abundances at the ASV level was observed between the ILI (acute phase) and control groups (Supplementary Fig. 7). To test whether core genera showed variation in their abundance depending on the disease status, we calculated the variation in relative abundance of each core genera within a group using proportional variability (PV). Comparison of PV of core genera between groups revealed higher variation in abundances of the more dominant and prevalent genera, i.e., Corynebacterium, Dolosigranulum, Haemophilus, Moraxella, and Rothia, during of the acute phase of the ILI event (Fig. 4B).Figure 4Core genera and their variation in different groups. (A) Core genera identified in nasopharynx. (B) Distribution of proportional variability values for each core genera within each group based on 999 bootstrap iterations.Full size imageNotably, the PV values for Corynebacterium and Haemophilus genera within the ILI samples at the recovery phase were more similar to the control group. On the contrary, Staphylococcus and Streptococcus had lower variability in ILI groups when compared to controls. These data suggest that the onset of ILI is characterized by variation in abundances of the dominant core genera, which is largely restored after recovery from the disease.Stability of the NP microbiota with and without ILILongitudinal stability of the microbiota is associated with resistance to pathogens and resilience to perturbations and is often suggested to have a positive association with diversity49. We therefore investigated the relationship between stability of the NP microbiota with disease status and phylogenetic diversity. To this end, we calculated stability, defined as 1- GUniFrac dissimilarity, between paired samples in the absence of ILI (n = 78) and during an ILI (n = 81). No significant difference in stability was observed between visits for the control and ILI groups (Fig. 5A). However, in both groups there was a large inter-individual variability in microbiota stability between visits (Fig. 5A, B). Notably, in the control group there was a negative correlation between phylogenetic diversity (PD) on the first visit and microbiota stability (Fig. 5C), also observed between samples from acute-ILI (v1) compared with 14 day and recovery visit microbiota.Figure 5Associations of stability and diversity. (A) Comparison of microbiota stability between visits. Here for control group, visits are randomly carried out throughout the influenza season, with 14 days intervals between first (v1) and second (V2) visit. For the ILI group, v1 is the acute-phase of ILI, v2 is 14 days later and v3 is visit between 7 and 9 weeks after v1. (B) Depicts individuals categorized into three groups based on the stability of microbiota between visits. Each line connects observations for an individual to demonstrate differences between visits. (C) Spearman’s correlation between stability (1-GUniFrac) and Phylogenetic diversity. (D) Spearman’s correlation between stability (1-GUniFrac) and relative abundance of core microbiota.Full size imageAnalysis of proportional variability indicated that the acute-ILI was associated with higher variability in relative abundances of key core microbiota members compared to controls. We further investigated whether the observed microbiota stability was associated with the relative contribution of core members (core abundance) to the total community abundance. We observed that higher core abundance was associated with higher stability between visits in the control group, as well as between acute-ILI (visit-1) with 14 days (visit-2) and with recovery phase (visit-3) respectively (Fig. 5D). However, core abundances did not correlate with stability between 14 days (visit-2) and recovery stage (visit-3), indicative of a more unstable environment in the early phase of recovery from the disease.DiscussionHere we studied the NP microbiota in older adults during an influenza-like illness event. We evaluated the differences in the NP microbiota in those not reporting an ILI event throughout the 2014–2015 influenza season with those reporting an ILI event, sampled during the acute phase of ILI (< 72 h after report), 14 days after and 7–9 weeks after the onset of ILI, considered as the recovery phase. Acute ILI was associated with differences in microbiota community and structure when compared to controls and recovery samples. The NP microbiota exhibited high inter-individual differences in dynamics from onset to recovery from ILI. Dominant core genera showed higher variability in acute-ILI and 14 days after ILI when compared to controls, indicative of an unstable microbiota environment in the early days of reporting an ILI event.Micro-niches within the upper-respiratory tract are occupied by distinct microbial communities and diverse bacteria can co-exists in the NP8,9. Anatomically, the NP is located above the oral cavity and can be blocked during respiratory infections due to nasal congestion. Moreover, local changes in inflammatory responses may influence the habitability of NP by microbes. Thus, changes in these micro-niches can occur during respiratory infections thereby potentially impacting the commensal microbiota through proinflammatory responses or shortage of nutrients50,51. Acute-ILI was characterized by higher abundances of Proteobacteria and lower abundances of Actinobacteriota and Firmicutes. Similar observations have been previously reported in individuals with upper respiratory tract viral infections15. Notably, Actinobacteriota and Firmicutes had higher abundances after recovery from ILI, further suggesting that these phyla are negatively associated with ILI at the acute phase and are largely restored after disease52. At the genus level, the Haemophilus, Gemella and Porphyromonas genera were positively associated with acute-ILI. Haemophilus was more abundant in infected individuals compared to non-infected individuals within the ILI group at the acute phase. Haemophilus was also more abundant in samples collected 14 days after the acute-ILI and only reduced after recovery from the ILI, likely suggesting a reduction of the pathogenic variant at a later phase of recovery from ILI. Previously, Haemophilus influenzae was detected in samples collected at the recovery phase as well as in control samples in this cohort6. Species or strain typing for H. influenzae or H. haemolyticus is challenging using short-amplicon sequencing approaches as used in this study, however, the overall positive association confirms the biological signal captured in our analysis. The genus Gemella is widely considered as a commensal of the respiratory niche, however, there is evidence for it being a potential opportunistic pathogen in older adults53. Similarly the genus Porphyromonas, more abundant in acute-ILI compared to controls, has been associated with pro-inflammatory responses54,55. Notably, the gut microbiota of individuals with acute-ILI was previously reported to harbor a pro-inflammatory profile17. Overall, based on our observations we hypothesize that ILI might promote expansion of pro-inflammatory bacteria, as previously shown for the gut microbiota, also locally within the respiratory tract. In addition, previous studies have observed an association between the nasal microbiota and inflammatory responses during infections9,56. Therefore, future studies should investigate the dynamic interactions between immune system and the microbiome associated with ILI.Corynebacterium, that belongs to the Actinobacteriota phylum, was the only genera that had a negative association with acute-ILI. Corynebacterium is proposed as one of the keystone species in the upper respiratory tract, mainly due to its positive association with health8,57. Majority of the previous studies of the NP microbiota included children and adults (< 65 years age), but a recent study during influenza virus infection across age-groups (including older adults, n = 66) observed a lower prevalence of Corynebacterium16. Our observation of lower abundances of Corynebacterium during ILI at the acute phase, and its increase after recovery from the disease in participants > 60 years of age, indicates a potential life-long key role for Corynebacterium and related species with health in the upper respiratory tract. Future studies investigating the mechanistic role of Corynebacterium in the upper respiratory tract are need to better understand the impact of this bacterium in human health.Our study included a population of older adults (> 60 years of age) with high prevalence of polypharmacy and co-morbidities. While interactions between the nasopharyngeal microbiota and different medications is limited, recent studies on the impact of the gut microbiome on drug metabolism have highlighted its importance for human health58. Because of the high prevalence in polypharmacy and comorbidities in our cohort, we performed all association studies with these variables, and studied how these results would relate to those found for the ILI event. We did not observe any genera associated with antibiotics usage, which was significantly higher in ILI group. However, in this study we did not consider timing of antibiotic usage (i.e. either taken before or due to the ILI), which can have a potential impact on the recovery dynamics of the NP microbiota and therefore needs further investigation. Notably, statins usage (which was significantly higher in ILI group, Table 1), was negatively associated with four genera, none of which showed associations with the ILI after correcting for multiple testing (Fig. 3A). Statins have anti-inflammatory properties and are proposed to have a potential protective role on seasonal influenza patients59. We observed core genera such as Dolosigranulum negatively associated with a number of medications. However, the biological significance of these associations will require more mechanistic studies to better understand the NP microbiome-drug interactions, of especial relevance in the context of the aging population.A previous study suggested that core upper respiratory tract microbiota is perturbed during influenza A virus infection15. The core microbiota represents taxa that are highly prevalent, likely due to their adaptation to a particular ecosystem, and could play a vital role in maintaining stability and therefore health60,61. Hence, any variation in the core microbiota could suggest imbalances in the ecosystem, leading to susceptibility for disease or simply serving as a biomarker of disease. Therefore, we compared the variability in the core microbiota in our cohort. To this end, we quantified the inter-group variability in core microbiota using a non-parametric measure, Proportional Variability (PV)41,42. PV can be a better estimate of variability for quantities undergoing very different dynamics, in our study, relative abundances of core bacterial taxa. Although it is difficult to estimate a range of abundance values for bacteria that can be considered as “healthy”, variability within groups can serve as markers for perturbation, as suggested in the analogy with Anna Karenina principle62. We observed higher variability within the ILI group at the early phases (acute and 14 days) for dominant and prevalent taxa such as Corynebacterium, Moraxella and Dolosigranulum, which have been previously associated with a “healthy” NP microbiota8. Lower variability of core genera such as Streptococcus and Staphylococcus was observed in the ILI group compared to the control group. This indicates that some core bacteria are strongly or similarly selected during ILI in the majority (if not all) of the diseased participants, thus showing lower variability within the diseased group. In addition, the differences in abundances we observed at ASV level likely indicate the importance of different clades of dominant groups e.g. Moraxella and Corynebacterium that may be associated with health or disease. Furthermore, pathogenic strains within Streptococcus and Staphylococcus genera can cause complications and exacerbate respiratory infection63. There is a need for investigating strain-level variation between pathogenic (non-core) strains and core strains of Streptococcus and Staphylococcus, which could illuminate the potential impact of strain variation on host-susceptibility to infection.The longitudinal analysis of beta-diversity indicated that the stability (1- GUniFrac) of the overall microbial community was variable between visits, independently of the disease status. A negative association between phylogenetic diversity, a measure of biodiversity, and stability in the absence of ILI suggests that individuals with higher phylogenetic diversity exhibit a more variable microbiota composition. This is contrary to the widely reported diversity -stability relationship and requires further investigation in the context of upper respiratory microbiota and its importance in host-health. The abundance of core microbiota was associated with higher stability in controls and also between acute-ILI and other visits. This suggests that the core microbiota at the acute phase of ILI potentially plays a critical role in stability and therefore recovery of the NP microbiota, especially 7–9 weeks after the onset of ILI.ConclusionInvestigation of the NP microbiota in the older adult population suggests that onset of ILI is accompanied by changes in the microbiota. Potential pro-inflammatory bacteria increase in abundances during acute-ILI. Some strains belonging to genera such as Haemophilus, Streptococcus and Staphylococcus consists of strains that are known causative agents of secondary infections related to complications of ILI in the aging population64. Increased abundances of Gemella and Prophyromonas in acute-ILI suggests that there is a need to investigate the role of these bacteria during ILI. Variability in core microbiota can be viewed as a potential biomarker of ILI, indicating that higher core microbiota abundance during onset of ILI is associated with higher resilience to changes during recovery stage. Future studies should focus on the role of core NP microbiota in determining the susceptibility to ILI and its influence on recovery. For this, a trans-domain integrated approach will be crucial to better understand the three-way interaction between core microbiota-host immune system-viral infection outcome.Ethics declarations and consent to participateEthical clearance was obtained from the regional Medical Ethical Committee Noord Holland and written informed consent was provided by the participants. This study is registered with the Netherlands Trial Registry, number NL4666. Data availability Raw sequencing data analyzed in this study are deposited at European Nucleotide Archive database under the study accession number PRJEB46215. The R code and scripts used to analyze the data are available from the GitHub repository https://github.com/RIVM-IIV-Microbiome/ILI-Respiratory-Microbiota-2021. Information pertaining to participant data is available following institutional regulations. ReferencesWood-Charlson, E. M. et al. The national microbiome data collaborative: Enabling microbiome science. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 18, 313–314. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-020-0377-0 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Darvishian, M., Bijlsma, M. J., Hak, E. & van den Heuvel, E. R. Effectiveness of seasonal influenza vaccine in community-dwelling elderly people: A meta-analysis of test-negative design case-control studies. Lancet. Infect. Dis. 14, 1228–1239 (2014).PubMed Google Scholar Nichol, K. L., Heilly, S. J., Greenberg, M. E. & Ehlinger, E. Burden of influenza-like illness and effectiveness of influenza vaccination among working adults aged 50–64 years. Clin. Infect. Dis. 48, 292–298 (2009).PubMed Google Scholar Jefferson, T. et al. Efficacy and effectiveness of influenza vaccines in elderly people: A systematic review. The Lancet 366, 1165–1174 (2005).CAS Google Scholar Monto, A. S., Hornbuckle, K. & Ohmit, S. E. Influenza vaccine effectiveness among elderly nursing home residents: A cohort study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 154, 155–160 (2001).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Van Beek, J. et al. Influenza-like illness incidence is not reduced by influenza vaccination in a cohort of older adults, despite effectively reducing laboratory-confirmed influenza virus infections. J. Infect. Dis. 216, 415–424 (2017).PubMed Google Scholar Fitzner, J. et al. Revision of clinical case definitions: Influenza-like illness and severe acute respiratory infection. Bull. World Health Organ. 96, 122 (2018).PubMed Google Scholar Man, W. H., de Steenhuijsen Piters, W. A. & Bogaert, D. The microbiota of the respiratory tract. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15, 259–270 (2017).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kumpitsch, C., Koskinen, K., Schöpf, V. & Moissl-Eichinger, C. The microbiome of the upper respiratory tract in health and disease. BMC Biol. 17, 87 (2019).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar deSteenhuijsenPiters, W. A. et al. Dysbiosis of upper respiratory tract microbiota in elderly pneumonia patients. ISME J. 10, 97–108 (2016).CAS Google Scholar Whelan, F. J. et al. The loss of topography in the microbial communities of the upper respiratory tract in the elderly. Ann. Am. Thorac. Soc. 11, 513–521 (2014).PubMed Google Scholar Franceschi, C. et al. Inflamm-aging: An evolutionary perspective on immunosenescence. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 908, 244–254 (2000).ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Brugger, S. D., Bomar, L. & Lemon, K. P. Commensal–pathogen interactions along the human nasal passages. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005633 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zipperer, A. et al. Human commensals producing a novel antibiotic impair pathogen colonization. Nature 535, 511–516 (2016).ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kaul, D. et al. Microbiome disturbance and resilience dynamics of the upper respiratory tract during influenza A virus infection. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–12 (2020).MathSciNet Google Scholar Ding, T. et al. Microbial composition of the human nasopharynx varies according to influenza virus type and vaccination status. MBio 10, e01296-e11219 (2019).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fuentes, S. et al. Associations of faecal microbiota with influenza-like illness in participants aged 60 years or older: An observational study. Lancet Healthy Longevity 2, e13–e23 (2021). Google Scholar Biesbroek, G. et al. Deep sequencing analyses of low density microbial communities: Working at the boundary of accurate microbiota detection. PLoS ONE 7, e32942 (2012).ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bosch, A. A. et al. Development of upper respiratory tract microbiota in infancy is affected by mode of delivery. EBioMedicine 9, 336–345 (2016).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Caporaso, J. G. et al. Global patterns of 16S rRNA diversity at a depth of millions of sequences per sample. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 4516–4522 (2011).ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Racine, J. S. (JSTOR, 2012).Team, R. C. R: A language and environment for statistical computing (2013).Callahan, B. J. et al. DADA2: High-resolution sample inference from Illumina amplicon data. Nat. Methods 13, 581–583 (2016).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wang, Q., Garrity, G. M., Tiedje, J. M. & Cole, J. R. Naive Bayesian classifier for rapid assignment of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 5261–5267 (2007).ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Quast, C. et al. The SILVA ribosomal RNA gene database project: Improved data processing and web-based tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D590–D596 (2012).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McMurdie, P. J. & Holmes, S. phyloseq: An R package for reproducible interactive analysis and graphics of microbiome census data. PLoS ONE 8, e61217 (2013).ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Davis, N. M., Proctor, D. M., Holmes, S. P., Relman, D. A. & Callahan, B. J. Simple statistical identification and removal of contaminant sequences in marker-gene and metagenomics data. Microbiome 6, 1–14 (2018). Google Scholar Kassambara, A. & Mundt, F. Package ‘factoextra’. In Extract and Visualize the Results of Multivariate Data Analyses 76 (2017).Gaujoux, R. & Seoighe, C. A flexible R package for nonnegative matrix factorization. BMC Bioinform. 11, 1–9 (2010). Google Scholar Dixon, P. VEGAN, a package of R functions for community ecology. J. Veg. Sci. 14, 927–930 (2003). Google Scholar Reimer, L. C. et al. Bac Dive in 2019: Bacterial phenotypic data for high-throughput biodiversity analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D631–D636 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Eisenhofer, R. et al. Contamination in low microbial biomass microbiome studies: Issues and recommendations. Trends Microbiol. 27, 105–117 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Karstens, L. et al. Controlling for contaminants in low-biomass 16S rRNA gene sequencing experiments. MSystems 4, e00290 (2019).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Salter, S. J. et al. Reagent and laboratory contamination can critically impact sequence-based microbiome analyses. BMC Biol. 12, 87 (2014).PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stinson, L. F., Keelan, J. A. & Payne, M. S. Identification and removal of contaminating microbial DNA from PCR reagents: impact on low-biomass microbiome analyses. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 68, 2–8 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kembel, S. W. et al. Picante: R tools for integrating phylogenies and ecology. Bioinformatics 26, 1463–1464 (2010).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lahti, L. & Shetty, S. (2018).Wu, C., Chen, J., Kim, J. & Pan, W. An adaptive association test for microbiome data. Genome Med. 8, 1–12 (2016). Google Scholar Chen, J. et al. Associating microbiome composition with environmental covariates using generalized UniFrac distances. Bioinformatics 28, 2106–2113 (2012).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lozupone, C., Lladser, M. E., Knights, D., Stombaugh, J. & Knight, R. UniFrac: An effective distance metric for microbial community comparison. ISME J. 5, 169–172 (2011).PubMed Google Scholar Heath, J. P. & Borowski, P. Quantifying proportional variability. PLoS ONE 8, e84074 (2013).ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Heath, P. Quantifying temporal variability in population abundances. Oikos 115, 573–581 (2006). Google Scholar Kolde, R. & Kolde, M. R. Package ‘pheatmap’. R package 1, 790 (2015). Google Scholar Wickham, H. ggplot2. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Comput Stat 3, 180–185 (2011). Google Scholar Kassambara, A. & Kassambara, M. A. (2020).Ferreira, J. A. & Fuentes, S. Some comments on certain statistical aspects of the study of the microbiome. Brief. Bioinform. 21, 1487–1494 (2020).PubMed Google Scholar Zeileis, A., Wiel, M. A., Hornik, K. & Hothorn, T. Implementing a class of permutation tests: the coin package. J. Stat. Softw. 28, 1–23 (2008). Google Scholar Ferreira, J. & Zwinderman, A. On the Benjamini–Hochberg method. Ann. Stat. 34, 1827–1849 (2006).MathSciNet MATH Google Scholar Sommer, F., Anderson, J. M., Bharti, R., Raes, J. & Rosenstiel, P. The resilience of the intestinal microbiota influences health and disease. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15, 630–638 (2017).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Raza, M., Blackwell, C., Elton, R. & Weir, D. Bactericidal activity of a monocytic cell line (THP-1) against common respiratory tract bacterial pathogens is depressed after infection with respiratory syncytial virus. J. Med. Microbiol. 49, 227–233 (2000).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Siegel, S. J., Roche, A. M. & Weiser, J. N. Influenza promotes pneumococcal growth during coinfection by providing host sialylated substrates as a nutrient source. Cell Host Microbe 16, 55–67 (2014).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chaban, B. et al. Characterization of the upper respiratory tract microbiomes of patients with pandemic H1N1 influenza. PLoS ONE 8, e69559 (2013).ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jayananda, S., Gollol-Raju, N. S. & Fadul, N. Gemella species bacteremia and stroke in an elderly patient with respiratory tract infection. Case Rep. Med. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/1098527 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, Y. et al. Porphyromonas gingivalis induced inflammatory responses and promoted apoptosis in lung epithelial cells infected with H1N1 via the Bcl-2/Bax/Caspase-3 signaling pathway. Mol. Med. Rep. 18, 97–104 (2018).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Guilloux, C.-A., Lamoureux, C., Beauruelle, C. & Héry-Arnaud, G. Porphyromonas: A neglected potential key genus in human microbiomes. Anaerobe 68, 102230 (2020).PubMed Google Scholar Lehtinen, M. J. et al. Nasal microbiota clusters associate with inflammatory response, viral load, and symptom severity in experimental rhinovirus challenge. Sci. Rep. 8, 1–12 (2018). Google Scholar Pettigrew, M. M. et al. Upper respiratory tract microbial communities, acute otitis media pathogens, and antibiotic use in healthy and sick children. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78, 6262–6270 (2012).ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Maier, L. et al. Extensive impact of non-antibiotic drugs on human gut bacteria. Nature 555, 623–628 (2018).ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Atamna, A. et al. Statins and outcomes of hospitalized patients with laboratory-confirmed 2017–2018 influenza. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 38, 2341–2348 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Shade, A. & Handelsman, J. Beyond the Venn diagram: The hunt for a core microbiome. Environ. Microbiol. 14, 4–12 (2012).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Shetty, S. A., Hugenholtz, F., Lahti, L., Smidt, H. & de Vos, W. M. Intestinal microbiome landscaping: insight in community assemblage and implications for microbial modulation strategies. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 41, 182–199 (2017).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zaneveld, J. R., McMinds, R. & Thurber, R. V. Stress and stability: Applying the Anna Karenina principle to animal microbiomes. Nat. Microbiol. 2, 1–8 (2017). Google Scholar Rynda-Apple, A., Robinson, K. M. & Alcorn, J. F. Influenza and bacterial superinfection: Illuminating the immunologic mechanisms of disease. Infect. Immun. 83, 3764–3770 (2015).CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Miellet, W. R. et al. Influenza-like illness exacerbates pneumococcal carriage in older adults. Clin. Infect. Dis. 73(9), e2680 (2020). Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank all participants for their invaluable contribution to this study.FundingThis work was supported by the Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport, and the Strategic Program of the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsCenter for Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The NetherlandsSudarshan A. Shetty, Josine van Beek, Elske Bijvank, James Groot, Sjoerd Kuiling, Thijs Bosch, Debbie van Baarle & Susana FuentesDepartment of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, Virology and Immunology Research Group, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The NetherlandsSudarshan A. Shetty & Debbie van BaarleAuthorsSudarshan A. ShettyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJosine van BeekView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarElske BijvankView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJames GrootView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSjoerd KuilingView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarThijs BoschView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDebbie van BaarleView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSusana FuentesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsD.vB. and J.vB. were responsible for the ILI study. D.vB., and S.F. conceived and designed respiratory microbiota experiments. T.B. coordinated and J.G. and S.K. performed laboratory work. S.A.S. performed the microbiota analysis. S.A.S. wrote the initial draft of the manuscript with inputs from S.F. All authors contributed to interpreting the results, critically revisions of the manuscript and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Susana Fuentes.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleShetty, S.A., van Beek, J., Bijvank, E. et al. Associations and recovery dynamics of the nasopharyngeal microbiota during influenza-like illness in the aging population. Sci Rep 12, 1915 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-05618-9Download citationReceived: 07 October 2021Accepted: 12 January 2022Published: 03 February 2022DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-05618-9Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyNanoparticle-enhanced nasal flu vaccine delivers promising early data SUBSCRIBE AD-FREE LOG IN HOME SCIENCE Biology Environment Materials Medical Physics Space View all SCIENCE news Biology Environment Materials Medical Physics Space View all SCIENCE news TECH AI & Humanoids Consumer Tech Energy Manufacturing Military Robotics Deals View all TECHNOLOGY news AI & Humanoids Consumer Tech Energy Manufacturing Military Robotics Deals View all TECHNOLOGY news TRANSPORT Aircraft Automotive Bicycles Marine Motorcycles Urban Transport View all TRANSPORT news Aircraft Automotive Bicycles Marine Motorcycles Urban Transport View all TRANSPORT news LIFESTYLE Outdoors Tiny Houses Architecture Good Thinking Holiday Destinations View all LIFESTYLE news Outdoors Tiny Houses Architecture Good Thinking Holiday Destinations View all LIFESTYLE news BODY & MIND Medical Innovations Wellness & Healthy Living Illnesses and conditions Brain Health Medical Innovations Wellness & Healthy Living Illnesses and conditions Brain Health © 2024 New Atlas Menu HOME SCIENCE Biology Environment Materials Medical Physics Space View all SCIENCE news TECH AI & Humanoids Consumer Tech Energy Manufacturing Military Robotics Deals View all TECHNOLOGY news TRANSPORT Aircraft Automotive Bicycles Marine Motorcycles Urban Transport View all TRANSPORT news LIFESTYLE Outdoors Tiny Houses Architecture Good Thinking Holiday Destinations View all LIFESTYLE news BODY & MIND Medical Innovations Wellness & Healthy Living Illnesses and conditions Brain Health SUBSCRIBE AD-FREE LOG IN Show Search Search Query Submit Search Infectious Diseases Nanoparticle-enhanced nasal flu vaccine delivers promising early data By Rich Haridy January 30, 2022 Facebook Twitter Flipboard LinkedIn Nanoparticle-enhanced nasal flu vaccine delivers promising early data Mouse experiments revealed an influenza nasal vaccine induced strong immune responses in the nose and lungsSyda_Productions/Depositphotos View 1 Image 1/1 Mouse experiments revealed an influenza nasal vaccine induced strong immune responses in the nose and lungsSyda_Productions/Depositphotos Researchers at Georgia State University have produced a novel nanoparticle-enhanced intranasal influenza vaccine. The results of a preclinical study that have just been published demonstrate the unique nasal spray induces robust local and systemic immune responses for over six months in animal models.Inhalable nasal vaccines have long been considered a holy grail for vaccines against viruses known to take hold in a person’s upper respiratory tract. The idea is that administering vaccine antigens directly to mucous membranes in the nose could train that local tissue to more rapidly mount an immune response immediately at the point a virus enters a human body.But producing an effective intranasal vaccine has proved a huge challenge to scientists for decades. Mucous membranes in the nose and upper respiratory tract are thick, and high doses of vaccine antigens are often needed to trigger an immune response.In the United States there is an intranasal flu vaccine already available called FluMist and its effectiveness can vary from year to year depending on the dominant strains of influenza circulating.FluMist is known as a live attenuated vaccine, meaning it contains real active viral particles. The virus in these kinds of vaccines has been weakened to ensure it doesn’t cause serious disease, however, there is still a chance of infection from live attenuated vaccines. So this means they are often limited to young healthy cohorts (in this case healthy subjects aged between two and 49).This new intranasal flu vaccine takes a more traditional path, training the immune system to target a single small part of the influenza virus. In this instance the vaccine presents the immune system with a part of a protein on the surface of the influenza virus called hemagglutinin (HA).Current flu vaccines often target the head of HA proteins but this part of the virus is known to mutate frequently, leading to the need for the vaccines to be reformulated every year. Instead of using the head of HA proteins as a vaccine antigen, newer flu vaccines in development target the stalk of these proteins. HA stalks are thought to be conserved from mutation to mutation, meaning an effective vaccine using this as its antigenic target could offer universal protection from annual influenza mutations.The primary innovation in this new intranasal vaccine candidate from Georgia State University researchers is the creation of a complex nanoparticle that can present the immune system with HA stalk antigens alongside several other structures that amplify an immune response.The nanoparticle is first built out of a polymer called polyethyleneimine (PEI). Then the researchers incorporated a substance known as CpG into the nanoparticle to further amplify the immune response.“The PEI-HA/CpG nanoparticles show good potential as a cross-protective influenza vaccine candidate,” said Baozhong Wang, corresponding author on the new study. “The combination of PEI and CpG in the PEI-HA/CpG nanoparticle group contributed to the multifaceted immune responses, leading to vigorous cross protection. The incorporation of CpG and antigens into the same nanoparticle enhanced cellular immune responses.”Early mouse studies have revealed this novel intranasal nanoparticle vaccine induced broad and robust immune responses lasting over six months. It seems the unique combination of a PEI-based nanoparticle with CpG immune-enhancement helps the HA stalk antigen trigger strong immune responses through mucosal surfaces.First author on the study Chunhong Dong says these preliminary studies are promising but notes there still is work to be done before the vaccine is ready to move to human studies. These initial animal tests have found no adverse effects from the vaccine but more safety work is needed before clinical trials can start.“Nanoparticle platforms have shown intriguing characteristics and great potentials in the development of next-generation cross-protective influenza vaccines,” said Dong. “However, challenges exist to the successful research and development of nanoparticle vaccines. Though no apparent adverse effects were observed in the study, a more comprehensive safety evaluation of the nanoparticle adjuvant system is needed before clinical trials.”The new study was published in the journal ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces.Source: Georgia State University Tags Infectious DiseasesVaccinesInfluenzaVirusNanoparticlesGeorgia State UniversityNew Atlas Audio Facebook Twitter Flipboard LinkedIn 1 comment Rich Haridy Rich has written for a number of online and print publications over the last decade while also acting as film critic for several radio broadcasters and podcasts. His interests focus on psychedelic science, new media, and science oddities. Rich completed his Masters degree in the Arts back in 2013 before joining New Atlas in 2016. Most Viewed Automotive VW's most impressive California camper van launches at tempting price Aircraft Natilus takes on Airbus and Boeing with blended-wing airliner Tiny Houses Plus-size tiny house provides rustic cottage living on wheels Load More 1 comment Sign in to post a comment. Please keep comments to less than 150 words. No abusive material or spam will be published. udayp February 1, 2022 02:02 AM Tragic that all these potential treatments and preventives had to wait till the big pharma managed to get their billlions of doses out and now legislative as mandates in most countries. These developments were held up for too long GET OUR NEWSLETTEROver 220,000 people receive our email newsletter. Get your daily dose of extraordinary ideas! Register HOME SUBSCRIBE FEATURES REVIEWS ABOUT ADVERTISE TERMS PRIVACY CONTACT RSS FAQ SCIENCE Biology Environment Materials Medical Physics Space Quantum Computing TECHNOLOGY AI & Humanoids Computers Consumer Tech Drones Energy Home Entertainment Manufacturing Military Music Robotics Telecommunications Virtual Reality Deals TRANSPORT Aircraft Automotive Bicycles Marine Motorcycles Urban Transport LIFESTYLE Architecture Around the Home Children Collectibles Good Thinking Holiday Destinations Outdoors Pets Remarkable People Tiny Houses 20th Anniversary BODY & MIND Illnesses and conditions Brain Health Medical Innovations AI in Health Imaging & Diagnostics Medical Devices Psychedelics Wellness & Healthy Living Aging Well Diet & Nutrition Fitness & Exercise Sleep Follow Us twitter instagram pinterest flipboard facebook linkedin © 2024 New AtlasSTAT News Highlights sa-mRNA Skip to main content Global Selector Newsroom Partnering Contact We Are CSL We Are CSL Our Businesses and Products Vita: Original Stories Our Leadership Worldwide Locations Corporate Governance Our Businesses and Products CSL Behring CSL Seqirus CSL Vifor Corporate Governance Code of Responsible Business Practice Core Policies Vita means life. It's also our platform for sharing the stories of biotech's promise to patients and public health. Read the Stories CSL consists of CSL Behring, CSL Seqirus and CSL Vifor. Learn more by visiting each section. Our Businesses and Products Patients & Public Health Patients & Public Health Rare & Serious Diseases Iron Deficiency Nephrology Vaccines Patient Support & Organizations Rare & Serious Diseases Immunodeficiency and Autoimmune Diseases Hereditary Bleeding Disorders Hereditary Angioedema Alpha 1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Iron Deficiency Iron Deficiency Patient Stories Nephrology Nephrology Patient Stories Vaccines COVID-19 Pandemic Response In-Licensing Antivenoms and Q fever Vaccine Patient Support & Organizations CSL Behring USA Support & Assistance Programs CSL Vifor Managed Access Programs LEAD Grants Biotechnology leader CSL Behring offers the broadest range of quality plasma-derived and recombinant therapies in our industry. CSL Behring: Rare & Serious Diseases Derived from the expression 'securing health for all of us', CSL Seqirus is one of the world's largest influenza vaccine providers. CSL Seqirus: Vaccines R&D R&D R&D Capabilities Awards, Grants and Initiatives World-Class R&D Network Product Pipeline Clinical Studies at CSL Clinical Studies at CSL Current Clinical Trials Research Practices How to Participate Clinical Studies FAQs R&D focuses its expertise on four strategic platforms: plasma protein technology; recombinant technology; cell and gene therapy; and vaccines technology. R&D Capabilities One of our core values at CSL is Innovation. We support collaborative innovation through the endowment of awards and grants to researchers around the world. Awards, Grants and Initiatives Sustainability Sustainability Healthier Environment Healthier Communities Promising Futures Governance Data and Reporting Centre Healthier Environment Climate Resilience Energy Water and Waste Healthier Communities Product Safety & Quality Innovation and R&D Access and Affordability Responsible & Resilient Supply Chain Donor Experience Patient Experience Promising Futures Talent and Culture Health, Safety & Wellbeing Inclusion and Belonging Governance Ethics & Transparency Data Protection & Privacy Stakeholder Engagement & Material Topics Data and Reporting Centre Annual Publications Policies Key Performance Data Summary As part of our broader sustainability strategy to build a more sustainable future, we've committed to a 40% reduction in absolute Scope 1 and 2 emissions by 2030. Learn About Our Targets Along with our sustainability strategy, CSL’s community contribution framework helps deliver on our Values and support execution of our 2030 strategy. Supporting Our Communities Careers Careers Diversity, Equity & Inclusion How CSL Supports Your Well-being Early Careers at CSL Early Careers at CSL Apprenticeships Internships at CSL Graduate Rotational Programs at CSL At CSL, Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) is at the core of our mission and who we are. It fuels our innovation day in and day out. Read About Our DE&I Whether you are early in your college education or recently completed your degree, it's never too soon to consider CSL for your Promising Future! Early Careers at CSL Investors CSL Back Search We Are CSL We Are CSL Our Businesses and Products Our Businesses and Products CSL Behring CSL Seqirus CSL Vifor Vita: Original Stories Our Leadership Worldwide Locations Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Code of Responsible Business Practice Core Policies Patients & Public Health Patients & Public Health Rare & Serious Diseases Rare & Serious Diseases Immunodeficiency and Autoimmune Diseases Hereditary Bleeding Disorders Hereditary Angioedema Alpha 1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Iron Deficiency Iron Deficiency Iron Deficiency Patient Stories Nephrology Nephrology Nephrology Patient Stories Vaccines Vaccines COVID-19 Pandemic Response In-Licensing Antivenoms and Q fever Vaccine Patient Support & Organizations Patient Support & Organizations CSL Behring USA Support & Assistance Programs CSL Vifor Managed Access Programs LEAD Grants R&D R&D R&D Capabilities Awards, Grants and Initiatives World-Class R&D Network Product Pipeline Clinical Studies at CSL Clinical Studies at CSL Current Clinical Trials Research Practices How to Participate Clinical Studies FAQs Sustainability Sustainability Healthier Environment Healthier Environment Climate Resilience Energy Water and Waste Healthier Communities Healthier Communities Product Safety & Quality Innovation and R&D Access and Affordability Responsible & Resilient Supply Chain Donor Experience Patient Experience Promising Futures Promising Futures Talent and Culture Health, Safety & Wellbeing Inclusion and Belonging Governance Governance Ethics & Transparency Data Protection & Privacy Stakeholder Engagement & Material Topics Data and Reporting Centre Data and Reporting Centre Annual Publications Policies Key Performance Data Summary Careers Careers Diversity, Equity & Inclusion How CSL Supports Your Well-being Early Careers at CSL Early Careers at CSL Apprenticeships Internships at CSL Graduate Rotational Programs at CSL Investors Newsroom Partnering Contact Global Selector CSL We Are CSL Vita: Original Stories 2022 STAT News Highlights sa-mRNA STAT News Highlights sa-mRNA Early research shows the potential of sa-mRNA “as the next generation of influenza vaccine technology,” says Roberta Duncan, who is leading the mRNA program at global flu vaccine leader Seqirus. By Eric Monticello 02 Feb 2022 Story Topics Flu Research and Development COVID-19 made messenger RNA (mRNA) a celebrated vaccine technology and now researchers are looking at how to use it to protect the population against other threats, including influenza. There’s more research to be done, but the potential is there for self-amplifying mRNA, Roberta Duncan, Vice President and mRNA Program Lead at global influenza vaccines leader Seqirus, explained in a recent STAT News article. “We expect to advance our sa-mRNA technology from the preclinical phase into Phase 1 clinical trials later this year,” Duncan said. “We’re excited about the potential of sa-mRNA and will continue to follow the science and data as we pursue further development.” Read the article in STAT. STAT, a Boston-based news hub for biotech, science and health care, explains how sa-mRNA differs from both traditional vaccine tech and mRNA. Messenger RNA vaccines give the immune system instructions to make a virus protein that stimulates an immune response and leaves a blueprint to recognize and fight a future infection. The potential for sa-mRNA is that it “can trigger production of more protein and more potent cellular immune responses than an equivalent amount of mRNA, subsequently increasing the body’s ability to fight the influenza virus.” Related Explainer: What Is Seasonal Flu? Health officials recommend getting vaccinated against seasonal influenza, but do you know why? For one thing, the flu is alwa… 18 Nov 2021 share Terms of Use Cookie Policy Global Privacy Policy Accessibility Statement Sitemap Terms of Use Cookie Policy Global Privacy Policy Accessibility Statement Sitemap CSL, All Rights Reserved © 2024 Search CSL CSL (CSL Behring's Parent Company) CSL Behring Worldwide Americas Argentina Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Mexico Asia Pacific Australia China Japan Korea Singapore Taiwan Middle East Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates (MEA) Europe Austria Belgium and Luxembourg Czech Republic Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Netherlands Norway Poland Slovakia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom CSL Plasma (CSL Behring Subsidiary) CSL Plasma US CSL Plasma Germany CSL Plasma HungaryThe saddest lookin' time: Looking back at the Spanish flu pandemic | News | tribunecourier.com Skip to main content × Thank you for reading! Please log in, or sign up for a new account and purchase a subscription to continue reading. Please purchase a subscription to continue reading. Your current subscription does not provide access to this content. Sign Up Log In Purchase a Subscription × Have a promo code? Find Offers Back You have permission to edit this article. Edit Close Sign Up Log In Dashboard Logout My Account Dashboard Profile Saved items Logout Home About Us Contact Us Advertise Terms of Use Privacy Policy Artificial Intelligence Policy Subscription Services Submission Forms Submit News Promote Your Event e-Edition News Local News Church Community Obituaries Sports Special Archives Puzzles Election Results Subscribe Site search Search Sign Up Log In Dashboard Logout My Account Dashboard Profile Saved items Logout Facebook 56° Clear Benton, KY (42025 ) Today Mainly sunny. High 67F. Winds light and variable.. Tonight A mostly clear sky. Low 42F. Winds light and variable. Updated: November 11, 2024 @ 1:12 am Full Forecast Monday, November 11, 2024 Site search Search Toggle navigation Subscribe Home About Us Contact Us Advertise Terms of Use Privacy Policy Artificial Intelligence Policy Subscription Services Submission Forms Submit News Promote Your Event e-Edition News Local News Church Community Obituaries Sports Special Archives Puzzles Election Results Share This Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Subscribe to Continue Editor's Pick The saddest lookin' time: Looking back at the Spanish flu pandemic BY JUSTIN LAMB FOR THE TRIBUNE-COURIER Feb 1, 2022 Feb 1, 2022 Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Subscribe to Continue Volunteer nurses at the Marshall County Courthouse during the early part of the Spanish Flu Pandemic in 1918. Photo provided Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save At approximately 40 million deaths, the influenza pandemic of 1918-1919 killed more people worldwide than World War I and has been cited as one of the most devastating pandemics in world history. Known as the “Spanish Flu” “Spanish Lady” or “La Grippe,” the sickness affected 500 million people and wiped out nearly five% of the world’s population.Due to inadequate data at the time, the exact origin of the Spanish Flu is unknown with some reporting cases as early as 1916. However, the first official case was not reported in the United States until January 1918 in Haskell County, Kansas when Dr. Loring Miner warned the U.S. Public Health Services of a possible incoming pandemic after treating several ill patients.Three months later on March 11, 1918, a company cook Fort Riley, Kansas reported sick with a sudden onset of symptoms. By noon on the same day, over 100 soldiers at the fort were in the hospital after contracting the extremely contagious strain of the flu. Within days, 522 men at the camp had reported sick. Later that day, the virus was reported clear across the country in Queens, New York. Patients experienced some of the classic flu symptoms such as fever, chills, and fatigue but other more severe symptoms also appeared such as bluing of the skin as result of their lungs rapidly filling with fluid. One of most horrific symptoms was bleeding from the nose, mouth, eyes, and ears. Many who contracted the virus would die within hours leaving health officials puzzled on how to combat the virus. With war raging in Europe and to keep the war morale up, wartime censors downplayed the early reports of the illness and mortality rates in the United States, Britain, German, and France were kept secret. However, with Spain’s neutrality in the war, the media was free to report the illness thus creating the false impression that Spain was the origin of the flu. The flu became known throughout the world as the “Spanish Flu” due to the increased coverage of Spain’s 8 million deaths due to the influenza problem.The Spanish Flu officially first appeared in Kentucky around September 27, 1918 when a group of soldiers traveling from Texas on the Louisville & Nashville railroad stopped in Bowling Green. While there the soldiers unknowingly infected several citizens before returning to the train and exiting on. By the second and third week of the epidemic, Louisville was experiencing about 180 deaths a week from influenza. The situation continued to be bad throughout the fall and into the winter months. Approximately 4,800 deaths were tolled in Paducah. On October 6th, 1918, the Kentucky state health board was forced to issue a state-wide proclamation closing “all places of amusement, schools, churches and other places of assembly.” The public was ordered to wear protective masks while in public. On September 30, 1918, a parade in which hundreds attended was held in Benton to promote the Liberty Bond program aiding the war effort in Europe. Within days, a tremendous wave of influenza cases rocked the county. The courthouse and all public places closed. County Judge Walter Prince and Circuit Clerk H.H. Lovett were reported ill.The exact total of Spanish flu victims in Marshall County is not known due to poor record keeping, but at least 60 people died as a result in Marshall County. One story was recorded from the community of Olive where Oscar and Dollie Lovett lost two of their young children, nine-year old Nellie and four-year old Evalyn, to the Spanish Flu just a day apart. As the Lovetts went to bury their two small children in the Horn Cemetery they were prepared for their other two children, eight-year old daughter Winnie and five-year old son Welburn, who had also been infected by the flu, to be dead when they returned, but thankfully they survived. A nearby elderly couple in the same community, Alexander and Julia Brown died within 15 days of each other. In the Sharpe community, a local barber Claude Cox unknowingly infected several in the community while cutting their hair. He ultimately succumbed to pneumonia because of the Spanish flu. Communities were in a panic. Some went as far as burning down the houses of those who had died from the flu in an attempt to contain the spread.In nearby Trigg County, five members of Reverend Jesse Linn Boyd Darnall’s family died in one week. Darnall was a native of Brewers in Marshall County before moving to Trigg County. The entire family of eight was inflicted with the flu and the first victim was their 21-year old son Perkins who passed on a Friday. The following day, daughter Elo died, and on Sunday, a younger daughter Naomi fell victim. On Wednesday morning, the eldest daughter Martha Dill succumbed to the flu. After witnessing the deaths of four of her children, Mrs. Martha Darnall died as result of the flu a few days later.The Henson family of Trigg County was also hit hard by the pandemic. Seven members of the family died in a two-week period. The first to go was Bulah Dee Henson, a 28-year-old mother who was expecting a new baby. Eight days later, her husband Will Henson died leaving their two children, Robye and Ruby, orphaned and in the care of their grandparents. Years later their daughter Robye Henson Brown recalled this tragic period, “I don’t remember too much about this time, only that they were very dark and sad times, and that we were hungry sometimes because everyone was too sick to cook or too sad. One of our neighbors would bring food and set it down at the base of a tree for us to pick up.”Further east in Webster County, resident Doy Lee Lovan reported that “the impact of the flu was especially dramatic as it was combined with a smallpox epidemic there. One person from every house on our street died as a result.” In the coal fields of the Eastern Kentucky region of Pike County, a coal miner noted that “It was the saddest lookin’ time then that ever you saw in your life. And, every, nearly every porch, every porch that I’d look at had-would have a casket box a-sittin’ on it. And men a diggin’ graves just as hard as they could and the mines had to shut down there wasn’t a nary a man, there wasn’t a, there wasn’t a mine a’runnin’ a lump of coal or runnin’ no work. Stayed that away for about six weeks.”With no influenza vaccine at the time, the number of bodies from the fatalities of the Spanish flu quickly outpaced the available resources to deal with them. Many citizens in Kentucky relied primarily on homemade remedies that had been passed down within families for generations including steam baths, castor oil, calomel, quinine, and particularly whiskey. One of the oldest homemade concoctions was asafetida, a foul-smelling gum placed in a small bag and worn around the neck which was believed to be a cure for almost any ailment.Mortuaries were forced to stack bodies like cordwood in the corridors of funeral homes. There weren’t enough coffins for all the bodies, nor were there enough people to dig graves. In some instances, mass graves were dug to free the towns and cities of the masses of rotting corpses. According to oral history passed down through the generations, grave diggers in Marshall County could not keep up with the death tolls as nearly every family in the county was impacted. To make matters more complicated, the area was hit with a record blizzard which made burials impossible due to the frozen ground. Bodies of the flu victims were placed on the courthouse yard until the ground thawed and they could be properly buried.The pandemic peaked in the fall of 1918, but influenza remained prevalent throughout the state during the winter and spring of 1919. Even President Woodrow Wilson suffered from the Spanish Flu in early 1919 while negotiating the Treaty of Versallies to end World War I. During the spring and summer of 1919, people in the Jackson Purchase suffered from the prolonged effects of the pandemic, including loss of hearing, bronchitis, pneumonia or total disability. By early 1920, cases began to decline, and life soon began returning to normal. Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save Featured Local Savings Latest e-Edition The Tribune Courier The Tribune Courier Most Popular Articles Images Videos Commented ArticlesKentucky writes storybook beginning to Mark Pope EraKSP confirms death investigation in Calloway CountyIAM union members at Westlake Vinyls in Calvert City strike over payCCSO: Murray man arrested for breaking into vehicles connected to KSP homicide caseIAM workers, Westlake Vinyls reach agreement to end strikeMarshall Countians elect three city councilsPaducah's 'Team Blitz' wins big at karate world championshipMarshall County High School SBDM to hold Wednesday meetingKentucky voters defeat a measure intended to allow tax dollar support for private school educationJudge dismisses former 911 director's lawsuit against Marshall County Fiscal Court Images Videos CommentedSorry, there are no recent results for popular commented articles. Follow us on Facebook tribunecourier Westlake says agreement reached, strike to end Sections Home News Sports Announcements Obituaries Opinion Local Events Galleries Online Features Services Subscription Services Submission Forms Classifieds Place an Ad Promote Your Event Search Weather Contact Information tribunecourier.com 86A Commerce Blvd Benton, KY 42025 Phone: (270) 527-3162 Email: editor@tribunecourier.com Follow Us Facebook × Browser Compatibility Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.We recommend switching to one of the following browsers: Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox © Copyright 2024 Tribune Courier 86A Commerce Blvd, Benton, KY | Terms of Use | Privacy Policy Powered by BLOX Content Management System from BLOX Digital.Avian Flu Detected in 53 Wild Ducks in North Carolina | Outdoor Life Search for: Hunting Big Game Hunting Deer Hunting Bow Hunting Hunting Dogs Predator Hunting Small Game Hunting Turkey Hunting Upland Bird Hunting Waterfowl Hunting Wild Game Recipes Fishing Fly Fishing Freshwater Bass Fishing Panfish Fishing Saltwater Fishing Ice Fishing Record Fish Saltwater Fishing Wild Caught Fish Recipes Conservation Climate & Environment Hunter Recruitment Policy & Legislation Public Lands & Waters Wildlife Management Guns Ammo Competitive Shooting Concealed Carry Handguns Rifles Shot Show Shotguns Gear ATVs Camping Gear Fishing Gear Hunting Gear Knives Optics Shooting Gear Survival Gear Trucks Survival Animal Attacks Fitness Foraging & Gardening Natural Disaster Survival Survival Skills Wilderness Survival FOLLOW US Newsletter Sign-Up Facebook Instagram Youtube RSS Merch Cover Art Knives 747K 181K 57.8K Search for: Hunting Big Game Hunting Deer Hunting Bow Hunting Hunting Dogs Predator Hunting Small Game Hunting Turkey Hunting Upland Bird Hunting Waterfowl Hunting Wild Game Recipes Fishing Fly Fishing Freshwater Bass Fishing Panfish Fishing Ice Fishing Record Fish Saltwater Fishing Wild Caught Fish Recipes Conservation Climate & Environment Hunter Recruitment Policy & Legislation Public Lands & Waters Wildlife Management Guns Ammo Competitive Shooting Concealed Carry Handguns Rifles Shot Show Shotguns Gear ATVs Camping Gear Fishing Gear Hunting Gear Knives Optics Shooting Gear Survival Gear Trucks Survival Animal Attacks Fitness Foraging & Gardening Natural Disaster Survival Survival Skills Wilderness Survival Merch Cover Art Knives Newsletter Sign-up Conservation Wildlife Management Avian Flu a Growing Concern in North Carolina as Officials Confirm More Cases in Wild Ducks The disease has now been confirmed in 53 wild waterfowl, raising the risk for potential infections in domestic birds By Dac Collins Updated on Feb 2, 2022 2:14 PM EST A wigeon in South Carolina was one of the first wild ducks in the region to test positive for avian influenza. Tom Koerner / USFWS Share State officials and farmers in North Carolina are becoming increasingly concerned with the presence of avian flu in the region’s migratory waterfowl populations. On Jan. 14, the USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service confirmed that Eurasian H5 avian influenza had been discovered in an American wigeon killed by a duck hunter in Colleton County, South Carolina. This was the first time that highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) had been detected in a wild bird in the United States since 2016. Then, on Jan. 18, USDA APHIS announced that another Colleton County wild duck had tested positive—as did a Northern shoveler taken by a hunter in Hyde County, North Carolina, on Dec. 30. Now the Mount Airy News is reporting that HPAI has been confirmed in 53 wild waterfowl that were harvested by duck hunters at three different sites in North Carolina. Aside from the Hyde County location, positive samples were detected at a site on the Pamlico/Beaufort County line and at another site in Bladen County. And even though North Carolina’s duck hunting season ended on Monday, Jan. 31, the presence of potentially infected migratory boards is a growing cause of concern for the state’s commercial and backyard poultry farmers. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say the risk to the general public from HPAI infections remains low, but that the risk to poultry and domestic fowl is extremely high. “Many birds have died, and millions of chickens and turkeys in several states have been culled to try to control the outbreaks,” the CDC says, referring to a 2015 bird flu outbreak that led to the culling of more than 50 million chickens and turkeys at poultry farms across the West and Midwest. North Carolina is the second largest poultry producing state in the United States, and is home to more than 515 million domestic chickens and turkeys. Clearly, an outbreak of HPAI could deal a significant blow to the state’s agricultural sector. But what risk would an outbreak pose for wild waterfowl populations in the Atlantic flyway? Joe Fuller, a wildlife biologist with the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission, says that risk is fairly low. Fuller explains that the Commission has not found or heard of any mortality events involving multiple ducks or waterbirds anywhere in the state. (So far, all of the positive HPAI samples confirmed by USDA APHIS were discovered during routine surveillance checks of hunter-harvested waterfowl.) Fuller says that, at this point, the Commission does not believe that wild waterfowl populations in the Atlantic Flyway will be noticeably impacted by the disease. “The highly pathogenic strain can cause mortality in ducks and other waterfowl, but generally not to the extent as what would be expected in poultry,” Fuller says. “Mortality in wild waterfowl in Europe has occurred. And the extent to which this would have a population level impact [on wild waterfowl] is unclear, but likely minimal.” Meanwhile, with this worst-case scenario in mind for domestic birds, North Carolina’s state veterinarian Mike Martin released a statement on Jan. 27 urging the state’s farmers and poultry owners to take the threat of HPAI seriously. He strongly encouraged them to keep their domestic birds isolated from people and other animals, and to keep flocks away from ponds where they could encounter migratory birds. Read Next: If Chronic Wasting Disease Is Fatal, Why Aren’t We Finding CWD-Killed Deer in the Woods? “These findings continue to support evidence that high path avian influenza is currently present in the Atlantic Americas migratory flyway,” Martin said. “Wild birds can carry this virus asymptomatically and potentially spread it to domestic poultry. We strongly encourage all poultry owners to follow strict biosecurity measures for at least the next 30 days, which is the time frame these birds are anticipated to be migrating through the state.” Summary The disease has now been confirmed in 53 wild waterfowl, and it presents a significant risk to domestic birds in the state. Dac Collins News Editor Dac Collins is the News Editor at Outdoor Life. He helps tell the latest stories about America’s hunters and anglers while reporting on critical conservation issues, oftentimes with a fly rod or shotgun in hand. He lives in Colorado with his wife and son. Learn more about Outdoorlife.com Editorial Standards Latest Hunting My First Buck Was the Biggest Typical Mule Deer Ever Taken with a Bow. I Almost Discarded the Antlers My First Buck Was the Biggest Typical Mule Deer Ever Taken with a Bow. I Almost Discarded the Antlers By Bill Barcus as told to Lee Kline Hunting ‘I Thought I’d Fall Out of the Tree.’ Missouri Hunter Tags Her Biggest Buck Yet ‘I Thought I’d Fall Out of the Tree.’ Missouri Hunter Tags Her Biggest Buck Yet By Bob McNally More in Wildlife Management Avian Flu Spreads Across Southeastern U.S. and Beyond, Killing Hundreds of Wild Birds Along the Atlantic Flyway Avian Flu Spreads Across Southeastern U.S. and Beyond, Killing Hundreds of Wild Birds Along the Atlantic Flyway By Kristen A. Schmitt More Than 1,500 Pheasants, Quail, and Ducks Euthanized as Texas Confirms Bird Flu Outbreak at a Commercial Game Bird Operation More Than 1,500 Pheasants, Quail, and Ducks Euthanized as Texas Confirms Bird Flu Outbreak at a Commercial Game Bird Operation By Dac Collins The U.K. Releases 55 Million Game Birds Every Year. This Group Says Not to Release Any Amid Avian Flu Fears The U.K. Releases 55 Million Game Birds Every Year. This Group Says Not to Release Any Amid Avian Flu Fears By Dac Collins Bird Flu Has Reached Oregon and Washington Bird Flu Has Reached Oregon and Washington By Keegan Sentner Two Red Foxes in Utah Test Positive for Avian Influenza Two Red Foxes in Utah Test Positive for Avian Influenza By Keegan Sentner USDA Bans Importation of All Hunter-Harvested Waterfowl from Canada the Day After Hunting Season Opens USDA Bans Importation of All Hunter-Harvested Waterfowl from Canada the Day After Hunting Season Opens By Dac Collins USDA Walks Back Canada Waterfowl Ban, Will Allow Hunters to Bring Meat Across the Border USDA Walks Back Canada Waterfowl Ban, Will Allow Hunters to Bring Meat Across the Border By Dac Collins Brown Bear Cub Becomes the Second Bruin in Alaska to Die from Bird Flu Brown Bear Cub Becomes the Second Bruin in Alaska to Die from Bird Flu By Dac Collins SEE MORE More in Conservation Smoke a Goose with the Wing Still On? Waterfowl Importation Ban Could Cause Confusion for Hunters at Canadian Border Smoke a Goose with the Wing Still On? Waterfowl Importation Ban Could Cause Confusion for Hunters at Canadian Border By Joe Genzel Deadliest Bird Flu Outbreak in U.S. History Is Killing Bears, Mountain Lions, and Marine Mammals Deadliest Bird Flu Outbreak in U.S. History Is Killing Bears, Mountain Lions, and Marine Mammals By Katie Hill Waterfowl Fall from the Sky by the Hundreds as Lunar Eclipse Coincides with Snowstorm in Central Oregon Waterfowl Fall from the Sky by the Hundreds as Lunar Eclipse Coincides with Snowstorm in Central Oregon By Keegan Sentner What Happens to Duck Hunting When the Great Salt Lake Dries Up? What Happens to Duck Hunting When the Great Salt Lake Dries Up? By Katie Hill A Polar Bear Died from Bird Flu in Alaska A Polar Bear Died from Bird Flu in Alaska By Katie Hill The Story Behind the Snow Goose Mass Die-Off Video The Story Behind the Snow Goose Mass Die-Off Video By Katie Hill Federal Officials Confirm Botulism Outbreak at Klamath Refuges, with 20,000 Birds Dead So Far Federal Officials Confirm Botulism Outbreak at Klamath Refuges, with 20,000 Birds Dead So Far By Dac Collins Hundreds of Ducks Dead Amid Reports of Avian Flu and Botulism at Two Critical California Refuges Hundreds of Ducks Dead Amid Reports of Avian Flu and Botulism at Two Critical California Refuges By Katie Hill SEE MORE NEWSLETTER SIGNUP Get the hottest outdoor news and cutting-edge gear reviews. Sign Up By signing up you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. Hunting Big Game Hunting Deer Hunting Bow Hunting Hunting Dogs Predator Hunting Small Game Hunting Turkey Hunting Upland Bird Hunting Waterfowl Hunting Wild Game Recipes Fishing Fly Fishing Freshwater Bass Fishing Panfish Fishing Ice Fishing Record Fish Saltwater Fishing Wild Caught Fish Recipes Conservation Climate & Environment Hunter Recruitment Policy & Legislation Public Lands & Waters Wildlife Management Guns Ammo Competitive Shooting Concealed Carry Handguns Rifles Shot Show Shotguns Gear ATVs Camping Gear Fishing Gear Hunting Gear Knives Optics Shooting Gear Survival Gear Trucks More About Us Outdoor Life+ FAQ Outdoor Life Editorial Standards How We Test and Review Products Contact Us Affiliate Disclosure Privacy Policy Sitemap FOLLOW US DISCLAIMER(S) Articles may contain affiliate links which enable us to share in the revenue of any purchases made. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Service. © 2024 Recurrent. All rights reserved.Can COVID tests be wrong? Skip to content NEWS10 ABC Albany 48° Sign Up Albany 48° Sponsored By Toggle Menu Open Navigation Close Navigation Search Please enter a search term. Primary Menu News Local Video Crime National International NY Capitol News Your Local Election Headquarters Empire State Weekly Election Results Fentanyl Crisis Special Reports Wake Up With 10 New York News Classroom Progress Report North Country Hudson Valley Capital Region Restaurant Inspections Sign-up for our Newsletter Politics from The Hill Health Automotive News Entertainment Stocks Press Releases Top Stories UN climate talks to focus on money to help poor nations … 53 mins ago Satellite images and documents indicate China working … 2 hours ago Blanket of smoke covers capital region: What to know 3 hours ago Video Joey Logano wins Phoenix finale for 3rd NASCAR Cup … 6 hours ago Albany NY Weather Albany Weather Radar Weather Alerts Allergy Report Closings and Delays Mobile Storm Tracker Weather 101 Traffic Watch News Live News Schedule TV Schedule Sports Local Sports 1st and 10 Senior Spotlight College Sports Saints and Danes Orange Nation NASCAR New England Nation NY Blitz Buffalo Bills Jobs Find a Job Post a Job Work for Us Community Pet Connection with Steve Caporizzo Pet Connection Tips Hispanic Heritage Month Off the Beaten Path Contests Thank you for your service! Destination NY Women’s Health Coats for Kids Home for the Holidays Be Our Guest Restaurant Rundown Concerts & Performances Fantastic Frights Holidays The Upside Giving on 10 Pledge of Allegiance Veterans Voices BestReviews BestReviews Daily Deals Video Center About Us Contact Us Meet the Team Mobile Apps and Site Advertise With Us Regional News Partners About BestReviews FOX 23 Search Please enter a search term. Travelers pass a sign near a COVID-19 testing site in Terminal E at Logan Airport, on Dec. 21, 2021, in Boston. A new AP-NORC poll shows that few Americans – just 15% – say they’ll consider the pandemic over only when COVID-19 is largely eliminated. By contrast, 83% say they’ll feel like the pandemic is over when it’s largely a mild illness, like the seasonal flu. (AP Photo/Charles Krupa, File) News Can COVID tests be wrong? by: Sarah Darmanjian Posted: Jan 31, 2022 / 01:03 PM EST Updated: Jan 31, 2022 / 03:29 PM EST Travelers pass a sign near a COVID-19 testing site in Terminal E at Logan Airport, on Dec. 21, 2021, in Boston. A new AP-NORC poll shows that few Americans – just 15% – say they’ll consider the pandemic over only when COVID-19 is largely eliminated. By contrast, 83% say they’ll feel like the pandemic is over when it’s largely a mild illness, like the seasonal flu. (AP Photo/Charles Krupa, File) by: Sarah Darmanjian Posted: Jan 31, 2022 / 01:03 PM EST Updated: Jan 31, 2022 / 03:29 PM EST SHARE ALBANY, N.Y. (NEWS10)- More attention has been given to COVID-19 during flu season over the past two years leaving some wondering what happened to the flu? Because COVID is more contagious than the flu there have been many more cases in New York. Moderna announces full US approval for its COVID-19 vaccine Between the week ending Nov. 6 and the week ending Jan. 15, there were 1,932,499 more cases of COVID than flu reported according to the New York State Department of Health. Flu cases totaled 37,700 during that same period, meaning there were 52 times more cases of COVID. The number of COVID cases was also likely higher because people were using at-home tests. On the surface, people with mild cases of COVID or the flu may show similar symptoms. Both viruses can cause a fever, muscle aches, sore throat, and tiredness, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Therefore, testing is important to determine if someone has influenza (the virus that causes the flu) or COVID, but are the tests accurate? How to spot fake COVID-19 test centers Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests are used by laboratories to test for COVID-19. Whereas an antigen test is used by many companies that make at-home tests. What does that mean in terms of testing accuracy and could someone with the flu test positive for COVID? “PCR tests are very specific and sensitive for the pathogen they are looking for. PCR tests are designed to specifically target those viruses,” Dr. Steven Hanks, chief clinical officer, and chief operating officer for St. Peter’s Health Partners said Friday. “They are developed to detect and amplify specific genetic sequences that are specific to the virus that is being screened (i.e., influenza or SARS), meaning flu could not cause a false positive on a COVID test.” Why is the new COVID variant called stealth omicron? Antigen tests are designed to detect antigens produced by the body to fight COVID which would be different than the antigens produced to fight the flu. People in the initial stages of COVID could test negative but it’s because their bodies may not have built up enough antigens to be detected by at-home tests, according to UMass Chan Medical School. However, someone can test positive for COVID and have the flu as well, said Dr. Hanks. This is called co-infection. A small number of people with COVID studied by Iranian researchers also had the flu. However, the researchers expressed concern about the risk of co-infection for people considered high risk for serious illness and said further studies were needed on the topic in general. Nearly 300 new cases reported in Albany County COVID update, January 29 Fortunately, now that the holidays are past, the number of COVID cases has gone down significantly statewide. After peaking on Jan. 7, cases have fallen 90%. Sunday, Gov. Kathy Hochul reported 8,781 new cases since Saturday. Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ✕ Read next > Read next > Next ✕ ✕ Read next > Next story in Cancel Read next > Next story in Cancel Trending on NEWS10 Smoke from Ulster Co. brush fire covers Capital Region Drones strike Moscow as top UK official highlights … 2024 Veterans Day events around the Capital Region Close Thanks for signing up! Watch for us in your inbox. Subscribe Now Daily News SIGN UP NOW The best blankets, quilts and throws for cozy season Bedding / 3 days ago Throw blankets can be found in almost any size, fabric and color, with numerous options for electric or weighted blankets to keep warm this season. Starbucks’ holiday menu is back — here’s what’s on … Coffee & Accessories / 4 days ago It’s the most wonderful time of the year! Starbucks rolls out its annual holiday menu on Nov. 7. Best warm activewear for winter workouts Sports Apparel / 6 days ago There is winter exercise apparel for every part of your body, with plenty of styles and colors available. View All BestReviews Top Stories UN climate talks to focus on money to help poor nations … Satellite images and documents indicate China working … Blanket of smoke covers capital region: What to know Joey Logano wins Phoenix finale for 3rd NASCAR Cup … Portia Strong: 10 year old living life to the fullest Top Stories More Stories Middle East latest: Israeli strike kills 3 people … UN climate talks to focus on money to help poor nations … Round 2 in the Trump-vs-Mexico matchup looks ominous … Trump announces Tom Homan, former director of immigration … Will Trump’s hush money conviction stand? A judge … Satellite images and documents indicate China working … Research reveals China has built prototype nuclear … Trump breaks GOP losing streak in nation’s largest … More Stories Latest Coronavirus Videos Audience sits close at Trump’s Mt Rushmore event 4 years ago Expert: US leaving WHO would be ‘gift’ to China 4 years ago Trump: FDA hydroxy warning based on ‘phony study’ 4 years ago Kroger to give $130M in ‘Thank You’ pay 4 years ago Fauci Testifies 5 years ago More Videos NEWS10 ABC Video Blanket of smoke covers capital region: What to know 4 hours ago Portia Strong: 10-year-old girl living life to the … 8 hours ago Runners honor veterans in this year’s Stockade-Athon 14 hours ago police make arrest in alleged assault incident 15 hours ago Trooper injured after patrol vehicle was struck 15 hours ago First IHOP-Applebees joint restaurant coming to the … 15 hours ago 1 in 5 Americans might have long COVID 15 hours ago Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree arrives in NYC 15 hours ago Veterans Day observances in the Capital Region 16 hours ago DMV warns drivers of increased deer, moose activity 16 hours ago Stockade-athon 15k road race 16 hours ago Hannaford experiencing cyber security issue 16 hours ago More Videos More from NEWS10 ABC Gunmen open fire in a bar in central Mexico killing … Smoke from Ulster Co. brush fire covers Capital Region Runners honor veterans in this year’s Stockade-Athon Deputies arrest Valatie man accused of rape King Charles III and Kate attend remembrance event … Troy light art festival welcomes ‘winter’s darkness’ Waterford man accused of grand larceny arrested 1 monkey recovered safely, 42 others remain on the … More from NEWS10 ABC Download our news app Trending on NEWS10 Smoke from Ulster Co. brush fire covers Capital Region Drones strike Moscow as top UK official highlights … 2024 Veterans Day events around the Capital Region Where to sing karaoke in the Capital Region Fire crews on both US coasts battle wildfires; 1 … White Creek man sentenced on attempted murder charges Grand opening for new Marshalls store in Bennington … New wood-fired restaurant opening in downtown Schenectady READ MORE: The Upside BestReviews.com - Top picks to make everyone happy The best Black Friday deals at PetSmart Holiday / 2 days ago Target’s holiday family pajama sets are 30% off right … Holiday / 2 days ago Walmart has holiday family pajama sets for up to … Holiday / 3 days ago Target’s 3-day Early Black Friday Sale is live now Holiday / 3 days ago Netflix’s holiday movie lineup includes Lindsay Lohan … Holiday / 1 week ago Five Below wins Christmas with these ‘90s and aughts-inspired … Holiday / 2 weeks ago View All BestReviews Picks Your Local News Leader News Albany NY Weather Video Sports Community Contests About Us About Our Ads Mission FCC Applications WTEN FCC Public File WXXA FCC Public File EEO Report WPIX EEO Report WTEN Children’s Programming WXXA Children’s Programming Closed Captioning Work For Us Get News App Get the iOS app Get the Android app from Google Play Get Weather App Get the iOS Weather app Get the Android Weather app from Google Play Stay Connected Haystack Privacy Policy 06/27/2024 Terms Of Use FCC Applications Public File Assistance Contact The Hill NewsNation BestReviews Content Licensing Nexstar Digital Journalistic Integrity Sitemap Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information © 1998 - 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. | All Rights Reserved. ✕Michael Greenberg, MD: Improving Access to High-Dose Flu Vaccines for Older Patients NewsMediaPodcastsShowsState Of Sciences - PresentationsVideosWebinarsMultimedia SeriesCURE Connections®InsightsMedcast PodcastsMedcast VideosNews NetworkPeer ExchangePeers & PerspectivesConferencesConference CoverageConference ListingPartnersCME/CEResourcesDigital SupplementsInteractive ToolsLive EventsPress ReleasePublicationsSponsoredAdvisory BoardSubscribeChoose SpecialtyAllergyAllergyAllergyAllergyBiosimilarsCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyFDA NewsFamily MedicineFamily MedicineFamily MedicineFamily MedicineGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGeriatricsGeriatricsGeriatricsHematologyHematologyHematologyHepatologyHepatologyHepatologyHepatologyHepatologyHospital MedicineInfectious DiseaseInfectious DiseaseInternal MedicineNephrologyNephrologyNephrologyNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyObesity ManagementOphthalmologyOphthalmologyOphthalmologyOphthalmologyOphthalmologyPainPainPainPainPainPediatricsPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPulmonologyPulmonologyPulmonologyPulmonologyPulmonologyRDR Alert®RDR Alert®RDR Alert®RDR Alert®RDR Alert®RheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologySleepSleepSleepSurgerySurgeryWomen's HealthSpotlight - FDA NewsThe Respiratory ReportBiosimilars SpotlightDME & nAMD On-Demand PresentationCOVID-19Choose SpecialtyAllergyAllergyAllergyAllergyBiosimilarsCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyCardiologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyDermatologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyEndocrinologyFDA NewsFamily MedicineFamily MedicineFamily MedicineFamily MedicineGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGastroenterologyGeriatricsGeriatricsGeriatricsHematologyHematologyHematologyHepatologyHepatologyHepatologyHepatologyHepatologyHospital MedicineInfectious DiseaseInfectious DiseaseInternal MedicineNephrologyNephrologyNephrologyNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyNeurologyObesity ManagementOphthalmologyOphthalmologyOphthalmologyOphthalmologyOphthalmologyPainPainPainPainPainPediatricsPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPsychiatryPulmonologyPulmonologyPulmonologyPulmonologyPulmonologyRDR Alert®RDR Alert®RDR Alert®RDR Alert®RDR Alert®RheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologyRheumatologySleepSleepSleepSurgerySurgeryWomen's Health SpotlightNewsMediaMultimedia SeriesConferencesPartnersCME/CEResourcesAdvisory BoardSubscribeAdvertisementVideoFebruary 3, 2022Michael Greenberg, MD: Improving Access to High-Dose Flu Vaccines for Older PatientsAuthor(s):Armand Butera Dr. Greenberg urges the ACIP to update their vaccine guidelines for patients 65 years and older to recommend high-dose flu vaccines.For the first time in over 10 years, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is considering recommending certain high-dose influenza vaccines more strongly to Americans 65 years and older.With influenza cases steadily rising early in the year, as well as medical professionals speaking of a potential “twindemic” involving the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, a potential change in vaccine recommendations could aid countless older patients across the country.In an interview with HCPLive, Michael Greenberg, MD, North America Medical Head at Sanofi-Pastuer, spoke of the available high-dose flu vaccines currently out in the marketplace such as Fluezone HD, and how greater access to these types of vaccines could help mend the equity gap across different patient populations.“(The flu) disproportionately affects people over the age of 65, people who have underlying medical conditions such as heart disease, diabetes, chronic lung disease, the very young, and as well different parts of our society,” Greenberg said. “Underrepresented minority groups are disproportionately affected by flu with more likelihood of landing in the hospital, so it's a serious problem.”Patient groups such as the elderly and those with skin of color have also been hindered by a lack of access to high dose flu vaccines, as earlier studies have suggested. In a recent study published last year in The Lancet, among adults 65 years and older who received a flu vaccine, those from racial and ethnic minority groups were 26%-32% less likely to receive the more effective high-dose vaccine option.“In the absence of (clear guidance from ACIP), clinics that have to purchase their flu vaccine in February or March for the next flu season will do so on the basis of what information is available to them, the recommendations from the CDC, and then of course, the cost of vaccines,” Greenberg said. “If they're not led by the by the evidence, then oftentimes, those health care facilities or pharmacies, where people of color may be going, may not have the same stock of the high dose vaccine, for example, and therefore the likelihood of getting it and access is going to be different in those communities.”Greenberg noted that even prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, influenza was responsible for up to 52,000 deaths every year in America as well as the hospitalization of hundreds of thousands of other patients. Of the 3 available high-dose flu vaccines on the market, all of which are manufactured by Sanofi-Pasteur, Fluezone High Dose (HD) demonstrated to superior efficacy compared to a standard dose flu vaccine among patients 65 years and older.He hopes that the ACIP with grant a stronger recommendation of high-dose flu vaccines regardless of the manufacturer to help protect some of the most vulnerable patients in the country.“We need to make sure that that there are better flu vaccines available and that they're shown to be effective against the things that matter to patients,” Greenberg said. “You need to be able to demonstrate that your vaccine can protect beyond that typical flu infection and actually reduce hospitalizations for cardiac and respiratory diseases, that it can reduce the likelihood of having an NMI or a stroke in people who are at higher risk, because that's what matters to patients. And right now, the ACIP has that opportunity to do it.”To hear more from Dr. Greenberg, watch the video above.Related VideosRelated Content AdvertisementSeptember 16th 2024Helping Schools Calculate Respiratory Infection RiskAmanda Wilson, PhD Ashley Lowe, PhD, MSPH Lynn B. Gerald, PhD, MSPHJune 6th 2024The Changing Community-Acquired Pneumonia Landscape with Thomas File, MD, MSc, MACPKevin KunzmannJuly 31st 2024Survey Details General Public's Eroding Trust Level with Healthcare After COVID-19Patrick CampbellJune 14th 2022Sleeping Through Infectious Disease and the COVID-19 VaccineGiuliana GrossiMarch 28th 2024Short-Term Biofeedback Therapies Lead to Alleviation of Certain Long COVID SymptomsTim SmithMarch 22nd 2024Periprosthetic Joint Infections Linked to Increased Mortality in Rheumatoid Arthritis PatientsKevin KunzmannRelated Content AdvertisementSeptember 16th 2024Helping Schools Calculate Respiratory Infection RiskAmanda Wilson, PhD Ashley Lowe, PhD, MSPH Lynn B. Gerald, PhD, MSPHJune 6th 2024The Changing Community-Acquired Pneumonia Landscape with Thomas File, MD, MSc, MACPKevin KunzmannJuly 31st 2024Survey Details General Public's Eroding Trust Level with Healthcare After COVID-19Patrick CampbellJune 14th 2022Sleeping Through Infectious Disease and the COVID-19 VaccineGiuliana GrossiMarch 28th 2024Short-Term Biofeedback Therapies Lead to Alleviation of Certain Long COVID SymptomsTim SmithMarch 22nd 2024Periprosthetic Joint Infections Linked to Increased Mortality in Rheumatoid Arthritis PatientsKevin KunzmannAbout UsAdvertiseEditorialContact UsDo Not Sell My InformationPrivacyTerms & ConditionsContact Info2 Commerce Drive Cranbury, NJ 08512609-716-7777© 2024 MJH Life Sciences All rights reserved.Migraine with fever: Causes, treatment, and prevention Medical News TodayHealth ConditionsHealth ConditionsAlzheimer's & DementiaAnxietyAsthma & AllergiesAtopic DermatitisBreast CancerCancerCardiovascular HealthCOVID-19DiabetesEnvironment & SustainabilityExercise & FitnessEye HealthHeadache & MigraineHealth EquityHIV & AIDSHuman BiologyLeukemiaLGBTQIA+Men's HealthMental HealthMultiple Sclerosis (MS)NutritionParkinson's DiseasePsoriasisPsoriatic ArthritisSexual HealthUlcerative ColitisWomen's HealthHealth ProductsHealth ProductsAllNutrition & FitnessVitamins & SupplementsCBDSleepMental HealthAt-Home TestingMen’s HealthWomen’s HealthDiscoverNewsLatest NewsOriginal SeriesMedical MythsHonest NutritionThrough My EyesNew Normal HealthPodcastsAll3 ways to slow down type 2 diabetes-related brain agingToxic metals in tampons: Should you be worried?Can tattoos cause blood or skin cancer?Can we really ‘outrun the Grim Reaper’?What makes a diet truly heart-healthy?Is intermittent fasting actually bad for your heart?ToolsGeneral HealthDrugs A-ZHealth HubsHealth ToolsFind a DoctorBMI Calculators and ChartsBlood Pressure Chart: Ranges and GuideBreast Cancer: Self-Examination GuideSleep CalculatorQuizzesRA Myths vs FactsType 2 Diabetes: Managing Blood SugarAnkylosing Spondylitis Pain: Fact or FictionConnectAbout Medical News TodayWho We AreOur Editorial ProcessContent IntegrityConscious LanguageNewslettersSign UpFollow UsSubscribeWhat is the relationship between migraine and fever?Medically reviewed by Deena Kuruvilla, MD — Written by Carolyn Farnsworth — Updated on February 10, 2023Is it COVID-19?Other causesSelf-careDiagnosisPreventionContacting a doctorSummaryMigraine does not cause a fever. If a severe headache and fever occur together, it is likely due to another health condition, which may be infectious.A migraine headache involves severe pain that generally starts on one side of the head. Specialists do not diagnose migraine until the symptoms have happened on at least five occasions. Migraine triggers vary widely, and for some people, symptoms of another illness can trigger a migraine headache. However, in many cases, a severe headache and a fever result from a condition other than migraine.Below, we explore health conditions that are more likely to cause a severe headache and a fever.Could it be COVID-19?Share on Pintereststaticnak1983/Getty ImagesThe symptoms of COVID-19 differ from person to person, and some people have a headache. One study found that 98% of participants with COVID-19 had headaches. These lasted an average of 1 week, but 13% of the participants had a headache that lasted for over a month.There have been a few reports of people with COVID-19 experiencing migraine episodes. These people had dealt with migraine for years before getting COVID-19. Migraine is not a direct result of COVID-19.Other potential symptoms of COVID-19 include: a fever a new loss of taste or smellfatiguea dry coughshortness of breathvomiting diarrheaa sore throat Anyone with a headache and other COVID-19 symptoms should seek testing as soon as possible and otherwise stay home.Headaches and a high fever can be symptoms of long COVID, which involves some COVID-19 symptoms persisting or developing for weeks, months, or even longer.Learn more about long COVID and its symptoms.Causes of a headache and a feverMigraine usually causes a severe headache, but it does not cause fever. Below, learn about health issues that can cause both a headache and a fever, many of which are infectious.InfluenzaInfluenza, or the flu, is a common condition caused by an influenza virus. Some people with the flu have a mild illness, but it can be severe, particularly for older people and infants. A headache is a common flu symptom, and the flu can make an existing migraine headache worse. This may happen due to increased sinus pressure. For most people with the flu, the headache is mild and goes away on its own. Other flu symptoms can include: a runny noseaching musclesfatiguea coughchillsa fever The majority of flu cases improve with rest and home care. But anyone with a higher risk of complications may benefit from antiviral drugs, which can reduce the severity of symptoms and speed up recovery. Epstein-Barr virusThe Epstein-Barr virus is one of the most common causes of viral infection in humans. It generally spreads through bodily fluids, particularly saliva. This virus is perhaps best known for causing mononucleosis, an infection common in teenagers that is also known as mono or glandular fever. Some of the symptoms include: a headache a feverbody achessevere tiredness a sore throatA headache caused by mono tends to feel more like a tension headache than a migraine headache. Treatment for mono typically involves a few weeks of rest and hydration.Sinus headacheSinus headaches occur when there is pressure or inflammation inside the sinuses. These are small cavities behind the eyebrows and in the cheeks. When the sinuses become blocked or infected, a resulting headache can feel very similar to a migraine headache.A sinus headache and a fever can stem from a sinus infection. The other symptoms include:pain and pressure in the face a sore throat a runny or stuffy nosea coughMost sinus infections resolve on their own with rest and home care. Treatment may include decongestants, steam, or warm compresses. If a person has a fever, and the doctor finds that the infection is bacterial, they may prescribe an antibiotic.The coughing that stems from a sinus infection may trigger a migraine headache.Sinus headaches are sometimes misdiagnosed as migraine headaches, due to some common triggers, pain locations, and other symptoms. Research from 2013 points out that health experts should better distinguish the diagnostic criteria for sinus conditions and migraine. Hemiplegic migraine The only condition that causes a migraine headache and fever is called hemiplegic migraine. It also causes weakness on one side of the body. Hemiplegic migraine may be “familial,” if at least one other family member has it, or “sporadic,” when there is no family history.Some other symptoms of this type of migraine include: tirednessnumbnessimpaired coordination issues with vision Severe attacks of hemiplegic migraine can lead to fever, seizures, or coma. Hemiplegic migraine is extremely rare and occurs in approximately 0.01% of the general population. Healthcare professionals may use anti-inflammatory drugs, tricyclic antidepressants, antiseizure medications, and a variety of other drugs to treat it. MeningitisMeningitis is inflammation of the meninges, the membranes that surround the brain, and this can cause a headache.Meningitis may be due to an infection, an autoimmune disorder or cancer, or a reaction to a drug, for example. Depending on the cause and severity, it can be life threatening.Typical symptoms include:a fever neck pain or stiffnesslight sensitivityA person may also experience dizziness, confusion, and nausea and vomiting, as well as a headache.Encephalitis Encephalitis refers to inflammation of the brain. It is uncommon and can be very dangerous.A person first typically has flu-like symptoms, such as a high temperature and a headache. The following symptoms may then develop over hours, days, or weeks:confusion or disorientationseizureschanges in personality and behaviordifficulty speakingweakness or loss of movement in some parts of the bodyloss of consciousnessAnyone who has any of these symptoms should receive immediate medical care.Dental abscessesA dental abscess is a collection of pus in the teeth or gums. It results from a bacterial infection around or in a tooth.Symptoms commonly include:a feverpainan unpleasant taste in the mouthA person needs emergency medical care if a dental abscess occurs with:a high temperaturea decreased level of consciousnessa headachedehydrationTumorA cancerous tumor can cause many symptoms, and sometimes it causes none. Some common signs and symptoms of cancer include:pain, including a headachea feverfatiguechanges in bowel or bladder functionunusual bleeding or dischargea lumpHere, learn about other causes of headache and a fever.Self-care strategiesSelf-care techniques cannot cure migraine, but they may help reduce the symptoms. A person can:place a cool compress on their foreheadlie down in a silent, dark roomtake over-the-counter pain medicationrest or sleepThese strategies may also help with headaches caused by other conditions, such as the flu or a sinus infection.Diagnosis It can be difficult to determine whether symptoms indicate a severe headache or a migraine episode. Before a person receives a migraine diagnosis, a doctor considers these criteria:whether the person has had at least five migraine episodes, each lasting 4–72 hourswhether any pain occurs on one side of the head whether there is any accompanying vomiting or nausea whether there is a pulsing or throbbing sensationwhether there are any changes in vision Prevention A number of medications can prevent or treat migraine episodes. Calcium channel blockers, beta-blockers, antidepressants, and anticonvulsants can help prevent these episodes, for example.Research has also shown that acupuncture may prevent a migraine attack or prevent one in an early stage from worsening. Health experts recommend that people who experience frequent migraine episodes get regular exercise. Even low-impact exercises have shown promise in preventing episodes. When to contact a doctor Anyone with a severe headache and a fever should receive prompt medical care and guidance. If the pain is debilitating, consider an urgent visit to a healthcare facility. Headaches that occur with a fever may not be related to migraine, but they can stem from serious illnesses, many of which are infectious.Anyone with migraine but no fever should see a doctor if: They have more than one migraine episode per week.Migraine begins to interfere with regular activities, such as work or school. Over-the-counter medication is insufficient to ease the pain and other symptoms.In general, anyone experiencing frequent, severe headaches should contact a doctor. Only a healthcare professional can diagnose migraine and provide the right management and treatment recommendations.SummaryMigraine does not cause a fever, and in most cases, a fever and a headache stem from a different health issue, such as an infection. In some cases, however, the symptoms of another illness can trigger a migraine episode.Anyone with a fever and a headache should consult a medical professional or seek testing for COVID-19. With adequate rest and proper medical attention, most causes of a fever plus a headache resolve over time. Flu / Cold / SARSHeadache / MigraineInfectious Diseases / Bacteria / VirusesNeurology / NeuroscienceCOVID-19How we reviewed this article:SourcesMedical News Today has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.About Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). (2020).https://www.cdc.gov/epstein-barr/about-ebv.htmlAbout infectious mononucleosis. (2020).https://www.cdc.gov/epstein-barr/about-mono.htmlBarber, M., et al. (2020). Exercise and migraine prevention: A review of the literature.https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11916-020-00868-6Cutter, E. E. (2021). How to diagnose migraine.https://americanheadachesociety.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/AHS-First-Contact-Diagnosing-Migraine-.pdfDental abscess. (2018).https://cks.nice.org.ukopics/dental-abscess/Diener, H.-C., et al. (2019). Treatment of migraine attacks and prevention of migraine: Guidelines by the German migraine and headache society and the German Society of Neurology.https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/2514183X18823377Encephalitis. (2019).https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/encephalitis/Epstein-Barr virus. (n.d.).https://headaches.org/2007/10/25/epstein-barr-virus/Flu. (2017).https://medlineplus.gov/flu.htmlFriedman, D. I. (2017). When should I see a doctor about migraines?https://americanmigrainefoundation.orgesource-library/when-should-i-see-a-doctor-about-migraines/García-Azorín, D., et al. (2021).https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-94220-6Hemiplegic migraine. (2019).https:/arediseases.orgare-diseases/hemiplegic-migraine/Hersi, K., et al. (2021). Meningitis.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459360/Is it migraine or sinus headache? (2021).https://americanmigrainefoundation.orgesource-library/sinus-headache/Kumar, A., et al. (2021). Hemiplegic migraine.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK513302/Lui, J. Z., et al. Loneliness and migraine self-management: A cross-sectional assessment. (2020). https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2150132720924874Meningitis. (2021).https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/meningitisMigraine: Overview. (2021).https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279373/#_NBK279373_pubdet_Migraine attack triggers. (n.d.).https://migrainetrust.org/live-with-migraine/self-management/common-triggers/Patel, Z. M., et al. (2013). “Sinus headache”: Rhinogenic headache or migraine? An evidence-based guide to diagnosis and treatment.https://www.uclahealth.org/head-neck-surgery/workfiles/Secure/Suggested%20Readings/Patel_IFAR_Sinus_Headache_2013.pdfPreventative treatments. (2016).https://americanmigrainefoundation.orgesource-library/understanding-migrainepreventive-treatments/Sinus infection (sinusitis). (2019).https://www.cdc.gov/antibiotic-use/sinus-infection.htmlSymptoms of COVID-19. (2021).https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.htmlTop ten migraine triggers and how to deal with them. (2017).https://americanmigrainefoundation.orgesource-libraryop-10-migraine-triggers/Treatment: What you need to know. (2021).https://www.cdc.gov/flureatmentreatment.htmWaliszewska-Prosół, M., et al. (2021). The unusual course of a migraine attack during COVID-19 infection — Case studies of three patients.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8101002/What your flu headache is telling you. (n.d.).https://headaches.org/2018/02/26/flu-headache-telling/Share this articleMedically reviewed by Deena Kuruvilla, MD — Written by Carolyn Farnsworth — Updated on February 10, 2023Latest newsClassic and green Mediterranean diets may help slow brain agingRheumatoid arthritis linked to changes in the gut microbiome in new studyDaytime sleepiness may be a sign of higher dementia riskCould taking fish oil supplements help lower cancer risk?Can a combo of “active” therapies help lower dementia risk?Related CoverageHeadache and fever: What's the link?Medically reviewed by Cynthia Taylor Chavoustie, MPAS, PA-CHeadache and fever are common symptoms for many different medical conditions. Sometimes people may experience both a headache and a fever. Learn more.READ MORECan COVID-19 cause headaches?Medically reviewed by Meredith Goodwin, MD, FAAFPCOVID-19 can cause headaches, but they may also happen due to conditions such as dehydration. Headache is also a common COVID-19 vaccine side effect.READ MOREGlandular fever: What to knowMedically reviewed by E. Mimi Arquilla, DOGlandular fever, or infectious mononucleosis, stems from a viral infection. It causes fatigue, swollen glands, a sore throat, and other symptoms. Find…READ MOREImitrex: Pregnancy, breastfeeding, and birth control information pregnancyLearn about Imitrex and the effects it might have on pregnancy, breastfeeding, and birth control. READ MOREBotox dosageBotox is a prescription drug used to treat various conditions, including overactive bladder and excessive sweating. Learn about the drug’s dosages…READ MOREAbout UsContact UsTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsHealth HubsMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzyFrontiers | Applying the Spatial Transmission Network to the Forecast of Infectious Diseases Across Multiple Regions Skip to main content Top bar navigation Frontiers in Public Health About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Search Frontiers in Public Health Sections Sections Aging and Public HealthChildren and HealthDigital Public HealthDisaster and Emergency MedicineEnvironmental Health and ExposomeHealth EconomicsInfectious Diseases: Epidemiology and PreventionInjury Prevention and ControlLife-Course Epidemiology and Social Inequalities in HealthOccupational Health and SafetyPlanetary HealthPublic Health Education and PromotionPublic Health PolicyPublic Health and NutritionPublic Mental HealthRadiation and HealthSubstance Use Disorders and Behavioral Addictions ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Frontiers in Public Health Sections Sections Aging and Public HealthChildren and HealthDigital Public HealthDisaster and Emergency MedicineEnvironmental Health and ExposomeHealth EconomicsInfectious Diseases: Epidemiology and PreventionInjury Prevention and ControlLife-Course Epidemiology and Social Inequalities in HealthOccupational Health and SafetyPlanetary HealthPublic Health Education and PromotionPublic Health PolicyPublic Health and NutritionPublic Mental HealthRadiation and HealthSubstance Use Disorders and Behavioral Addictions ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Frontiers in Public Health Sections Sections Aging and Public HealthChildren and HealthDigital Public HealthDisaster and Emergency MedicineEnvironmental Health and ExposomeHealth EconomicsInfectious Diseases: Epidemiology and PreventionInjury Prevention and ControlLife-Course Epidemiology and Social Inequalities in HealthOccupational Health and SafetyPlanetary HealthPublic Health Education and PromotionPublic Health PolicyPublic Health and NutritionPublic Mental HealthRadiation and HealthSubstance Use Disorders and Behavioral Addictions ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Submit your research Search Download article Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) Share on Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex 1,3K Total views 705 Downloads 6 Citations Citation numbers are available from Dimensions View article impact View altmetric score Share on Edited by Chiara de Waure University of Perugia, Italy Reviewed by Caijun Sun Sun Yat-sen University, China Bin Guo Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, China Table of contents Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion Conclusion Data Availability Statement Author Contributions Funding Conflict of Interest Publisher's Note Supplementary Material References Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex Check for updates Download article Download Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) ORIGINAL RESEARCH article Front. Public Health, 11 March 2022 Sec. Infectious Diseases: Epidemiology and Prevention Volume 10 - 2022 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.774984 Applying the Spatial Transmission Network to the Forecast of Infectious Diseases Across Multiple Regions Huimin Wang1Jianqing Qiu1Cheng Li1Hongli Wan1Changhong Yang2Tao Zhang1* 1Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, West China School of Public Health and West China Fourth Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China 2Sichuan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Chengdu, China Objective: Timely and accurate forecast of infectious diseases is essential for achieving precise prevention and control. A good forecasting method of infectious diseases should have the advantages of interpretability, feasibility, and forecasting performance. Since previous research had illustrated that the spatial transmission network (STN) showed good interpretability and feasibility, this study further explored its forecasting performance for infectious diseases across multiple regions. Meanwhile, this study also showed whether the STN could overcome the challenges of model rationality and practical needs. Methods: The construction of the STN framework involved three major steps: the spatial kluster analysis by tree edge removal (SKATER) algorithm, structure learning by dynamic Bayesian network (DBN), and parameter learning by the vector autoregressive moving average (VARMA) model. Then, we evaluated the forecasting performance of STN by comparing its accuracy with that of the mechanism models like susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered-susceptible (SEIRS) and machine-learning algorithm like long-short-term memory (LSTM). At the same time, we assessed the robustness of forecasting performance of STN in high and low incidence seasons. The influenza-like illness (ILI) data in the Sichuan Province of China from 2010 to 2017 were used as an example for illustration. Results: The STN model revealed that ILI was likely to spread among multiple cities in Sichuan during the study period. During the whole study period, the forecasting accuracy of the STN (mean absolute percentage error [MAPE] = 31.134) was significantly better than that of the LSTM (MAPE = 41.657) and the SEIRS (MAPE = 62.039). In addition, the forecasting performance of STN was also superior to those of the other two methods in either the high incidence season (MAPE = 24.742) or the low incidence season (MAPE = 26.209), and the superiority was more obvious in the high incidence season. Conclusion: This study applied the STN to the forecast of infectious diseases across multiple regions. The results illustrated that the STN not only had good accuracy in forecasting performance but also indicated the spreading directions of infectious diseases among multiple regions to a certain extent. Therefore, the STN is a promising candidate to improve the surveillance work. Introduction The outbreak of infectious diseases poses a serious threat to public health and imposes a heavy burden on the global economy. According to recent research studies, there were around 291,000–646,000 deaths caused by seasonal influenza-related respiratory illnesses worldwide every year (1, 2). The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated that from October 1, 2019 to April 4, 2020, there were 39,000,000–56,000,000 flu infections and 24,000–62,000 flu deaths in the US (3). In addition, the WHO assessed that the first influenza pandemic in this century damaged the global economy by around $800 billion (4). In view of the severe threats of infectious diseases, consistently improving the infectious disease surveillance work is the top priority for health promotion (5). How to utilize the surveillance data to achieve accurate and reliable forecasting in the early stage of infectious diseases is an important basis for formulating corresponding prevention and control strategies, so it has attracted the attention of a large number of researchers. Specifically, good forecasting for infectious diseases requires three main properties: (1) interpretability, that is, the model reflects the epidemic features of infectious diseases in order to guarantee the forecasted results to make sense in practice, (2) feasibility, which involves the support of statistical software (such as SPSS, SAS, and R), the availability of data, and the needs from disease surveillance, etc., and (3) forecasting performance, the inherent ability of the model to accurately forecast the future epidemics of infectious diseases, so as to help propose precise prevention and control measures and to allocate limited resources in the most needed places. To this end, previous research proposed the spatial transmission network (STN) and showed its good interpretability and feasibility for the transmission mechanism of diseases (6). However, the last but most important work of forecasting performance assessment was left to be done. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to further explore the forecasting performance of the STN for infectious diseases across multiple regions. However, there were two major challenges when exploring the forecasting performance of STN. The first challenge was related to the rationality of the model. The STN model essentially involved spatial clustering analysis, structure learning, and parameter learning, where the vector autoregressive moving average (VARMA) model was adopted for parameter learning. Although it seemed natural to apply the VARMA model to forecasting, the rationality remained quite unclear in the spatio-temporal settings, especially when compared with mechanism models (7, 8) and machine learning methods (9). For example, as classic representatives of mechanism models, the compartmental models, such as susceptible-infectious-recovered-susceptible (SIRS) (10, 11), susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (SEIR) (12), and susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered-susceptible (SEIRS) (13), have been widely applied in the field of influenza prediction. Meanwhile, the machine learning methods are also playing more and more important roles in infectious disease forecasting. Svitlana et al. established and evaluated the capability of long-short term memory (LSTM) for nowcasting (predicting in “real time”) and forecasting (predicting the future) of influenza-like illness (ILI) dynamics, which found that the neural network structure that relied on LSTM units outperformed the traditional regression model (14). Therefore, the rationality of the VARMA model in infectious disease forecasting should be qualified by comparing its performance with those of the machine learning models and mechanism models. In addition, the second challenge came from practical needs. To be specific, both spatial and temporal transmission of infectious diseases are influenced by many external factors, such as the effective distance between the cities, population size, and transportation. Previous research showed fantastic applications on how such factors could be used to improve forecasting performance (15). In addition, another inspiring study suggested that, in order to verify the robustness of the model when dealing with seasonal infectious diseases, its forecasting performance should be verified in both high and low incidence seasons (16). All these contributions shed light upon a systematic way to build the forecasting framework based on the STN model. This study will show whether the STN could overcome the above two challenges and contribute to the forecast of infectious diseases across multiple regions. The sentinel surveillance data of ILI in the Sichuan Province of China from 2010 to 2017 was used as an example for illustration. Sichuan is one of the core regions for influenza surveillance in China. The representativeness of these areas not only guaranteed the applicability of this method in these regions but also offered evidence for future application to other regions. Materials and Methods Data Collection and Preparation Ever since the outbreak of influenza A (H1N1) in 2009, China has established a nationwide ILI sentinel surveillance system, which consists of 193 sentinel hospitals in 30 provinces at present. The identification of patients with ILI is based on the standard case definition of the WHO, that is, body temperature ≥38°C with either cough or sore throat, in the absence of an alternative diagnosis (17). Besides, the ILI% was widely used in influenza surveillance to reflect the local intensity of the influenza epidemic, where ILI% = (the number of ILI cases in outpatient and emergency departments)/(the total number of outpatient and emergency cases) ×100% (18, 19). Taking n places as an example, x1(t), x2(t), ⋯ , xn(t) denoted the ILI% values of the place n at the t-th week. Accordingly, all the observed data at the t-th week could be noted as xt = {x1(t), x2(t), ⋯ , xn(t)}, where xt is a vector with n series components (boldface notation indicated vectors and matrices hereafter). As for this study, the weekly ILI% time series data came from each city of Sichuan Province from 2010 to 2017, so t ranged from 1 to 416. Such sample size was large enough relative to the complexity of the models utilized below, since the maximum degrees of freedom of the STN, LSTM, and SEIRS model employed by this study were no more than 40. In addition, Zhang et al. reported that at least 3 years of weekly historical data were required for VARMA-type models to assure the quality of infectious diseases surveillance (20). Therefore, it was plausible that the sample size in this study could support the model estimation. Furthermore, the application of STN required either each univariate time series to be weak stationary (i.e., the mean and covariance matrices of the time series are independent on time), or the multivariate time series to meet the cointegration condition (i.e., a linear combination of individual unit-root non-stationary time series becomes a stationary series), where the weak stationary and the cointegration conditions could be checked by the unit-root test and cointegration test, respectively (21). If both conditions were violated, one should seek other time series analysis techniques for the solution. For the sake of clarity, this study only focused on situations when both conditions were satisfied, and readers who might be interested in more complicated situations could refer to the works of other researchers (22). The Construction of STN The construction of STN mainly consisted of three steps: spatial clustering analysis, structure learning, and parameter learning. First, due to the heterogeneity of ILI% data in Sichuan Province, the spatial kluster analysis by tree edge removal (SKATER) algorithm was used to divide the whole area into several homogeneous clusters. Second, the structural information of STN (i.e., the existence and direction of disease transmission) among cities in each cluster was identified from the original data through structure learning. Lastly, the parameters of STN that measured the intensity of disease transmission between different cities were estimated by parameter learning. After the construction of STN, the future incidence of infectious diseases could be forecasted. Spatial Clustering Analysis To avoid the curse of dimensionality in modeling and to make the results more interpretable, the SKATER algorithm was used for spatial clustering analysis. This is a graph clustering algorithm based on the minimum spanning tree, which obtains the clustering result that satisfies the spatial adjacency constraint by cutting off the edges of the minimum spanning tree (23). Specifically, after standardizing the ILI%, population density (people per-square kilometer), and the number of domestic tourists (10,000 person-times), the Euclidean distance between the two regions was calculated to obtain the difference matrix. The root adjacency method was used to constrain the adjacency matrix, the minimum clustering area size was set to two regions, and the result of cluster division was finally obtained. The Structure Learning of STN The first-order conditional dependencies approximation for dynamic Bayesian network (G1DBN) was used to build the structure of STN (24). It implemented the structural learning in a two-step way. Specifically, it first learned a directed acyclic graph from the first-order partial dependence relationships among the time series of different regions. Then, it optimized the graph from the first step to infer the network structure of the STN. As a result, the estimated STN structure would include a set of nodes to represent each city and pairs of edges to indicate which cities have an impact on others in influenza transmission (6). The Parameter Learning of STN We used the VARMA model for parameter learning, which was a flexible modeling framework that could comprehensively describe and predict the dynamic relations among each component of multivariate time series (25). Taking the n-dimensional as an example, a general VARMA (p, q) model can be written as: xt=a0+∑i=1paixt-i+εt-∑j=1qbjεt-j. (1) Where, p and q are non-negative integers, a0 is an n-dimensional constant vector, ai and bj are n × n constant matrices, and {εt} is a sequence of independent and identically distributed random vectors. In addition, εt is the white noise sequence and the residual of the model fitting, and ∑j=1qbjεt-j is a moving average (MA) term. The model-fitting step was comprised of order determination and parameter estimation. First, in the part of order selection, the values of p and q in Equation (1) were determined. Tiao and Tsay proposed to use the two-way p-value table for extended cross-correlation matrices to specify the order (p, q) (26). Once the orders were determined, the parameters of the VARMA model could be estimated by the conditional likelihood method. However, the VARMA model may encounter a problem of identifiability, which means that the coefficients may not be uniquely determined. To solve this problem, this study used the Kronecker index approach to perform structural specification of the VARMA model (25). The Forecast of STN We applied the minimum mean-squared error criterion for the forecasts of the VARMA (p, q) time series xt. For VARMA (p, q) model, the l-step ahead forecast of xt+l at the forecast origin t is: xt(l)=E(xt+l|Ft)=a0+∑i=1paiXt(l-i). (2) A more convenient expression based on MA appears as: xt(l)=E(xt+l|Ft)=∑k=0∞ψl+kεt-k. (3) The prediction of the minimum mean-squared error of xt+l is the conditional expectation of xt+l at a given Ft. We denote Ft and the information available at t and ψl as the coefficient matrices. The l-step ahead forecast error is Equation (4). Consequently, the covariance matrix of l-step ahead forecast error is Equation (5): et(l)=εt+l+∑k=1l-1ψkεt+l-k, (4) Cov[et(l)]=∑ε+∑k=1t-1ψk∑εψkT, (5) where Equation (4) shows that the forecast error tends to the random part of xt as l increases. When l approaches 0, xt(l) tends to E(xt). Besides, Equation (5) shows that, as l approaches infinity, Cov[et(l)] converges to Cov(xt). As the time lag increases, the dynamic dependence of the stationary reversible VARMA model decays exponentially to 0. Equation (5) also provides an effective method for calculating the covariance matrix of the forecast error. The Comparison Models Since it has been already reported that the forecasting performance of the VARMA model was superior to that of the univariate time series model (27), this study chose another two mainstream methods, SEIRS and LSTM, as comparison models. The two methods respectively represented the mechanism models and machine learning methods, which could serve as benchmarks for forecasting performance comparison. The SEIRS Model The SEIRS model, as a type of mechanism model, has four groups: susceptible (S), exposed (E), infectious (I), and recovered (R), with the total population size N = S+E+I+R. For ILI, the immunity of individuals after recovery is only temporary, and there is still the possibility of reinfection. We emphasized that both infected persons and exposed persons who may be in the incubation period were infectious. Meanwhile, this study did not consider dramatic population changes during only a few years. Therefore, the SEIRS model was adopted in this study to describe the transmission of ILI. The specific equation of the SEIRS model adopted was as follows: {dSdt=−rβISN−r2β2ESN+λRdEdt=rβISN−αE+r2β2ESNdIdt=αE−γIdRdt=γI−λR (6) In Equation (6), the N represents the total number of people in the region. S, E, I, and R denote susceptible, exposed, infected, and recovered group, respectively. For each unknown parameter, β is the probability of the infected person transmitting the virus to the susceptible person, β2 is the probability of the exposed person transmitting the virus to the susceptible person, r denotes the average number of susceptible persons in contact with infected persons, r2 denotes the average number of susceptible persons in contact with exposed persons, α represents the probability of the exposed person becoming infected, γ represents the probability of the infected person recovering to health, and λ indicates the probability of the recovered person returning to a susceptible state. The optimal estimates of these parameters were estimated by the historical ILI% data of each city based on the minimum fitted error. The LSTM Method The LSTM neural network is an improved algorithm based on the recurrent neural network (RNN). By adding a “gate” structure, it overcomes the shortcomings of RNN and avoids the vanishing gradient problem. “Gate” structure can selectively forget or memorize information, including the existence of a sigmoid activation function. A LSTM unit contains three gates: forgetting gate, input gate, and output gate, which makes the invariable self-cycling weight matrix in RNN change. These changed weights are adjusted continuously according to the learning process, so as to solve the problem of gradient disappearance. Performance Validation The performance validation step included residual checking and performance comparison. For the residual checking part, since a well-behaved VARMA model should ideally extract all the regular pattern information out of the original data, the residuals of the model were white noise (i.e., the data should be completely random series without any regular pattern information). Therefore, the Ljung-Box statistics was utilized in this study to verify the model by testing whether residuals of the model were only white noises. As for the performance comparison part, we compared the results of the STN with those of the other two types of models. To this end, the accuracy of the methods was measured. The accuracy evaluated whether the forecasted values of the ILI% were close to the real ones. In this study, considering that the value of ILI% was decimal, the relative measurement index would be appropriate to distinguish the difference of forecasting performance of the models, so we adopted mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) to monitor the accuracy. In addition, to assess the forecasting performance of the model, the whole time series data was split into the training set and the testing set. We used the first set for the test of model fitting and the second one for forecasting. For the overall performance, the training set integrated the data from the 1st week of 2010 to the 26th week of 2017, while the testing set data consisted of data from the second-half year of 2017. Furthermore, we also tried several different dataset splitting methods (see Section Seasonal Forecast) to evaluate the seasonal forecasting performance. Seasonal Forecast Influenza has the characteristic of seasonal epidemics, and the high incidence season of disease epidemics is from November to March of the next year. In order to study whether there was a difference in the forecasting performance of STN in the high incidence season and the low incidence season of the disease, and the robustness of the forecasting performance of STN, the last high incidence season (data integrated from the 44th week of 2016 to the 13th week of 2017) and the last low incidence season (data integrated from the 14th week of 2017 to the 43rd week of 2017) were specifically divided from the original data set for forecasting verification. The forecasting performances of the STN and the other two models were compared in the high and low incidence seasons of ILI. All the above statistical tests were conducted at the statistically significant level of 0.05. The SKATER was performed in GeoDa 1.18.0.0. SEIRS model and LSTM model were performed in MATLAB R2021a. The rest of the statistical analyses were performed in R 4.0.1 using the computing packages {MTS} for the VARMA model and {G1DBN} for DBN. Results Cluster Partitioning The grouping of eight clusters based on the SKATER algorithm is shown in Figure 1. However, this study did not include the clusters where these cities may contain outliers. Therefore, 14 cities in Sichuan Province were included, which were divided into 5 clusters (i.e., cluster 1: Aba, Mianyang, Ganzi, and Ya'an; cluster 2: Guang'an, Suining, and Ziyang; cluster 3: Yibin, Luzhou, and Neijiang; cluster 4: Chengdu and Deyang; cluster 5: Meishan and Zigong). FIGURE 1 Figure 1. The cluster results of spatial kluster analysis by tree edge removal (SKATER) algorithm. Data Preparation and Description The ILI% series of actual values of the 14 cities in Sichuan could be seen from Figure 3 and Supplementary Figures 1–4. In most time series, stationarity could be visually verified since there was no dramatic change. Furthermore, except for Chengdu, Suining, and Ziyang, the unit-root test showed that the values of P of other cities were less than 0.05, which further confirmed that the time series were stationary. For Chengdu, Suining, and Ziyang, cointegration tests were performed on ILI% time series vectors of all cities in their clusters (i.e., clusters 2 and 4). The results were significant, indicating that there were both cointegrations among ILI% sequences of cities in these two clusters. Besides, from the cross-correlation plots shown in Figures 2A–F and Supplementary Figures 5–8, the existence of dynamic correlations among the ILI% time series had been verified. Therefore, it was appropriate to use the VARMA model for further analysis. FIGURE 2 Figure 2. The cross-correlation of ILI% between cities of cluster 1. (A) Aba and Mianyang. (B) Aba and Ganzi. (C) Aba and Ya'an. (D) Mianyang and Ganzi. (E) Mianyang and Ya'an. (F) Ganzi and Ya'an. Estimates of the VARMA Model In this study, we estimated the VARMA model for 1–390 weeks. The best model for each cluster is listed in Table 1. TABLE 1 Table 1. The best vector autoregressive moving average (VARMA) model for each cluster. Performance Validation It could be seen from Figure 3 and Supplementary Figures 1–4 that both the fitted values and forecasted values approximated very well to the actual ones. In addition, the forecasting part also exhibited that the 95% CI of forecasted values could basically contain the actual values, which suggested the STN was also good at precision. More details about the residual checking and model comparison are given below. FIGURE 3 Figure 3. The fitted/forecasted time series vs. the actual values for cities of cluster 1. (A) Aba. (B) Mianyang. (C) Ganzi. (D) Ya'an. Residual Checking For cluster 1, the Q statistics for 1-, 5-, 10-, and 20-lag Ljung-Box tests were 0.56 (df = 16, P = 1.00), 45.84 (df = 80, P = 1.00), 136.76 (df = 160, P = 0.91), and 294.01 (df = 320, P = 0.85), respectively, which validated that the VARMA model had fully extracted the useful information out of the original data and that the left residuals were only white noise series. Meanwhile, compared with Figures 2A–F, 4 displays that the information of cross-correlation between dynamic time series of cluster 1 has been fully extracted by the VARMA model. The other clusters had similar results. More details are given in Supplementary Figures 9–12. FIGURE 4 Figure 4. The cross-correlation of the residuals between cities of cluster 1. (A) The residuals of Aba and Mianyang. (B) The residuals of Aba and Ganzi. (C) The residuals of Aba and Ya'an. (D) The residuals of Mianyang and Ganzi. (E) The residuals of Mianyang and Ya'an. (F) The residuals of Ganzi and Ya'an. Performance Comparisons Comparing the forecasting accuracy of STN, SEIRS, and LSTM models, Table 2 lists the MAPE value comparison of the three models. The average MAPE of the 14 cites of STN was 31.134, which was 25.26 and 49.82% less than that of the LSTM and SEIRS respectively. At the city level, the MAPE of STN was almost the smallest among the three models, with only a few exceptions. For example, the forecasting accuracy of STN was not the best among the three models in the three cities in cluster 2, which might be affected by the instability of the original data series of Suining and Ziyang. Although there was a cointegration relationship between the three sequences in this cluster, the instability of the sequence still affected the forecasting performance of the STN model. In addition, for the forecasting of Luzhou, SEIRS performed slightly better than STN, which might be influenced by the geographical location of Luzhou. As Luzhou is located at the intersection of Sichuan, Yunnan, Guizhou, and Chongqing, its epidemic situation is likely to be affected by other cities outside the province, which was out the scope of this study since it only built networks within Sichuan Province. However, even in this case, the forecasting performance of the other two cities in cluster 3 was still good. As for Ganzi, it could be seen from Figure 3 that ILI% remains at a low level from 2010 to 2015, and the incidence of ILI in some weeks was reported to be zero. Except for the above plausible exceptions, the accuracy of STN forecasting was generally better than that of the SEIRS and LSTM models. TABLE 2 Table 2. The comparison of the forecasting mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of the three methods. The Results of the Seasonal Forecast The Forecast of High Incidence Season The training set and testing set were redivided, and the forecast analysis of high incidence season used data integrated from the 1st week of 2010 to the 43rd week of 2016 as the training set, data integrated from the 44th week of 2016 to the 13th week of 2017 as the testing set. Table 3 lists the comparison of MAPE values of the three models in forecast analysis in high incidence season. According to the mean MAPE of the 14 cities, the forecasting accuracy advantage of STN was more obvious than that of LSTM and SEIRS. The MAPE value of STN decreased to 24.742 when compared with that before the seasonal division of the forecast set, and the MAPE value of LSTM reached about three times that of STN. For each city except Zigong, the accuracy of STN forecasting of the other cities was better than that of the other two models. In Zigong, the forecasting accuracy of LSTM was slightly better than that of STN. However, it did not affect the overall assessment of performance since the MAPE in Zigong was already very low and the difference between STN and LSTM was even lower. TABLE 3 Table 3. The comparison of the forecasting MAPE in the high incidence season of the three methods. The Forecast of Low Incidence Season In the forecasting analysis of low incidence season, we included the data integrated from the 1st week of 2010 to the 13th week of 2017 as the training set, and the data integrated from the 14th week of 2017 to the 43rd week of 2017 as the testing set. Table 4 lists the comparison of MAPE values of the three models in the forecasting analysis of low incidence season. According to the mean MAPE of the 14 cities, the forecasting MAPE of STN decreased to 26.209 when compared with that before the seasonal division of the forecast set and was still better than that of LSTM and SEIRS. At the city level, the accuracy of STN was better than that of the other two models for most cities excluding Mianyang, Ganzi, and Ziyang. The low accuracy of STN forecasting in Ganzi and Ziyang might be owed to the reasons mentioned in Section Performance comparisons, and the accuracy of Ganzi affected that of Mianyang since they were in the same cluster. TABLE 4 Table 4. The comparison of the forecasting MAPE in the low incidence season of the three methods. In general, the accuracy of STN forecasting in both high and low incidence seasons was the best among the three models, and the MAPE value of STN decreased significantly when compared with the forecast set which was not divided according to the seasonality of influenza. To be more specific, the numbers of regions with the best accuracy of STN forecasting in high incidence season and low incidence season increased, especially in high incidence season. This showed that STN had good forecasting performance and strong robustness in both high and low incidence seasons. Furthermore, STN had better forecasting accuracy either in the high or low incidence season, but it was more suitable in the high incidence season. Discussion The results of this study illustrated that the STN had advantages in forecasting performance of infectious diseases across multiple regions. The accuracy of its forecasting performance was superior to SEIRS and LSTM. Combined with previous research results (6), it could be seen that the STN would be very helpful in guiding the practical prevention and control work of infectious diseases. According to Stoto (28), a practical surveillance system should include three parts: continuous monitoring of multivariate data, applying algorithms to raise the alarm when something unusual is happening, and a protocol on how to respond to an alarm. It was observed from our results that the STN could assist to improve all three parts of the surveillance system. First, as a multivariate time series analysis model, the STN model could inherently integrate and extract information from multivariate data, which could not only be limited to a single variable (e.g., ILI%) across regions but could also contain other types of variables (e.g., meteorological, social-economic, and environmental factors). The second advantage of STN was that its results could suggest when and where the next outbreak would probably occur and how serious the next outbreak would be, so that it could provide suggestions and evidence on whether an alarm should be raised. Last but not least, the information of direction and time-lag of influenza transmission exhibited by STN could also indicate the way about how to respond to an alarm. For example, this study found that there was a 1-week lagging transmission route from Yibin to Luzhou (the estimated effect was 0.248), which suggested that Luzhou should pay attention to the epidemic situation of Yibin. The same suggestion was also applicable to Yibin, where there was a 2-week lagging transmission route from Neijiang to Yibin (the estimated effect was 0.014). Furthermore, the lag effect as long as 2 weeks also reminded that the surveillance of influenza should maintain a long enough temporal window for early warning. Since the interpretation of the STN model and its potential application were highly consistent with the establishment of a multi-point trigger and a multi-channel surveillance mechanism of infectious diseases (29), it was expected that the STN model could probably serve as a new tool for the improvement of intelligent early warning of infectious diseases. Except for the interpretation of results, there were still other features that could also guarantee the potential use of STN in the practice of influenza surveillance. First, the VARMA model could provide evidence of both strengths of association and temporality, which were the two key points of the Hill's criteria for causality (30). Meanwhile, under some mild conditions, the probability distribution of the VARMA model could be reliably represented as a causal network, and the latter was a commonly used tool in causal inference (24). To this end, it was plausible that the STN could at least partly serve for the etiological study to screen crucial clues of the cause-and-effect relationships. Secondly, from the perspective of representativeness, China is a large country with great diversities among different areas in many aspects (e.g., environment, population, economy, and social customs), and Sichuan Province has the fourth largest population, the fifth largest land, and the sixth highest GDP in China. Besides, the population in Sichuan province includes 55 of China's 56 ethnic groups, and there are many major types of landforms in Sichuan (e.g., mountains, hills, plateaus, and plains). Therefore, the application of STN to the surveillance of influenza in Sichuan province suggested that it could also be considered for infectious diseases surveillance in other areas. However, it should also be acknowledged that there were still some limits in our study. For example, this study provided our explanations based on the features of our analyzed results and some practical experience, so relevant etiological and laboratory data were still in need to further identify the speculations about the spreading direction of influenza in the Sichuan province. Besides, there was a long way to go from model building to making causal inferences about influenza epidemics in the real world. Therefore, it was highly expected that the STN could provide a new way for causal inference in the surveillance of infectious diseases. Conclusion This study applied the STN to forecasting infectious diseases across multiple regions. The results illustrated that the STN not only had good accuracy in forecasting performance but could also indicate the spreading directions of infectious diseases among multiple regions to a certain extent. Therefore, the STN was a promising candidate to improve the surveillance work. Data Availability Statement The data analyzed in this study is subject to the following licensesestrictions: the data that support the findings of this study are available from Sichuan Center for Disease Control and Prevention but restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data are however available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of Sichuan Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Requests to access these datasets should be directed to CY, changhong_yang@163.com. Author Contributions HWang consulted the literature, analyzed the data, and was a major contributor in writing the manuscript. JQ analyzed the data and wrote part of the manuscript. CL wrote part of the manuscript and checked the full manuscript. HWan analyzed the results. CY collected the data. TZ analyzed the data and reviewed all the material. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. Funding This research work was funded by Sichuan Science and Technology Program (2020YFS0015, 2020YFS0091, and 2021YFS0001-LH), Health Commission of Sichuan Province (20PJ092), National Natural Science Foundation of China (81602935), Chongqing Science and Technology Program (cstc2020jscxcylhX0003), Chengdu Science and Technology Program (2021-YF05-01585-SN), Sichuan University (2018hhf-26), Central government funding items (2021zc02), and Liangshan Prefecture Center for Disease Control and Prevention (H210322). Conflict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher's Note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Supplementary Material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.774984/full#supplementary-material References 1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Seasonal flu death estimate increases worldwide (2017). Available online at: https://www.cdc.gov/mediaeleases/2017/p1213-flu-death-estimate.html (accessed August 28, 2020). 2. Iuliano AD, Roguski KM, Chang HH, Muscatello DJ, Palekar R, Tempia S, et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet. (2018) 391:1285–300. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)33293-2 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2019–2020 U.S. Flu season: preliminary burden estimates (2020). Available online at: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/preliminary-in-season-estimates.htm (accessed August 28, 2020). 4. World Health Organization. The strategic movement of WHO to deal with influenza pandemics (2006). Available online at: https://www.who.int/csresources/publications/influenza/CHfinal.pdf?ua=1 (accessed August 28, 2020). 5. Thacker SB, Choi K, Brachman PS. The surveillance of infectious diseases. JAMA. (1983) 249:1181–5. doi: 10.1001/jama.1983.03330330059036 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 6. Qiu J, Wang H, Hu L, Yang C, Zhang T. Spatial transmission network construction of influenza-like illness using dynamic Bayesian network and vector-autoregressive moving average model. BMC Infect Dis. (2021) 21:164. doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-05769-6 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 7. Zhou T, Liu Q, Yang Z, Liao J, Yang K, Bai W, et al. Preliminary prediction of the basic reproduction number of the Wuhan novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV. J Evid Based Med. (2020) 13:3–7. doi: 10.1111/jebm.12376 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 8. Liu QH, Ajelli M, Aleta A, Merler S, Moreno Y, Vespignani A. Measurability of the epidemic reproduction number in data-driven contact networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2018) 115:12680–5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1811115115 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 9. Wu D, Gao L, Xiong X, Chinazzi M, Vespignani A, Ma YM, et al. DeepGLEAM: a hybrid mechanistic and deep learning model for COVID-19 forecasting. arXiv [Preprint]. (2021). Available online at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.06684 (accessed May 30, 2021). Google Scholar 10. Shaman J, Karspeck A. Forecasting seasonal outbreaks of influenza. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2012) 109:20425–30. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1208772109 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 11. Shaman J, Karspeck A, Yang W, Tamerius J, Lipsitch M. Real-time influenza forecasts during the 2012–2013 season. Nat Commun. (2013) 4:2837. doi: 10.1038comms3837 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 12. Smirnova A, deCamp L, Chowell G. Forecasting epidemics through non-parametric estimation of time-dependent transmission rates using the SEIR model. Bull Math Biol. (2019) 81:4343–65. doi: 10.1007/s11538-017-0284-3 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 13. Mummert A, Otunuga OM. Parameter identification for a stochastic SEIRS epidemic model: case study influenza. J Math Biol. (2019) 79:705–29. doi: 10.1007/s00285-019-01374-z PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 14. Volkova S, Ayton E, Porterfield K, Corley CD. Forecasting influenza-like illness dynamics for military populations using neural networks and social media. PLoS One. (2017) 12:e0188941. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188941 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 15. Brockmann D, Helbing D. The hidden geometry of complex, network-driven contagion phenomena. Science. (2013) 342:1337–42. doi: 10.1126/science.1245200 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 16. Ben-Nun M, Riley P, Turtle J, Bacon DP, Riley S. Forecasting national and regional influenza-like illness for the USA. PLoS Comput Biol. (2019) 15:e1007013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007013 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 17. Fitzner J, Qasmieh S, Mounts AW, Alexander B, Besselaar T, Briand S, et al. Revision of clinical case definitions: influenza-like illness and severe acute respiratory infection. Bull World Health Organ. (2018) 96:122–8. doi: 10.2471/BLT.17.194514 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 18. Harcourt SE, Morbey RA, Smith GE, Loveridge P, Green HK, Pebody R, et al. Developing influenza and respiratory syncytial virus activity thresholds for syndromic surveillance in England. Epidemiol Infect. (2019) 147:e163. doi: 10.1017/S0950268819000542 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 19. Zhu D, Lok C, Chao S, Chen L, Li R, Zhao Z, et al. Detection and characterization of type B influenza virus from influenza-like illness cases during the 2017–2018 winter influenza season in Beijing, China. Arch Virol. (2019) 164:995–1003. doi: 10.1007/s00705-019-04160-w PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 20. Zhang T, Ma Y, Xiao X, Lin Y, Zhang X, Yin F, et al. Dynamic Bayesian network in infectious diseases surveillance: a simulation study. Sci Rep. (2019) 9:10376. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-46737-0 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 21. Zhang T, Yin F, Zhou T, Zhang XY Li XS. Multivariate time series analysis on the dynamic relationship between Class B notifable diseases and gross domestic product (GDP) in China. Sci Rep. (2016) 6:29. doi: 10.1038/s41598-016-0020-5 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 22. Nakajima J. Bayesian analysis of multivariate stochastic volatility with skew return distribution. Economet Rev. (2017) 36:546–62. doi: 10.1080/07474938.2014.977093 CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 23. Wei C, Cabrera-Barona P, Blaschke T. Local geographic variation of public services inequality: does the neighborhood scale matter? Int J Environ Res Public Health. (2016) 13:981. doi: 10.3390/ijerph13100981 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 24. Lèbre S. Inferring dynamic genetic networks with low order independencies. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol. (2009) 8:1–38. doi: 10.2202/1544-6115.1294 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 25. Ruey S, Tsay. Multivariate Time Series Analysis With R and Financial Applications. New Jersey: Wiley Press (2014). 522 p. Google Scholar 26. Tiao GC, Tsay RS. Multiple time series modelling and extended sample cross correlations. J Bus Econ Stat. (1983) 1:43–56. doi: 10.1080/07350015.1983.10509323 CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 27. Tao J, Ma Y, Zhuang X, Lv Q, Liu Y, Zhang T, et al. How to improve infectious disease prediction by integrating environmental data: an application of a novel ensemble analysis strategy to predict HFMD. Epidemiol Infect. (2021) 149:e34. doi: 10.1017/S0950268821000091 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 28. Stoto A. Comment on: a Bayesian dynamic model for influenza surveillance by Sebastianiet al. Stat Med. (2006) 25:1817–8. doi: 10.1002/sim.2565 CrossRef Full Text 29. Yang W, Lan Y, Lv W. Establishment of multi-point trigger and multi-channel surveillance mechanism for intelligent early warning of infectious diseases in China. Chinese J Epidemiol. (2020) 41:1753–7. doi: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20200722-00972 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 30. Science-based Medicine. Causation and Hill's criteria (2010). Available online at: https://sciencebasedmedicine.org/causation-and-hills-criteria/ (accessed August 28, 2020). Keywords: spatial transmission network, infectious disease, vector autoregressive moving average, SEIRS, long-short term memory Citation: Wang H, Qiu J, Li C, Wan H, Yang C and Zhang T (2022) Applying the Spatial Transmission Network to the Forecast of Infectious Diseases Across Multiple Regions. Front. Public Health 10:774984. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.774984 Received: 13 September 2021; Accepted: 02 February 2022; Published: 11 March 2022. Edited by: Chiara de Waure, University of Perugia, Italy Reviewed by: Caijun Sun, Sun Yat-sen University, China Bin Guo, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, China Copyright © 2022 Wang, Qiu, Li, Wan, Yang and Zhang. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. *Correspondence: Tao Zhang, statzhangtao@scu.edu.cn Disclaimer: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Footer Guidelines Author guidelinesEditor guidelinesPolicies and publication ethicsFee policy Explore ArticlesResearch Topics Journals Outreach Frontiers Forum Frontiers Policy Labs Frontiers for Young Minds Connect Help centerEmails and alerts Contact us SubmitCareer opportunities Follow us © 2024 Frontiers Media S.A. All rights reserved Privacy policy | Terms and conditionsShycocan disables the attack mechanism of the virus-the spike protein: Rajah Vijay Kumar, ET HealthWorld Login Get App News HospitalsFinanceDiagnosticsPeople MovementM&APharmaPolicySlideshowsResearchMedical DevicesIndustryView all News Exclusives Leaders Speak Events Awards Webinars Brand Solutions More Newsletters MasterClasses About Us Contact Us Advertise With Us Search Pharma Policy Medical Devices Diagnostics Industry Hospitals More Medical Devices 5 min read Shycocan disables the attack mechanism of the virus-the spike protein: Rajah Vijay Kumar The incidence of influenza is practically nil along the equator, about five degrees up and five degree down of equator. Specific wavelengths of photons were detected from the sun that shielded the virus. Telegram Facebook Copy Link Shahid Akhter , ETHealthWorld Updated On Feb 7, 2022 at 11:50 AM IST Read by: 100 Industry Professionals Read by 100 Industry Professionals Shahid Akhter, editor, ETHealthworld, spoke to Rajah Vijay Kumar, Chairman, Organization de Scalene, to know about the creation of Shycocan that was intended for the farmers but soon it proved to be eqaully good for Covid-19 virus. What is Shycocan project? Shycocan was actually started as a fun project for us in the sense that in 2007, there was an epidemic of influenza. which didn't much affect the eastern part of the world, but it was pretty prominent and caused a lot of problem in the West. In 2012, we read a paper which was published in a peer reviewed journal, saying that the incidence of influenza was the least or practically nil along the equator about five degrees up and five degree down of equator. So this was very interesting for us as to why this is happening. And at the same time for another patent of ours called the GNP patent we had developed a very special super-alloy for a different purpose. So we thought it's very interesting that we should study why along the equator the incidences of influenza were low. So myself, along with a couple of my team members, we went to the equator onto one of the islands of Indonesia where we set up our devices, measuring devices, and we started monitoring as to what is there indeed, what is there in the equator that we don't have here that can protect from infection. So we started looking at it seriously. And then we found that there were specific wavelengths of photons that we could detect from the sun, from the sunlight along the equator that was very specific that it was not seen in Bangalore. So that is where the whole curiosity started. Advt We wanted to produce this particular type of signals that always come from the sun to be generated using some kind of a device. So we started working on it and in 2015 we came out with a device which was not called Shycocan at the time, but was a device that could produce similar thing which we saw along the equator. So we said, okay, why don't we put it in our center? We started in 2015 and in 2018 we could successfully build a device and that was put in our campus. How do you see Shycocan impacting Covid-19?We were planning to introduce this for the bird flu and swine flu for the farmers because millions of birds die. Many farmers go bankrupt. So we wanted to work on that. And that the time when we suddenly heard the news around November/ December of 2019 about the Coronavirus and the pandemic. It was not yet a pandemic at that time. But we were interested. And then when we studied, our microbiology team assembled here and they started looking at it, they found that it's a very similar virus from the point of view of its functionality. Both were enveloped RNA virus and so on. So we thought why not, if it works for influenza, it should probably work for this, we don't know. So in principle the idea was to disable the attack mechanism of the virus. Basically, it is disabling the spike protein, the N terminal of the spike protein is disabled so that the virus cannot home or cannot latch on to the host cells. And this is the principle which we had put it for the influenza. What do you mean by Shycocan lab test?There were no laboratories who were willing to test it, because all laboratories were busy with the COVID. So, we couldn't find one in India. We had sent it to the United States. And then from there it was shipped to Mexico and then we could find a BSL 2 lab there to study to work on it, I mean to test whether it really works. So, it was tested first on surrogates, surrogates of COVID, which is an EPA approved surrogate virus, the equatorial arthritis virus was tested on then our old curiosity of influenza was still in our head. So we requested the lab to also test it for influenza because everything was working before this as a hypothesis. We got very good results and then we discussed it with with FDA in the U.S. and two other regulatory bodies saying that this is a good way to mask protection like, a mask can protect you and your other issues, other things with government adopted will do excellent to prevent spreading out a disease, but this could also work in a mass scale in a closed environment where that is where infections happen. So we started off on that and slowly over a period we could get most of the regulators world over in different countries agreed and accepted that this can be used, and then then it went forward. Advt So that is how the whole thing happened. That's a story of Shycocan. So it was not intended at all for the pandemic. It just happened to be there. What is the Shycocan design?Shycocan is designed to produce hydrogen photons and of various wavelengths along a spectrum and these photons who dominate photo electrons and these electrons are the ones which go and attach itself to the receptor binding domain and make the virus attributed or make the virus unable to get its attack mechanism working. By Shahid Akhter , ETHealthWorld Published On Feb 4, 2022 at 06:57 AM IST Telegram Facebook Copy Link Be the first one to comment. Comment Now COMMENTS Comment Now Read Comment (1) All Comments By commenting, you agree to the Prohibited Content Policy Post By commenting, you agree to the Prohibited Content Policy Post Find this Comment Offensive? Choose your reason below and click on the submit button. This will alert our moderators to take actions REASONS FOR REPORTING Foul Language Defamatory Inciting hatred against a certain community Out of Context / Spam Others Report Join the community of 2M+ industry professionals Subscribe to our newsletter to get latest insights & analysis. Download ETHealthworld App Get Realtime updates Save your favourite articles Scan to download App shycocan rajah vijay kumar organization de scalene influenza interviews RNA virus Covid-19 virus News See whats happening in Health sector right now Exclusive Read and get insights from specially curated unique stories from editorial Leaders Speak Business leaders sharing their insights Events Explore and discuss challenges & trends in India's leading B2B events Awards Recognise work that not only stood out but was also purposeful Webinars Join leaders & experts for roundtables, conferences, panels and discussions Join the community of 2M+ industry professionals Subscribe to our Daily Newsletter By continuing you agree to our Privacy Policy & Terms & Conditions Advertise With Us We have various options to advertise with us including Events, Advertorials, Banners, Mailers, etc. Get in Touch Download ETHealthworld App Save your favourite articles with seamless reading experience Get updates on your preferred social platform Follow us for the latest news, insider access to events and more. About Us Contact Us Newsletters Guest-Post Guidelines RSS Feed Sitemap RSS Feed Sitemap Guest-Post Guidelines The Economic Times Business Verticals Auto Retail Telecom Energy CIO Real Estate Marketing & Advertising CFO IT Security BFSI Government Hospitality HR Legal ET TravelWorld Infra B2B CIOSEA HRSEA HREMEA Education EnergyWorldMEA Manufacturing Pharma @2024 ETHealthworld.com. All Right Reserved. Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions HomeNewsMedical DevicesShycocan disables the attack mechanism of the virus-the spike protein: Rajah Vijay KumarMore than 30,000 birds destroyed in Kpone Katamanso, due to Avian flu Skip to content +233 (0) 20 495 2367 info@gbcghanaonline.com Search Search Close this search box. News World Sports Entertainment Technology Education More Newsletter | Reports Research | Discovery Speeches | Lectures Youth | Children Photography Commentary Travel | Tour Editorials Features Menu News World Sports Entertainment Technology Education More Newsletter | Reports Research | Discovery Speeches | Lectures Youth | Children Photography Commentary Travel | Tour Editorials Features GHANA WEATHER General, Health More than 30,000 birds destroyed in Kpone Katamanso, due to Avian flu February 5, 2022 No Comments Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Pinterest By Sherif Iddrissu Thirty thousand poultry have been culled due to the avian flu outbreak in Bediako-Saki, a suburb in the Kpone-Katamanso Municipality in the Greater Accra Region. This is the largest infection in the Municipality. A visit to the Delawin farm saw the veterinary and environmental officers undertaking the destruction amidst spraying of disinfectants. Speaking to GBC News, the Tema Metro Director of Veterinary Services, Dr. Emmanuel Pecku said the farm reported the outbreak with 1,800 dying naturally on the farm and the remaining 20,200 destroyed by Veterinary Officers. Dr. Pecku explained that the destruction of the birds was necessary to prevent the spread of the flu to other farms. He explained that, ”bird flu can affect human beings, especially farmhands and all those who come into contact with infected birds”. ”The Assembly and the Veterinary Service will focus on containing and stamping out the disease, no human infections have yet been recorded”, he stated. The Senior Environmental Health Officer at the Kpone- Katamanso Municipality, Samuel Benkrom said the Environmental Health Department of the Assembly put in measures to contain the spread of the disease and assured the public of effective surveillance and disease control management. The Manager of the Delawin Farm, Papa Kofi Awuku-Edu said they have lost about GHC 400,000 bird flu, stressing that ”it is heartbreaking to see the birds being killed after investing so much money into the farm.” Read More: https://www.gbcghanaonline.com/categoryews/health/ Related Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * Email * Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Current ye@r * Leave this field empty Ken Kuranchie petitions Akufo-Addo to remove Kissi Agyebeng as Special Prosecutor Mahama criticises Akufo-Addo for unveiling statue of himself Mahama criticises Gov’t for plunging citizens into debt and economic hardship President Akufo-Addo to commission Flower Pot Interchange on November 19 We are ready to ensure peaceful elections- Police Inaki Williams to miss AFCON qualifier games against Angola and Niger due to injury ADVERTISEMENT Recent News Only Bawumia can continue Akufo-Addo’s educational reforms – Dr. Adutwum November 11, 2024 Ken Kuranchie petitions Akufo-Addo to remove Kissi Agyebeng as Special Prosecutor November 11, 2024 Mahama criticises Akufo-Addo for unveiling statue of himself November 11, 2024 Mahama criticises Gov’t for plunging citizens into debt and economic hardship November 11, 2024 President Akufo-Addo to commission Flower Pot Interchange on November 19 November 10, 2024 We are ready to ensure peaceful elections- Police November 10, 2024 Inaki Williams to miss AFCON qualifier games against Angola and Niger due to injury November 10, 2024 28-year-old unemployed jailed for robbery, stealing November 10, 2024 Prof Agyeman-Duah expresses concern over Ghana’s democracy November 10, 2024 Alan Kyerematen to promote Ghana United Farmers Association November 10, 2024 Rocky Dawuni bags fourth Grammy nomination with ‘Rise’ single November 10, 2024 Citizens must have access to information at every stage of electoral process – Parliamentary Network Africa November 10, 2024 World Africa Americas Asia Middle East United Kingdom Ghana Politics NPP Government The Opposition Propaganda Ghana vs IMF Election 2024 Health Vaccination Prevention Food Healthy Living Health Workers Entertainment Celebrity News Music News Movies Video Stories Awards/Honours Business Finance Economy Exchange Rate Startups Private Sector Technology Innovation Tech Future Security Gadgets/Devices New Technologies Bringing you the Right News at the Right Moment The Nation's Broadcaster. We are the Number one Authentic Television and Radio Broadcasting Network in Ghana. Only Bawumia can continue Akufo-Addo’s educational reforms – Dr. Adutwum November 11, 2024 Ken Kuranchie petitions Akufo-Addo to remove Kissi Agyebeng as Special Prosecutor November 11, 2024 Mahama criticises Akufo-Addo for unveiling statue of himself November 11, 2024 Mahama criticises Gov’t for plunging citizens into debt and economic hardship November 11, 2024 FOLLOW GBC Facebook Instagram Youtube Log In Term of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Newsletters Advertise with us Corporate Website Ministry of Information Ads Centre Contact Us Menu Term of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Newsletters Advertise with us Corporate Website Ministry of Information Ads Centre Contact Us © Ghana Broadcasting Corporation 2024 | All rights reserved. Go to mobile version