Avian influenza vaccination: why it should not be a barrier to safe trade - WOAH - World Organisation for Animal Health Direct access to content Direct access to research Direct access to menu Menu Search enfres Codes and Manuals Publications Documentary Portal Training Platform ANIMUSE PVSIS Bookshop Cart My account enfres Animal Diseases Avian Influenza Antimicrobial resistance Search Who we areToggle submenu Back to menuWho we areWe are the global authority on animal health. Founded in 1924 as the Office International des Epizooties (OIE), in May 2003 we adopted the common name World Organisation for Animal Health. An intergovernmental organisation, we focus on transparently disseminating information on animal diseases, improving animal health globally and thus build a safer, healthier and more sustainable world Mission Advocacy Strategy Structure Members Collaborate with us What we doToggle submenu Back to menuWhat we doWe work to improve animal health and welfare across the globe. By collecting, analysing and disseminating veterinary scientific information, we encourage international solidarity in the control of animal health risks. Furthermore, we work across borders to foster a One Health approach, recognising that the health of animals, humans and the environment are interdependent. Animal Health and WelfareToggle submenu Back to menu Animal Diseases Disease Data Collection Animal Welfare Wildlife Health Official Disease Status StandardsToggle submenu Back to menu Codes and Manuals Standard-Setting Process Observatory Global InitiativesToggle submenu Back to menu Disease Eradication Antimicrobial resistance One Health Biological threat reduction Food Safety Publications What we offerToggle submenu Back to menuWhat we offerWe oversee various programmes, both cross-sectoral ones and those focused on specific needs, to improve the capacities of Veterinary Services and Aquatic Animal Health Services. These programmes are designed to empower and guide countries in the development and implementation of sustainable national plans which go well beyond purely veterinary matters. Improving Veterinary ServicesToggle submenu Back to menu PVS Pathway Vaccine banks Expertise Network Safe Trade and Movement of Animals Self-declared Disease Status Veterinary products Emergency Preparedness Our 100th AnniversaryToggle submenu Back to menuOur 100th AnniversaryCelebrating 100 years of WOAH’s unwavering commitment to global animal health—a legacy of collaboration, innovation, and progress. Join us in honouring WOAH’s past, embracing the present, and charting a sustainable future. WOAH turns 100: A century of improving animal health and welfare Anniversary Reflections Share your anniversary wish Wall of anniversary wishes A century strong: our history Stories and Moments MediaToggle submenu Back to menuMediaFind information related to the animal disease situation in the world, as well to the work of the Organisation. News Events WAHIS Use the search engine below to find a specific content. Search Inicio » News » Avian influenza vaccination: why it should not be a barrier to safe trade Statements Avian influenza vaccination: why it should not be a barrier to safe trade Published on 28 December 2023 Share: The page link has been copied to your clipboard View more Since 2005, avian influenza has had a staggering toll, with over 500 million birds lost to the disease worldwide. Its devastating impact extends beyond domestic and wild birds, threatening livelihoods, food security and public health. Since 2005, avian influenza has had a staggering toll, with over 500 million birds lost to the disease worldwide [1]. Its devastating impact extends beyond domestic and wild birds, threatening livelihoods, food security and public health. The recent shift in the disease’s ecology and epidemiology has heightened global concern as it has spread to new geographical regions. It has also caused unusual die-offs in wild birds and led to an alarming increase in mammalian cases. The rapidly evolving nature of avian influenza and changes in its patterns of spread [2] require a review of existing prevention and control strategies. To effectively contain the disease, protect the economic sustainability of the poultry sector and reduce potential pandemic risks, all available tools must be reconsidered including vaccination. The current spread of avian influenza is a major concern for the poultry industry, public health and biodiversity. Given recent developments in its epidemiology, and the increasing circulation of high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) in wild animals, stricter biosecurity measures and mass culling of poultry may no longer be sufficient to control the disease. With the seasonal north-south migration of wild birds, countries must be prepared for an increase in outbreaks and should consider complementary approaches, such as vaccination, in line with existing international animal health and welfare standards [3]. Key facts The epidemiology of avian influenza is evolving: the disease is gradually losing its seasonal nature, and high pathogenicity strains are circulating in wild birds. This intensified circulation increases the likelihood of virus evolution and spillover to new species, including mammals, posing a risk to human health. All available science-based disease control tools must be considered. In certain epidemiological contexts, vaccination can be an effective complement to other control strategies. If properly implemented, vaccination should not be a barrier to safe trade. Wider use of vaccination stimulates research innovation, improving the quality of available vaccines. Considering vaccination as part of available avian influenza control measures Traditionally, HPAI has been of concern mainly in domestic birds, with its control envisaged at farm level. Current transmission patterns show it is now circulating in wild bird populations, driving its spread not only across different farms, but also within farms. In practice, this has made it more and more difficult to protect a farm from disease introduction, due to increased exposure, both from neighbouring poultry farms and wild birds. There has been a global rise in HPAI outbreaks [4] and an increase in the genetic diversity of circulating virus strains. Thus, the use of sanitary control measures alone may no longer be a sustainable solution to effectively contain the disease. One such measure is the systematic mass culling of poultry, which results in heavy economic losses for farmers, has a lasting impact on their livelihoods and raises social, animal welfare and environmental concerns. Due to its negative impact on the sustainability of production practices and the image of the poultry industry to consumers, its acceptability must be scrutinised. Measures such as surveillance for early detection and monitoring of avian influenza viruses, preventive health measures (biosecurity) and disease control measures (culling, movement controls, quarantine) remain at the core of any avian influenza control strategy. However, poultry vaccination can no longer be excluded from the available alternatives and should be considered a complementary tool. When scientifically justified, it offers several advantages: Prevention and control of outbreaks in vaccinated domestic bird populations resulting in reduced virus circulation within and between flocks and lower risk of spillover to wildlife. Reduced economic losses, both direct (e.g. bird deaths) and indirect (e.g. mass culling and trade disruption). When properly implemented, avian influenza vaccination is compatible with safe trade, according to WOAH international standards. Lower risk of human exposure to avian influenza viruses, and thus of a potential pandemic, in line with the One Health approach [5] . Minimised environmental impact by reducing the risk of spill over to wild animals. Incentives for innovative research to maintain the efficacy of vaccines over time, thanks to the experience gained. This encourages manufacturers to develop and improve access to effective and up-to-date vaccines. In certain socioeconomic contexts, vaccination against avian influenza can contribute to the overall sustainability of the poultry industry and to the preservation of outdoor production systems. These are often a cultural heritage, even though such systems are not optimal in their biosecurity. It helps to maintain the health of domestic and wild birds, ensuring a stable supply of poultry products for consumers and preserving biodiversity. In addition, vaccination programmes with pre-established risk-based protocols enhance a country’s outbreak preparedness, both in the speed of response and preparation for the increased risk. Responsibilities of countries opting for poultry vaccination Avian influenza vaccination should be considered as part of a broader disease prevention and control strategy. This must include other provisions, such as biosecurity measures, disease surveillance for early detection, rapid response to outbreaks and a well-planned exit strategy. Vaccination can be a temporary measure to better control the disease situation. National Veterinary Authorities [6] are charged with the decision to vaccinate based on a risk-evaluation, which depends on several factors and involves varied responsibilities, including: The availability of high quality and reliable registered vaccines that meet WOAH international standards [7] and remain effective against circulating strains. Vaccine composition must be under constant review to respond to changing circumstances and epidemiology. Sufficient surveillance capacity to demonstrate that vaccination does not interfere with virus monitoring and early detection of outbreaks in vaccinated and unvaccinated bird populations. Robust surveillance systems are essential to monitor the potential presence of avian influenza viruses in domestic and wild birds, as well as in mammals. This determines which strains are circulating and ensures that immunisation targets are met, and appropriate control measures are implemented. However, building and maintaining this capacity is resource-intensive and not possible in all countries. The commitment of poultry producers to adhere to the disease control strategy in place. Data collection from producers and veterinarians on the duration of protection provided by vaccination and the time of virus shedding after vaccination if live vaccines are used. Such data will help to better define vaccination strategies. The capacity to ensure the traceability of the entire process, from vaccine production to on-farm administration and post-vaccination monitoring, including the traceability of vaccinated animals and their products. Vaccine selection, vaccination protocols and monitoring are critical components of a successful vaccination programme. The level of flock immunity required to prevent transmission hinges on several factors. Depending on the disease epidemiology, Veterinary Authorities – in consultation with the poultry sector – may decide to vaccinate only certain species in a selection of production systems [8]. Vaccination is compatible with the pursuit of safe trade in poultry and poultry products To date, despite the global crisis, vaccination has been used only in a limited number of countries as a preventive, emergency or systematic measure to protect poultry or other captive bird populations from HPAI. Concerns about international trade restrictions hamper its use, although the inclusion of vaccination as a control tool has been endorsed by international standards adopted by the World Assembly of WOAH national Delegates. Unjustified trade restrictions on poultry and poultry products from vaccinated flocks have a huge impact on a sector that contributes significantly to global food security and the economy. In fact, poultry meat exports account for 11% of total production, while egg exports account for 3% of production [9]. Imports of commercial genetic stocks of poultry are also essential to support meat and egg production systems of all countries. In addition, poultry meat and eggs are a low-cost, high-quality, low-fat protein food source, providing commodity redistribution and economic benefits and supporting the livelihoods of small-scale farmers. It is vital to maintain their international trade while ensuring the safety of these exchanges. This can be guaranteed in two ways: Countries that vaccinate will need to provide appropriate certification to their trading partners to ensure that their measures comply with WOAH science-based international standards. They must also demonstrate their plans to carry out necessary surveillance of circulating strains once vaccination is in place, and their capacity to prove the absence of virus circulation. Importing countries should make risk-based decisions and implement science-informed measures that allow for safe trade while preventing the spread of avian influenza. This is critical to avoid the closure of trade borders and the subsequent economic consequences for the poultry industry, farmers and consumers. In accordance with WOAH international standards, the use of vaccination does not affect the status of a country or zone as being HPAI-free if surveillance supports the absence of infection. Trade in poultry and poultry products can be conducted safely alongside vaccination. 81% of WOAH Members (107/133 answers) did not use any sort of avian influenza vaccination in the past five years [10], whereas 112 countries and territories reported disease presence over this period [1]. Policy recommendations The use of vaccination in poultry against HPAI remains the decision of each national Veterinary Authority in consultation with poultry producers. It should be tailored to the specific epidemiological and socioeconomic context, and the needs and capacities of each country or region. Flexibility and adaptability are essential to effectively address the dynamic nature of the disease and its potential threat to domestic and wild bird populations, and to public health. Some key considerations for national policies are outlined hereafter. Decision-making As described in WOAH standards [6], the decision to vaccinate poultry must be: part of a broader avian influenza control strategy with an exit plan; accompanied by an solid monitoring and surveillance system for domestic and wild bird populations to guide the selection of appropriate vaccine strains; based on the availability of sufficient financial, technical and human resources for disease surveillance and the maintenance of effective vaccination campaigns; combined with the enforcement of relevant regulations, including licensing, quality control, and safety standards for vaccines. Monitoring and evaluation The maintenance of vaccinations should rely on the regular evaluation of vaccination programmes to gather evidence on their effectiveness and adjust them as necessary, based on surveillance data and scientific developments. International cooperation, including trade The implementation of avian influenza vaccination programmes requires a careful balance between disease control and maintenance of safe international trade. Prior to exchange, trading partners should: establish mechanisms to ensure cooperation and transparent communication between relevant stakeholders, including ministries, Veterinary Authorities and producers; engage in bilateral discussions to agree on certification requirements and trade protocols, and to address trade concerns, so mutual recognition can be ensured in peacetime. Ultimately, multilateral dialogue and adherence to WOAH standards are key to ensuring that if a country decides to introduce vaccination against avian influenza, it will be carried out appropriately, without sanitary risks and will not form an unnecessary barrier to safe trade. Efforts should be made to maintain open lines of communication, thus minimising trade disruption while protecting animal health and welfare, as well as human and environmental health. Download pdf version Policy paper, Policy brief Avian influenza vaccination: why it should not be a barrier to safe trade .pdf – 283 KB See the document References 1. WAHIS data, WOAH. WAHIS: World Animal Health Information System 2. Infographic, WOAH; 2023. Avian influenza: understanding new dynamics to better combat the disease 3. EFSA AHAW Panel (EFSA Panel on Animal Health and Animal Welfare), European Union Reference Laboratory for Avian Influenza, Nielsen S. S. et al. EFSA Scientific Opinion, EFSA Journal, 21(10), 1-87; 2023. Vaccination of poultry against highly pathogenic avian influenza–part 1 Available vaccines and vaccination strategies 4. Avian influenza situation reports, WOAH. Situation reports on Avian Influenza 5. Ongoing avian influenza outbreaks in animals pose risk to humans, FAO-WHO-WOAH; July 2023. Situation analysis and advice to countries from FAO, WHO, WOAH 6. Chapter 4.18. on Vaccination. Terrestrial Animal Health Code, WOAH. Chapter 4.18. on Vaccination 7. Chapter 3.3.4. on Avian influenza. Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals, WOAH. Chapter 3.3.4. on Avian influenza 8. Chapter 10.4. on Infection with high pathogenicity avian influenza viruses. Terrestrial Animal Health Code, WOAH. Chapter 10.4. on Infection with high pathogenicity avian influenza viruses 9. OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2021-2030; 2023. OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2021-2030 10. Technical Item: Strategic challenges in the global control of high pathogenicity avian influenza, WOAH 90th General Session; 2023. Strategic challenges in the global control of high pathogenicity avian influenza Our latest news Statements WOAH welcomes G20’s unified commitment to advancing the One Health approach Published on 01/11/2024 Statements WOAH statement on novel mpox Published on 23/08/2024 Statements High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in Cattle Published on 05/04/2024 Statements Wildlife under threat as avian influenza reaches Antarctica Published on 13/03/2024 Newsletter The monthly newsletter that relays news from the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), as well as from its network and regions. News includes its Members’ self-declarations, articles, upcoming events, publications, communication tools and more. Subscribe to the monthly newsletter and stay informed on the organisation’s latest activities at both global and regional levels. Subscribe Regions Africa Americas Asia and the pacific Europe Middle East WOAH Contact Career Procurement Follow us facebook twitter linkedin instagram youtube flickr Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©WOAH2024 We use cookies on our website to give you the most relevant experience by remembering your preferences and repeat visits. By clicking “Accept”, you consent to the use of ALL the cookies. However you may visit Cookie Settings to provide a controlled consent. Cookies settings Accept all Reject allCookies policy Close Privacy Overview This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. These cookies ensure basic functionalities and security features of the website, anonymously. CookieDurationDescription__cfduid1 monthThe cookie is used by cdn services like CloudFare to identify individual clients behind a shared IP address and apply security settings on a per-client basis. It does not correspond to any user ID in the web application and does not store any personally identifiable information.viewed_cookie_policy1 yearThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data. Others others Other uncategorized cookies are those that are being analyzed and have not been classified into a category as yet. CookieDurationDescription_gat_UA-190436238-11 minuteNo description_gat_UA-27210936-11 minuteNo description_pk_id.2.ece21 year 27 daysNo description_pk_ses.2.ece230 minutesNo description_pk_testcookie.2.ece2sessionNo descriptionCONSENT16 years 8 months 2 days 15 hoursNo descriptionoKBJgxZFRjc-1 dayNo descriptionXxhSHVdnPFQD1 dayNo description Advertisement advertisement Advertisement cookies are used to provide visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns. These cookies track visitors across websites and collect information to provide customized ads. CookieDurationDescriptionIDE1 year 24 daysUsed by Google DoubleClick and stores information about how the user uses the website and any other advertisement before visiting the website. This is used to present users with ads that are relevant to them according to the user profile.test_cookie15 minutesThis cookie is set by doubleclick.net. The purpose of the cookie is to determine if the user's browser supports cookies.VISITOR_INFO1_LIVE5 months 27 daysThis cookie is set by Youtube. Used to track the information of the embedded YouTube videos on a website. Analytics analytics Analytical cookies are used to understand how visitors interact with the website. These cookies help provide information on metrics the number of visitors, bounce rate, traffic source, etc. CookieDurationDescription_gasessionThis cookie is installed by Google Analytics. The cookie is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. The cookies store information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors._gid1 dayThis cookie is installed by Google Analytics. The cookie is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visted in an anonymous form. Functional functional Functional cookies help to perform certain functionalities like sharing the content of the website on social media platforms, collect feedbacks, and other third-party features. CookieDurationDescription__cf_bm30 minutesThis cookie is set by CloudFare. The cookie is used to support Cloudfare Bot Management.langThis cookie is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.pll_language1 yearThis cookie is set by Polylang plugin for WordPress powered websites. The cookie stores the language code of the last browsed page. Performance performance Performance cookies are used to understand and analyze the key performance indexes of the website which helps in delivering a better user experience for the visitors. CookieDurationDescriptionYSCsessionThis cookies is set by Youtube and is used to track the views of embedded videos. Save & AcceptTargeting complement hyperactivation: a novel therapeutic approach for severe pneumonia induced by influenza virus/staphylococcus aureus coinfection | Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature signal transduction and targeted therapy letters article Targeting complement hyperactivation: a novel therapeutic approach for severe pneumonia induced by influenza virus/staphylococcus aureus coinfection Download PDF Download PDF Letter Open access Published: 29 December 2023 Targeting complement hyperactivation: a novel therapeutic approach for severe pneumonia induced by influenza virus/staphylococcus aureus coinfection Leili Jia1 na1, Haihua Luo2 na1, Lizhong Li1 na1, Mingyao Wang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4731-34883 na1, Jiangfeng Liu3 na1, Yuan Liang1, Shan Li2, Yong Jiang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8087-57172 na2, Juntao Yang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1180-391X3 na2 & …Hongbin Song1 na2 Show authors Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy volume 8, Article number: 467 (2023) Cite this article 1783 Accesses 2 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Infectious diseasesTarget identification Dear Editor,Infections by the influenza virus are a significant and widespread global health threat, as these infections have an annual death toll ranging from 290,000 to 650,000.1 A significant proportion of these fatalities are attributed to secondary bacterial pneumonia, a severe complication commonly caused by ubiquitous respiratory pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus).2 Of particular concern is the increased morbidity and mortality rates in individuals infected simultaneously with influenza virus and methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA).3 The concurrent presence of bacteria and influenza virus usually causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which is associated with acute lung injury (ALI), severe lung tissue edema, and widespread inflammation. Nevertheless, determining the complex mechanisms underlying the synergistic interplay will require further investigation with a suitable coinfection mouse model. In our previous study, we utilized different sequential coinfections at various time points to model influenza A virus and MRSA coinfection. We found that mice infected with influenza A virus (H1N1A/Puerto Rico/8/34, also known as PR8, at a concentration of 1 × 102 TCID50/ml) followed by exposure to MRSA (5 × 107 CFU/ml) after 2 days (referred to as the d-2 group, Supplementary Table S1) experienced significant mortality and lung tissue damage. Significantly, the d-2 group displayed the highest mortality rate and the most severe lung damage on the fifth day of coinfection.4 Moreover, the increasing viral loads (Supplementary Fig. S1) hinted at a connection between lung damage and inflammatory cell infiltration, suggesting that the high mortality rate after H1N1A/MRSA coinfection may be due to overactivation of the inflammatory response, although validating this hypothesis will require further systematic investigation.Based on these results, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis to investigate the pathogenesis of sequential H1N1A/MRSA coinfection and to study the multimodality of the immune response in the lung (Fig. 1a). We generated lung atlases by mapping 196,918 cells from mouse tissues using the following five infection conditions: PR8 alone, MRSA alone, and coinfection for 24/72/120 h. Nineteen cell types with significantly altered gene expression profiles were identified using downscaling and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) data visualization (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. S2). As communication between different cell types is involved in immune regulation, CellChat was used to investigate cell‒cell interactions in different infection conditions. After pathogen infection, neutrophils rapidly migrate to the infection site and contribute to acute inflammation. Therefore, as we expected, sequential H1N1A/MRSA infection led to increased communication between neutrophils and other cell types (Supplementary Fig. S3). Moreover, the increasing viral loads (Supplementary Fig. S1) hinted at a connection between lung damage and inflammatory cell infiltration, suggesting that the high mortality rate after H1N1A/MRSA coinfection may be due to overactivation of the inflammatory response; however, confirming this hypothesis will require further systematic investigation.Fig. 1Inhibiting complement over-activation demonstrates therapeutic efficacy in H1N1A/MRSA co-infected mice. a Schematic illustration of developing H1N1A/MRSA co-infected mouse model and treatment strategies. b UMAP plot of 196,918 cells from mice treated with PBS, MRSA, PR8, and coinfection for 24 h/72 h/120 h. c Differential interaction strength of significant ligand-receptor pairs for all cell clusters. d Top pathways from GSEA of T cells. e UMAP plot of seven subsets of macrophages colored by cluster identification. f Ratio of all cells belonging to the macrophages clusters. g Bubble plot showing the expression of functional pathways of macrophages in different groups. Immunohistochemistry of lung tissues was performed to detect the accumulation of complement (h) C3d and (i) C5 in co-infected mice with different treatments over time. The scale bar represents 200 μm. Histogram of the percentage of (j) C3d and (k) C5 positive area. N = 3/group. The survival curve of (l) C3 knock-out (C3−/−), (m) C5 knock-out (C5−/−). n Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining in representative mouse lung sections among knock-out groups (d-2 coinfection, C3−/− and C5−/− treated groups). o Quantification of serum IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-8 levels by ELISA. N = 4/group. The survival curve of (p) CVF treated and (q) anti-C5aR treated mice. r H&E staining in representative mouse lung sections among therapy groups (d-2 coinfection, CVF treated and anti-C5aR treated groups). s Quantification of serum IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-8 levels by ELISA. N = 4/group. All quantitative results were presented as mean ± SD. Type Il pneumocyte, T2P, inflammatory pneumocyte, IP; type I pneumocyte, T1P; lfitm3+ pneumocyte, lfitm3+P; B-cell-stimulating pneumocyte, BP. All the experimental groups in (g, h) were compared by a two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test; p < 0.05 indicates a significant difference. Ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. All the experimental groups in (n) and (p) were compared by a one-way ANOVA followed by Benjamini and Hochberg multiple comparisons test; p < 0.05 indicates a significant difference. Ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001Full size imageDisruption of the alveolar barrier and the dysregulation of inflammation are key pathophysiological factors in coinfection-induced acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome. As increased permeability resulting from dysfunction of the alveolar barrier is a defining characteristic of ALI in both clinical and experimental settings, our initial focus was a detailed analysis of subtypes of alveolar epithelial cells. We observed a markedly higher percentage of inflammatory and interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (Ifitm3+) pneumocytes, along with an increase in inflammatory alveolar epithelial cells, in the coinfected group than in the control group (Supplementary Figs. S4a and S5a–c). The functionalities of these subtypes of alveolar epithelial cells were closely linked to inflammatory responses, such as the response of IFN-γ (Supplementary Fig. S5d). This result strongly implies that disruption of the immune system and inflammation resulted in alterations to different types of cells during coinfection. Furthermore, a crucial factor in resolving ALI is the effective removal of neutrophils from the alveolar lumen. Therefore, identifying targets for intervention in coinfection depends on clarifying the process of neutrophil clearance. The uptake of neutrophils by alveolar macrophages through phagocytosis is an important pathway of neutrophil removal. Our analysis of macrophage subtypes has shown that M2 macrophages dependent on complement clusters increase complement activation, as evidenced by the high expression levels of complement activation marker genes such as chemokine ligand 2 (Ccl2) and genes in pathways associated with complement activation, such as the IFN pathway (Supplementary Fig. S4b and Fig. 1e–g). These results imply that complement activity may be overactivated during coinfection. Additionally, T cells may expedite neutrophil clearance. The findings of gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (Fig. 1d) revealed that coinfection promoted proinflammatory responses linked to the complement system in T cells, such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) signaling conveyed by nuclear transcription factor κ B (NF-kB), as well as complement processes (Fig. 1d). Overall, coinfection with H1N1A/MRSA resulted in excessive activation of the complement system, which involves numerous cellular components. Addressing the overactivation of the complement system could serve as a promising therapeutic option for coinfection.To confirm the involvement of complement activation in coinfection-induced acute lung injury, fluorescence staining for C3 deposition (C3d) and C5 was performed on lung tissue obtained under different infection conditions. Consistent with our previous histology results,4 the d-2 coinfection group, which had the most severe lung damage, showed the highest levels of C3 and C5 deposition, in contrast to that seen in the single pathogen infection groups (Fig. 1h–k). Further research was conducted on C3 and C5 mutant mice (C3−/− and C5−/−) that lack the complement protein C3 or C5 to understand the underlying mechanisms. C3- or C5-deficient mice coinfected with H1N1A/MRSA had a significant reduced mortality rate compared to coinfected wild-type mice (Fig. 1l, m). These knockout mice also had reduced lung inflammation, suggesting better recovery from pathological damage (Fig. 1n). To further elucidate whether this reduction was due to an alleviated inflammatory response, the levels of proinflammatory factors (IFN-γ, TNF-α, interleukin 6 [IL-6] and interleukin 8 [IL-8]) in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were assessed. The results showed that coinfection caused an increase in the levels of proinflammatory factors, while C3 or C5 knockout caused a significant reduction (Fig. 1o). These results showed that decreases in the level of complement molecules led to a significant reduction in mortality, lung injury, and immune disorder, suggesting that inhibition of complement activation may suppress the development of ARDS with H1N1A and MRSA coinfection.Thus, further research was conducted to verify the benefits of inhibiting complement activation through complement-targeted therapies. Cobra venom factor (CVF), which targets C3d, and anti-C5aR monoclonal antibodies were assessed for their therapeutic potential in a coinfection model. Previous studies have shown that CVF can efficiently diminish the levels of complement in various animal models; thus, the therapeutic efficacy of CVF for H1N1A/MRSA coinfection was evaluated. The results showed that mice treated with CVF had lower mortality rates (Fig. 1p) and less pathological damage than the d-2 group without treatment (Fig. 1r). As expected, mice treated with CVF also had lower levels of proinflammatory factors (Fig. 1s). Meanwhile, anti-C5aR monoclonal antibodies, which are widely used in targeted complement treatments in clinical settings, were also effective against coinfection when administered intravenously through the caudal vein. Anti-C5aR treatment significantly increased survival rates (Fig. 1q) and substantially decreased inflammatory infiltration and the release of proinflammatory factors (Fig. 1r, s). We also explored the effectiveness of targeting factors that regulate the complement system, with supporting details provided in the Supplementary Materials (Supplementary Fig. S6). Overall, these findings suggest that therapies targeting the complement system could be effective in treating severe H1N1A/MRSA coinfection.Influenza virus infection followed by secondary bacterial invasion is a known causative factor that promotes severe lung injury and inflammation.5 As such, there is an exigency to uncover the underlying pathogenesis and to develop effective therapies. Our study showed that complement pathways were activated in mice coinfected with H1N1A/MRSA, which led to ALI and increased mortality. Moreover, new therapeutic approaches have been proposed to address this issue, which effectively inhibit complement activation by targeting C3 or C5 using CVF or anti-C5aR, respectively. The targeting strategy efficiently reduced complement overactivation, leading to decreased lung injury and mortality. Taken together, these findings suggest that complements could be the key mediators of coinfection, and targeting complements can be an innovative clinical treatment strategy for managing coinfections with viruses and bacteria. Data availability I am pleased to inform you that our data have been released and are currently in a publicly accessible status on the China National Center for Bioinformation (CNCB) website. Here is the direct link for quick access: https:/gdc.cncb.ac.cn/gsa/browse/CRA013573. ReferencesIuliano, A. D. et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet 391, 1285–1300 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar Morens, D. M., Taubenberger, J. K. & Fauci, A. S. Predominant role of bacterial pneumonia as a cause of death in pandemic influenza: implications for pandemic influenza preparedness. J. Infect. Dis. 198, 962–970 (2008).Article PubMed Google Scholar Metersky, M. L. et al. Epidemiology, microbiology, and treatment considerations for bacterial pneumonia complicating influenza. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 16, e321–e331 (2012).Article PubMed Google Scholar Jia, L. et al. Severe pneumonia caused by coinfection with influenza virus followed by methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus induces higher mortality in mice. Front. Immunol. 9, 3189 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar McCullers, J. A. The co-pathogenesis of influenza viruses with bacteria in the lung. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 252–262 (2014).Article PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by grants from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Nos. 2018YFC1200100, 2016YFC1200905), National Key Technology R&D Program of China (No. 2017ZX10104001), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 30801004, 81371807), NSFC-Guangdong Joint Foundation of China (No. U1601225), Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation (No. 7122132), the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Innovation Fund for Medical Sciences (2021-I2M-1-044) and the National College Students Innovation and Entrepreneurship Training Program of China (No. 2023zglc06011).Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Leili Jia, Haihua Luo, Lizhong Li, Mingyao Wang, Jiangfeng Liu.These authors jointly supervised this work: Yong Jiang, Juntao Yang, Hongbin Song.Authors and AffiliationsInstitute for Disease Control and Prevention of PLA, Beijing, ChinaLeili Jia, Lizhong Li, Yuan Liang & Hongbin SongGuangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Proteomics, State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, ChinaHaihua Luo, Shan Li & Yong JiangState Key Laboratory of Common Mechanism Research for Major Diseases, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, 100005, Beijing, ChinaMingyao Wang, Jiangfeng Liu & Juntao YangAuthorsLeili JiaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHaihua LuoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLizhong LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMingyao WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJiangfeng LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYuan LiangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShan LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYong JiangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJuntao YangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHongbin SongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsH.S., Y.J., J.Y. and L.J. designed the research studies. L.J., L.L. and Y.L. conducted the experiments and acquired the data, while J.L., M.W. and H.L. analyzed the data. H.S., Y.J., L.J., M.W., J.L., S.L. and H.L. wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thanks Bai yuan-xiang and Yu guang-qiang for the technical support on bioinformatics.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Yong Jiang, Juntao Yang or Hongbin Song.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Ethical approval All relevant ethical safeguards have been met in relation to patient or subject protection, or animal experimentation. Supplementary informationSupplementary materialsSupplementary Table S1Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleJia, L., Luo, H., Li, L. et al. Targeting complement hyperactivation: a novel therapeutic approach for severe pneumonia induced by influenza virus/staphylococcus aureus coinfection. Sig Transduct Target Ther 8, 467 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023-01714-yDownload citationReceived: 23 March 2023Revised: 16 October 2023Accepted: 15 November 2023Published: 29 December 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023-01714-yShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Open Access Publishing About the Editors Editorial Board Journal Staff About the Partner Contact Journal open lectures Awards Publish with us For Authors & Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy (Sig Transduct Target Ther) ISSN 2059-3635 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedAvian influenza death of Alaska polar bear is a global first and a sign of the virus' persistence • Alaska Beacon HOME NEWS Economy & Environment Education Decision 2024 Government & Politics Health Justice Commentary ABOUT SUBSCRIBE DONATE Part of States Newsroom Economy & Environment Education Decision 2024 Government & Politics Health Justice 6:00 News Story Economy & EnvironmentHealth Avian influenza death of Alaska polar bear is a global first and a sign of the virus’ persistence The highly pathogenic influenza that has already killed vast numbers of birds and numerous mammals continues to circulate in the world’s wild populations By: Yereth Rosen - December 30, 2023 6:00 am A polar bear walks along the shore in Alaska on Sept. 6, 2019. A different animal discovered dead in October near Utqiagvik is now confirmed to be the world's first documented case of highly pathogenic avian influenza in a polar bear.(Photo provided by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service) A polar bear found dead on Alaska’s North Slope is the first of the species known to have been killed by the highly pathogenic avian influenza that is circulating among animal populations around the world. The polar bear was found dead in October near Utqiagvik, the nation’s northernmost community, the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation reported. The discovery of the virus in the animal’s body tissue, a process that required sampling and study by the North Slope Borough Department of Wildlife Management and other agencies, confirmed earlier this month that highly pathogenic avian influenza was the cause of death, said Dr. Bob Gerlach, Alaska’s state veterinarian. “This is the first polar bear case reported, for anywhere,” Gerlach said. As such, it was reported to the World Organisation for Animal Health and has gotten attention in other Arctic nations that have polar bears, he said. This was also the first Endangered Species Act-listed animal in Alaska known to fall victim to the disease. Polar bears, dependent on sea ice that is diminishing because of climate change, were listed as threatened in 2008. While polar bears normally eat seals they hunt from the sea ice, it appears likely that this bear was scavenging on dead birds and ingested the influenza virus that way, Gerlach said. Numerous birds on the North Slope of various species have died from this avian influenza, according to the Department of Environmental Conservation. However, the bear need not have directly eaten an infected bird to have become sick, Gerlach said. Dr. Bob Gerlach, Alaska’s state veterinarian, stands outside the Department of Environmental Conservation lab in Anchorage on May 13, 2022. (Photo by Yereth Rosen/Alaska Beacon) “If a bird dies of this, especially if it’s kept in a cold environment, the virus can be maintained for a while in the environment,” he said. The polar bear death is a sign of the unusually persistent and lethal hold that this strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza has on wild animal populations two years after it arrived in North America, officials said. “What we’re dealing with now is a scenario that we haven’t dealt with in the past. And so there’s no manual,” said Andy Ramey, a U.S. Geological Survey wildlife geneticist and avian influenza expert. No longer just a poultry problem Highly pathogenic avian influenza is called that because it spreads rapidly in flocks of domestic poultry, often requiring massive culls to control the contagions. Such outbreaks have been of concern in the past because of their economic consequences for global agriculture. Until recently, wild birds were afterthoughts. Though they were known to carry the viruses, ferrying them between domestic poultry populations, they were largely unaffected. That has changed dramatically. The prior U.S. outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza, in 2014-15, resulted in some wild bird infections, and some influenza-caused bird die-offs occurred in Europe shortly thereafter. But the current version is considered unprecedented in its effect on wild birds and other wildlife. “Across North America, and really around the world, lots of wild birds these days – I mean, thousands of wild birds these days, tens of thousands in some cases — are dying because of these highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses,” Ramey said. The deaths are of particular concern when they occur in populations that are already vulnerable, he said. An extreme example he cited is the highly endangered California condors, with a population of just a few hundred. After 21 influenza deaths were documented, federal wildlife officials launched what promises to be a challenging vaccination program in that population. The disease has also killed a variety of mammals around the world. In Alaska, three foxes, a black bear and a brown bear have died from this avian influenza. Elsewhere, more bears have been found dead after being infected by the virus, along with skunks, raccoons, mountain lions and large numbers of seals in eastern Canada and off the coasts of Maine and Washington state, as well as outside of North America. The nation’s first detection of the disease in a squirrel was confirmed earlier this month in an animal found in Arizona. U.S. Geological Survey wildlife geneticist Andy Ramey, standing at University Lake in Anchorage on May 18, 2022, is a leading authority on avian influenza. (Photo by Yereth Rosen/Alaska Beacon) To Gerlach, the polar bear case was not surprising, considering that black and brown bears have died. It is possible that more polar bears succumbed to the disease, but in remote places out of the view of people to record the events, he said. “You’re really dependent on the public that’s out there, or the wildlife biologists that are doing surveillance,” he said. Documenting cases in any wild mammal population can be difficult, he added: “How long is a carcass going to be in the wild before it gets scavenged or eaten by something else?” Aside from the large and wide-ranging death toll in the wild, the current outbreak has some other differences, particularly its durability, as seen in its persistence away from domestic flocks. The virus that caused the 2014-15 outbreak spread in the wild bird populations for a while, but it “sort of fizzled out,” Ramey said, probably because it was eventually stamped out in poultry operations. But this one continues to be maintained in the wild, as evidenced by monitoring in Western Alaska, a place far from any big farms raising chickens or turkeys, he said. Gerlach gave the same assessment. “After the second year, that all of sudden disappeared,” he said of the 2014-15 version. “It didn’t stick around, where this virus seems like it’s sticking around.” Rather than winding down, it is continuing to spread across the world, he noted, even into bird populations in Antarctica, as has been recently documented. There are signs that it is now endemic in the wild, a fixed feature into the foreseeable future, he said. If so, “it’s not going to go away. It’s going to be here, and we have to have some way to deal with it,” he said. Alaska a disease crossroads For Alaska, “a mixing area” for global bird migrations, spread of avian diseases is always an issue, Gerlach said. “Alaska is a catchall area for birds from North America or the Americas, as well as from Asia,” he said. The highly pathogenic avian influenza of 2014 and 2015 was introduced from Asia to North America by wild birds migrating through Alaska. The current influenza is also crossing continents through Alaska, though from multiple directions, Ramey’s research has found. Pacific black brant fly above Izembek Lagoon at Izembek National Wildlife Refuge on Dec. 27, 2013. The refuge is used as a migratory stop for nearly the entire global population of Pacific black brant. Black brant are among the wild birds in Alaska found to have been infected with the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus, according to state records. (Photo by Kristine Sowl/U.S. Fish and Wildlfie Service) In a newly published study, Ramey and his research partners found what is likely to have been three separate and independent introductions of highly pathogenic avian influenza into Alaska last year. His research, with colleagues from the USGS and other agencies, used genetic analysis to trace one form of influenza to North America and two to Asia. “To have three introductions in Western Alaska, two from East Asia and one from the Lower 48, I mean, we haven’t seen anything like that before,” he said. “It really, I think, exemplifies how these viruses now are clearly able to be maintained.” That study examined birds harvested in the fall of 2022 by hunters in the Izembek National Wildlife Refuge area at the southern tip of the Alaska Peninsula. Ramey and his colleagues found only a tiny number of hunted birds that were infected with the currently active highly pathogenic influenza virus: out of 811 swab samples taken directly from birds and another 199 samples from feces, the only harvested birds identified as infected were eight pintails, one cackling goose and one widgeon. It can take months to get test results from samples, so what happened to those harvested birds is unknown, he said. But their meat was safe to eat as long as it was properly cooked to the recommended 165 degrees, he said. “Heat is remarkably good at deactivating viruses,” he said. Along with the cooking advice, there are other longstanding recommendations about safely handling hunted birds, such as regular handwashing and avoidance of obviously sick animals. There is little evidence that the current avian influenza wave poses an infection risk to humans. Only a few cases have been documented in the world, and those were general among people working with poultry. For Alaskans dependent on wild game, this highly pathogenic influenza poses a different type of risk: possible food-security problems. If large numbers of birds wind up dying, that might mean less food on the table in rural Alaska, Ramey and Gerlach said. “Obviously, less birds could equate to less availability, and also less resiliency in the population from things like disease, or climate change, or toxins, et cetera, that could in fact, impact these populations of birds,” Ramey said. Plenty of stressors already exist in wild populations, he said, “so adding another threat to these populations isn’t doing them any favors.” YOU MAKE OUR WORK POSSIBLE. SUPPORT XAvian influenza death of Alaska polar bear is a global first and a sign of the virus’ persistence by Yereth Rosen, Alaska Beacon December 30, 2023 Avian influenza death of Alaska polar bear is a global first and a sign of the virus’ persistence by Yereth Rosen, Alaska Beacon December 30, 2023 A polar bear found dead on Alaska’s North Slope is the first of the species known to have been killed by the highly pathogenic avian influenza that is circulating among animal populations around the world. The polar bear was found dead in October near Utqiagvik, the nation’s northernmost community, the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation reported. The discovery of the virus in the animal’s body tissue, a process that required sampling and study by the North Slope Borough Department of Wildlife Management and other agencies, confirmed earlier this month that highly pathogenic avian influenza was the cause of death, said Dr. Bob Gerlach, Alaska’s state veterinarian. “This is the first polar bear case reported, for anywhere,” Gerlach said. As such, it was reported to the World Organisation for Animal Health and has gotten attention in other Arctic nations that have polar bears, he said. This was also the first Endangered Species Act-listed animal in Alaska known to fall victim to the disease. Polar bears, dependent on sea ice that is diminishing because of climate change, were listed as threatened in 2008. While polar bears normally eat seals they hunt from the sea ice, it appears likely that this bear was scavenging on dead birds and ingested the influenza virus that way, Gerlach said. Numerous birds on the North Slope of various species have died from this avian influenza, according to the Department of Environmental Conservation. However, the bear need not have directly eaten an infected bird to have become sick, Gerlach said. Dr. Bob Gerlach, Alaska’s state veterinarian, stands outside the Department of Environmental Conservation lab in Anchorage on May 13, 2022. (Photo by Yereth Rosen/Alaska Beacon) “If a bird dies of this, especially if it’s kept in a cold environment, the virus can be maintained for a while in the environment,” he said. The polar bear death is a sign of the unusually persistent and lethal hold that this strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza has on wild animal populations two years after it arrived in North America, officials said. “What we’re dealing with now is a scenario that we haven’t dealt with in the past. And so there’s no manual,” said Andy Ramey, a U.S. Geological Survey wildlife geneticist and avian influenza expert. No longer just a poultry problem Highly pathogenic avian influenza is called that because it spreads rapidly in flocks of domestic poultry, often requiring massive culls to control the contagions. Such outbreaks have been of concern in the past because of their economic consequences for global agriculture. Until recently, wild birds were afterthoughts. Though they were known to carry the viruses, ferrying them between domestic poultry populations, they were largely unaffected. That has changed dramatically. The prior U.S. outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza, in 2014-15, resulted in some wild bird infections, and some influenza-caused bird die-offs occurred in Europe shortly thereafter. But the current version is considered unprecedented in its effect on wild birds and other wildlife. “Across North America, and really around the world, lots of wild birds these days – I mean, thousands of wild birds these days, tens of thousands in some cases — are dying because of these highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses,” Ramey said. The deaths are of particular concern when they occur in populations that are already vulnerable, he said. An extreme example he cited is the highly endangered California condors, with a population of just a few hundred. After 21 influenza deaths were documented, federal wildlife officials launched what promises to be a challenging vaccination program in that population. The disease has also killed a variety of mammals around the world. In Alaska, three foxes, a black bear and a brown bear have died from this avian influenza. Elsewhere, more bears have been found dead after being infected by the virus, along with skunks, raccoons, mountain lions and large numbers of seals in eastern Canada and off the coasts of Maine and Washington state, as well as outside of North America. The nation’s first detection of the disease in a squirrel was confirmed earlier this month in an animal found in Arizona. U.S. Geological Survey wildlife geneticist Andy Ramey, standing at University Lake in Anchorage on May 18, 2022, is a leading authority on avian influenza. (Photo by Yereth Rosen/Alaska Beacon) To Gerlach, the polar bear case was not surprising, considering that black and brown bears have died. It is possible that more polar bears succumbed to the disease, but in remote places out of the view of people to record the events, he said. “You’re really dependent on the public that’s out there, or the wildlife biologists that are doing surveillance,” he said. Documenting cases in any wild mammal population can be difficult, he added: “How long is a carcass going to be in the wild before it gets scavenged or eaten by something else?” Aside from the large and wide-ranging death toll in the wild, the current outbreak has some other differences, particularly its durability, as seen in its persistence away from domestic flocks. The virus that caused the 2014-15 outbreak spread in the wild bird populations for a while, but it “sort of fizzled out,” Ramey said, probably because it was eventually stamped out in poultry operations. But this one continues to be maintained in the wild, as evidenced by monitoring in Western Alaska, a place far from any big farms raising chickens or turkeys, he said. Gerlach gave the same assessment. “After the second year, that all of sudden disappeared,” he said of the 2014-15 version. “It didn’t stick around, where this virus seems like it’s sticking around.” Rather than winding down, it is continuing to spread across the world, he noted, even into bird populations in Antarctica, as has been recently documented. There are signs that it is now endemic in the wild, a fixed feature into the foreseeable future, he said. If so, “it’s not going to go away. It’s going to be here, and we have to have some way to deal with it,” he said. Alaska a disease crossroads For Alaska, “a mixing area” for global bird migrations, spread of avian diseases is always an issue, Gerlach said. “Alaska is a catchall area for birds from North America or the Americas, as well as from Asia,” he said. The highly pathogenic avian influenza of 2014 and 2015 was introduced from Asia to North America by wild birds migrating through Alaska. The current influenza is also crossing continents through Alaska, though from multiple directions, Ramey’s research has found. Pacific black brant fly above Izembek Lagoon at Izembek National Wildlife Refuge on Dec. 27, 2013. The refuge is used as a migratory stop for nearly the entire global population of Pacific black brant. Black brant are among the wild birds in Alaska found to have been infected with the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus, according to state records. (Photo by Kristine Sowl/U.S. Fish and Wildlfie Service) In a newly published study, Ramey and his research partners found what is likely to have been three separate and independent introductions of highly pathogenic avian influenza into Alaska last year. His research, with colleagues from the USGS and other agencies, used genetic analysis to trace one form of influenza to North America and two to Asia. “To have three introductions in Western Alaska, two from East Asia and one from the Lower 48, I mean, we haven’t seen anything like that before,” he said. “It really, I think, exemplifies how these viruses now are clearly able to be maintained.” That study examined birds harvested in the fall of 2022 by hunters in the Izembek National Wildlife Refuge area at the southern tip of the Alaska Peninsula. Ramey and his colleagues found only a tiny number of hunted birds that were infected with the currently active highly pathogenic influenza virus: out of 811 swab samples taken directly from birds and another 199 samples from feces, the only harvested birds identified as infected were eight pintails, one cackling goose and one widgeon. It can take months to get test results from samples, so what happened to those harvested birds is unknown, he said. But their meat was safe to eat as long as it was properly cooked to the recommended 165 degrees, he said. “Heat is remarkably good at deactivating viruses,” he said. Along with the cooking advice, there are other longstanding recommendations about safely handling hunted birds, such as regular handwashing and avoidance of obviously sick animals. There is little evidence that the current avian influenza wave poses an infection risk to humans. Only a few cases have been documented in the world, and those were general among people working with poultry. For Alaskans dependent on wild game, this highly pathogenic influenza poses a different type of risk: possible food-security problems. If large numbers of birds wind up dying, that might mean less food on the table in rural Alaska, Ramey and Gerlach said. “Obviously, less birds could equate to less availability, and also less resiliency in the population from things like disease, or climate change, or toxins, et cetera, that could in fact, impact these populations of birds,” Ramey said. Plenty of stressors already exist in wild populations, he said, “so adding another threat to these populations isn’t doing them any favors.” YOU MAKE OUR WORK POSSIBLE. SUPPORT Alaska Beacon is part of States Newsroom, a nonprofit news network supported by grants and a coalition of donors as a 501c(3) public charity. Alaska Beacon maintains editorial independence. Contact Editor Andrew Kitchenman for questions: info@alaskabeacon.com. Follow Alaska Beacon on Facebook and X. View Republishing Guidelines Copy to clipboard 1Republish Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. AP and Getty images may not be republished. Please see our republishing guidelines for use of any other photos and graphics. Yereth RosenYereth Rosen came to Alaska in 1987 to work for the Anchorage Times. She has reported for Reuters, for the Alaska Dispatch News, for Arctic Today and for other organizations. She covers environmental issues, energy, climate change, natural resources, economic and business news, health, science and Arctic concerns. In her free time, she likes to ski and watch her son's hockey games.Alaska Beacon is part of States Newsroom, the nation’s largest state-focused nonprofit news organization.MORE FROM AUTHOR Related News Alaska-owned corporation approves $750,000 for legal fights…by James BrooksNovember 11, 2024 Freshwater seals in Alaska’s biggest lake are genetically…by Yereth RosenNovember 11, 2024 Scientists discover volcano-like structure in Arctic Ocean…by Yereth RosenNovember 8, 2024 INDEPENDENT AND ILLUMINATING JOURNALISM Democracy Toolkit // Register to vote | Find your polling place and registration status | How to vote early or by mail | View public notices DEMOCRACY TOOLKIT Register to voteFind your polling place and registration statusHow to vote early or by mailView public notices © Alaska Beacon, 2024 v1.59.8 ABOUT US The Alaska Beacon is an independent, nonpartisan news organization focused on connecting Alaskans to their state government. Our journalists fairly and fearlessly report on the people and interests that determine state policy. We’re part of States Newsroom, the nation’s largest state-focused nonprofit news organization. DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. (See full republishing guidelines.) DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy © Alaska Beacon, 2024 v1.59.8 States Newsroom Fair. Fearless. Free.What to know about influenza, COVID-19, RSV in Riverside CountySkip to main content HomeElection 2024Voter GuideNewsCathedral CityCoachellaCrime & CourtsEnvironmentPoliticsDesert Hot SpringsIndian WellsIndioLa QuintaPalm DesertPalm SpringsRancho MirageNational PoliticsUSA TODAYHomeless in the ValleySalton Sea Influenza, COVID-19, RSV are on the rise. What you need to knowEma Sasic Palm Springs Desert SunSanta Claus brought more than just gifts this holiday season. Sniffles, coughs, fevers and hospital visits have been increasing the last few weeks throughout the country, including Riverside County.Compared to last year, Riverside County is seeing a later curve with its respiratory virus season."Last year’s height of cases came earlier in the season, with significant contribution from RSV. This year, we are right now in the midst of our winter respiratory virus season with influenza, COVID-19, and RSV all on the rise," Dr. Jennifer Chevinsky, Riverside County's deputy public health officer, said Thursday. "This week, we saw COVID-19 numbers that surpassed our 12-month average. With that said, in our county, the current uptick appears to be led by influenza and influenza-like illness."The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a health advisory on Dec. 14 to medical caregivers saying that low vaccination rates against influenza, COVID-19 and RSV "could lead to more severe disease and increased health care capacity strain in the coming weeks."Here's what you need to know about influenza, COVID-19 and RSV cases this winter season.Far more influenza this seasonRiverside County's respiratory illness dashboard shows that there have been more than 10,000 influenza-like illness (defined as any illness with fever greater than or equal to 100°F and cough and/or sore throat) emergency room visits this season, far surpassing the numbers for COVID-19 and RSV. In the Coachella Valley, influenza is also the leading respiratory illness thus far, with nearly 1,400 total visits to the emergency room.For the week of Dec. 10, there were 1,245 influenza hospital visits in the county, according to the dashboard. During the 2022-2023 season, that number was 1,861.According to Riverside County Public Health's latest influenza surveillance report, influenza activity is moderate in the area, with influenza A being the predominant virus this season.Riverside County has reported at least seven influenza-related deaths during the 2023-2024 season, including a child under the age of 5 in the Coachella Valley. For younger children and older adults, as well as those with certain health conditions, respiratory viruses can cause more severe disease and may require additional medical care.At Eisenhower Health in Rancho Mirage as of Tuesday, there has been 299 cases reported, a 26.3% increase in cases the last seven days. The flu positivity rate at the hospital is 3.6%. There have been 1,435 total flu cases reported from Jan. 1 to Dec. 26."The upticks in influenza and influenza-like virus are occurring more towards the typical timeline," Chevinsky said. "We typically see further upticks around the holiday season, and, thus, do anticipate that influenza may reach high levels in our county."Overall in California, flu activity is increasing. Flu positivity reached 15% during the week of Dec. 10. There have been 81 influenza-related deaths in the state between Oct. 1 to Dec. 16.The latest flu vaccines are available to everyone 6 months and older. New with this year's recommendations is that anyone with a history of an egg allergy, regardless of severity, may receive any influenza vaccine (egg-based or non-egg-based) that is otherwise appropriate for their age and health status, according to the CDC.Those who should consult a medical professional about flu vaccines may be immunocompromised, have a history of severe allergic reaction to any component of the vaccine, children between 2-4 who have received a diagnosis of asthma or people who are pregnant.Appointments can be made by visiting myturn.ca.gov/en_US/flu.html or by contacting your local pharmacy or health care provider.Latest COVID-19 variant spreadingAmong the three respiratory illnesses, COVID-19 brought people to hospitals at the highest rates in recent years. But there has been a significant decrease this season.In Riverside County, there have been nearly 5,000 COVID-19 hospital visits this season. In the Coachella Valley, there have been 900 hospital visits, according to the county's dashboard.During the week of Dec. 10, there were 323 COVID-19 emergency room visits in the county, down significantly from the 2022-2023 season's count of 1,330.Eisenhower Health reported 178 new cases, a 0.6% increase in cases in the last seven days. The age group that has seen the largest percentage case increase is ages 0-17 with a 1.2% increase. There has also been a 2.7% increase in total inpatient COVID-19 admission in the last seven days. The hospital has reported 4,984 total COVID-19 cases this year.As of Dec. 22, the COVID-19 seven-day test positivity rate in California was 9.6%, which is roughly the same as last season's rate. There have been 1,079 COVID-19-related deaths in the state between Oct. 1 to Dec. 16.The latest COVID-19 variant gaining momentum in the country is JN.1. It accounted for more than 44% of cases in the U.S. in the week ending Dec. 23, according to CDC data.The dominant variant is most present in the Northeast, but it accounts for about 41% of cases in the West.JN.1 is likely more transmissible than other variants "or better at evading our immune systems than other circulating variants," the CDC said. However, the CDC reinforced that existing vaccines, tests and treatments still work well against the variant.Vaccine appointments can be made at https://myturn.ca.gov/.The CDC still recommends isolation and quarantine guidelines for those infected with COVID-19. People should be isolated from others if they test positive for the virus or if they experience symptoms without a positive test, the health agency says.If you have no symptoms but tested positive:Stay home for at least five days and isolate from others in your houseDay 0 is the day you tested (not the day you received the positive result)Day 1 is the first full day following the day you testedIf you develop symptoms within 10 days of when you tested, the clock restarts at zero on the day you started feeling symptomsIf you have symptoms but no positive test:Day 0 of isolation is the day of symptoms onset, regardless of when you tested positiveDay 1 is the first full day after your symptoms startedYou can end isolation when you test negative.RSV steadily increasesRespiratory syncytial virus is a common respiratory virus that usually causes mild, cold-like symptoms in most people, but immunocompromised individuals, older adults and infants are most at-risk for severe infection. The RSV season starts in the fall and peaks in the winter.Among the three respiratory illnesses, RSV accounts for the least hospital visits this season, with 677, according to the county's dashboard. There have been 122 emergency room visits due to the virus in the Coachella Valley thus far.Riverside County RSV-related hospital trips have steadily increased, with 102 reported for the week of Dec. 10. That is slightly down from last season's 122.At Eisenhower Health, there have been 85 cases reported, a 14.7% increase in cases in the last seven days. RSV positivity is 3%. Overall, there have been 663 total cases this year reported by the hospitalRSV activity remains elevated in California, according to the state's public health department. The overall percentage of RSV detections in labs during the week of Dec. 10 was 10.1%. RSV-related deaths have totaled 33 thus far this season, with 27 among those ages 65 and older and three among those younger than 18.The Food and Drug Administration approved several shots that became available in September for older adults, people in late pregnancy and infants.In addition to vaccination for all three respiratory viruses, Chevinsky reminds the public of simple measures they can take to protect themselves this season. Common sense practices include washing hands, increasing ventilation in indoor spaces, moving gatherings to outdoors when able, wearing a mask in crowded areas and staying home when sick. She also encourages safe practices around those who have heightened risk from these illnesses, such as people with immunocompromising or chronic health conditions, young children and older adults.Those who do come down with a respiratory illness, especially if at risk for severe disease, should speak with their health care provider about treatment options, she added.For more information and to access the county's respiratory illnesses dashboard, visit www.ruhealth.org/public-healthespiratory-virusesUSA Today contributed to this report.Ema Sasic covers entertainment and health in the Coachella Valley. Reach her at ema.sasic@desertsun.com or on Twitter @ema_sasic. Facebook Twitter EmailHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024SC wood duck die-offs linked to highly pathogenic Avian InfluenzaPlease ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of website accessibilitySun, 10 Nov 2024 19:11:44 GMT (1731265904584)Story Infinite Scroll - News3 v1.0.0 (common)c176e2edee36242d1f910bbcf0b370e84d231d3fNewsWeatherRadarMapsWeather CamsFlight InfoHurricane CenterHurricane MapsMini MeteorologistLowcountry LiveFeaturesGame CenterWatch Now 72 Sun 77 Mon 81SC wood duck die-offs linked to highly pathogenic Avian Influenzaby Brandi MartinTue, December 26th 2023 at 11:45 AMUpdated Tue, December 26th 2023 at 6:29 PMWood duck die-offs have been linked to a highly pathogenic avian influenza. (Credit: SC Dept. of Natural Resources)TOPICS:HPAIWood ducksSouth CarolinaDie-offsAvian influenzaSCDNRWaterfowlCounties(WPDE) — The South Carolina Department of Natural Resources (SCDNR) has reported an increase incalls concerning an apparent die-off of wood ducks in Clarendon, Colleton, and Williamsburg counties.Preliminary testing indicates two of these die-off events can be attributed to highly pathogenic Eurasian H5 avian influenza. Results are pending from additional die-off locations.Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) was first detected in the United States in January 2022 in two wild ducks harvested by a hunter in Colleton County, South Carolina, and one wild duck in Hyde County, North Carolina.Prior to these findings, HPAI had not been detected in a wild bird in the United States since 2016.Following the detection of HPAI in early 2022, portions of the United States experienced large die-off events of snow geese and eiders.READ MORE: Consumer Reports: Tesla recalls over 2 million vehicles“Since 2022, the greatest impact on wild birds in South Carolina has been seen in black vultures and bald eagles,” said Molly Kneece, SCDNR state waterfowl biologist. "Up to this point, we had not experienced any noticeable die-offs of waterfowl species in South Carolina. These recently reported wood duck die-offs seem to be localized but do have potential to spread into other counties and to other waterfowl species given the social and migratory behaviors of wood ducks."Hunters should be aware that HPAI is present in the environment, however, it is still safe to pursue and consume wildfowl this season.This type of HPAI virus is considered a low risk to people but a potential danger to the poultry industry, which is an important part of South Carolina’s agricultural economy.USDA Veterinary and Wildlife Services recommends hunters and others take precautions to protect themselves and domestic birds from the virus.South Carolina residents can help monitor this HPAI event by reporting sightings of dead waterfowl here.More information can be found here.Stay ConnectedLike UsFollow Ussbg-envelopeNewsletter Sign up /sign-up© 2024 Sinclair, Inc.TermsEEOFCCFCCPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyCookie PreferencesLoading ...COVID, flu, RSV, cold, strep: What is everyone catching this winter?Skip to main content HomeU.S.SportsEntertainmentLifeMoneyTechTravelOpinionFor SubscribersWeatherInvestigationsCrosswordsHumankindNewslettersMediaFor YouContributor Content What are Americans catching this winter? It's not just flu and COVID-19 anymore.Adrianna Rodriguez USA TODAYShow Caption Hide Caption CDC warns peak flu and COVID-19 levels still to comeDr. Mandy Cohen, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, warned that peak COVID-19 and flu levels are yet to come in the US.unbranded - NewsworthyIt’s that time of year, again, when everyone appears to be getting sick – your family, your friends, your co-workers. Even your dog.In recent years, COVID-19 was the likely culprit behind your sniffles, cough and sore throat. But health experts say it’s more of a toss-up this season between the coronavirus, influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, and other cold viruses.“You can take your pick this year,” said Dr. Steve Furr, president of the American Academy of Family Physicians. “It varies in times of the year and what part of the country.”Health officials fear the rise in infections will lead to increased hospitalizations. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a health advisory on Dec. 14 to medical caregivers saying that low vaccination rates against influenza, COVID-19 and RSV “could lead to more severe disease and increased health care capacity strain in the coming weeks.”Experts say the best defense against developing severe disease is to get vaccinated. And if you haven't gotten a jab, yet, it's not too late.COVID-19: When can you return to normal lifeHealth experts say the coronavirus continues to account for most hospitalizations caused by a respiratory virus.Hospital admissions increased by more than 10% in the week ending Dec. 16 compared with the previous week and by more than 6% for emergency department visits, according to the CDC. Deaths have also increased by more than 3%.A low vaccination rate may partly explain a rise in severe illness and hospitalizations. Only about 18% of Americans have gotten the updated bivalent shot that became available in September. At nursing homes, about a third of residents are up to date with COVID-19 vaccines.The CDC still recommends isolation and quarantine guidelines for those infected. People should be isolated from others if they test positive for the virus or if they experience symptoms without a positive test, the health agency says.If you have no symptoms but tested positive:◾ Stay home for at least five days and isolate from others in your house.◾ Day 0 is the day you tested (not the day you received the positive result).◾ Day 1 is the first full day following the day you tested.◾ If you develop symptoms within 10 days of when you tested, the clock restarts at zero on the day you started feeling symptoms.If you have symptoms but no positive test:◾ Day 0 of isolation is the day of symptoms onset, regardless of when you tested positive.◾ Day 1 is the first full day after your symptoms started.You can end isolation once you test negative.What are the symptoms of new COVID?The latest COVID-19 variant gaining momentum in the country is JN.1.First detected in September, it made up more than 44% of cases in the U.S. in the week ending Dec. 23, according to CDC data.The dominant variant is most present in the Northeast including New Jersey and New York, where it accounts for nearly 57% of cases. In the West, it accounts for about 41% and about 39% of cases in the mid-Atlantic.So far, JN.1 doesn’t seem to cause any unusual COVID-19 symptoms outside of fever and chills, cough, sore throat, congestion or runny nose, headache, muscle aches, fatigue, difficulty breathing, brain fog, and loss of taste or smell.It may spread easier or be better at evading our immune systems, health officials say, but there is no evidence that the strain causes more severe disease than other recent variants. Evidence indicates vaccines and antiviral medications work against it.Influenza: How do you tell if I have the flu or COVID?Half of the states in the U.S. – especially those in the South – have reported high or very high flu activity as of the week ending Dec. 16, according to the CDC.Positive lab tests for influenza rose to 12% of all tests given, up from 10% in the previous week. Overall, labs have processed more than 949,800 tests since Oct. 1; more than 52,800 were positive for the flu.Distinguishing between flu and COVID symptoms can be difficult. Both viruses tend to cause fevers, cough, muscle aches and fatigue. Luckily, providers test for both viruses at the hospital to determine the best course of antivirals.The Food and Drug Administration also authorized in February the first over-the-counter at-home test that can detect and differentiate between flu and COVID-19. The Lucira COVID-19 and Flu Home Test is a single-use test that can be purchased without a prescription and displays results in 30 minutes or less for influenza A, influenza B and COVID-19.Vaccination fatigue has led fewer Americans to get their flu vaccine compared with last year, Furr said. About 42% of U.S. adults had gotten flu shots by the first week of December, down from about 45% at the same time last year, according to the CDC.Respiratory syncytial virus: What are the first signs of RSV?RSV is a respiratory virus that infects the lungs and breathing passages, including the nose and throat. Health experts say it’s a common infection that most children experience by age 2 but can cause severe disease in babies and older adults.The CDC says symptoms of RSV tend to appear within four to six days after infection and may include:◾ Runny nose.◾ Coughing.◾ Sneezing.◾ Fever.◾ Wheezing.Health experts say symptoms typically resolve independently within a week or two. More concerning symptoms of RSV that may require emergency medical care include shortness of breath, high fever, bluish tint to the skin and worsening cough, according to the American Lung Association.In infants under 6 months, the only discernible symptoms may be increased irritability or lethargy, decreased appetite, or working harder to breathe. Infants are vulnerable to RSV-related complications because of their naive immune systems and small respiratory airways, health experts say.As of Dec. 16, nearly 12% of RSV tests in the U.S. were positive, according to the CDC, up from 3.6% at the beginning of October. Truveta, a health care and data analytics company, reports the highest rate of hospitalizations occurring in babies 0 to 6 months – making up nearly 25% of admissions in November.Until recently, there were no pharmaceutical interventions that could help prevent RSV infection. However, the FDA approved several shots that became available in September for older adults, people in late pregnancy and infants.As of Dec. 9, only 17% of adults 60 and older had received the new shots against RSV and about 7% of eligible pregnant people, according to the CDC.“People are overwhelmed by all the vaccines,” Furr said. “The uptake has not been as good as we would like.”A shortage of RSV shots for infants forced the CDC to reel back guidelines in October to recommend conserving shots for young patients at higher risk for developing severe disease. The Biden administration met with the drug’s manufacturers to increase supply by an additional 230,000 doses in January, according to a White House release.What else is out there? The common cold, strep throatViruses may cause a sore throat, but bacteria can cause strep throat.Group A streptococcus infections can occur any time during the year, but they’re more common in the winter and spring. The illness typically occurs more in children than adults, especially those ages 5 to 15, because it tends to spread in schools and day care centers, according to the CDC.The agency does not track noninvasive cases of strep throat, but Epic Research, which looks at electronic health records nationwide, reports doctor’s and emergency department visits for strep throat have been steadily rising since August.Data is sparse, but Dr. Phil Huang, director of the Dallas County health department in Texas, says there has been more strep activity in schools."We certainly see it (during) the same times that we see increases in respiratory viruses," he said.It takes two to five days for someone exposed to group A strep bacteria to become sick and develop symptoms, the CDC says, which can include fever, pain when swallowing, red and swollen tonsils, white patches or streaks of pus on the tonsils, red spots on the roof of the mouth and swollen lymph nodes. Unlike a respiratory virus, strep throat doesn’t usually cause a cough or runny nose.A simple swab test of the throat at a doctor’s office can provide definitive results. If positive, providers will prescribe antibiotics that will decrease symptoms and length of illness, prevent the bacteria from spreading to others and avoid serious complications.Health experts say common cold viruses are also in full swing this year. Cold symptoms last seven to 10 days and are most contagious in the first four to five days, health experts say. These viruses don’t typically result in hospitalizations, but some symptoms can last for weeks.These symptoms mirror classic signs of respiratory illness, including runny or congested nose, cough, sore throat, mild headache and sneezing.Unlike bacterial infections, such as strep throat, antibiotics don’t have any impact on respiratory viruses, which means the best thing to do is drink lots of fluids and rest as the virus takes its course.Contributing: Mike Snider, USA TODAY; The Associated PressSend tips to Adrianna Rodriguez: adrodriguez@usatoday.com Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024From the Farm Bill to Avian Influenza, Here's a Look Back at 2023’s Top Agriculture Stories | Farming and Agricultural News | lancasterfarming.com Skip to main content You are the owner of this article. Edit Article Add New Article Close You have permission to edit this article. Edit Close Subscribe Today Mailbox Markets Register Log In My Account Log Out Site search Search Home E-Newspaper Archives Advertising Media Kit E-Newsletters Market Reports Business Directory Weather Farming News News Dairy Livestock Poultry Field Crops Produce Hemp Conservation Organic Ag Business Equipment & Machinery Country Life Family Food & Recipes Antiques & History Mid-Atlantic Horse Youth Gardening Outdoors Fairs & Shows Farmhouse Podcast Buy & Sell Mailbox Markets Classifieds Auctions Polls Merchandise Store Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Lancaster Farming P.O. Box 609 Ephrata, PA 17522 (717) 394-3047 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn TikTok Instagram Site search Search Subscribe Log In My Account Log Out Farming News Country Life Classifieds Auctions Mailbox Markets From the Farm Bill to Avian Influenza, Here's a Look Back at 2023’s Top Agriculture Stories Share this Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link LancasterFarming e-Newspapers November 11, 2024 54° 54° Close From the Farm Bill to Avian Influenza, Here's a Look Back at 2023’s Top Agriculture Stories Philip Gruber, pgruber@lancasterfarming.com Dec 29, 2023 Dec 29, 2023 Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email House Agriculture Committee Chairman U.S. Rep. Glenn Thompson, R-Pa., walks with host U.S. Rep. Chellie Pingree, D-Maine, during a farm visit before a July 31, 2023, Farm Bill listening session in Freeport, Maine. U.S. Rep. Chellie Pingree's office Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Farmers took the good with the bad this year.Across the Mid-Atlantic, 2023 brought new agricultural issues. And it saw progress — though not necessarily resolution — on existing concerns.Net farm income is a case in point. This measure of farm profitability is expected to finish the year down 17%, according to the latest USDA forecast. That’s disappointing, but farmers were coming off a record year in 2022, so the decline isn’t as bad as it could be.As 2023 comes to a close, here are the biggest stories that affected farmers this year.Farm BillAmerica’s biggest piece of agricultural legislation came up for renewal this year, its 90th anniversary.Members of Congress held hearings in Washington and across the country to hear from farmers and stakeholders about what should be included in the Farm Bill.Ag lobbying groups made their pitches on topics from crops to conservation. Food assistance programs make up about 80% of the Farm Bill.The legislation is expected to reach $1.5 trillion.Pennsylvania’s own Rep. Glenn Thompson became chairman of the House Agriculture Committee at the beginning of the year, making him one of the top Farm Bill negotiators. Thompson is the first Pennsylvanian to head the committee since before the Civil War.Though Thompson sought an on-time and bipartisan Farm Bill, he’s had to settle for a one-year extension so far.When it could have been negotiating a Farm Bill this fall, the House found itself bogged down in a leadership fight, a budget impasse, and a quandary over military aid to Ukraine and Israel.Ag groups have urged Congress to pass the new Farm Bill as soon as possible next year.Because of slim majorities in the House and Senate, the Farm Bill will need both Republican and Democratic votes to pass.But bipartisanship could be hard to find given the heightened partisan sensitivities of a presidential election year.Avian InfluenzaThe poultry disease outbreak that swept the nation in 2022 continued this year. Across the two-year outbreak, the U.S. has seen 1,000 flocks infected totaling more than 75 million birds.Though avian influenza has killed domestic birds in almost every state, Pennsylvania was the hotbed of infections this spring. Many of the outbreaks were tied to farms that supply live bird markets.In March, the state quarantined 207 of these farms in Lancaster and Chester counties, imposing a regimen of disease testing. State Veterinarian Kevin Brightbill said some farms had failed to report suspected cases to the state.Pennsylvania got the outbreak under control in the spring and declared itself free of avian influenza, a key step for removing trade barriers, in August.As cases continued to trickle in nationwide — or flood in, during a late-fall spike — interest grew in vaccinating poultry against the disease.USDA vaccinated some California condors to protect the endangered wild species, but vaccinating food birds would likely prompt other countries to ban U.S. poultry.France lost many export markets in October when it began vaccinating birds to stop an outbreak that has devastated its foie gras duck industry.Meanwhile, Pennsylvania has paid more than $12 million in avian influenza recovery funds to farms and agribusinesses. Delmarva Chicken Association has proposed creating a similar program in the Farm Bill.USDA pays an indemnity on depopulated birds, but it does not cover losses such as flock placements missed while a farm is in a control area.Biosecurity remains the best protection against avian influenza. Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro talks about the proactive steps being taken against the avian flu at Silver Valley Farm in East Earl on Wednesday, March 29, 2023. Vinny Tennis Weather and Climate WoesThe weather brings headaches every year, and this year was no exception.Parts of the Mid-Atlantic saw an unusual spring drought. It was one of the top 10 driest Mays on record in both Maryland and Pennsylvania.Though later rains led to decent crops in many places, Vermont and northern New York got more rain than they could handle. A mid-July storm dumped as much as 9 inches, triggering landslides and widespread flooding in Vermont.On top of that, Canada had its worst wildfire season on record. The smoke spread haze, and a crispy savor, across the Northeast U.S. for several days this summer.The unhealthy levels of particulate matter in the air were not ideal for outdoor farm work — but also not a big concern for crops and livestock.Scientists say that without extensive study they cannot directly link a single weather system to climate change.But prolonged dry spells, intense rains and rising wildfire risk have all been proposed as possible effects of climate change.Some farm organizations have called for the Farm Bill to include measures to mitigate the effects of a warming planet.East Palestine DerailmentWhat might have been a routine industrial accident in eastern Ohio blew up into a national news story in February.A 150-car Norfolk Southern train partially derailed around 9:30 p.m. Feb. 3 near East Palestine, close to the Pennsylvania border.Among the 53 cars that left the tracks, 20 contained hazardous materials such as vinyl chloride. Some cars caught fire, and some spilled into a waterway that feeds the Ohio River.Three days later, the company conducted a controlled burn to prevent a larger explosion at the site.Ohio, Pennsylvania and the Environmental Protection Agency pounced on Norfolk Southern to make sure it properly cleaned up the site.But residents and farmers had seen the billowing black smoke and were concerned about the safety of their air, water, soil and homes. Anxiety and conspiracy theories ran rampant, with residents’ frustration boiling over in local meetings.Some people locally and nationally saw the situation as an example of big business running roughshod over rural America.State and federal officials tried to allay contamination fears as much as possible, though environmental sampling took several months. Ohio and Pennsylvania eventually found no health risks to people or livestock in their environmental sampling.Andrew Whelton, a Purdue University environmental engineering professor who conducted pro bono testing in the area, said agencies tested for too few chemicals.Norfolk Southern finished removing contaminated soil in October and announced Dec. 5 that the most intensive remediation work was done.The company has committed more than $100 million to East Palestine and nearby communities, and continues to operate an assistance center for locals. A farmer discs his field at a farm off Amishtown Road in New Holland, PA on Monday, May 15, 2023. VINNY TENNIS | Staff Photographer Animal Housing LawsThe Supreme Court in May upheld a California law, passed by ballot initiative, that requires pork sold in the state to come from systems where sows have enough space to lie down, fully extend their limbs and turn around freely.The National Pork Producers Council and American Farm Bureau Federation argued the law would illegally burden interstate commerce because most of California’s pork comes from out of state.When the court rejected that argument, ag groups turned their attention to the Ending Agricultural Trade Suppression Act, federal legislation that would ban state and local governments from imposing standards on the production of agricultural goods that come from other states.The bill could block animal welfare laws, like California’s Proposition 12, that raise farmers’ production costs. Farmers say they also worry about new requirements being based in emotion rather than science.But some Pennsylvania pork producers oppose the bill because they have already become compliant with California’s requirements and would lose a niche market.Brent Hershey, president of Hershey Ag in Marietta, Pennsylvania, said sow mobility and farrowing ease have improved since he switched to Prop 12-compliant housing. Jevtic Over-Order PremiumPennsylvania continued its effort this year to reform a state premium for dairy farmers.The over-order premium applies only to milk used in fluid products that is kept in the state for processing and retail, so it does not benefit all dairy farmers evenly.The Legislature will likely need to be involved in any reform proposal, and the Senate Agriculture and Rural Affairs Committee took the first step by holding a hearing in April.At that meeting, Ag Secretary Russell Redding proposed that retailers collect the premium on sales of fluid milk and send the money to the Department of Revenue, which would put it in a designated fund. The General Assembly would then allocate the money to farmers and processors.Redding has no control over the premium, which is set by the independent Milk Marketing Board (or simply the Milk Board, with a name change official Jan. 5).And reform has not been straightforward. Farmers, independent processors and cooperatives have differing goals, and whatever structure is created cannot interfere with interstate commerce.Sen. Elder Vogel, chairman of the ag committee, has had numerous stakeholder meetings to help develop legislation.“Folks involved with the OOP are aware of its intricacies and complexity, and we are planning to hit the ground running after the holidays,” said Abby Chiumento, a spokeswoman for Vogel. Russell Redding, Pennsylvania's secretary of agriculture, speaks in a hearing of the Senate Agriculture and Rural Affairs Committee, on April 25, 2023, at the state Capitol in a screenshot from the Senate livestream. PHILIP GRUBER | Staff Whole MilkA bill to allow whole milk in schools took major steps forward this year.It passed a U.S. House committee for the first time in June and received bipartisan approval in the full House earlier this month.Those votes were a decade in the making.Whole milk was removed from schools by a 2010 law designed to improve the healthfulness of school meals.But farmers and dairy organizations said the move drove children away from school milk — and its important nutrients — because they didn’t like the taste of the skim and 1% they were left drinking.Farmers’ cause has been buoyed by recent studies that undermine longstanding concerns about the health risks of saturated fat such as milkfat.The federal Dietary Guidelines for Americans still recommend a low-fat diet, though, and some Democrats have opposed giving children milk that conflicts with those standards.Some Democrats have also opposed the bill because school meals have traditionally been modified with comprehensive reforms, not bills focused on single foods.The bill passed the House 330-99 but is unlikely to pass the Senate this session.Foreign Ownership of FarmsAbout a dozen states passed or amended laws this year restricting foreign investment in land.Roughly half of states now have such laws, according to the National Agricultural Law Center.The laws were prompted by recent purchases that some lawmakers speculated could threaten national security.In one case, a Chinese food manufacturer bought 300 acres near an Air Force base in North Dakota last year.Just before that, a Chinese billionaire’s company tried to build a wind farm in Texas ranch country.Texas banned Chinese companies from accessing the state’s power grid, so the project was sold to a Spanish firm, The Associated Press reported.That project is also in the vicinity of an air base, but federal officials determined it wasn’t a threat, according to the AP.Americans’ ill feelings toward China have been simmering for some time, and they weren’t helped when a reputed Chinese spy balloon floated over the heartland in February. The U.S. military shot it down off the coast.Despite the furor over China, the country and its citizens own just one-hundredth of the 3% of U.S. private ag land that is foreign-owned.The countries with the largest stakes are all NATO allies — Canada, the Netherlands, Italy, the United Kingdom and Germany.Most of the foreign-owned land is forest, but cropland is gaining popularity as an investment opportunity, especially for renewable energy developers.Though the federal government tracks foreign land ownership, it’s up to states to restrict foreign ownership if they choose.Arkansas did just that, and in October, the state’s attorney general ordered a Syngenta subsidiary to sell farmland in the state. Syngenta is owned by a Chinese state-owned company. Newsletter Success! An email has been sent to with a link to confirm list signup. Error! There was an error processing your request. Breaking News Breaking news, sent straight to your inbox. Please enter a valid email address. Sign up By opting into newsletters you are agreeing to our privacy policy. From Our Partners What To Read Next Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link More information 2023: The Year in 80 Farm Headlines 2023's biggest developments in Mid-Atlantic agriculture are broken down month by month. Your Guide to the 2023 Farm Bill The Farm Bill helps farmers weather downswings in commodity prices, yes. But it also protects waterways and forests, provides groceries for needy people and supports the development of markets for local food. It even helps rural communities purchase police cars. Avian Influenza: Everything You Need to Know Here’s what you need to know about the risks, causes and prevention of avian influenza. Dry Weather Raises Concerns Across Mid-Atlantic Weeks of parched conditions are raising crop concerns in Pennsylvania and surrounding states. While farmers have had good conditions to make hay and ripen strawberries, farmers across the region are facing slow plant growth or relying on irrigation to get by. Train Derailment Creates Uncertainty for Farmers Farmers with land close to East Palestine, Ohio, remain uncertain if or how the toxic chemicals released from the derailed train cars will affect their operations. Prop 12 Prompts Industry Soul-Searching on Sow Housing Some Pennsylvania pork producers are skeptical of using federal legislation to overturn California’s rules for sow housing. Reforming Pennsylvania's Dairy Over-Order Premium: What You Need to Know After years of dairy farmers clamoring for change, Pennsylvania officials are taking another shot at rebuilding the state’s over-order premium. Here is what you need to know about the concerns with the premium, and the possibilities — and difficulties — of reform. US House Passes Bill Allowing Whole Milk in Schools The U.S. House passed a bill Wednesday allowing whole milk to be served in school meals, a major step toward reversing a 13-year-old prohibition that farmers say has hurt the industry. Foreign Ownership of US Farmland on the Rise Foreign entities own approximately 40 million acres of U.S. farmland, which accounts for 3% of all privately held agricultural land in the U.S., according to USDA. Tags Politics The Economy Trade Agriculture Classroom Legislation Institutions Meteorology Finance Law Business Industry Ecology Zootechnics Food Parliament And Legislative Bodies Job Market Sports Zoology Armed Forces Newsletter Philip Gruber Phil Gruber is the Print Content Manager at Lancaster Farming. He can be reached at 717-721-4427 or pgruber@lancasterfarming.com. Author email Sign up for our e-Newsletters! Success! An email has been sent to with a link to confirm list signup. Error! There was an error processing your request. Lancaster Farming News Breaking News Country Life Dairy News Field Crops News Industrial Hemp News Livestock News Mid-Atlantic Horse News Poultry News You must select at least one email list. Please enter a valid email address. Sign up Sections News Farming News Country Life Classifieds Business Directory Auctions Mailbox Markets Ancestry Archives Quick Links Subscribe Submit a Classified Liner Ad Contacts Advertising Media Kit Where to Buy Manage Subscription Merchandise Store CONTACT US LancasterFarming.com 21 W Main St, PO Box 609 Ephrata, PA 17522 Phone: (717) 394-3047 Email: Farming@LancasterFarming.com Follow Us Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube TikTok Pinterest Instagram × Browser Compatibility Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.We recommend switching to one of the following browsers: Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox Copyright © 2024 Lancaster Farming Privacy PolicyTerms of UseCareers ;SC Wood Duck Die-Offs Linked to Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza - Morning Ag Clips Subscribe ❯ PORTAL ❯ LOGIN ❯ By Keyword By topic By state Home Events Jobs Work With Us Skip to primary navigation Skip to main content Skip to primary sidebar Skip to footer Subscribe to ourdaily email❯ SubmitYour Content❯ Login❯ policy tractors & machinery education conservation webinars business dairy cattle poultry swine corn soybeans organic specialty crops Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Home Events Jobs Work With Us Morning Ag Clips Search By keyword By topic By state policy tractors & machinery education conservation webinars business dairy cattle poultry swine corn soybeans organic specialty crops For the best mobile experience, get the MAC App Today!Home » SC Wood Duck Die-Offs Linked to Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza livestock health poultry USDA HPAI ...SC Wood Duck Die-Offs Linked to Highly Pathogenic Avian InfluenzaCases are in Clarendon, Colleton and Williamsburg countiesPUBLISHED ON December 26, 2023Officials say that while HPAI is considered low-risk for transmission to humans, it may affect the economically important poultry industry in South Carolina. (SCDNR photo)COLUMBIA, S.C. — Within the last two weeks, the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources (SCDNR) and the United States Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) have received numerous calls concerning an apparent die-off of wood ducks in waterfowl impoundments and river swamps in Clarendon, Colleton and Williamsburg counties. Preliminary testing indicates two of these die-off events can be attributed to highly pathogenic Eurasian H5 avian influenza (HPAI). Results are currently pending from additional die-off locations. Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza was first detected in the United States in January 2022 in two wild ducks harvested by a hunter in Colleton County, South Carolina, and one wild duck in Hyde County, North Carolina. Prior to these findings, HPAI had not been detected in a wild bird in the United States since 2016. Following the detection of HPAI in early 2022, portions of the United States experienced large die-off events of snow geese and eiders. “Since 2022, the greatest impact on wild birds in South Carolina has been seen in black vultures and bald eagles,” said Molly Kneece, SCDNR state waterfowl biologist. “Up to this point, we had not experienced any noticeable die-offs of waterfowl species in South Carolina. These recently reported wood duck die-offs seem to be localized but do have potential to spread into other counties and to other waterfowl species given the social and migratory behaviors of wood ducks.” Hunters should be aware that HPAI is present in the environment, and it is also showing up in an APHIS sampling effort of hunter harvested birds. However, it is still safe to pursue and consume wild fowl this season. This type of HPAI virus is considered a low risk to people but it can be a danger to the poultry industry, which is an important part of South Carolina’s agricultural economy. USDA Veterinary and Wildlife Services recommends hunters and others to take precautions to protect themselves and the domestic birds they may encounter from the virus: Do not harvest or handle wild birds that are obviously sick or found dead without latex gloves. Dress your game birds in the field whenever possible. If you must dress birds at home, clean them in an area in which your poultry and pet birds have no access. Keep a separate pair of shoes to wear only in your game cleaning area. If this is not possible, wear rubber footwear and clean/disinfect your shoes before entering or leaving the area. Do not eat, drink or smoke while cleaning game. Always wear rubber gloves while cleaning game or cleaning bird feeders. Wash hands with soap and water immediately after handling game or cleaning bird feeders. If soap and water are not available, use alcohol wipes. Use dedicated tools for cleaning game, whether in the field or at home. Do not use those tools around your poultry or pet birds. Wash all tools and work surfaces with soap and water and then disinfect them. Avoid cross-contamination. Keep uncooked game in a separate container, away from cooked or ready-to-eat foods. Cook game meat thoroughly; poultry should reach an internal temperature of 165 degrees Fahrenheit to kill disease organisms and parasites. Double bag the offal and feathers. Tie the inner bag; be sure to take off your rubber gloves and leave them in the outer bag before tying it closed. Place the bag in a trash can that poultry and pet birds cannot access. This trash can should also be secure against access by children, pets or other animals. Julie Helm, a veterinarian and poultry specialist with Clemson Livestock Poultry Health, advises South Carolinians to protect small poultry flocks with two simple statements: “Keep it AWAY and Keep it CLEAN.” Keep it AWAY: Keep your poultry and pets away from wild ducks and geese and their environment — ponds, lakes and swampy areas. Take care not to track the wild waterfowl virus back to your flock if you are hunting or hiking in the wild waterfowl environment. Buy new birds from a reputable source. Keep new birds or returning show birds separated from your established home flocks for 30 days. Keep pests (rodents, raccoons, opossums, rabbits) out of bird pens. Keep visitors out of your bird areas; what may they be carrying on their feet, clothing or vehicles. Keep it CLEAN: Clean cages and coops. Clean any equipment first before it comes onto your property. Wear designated farm shoes and clothing to care for your birds. Wash your hands before and after working with your birds. Change birds’ food and water daily. Wash your vehicles and trailers after visiting other poultry facilities and before you come home — go through a car wash. DHEC strongly urges anyone who handles birds — including hunters and poultry farmers — to follow the recommended precautions for protecting themselves from possible exposure and to talk with a doctor if they have any health concerns regarding a possible exposure. South Carolina hunters and landowners can help SCNDR and APHIS monitor this potential HPAI event by reporting sightings of dead wood ducks or other waterfowl to SCDNR (800-922-5431 or [email protected], Subject Line: HPAI). Of notable interest will be the location of the die-off, number of individuals affected, species, and habitat type. HPAI testing will be done on a case-by-case basis, but it will be very helpful to know where any waterfowl die-offs are occurring and to what extent. After reporting any waterfowl die-off events to SCDNR, landowners and habitat managers can gather any dead waterfowl they find and bury those carcasses on site. This important step can help reduce the spread of HPAI to scavenging mammals and birds of prey. All equipment, tools, clothing, and boots should be disinfected with a solution of 1/3 cup bleach to 1 gallon of water. For more information on HPAI or to monitor confirmed detections in wild birds and commercial or backyard flocks follow: https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/animalhealth/animal-disease-information/avian/avian-influenza/2022-hpai Contact: SCDNR, Greg Lucas, [email protected], (864) 380-5201 South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Rembert C. Dennis Building 1000 Assembly Street, Columbia, SC 29201 Department Phone Numbers — South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Spread the word RECOMMENDED ARTICLES New oral solution combats major poultry diseaseJune 06, 2021WASHINGTON — Researchers at the USDA’s Agricultural Research Service and US Biologic, Inc., have developed an oral solution to an antibiotic alternative that fights against poultry coccidiosis, which costs the poultry […] Strong chicks = happy hens: Early nutrition is keyMarch 14, 2018WASHINGTON — An apple a day keeps the doctor away. No dessert before dinner. Eat your vegetables! Do you remember hearing these phrases at the dining room table while growing […] Vaccination against Salmonella Reading in turkeys being evaluatedApril 28, 2021TUCKER, Ga. — USPOULTRY approved approximately $60,000 in funding for a new research grant to evaluate strategies to reduce Salmonella Reading colonization in turkeys through the Board Research Initiative program. The […] Supporting Disease-Challenged Broiler Chickens Through NutritionMarch 07, 2024URBANA, Ill. — When broiler chickens are busy fighting the parasitic infection coccidiosis, they can’t absorb nutrients efficiently or put energy toward growth. With consumer sentiment pitted against antimicrobials and […] Browse More Clips USDA Surveying Cattle Operations $7,000 USPOULTRY Foundation Student Recruiting Grant Awarded to Wilkes Community College Primary Sidebar MORENORTH CAROLINA CLIPS Importance of Farm Field TripsNovember 11, 2024 N.C. Forest Service Offering Discounts on Tree Seedling OrdersNovember 11, 2024 Have a "Dairy" Great Idea? Applications for Dairy’s Foundation Grants Due Dec. 1November 11, 2024 SSGA Appoints New Executive DirectorNovember 11, 2024 Wool Calculator Now on SheepUSA.orgNovember 11, 2024 Trending Latest TRENDING CLIPS Svalbard Global Seed Vault Evokes Epic Imagery and Controversy November 4, 2024 Bio-Based Fibers Could Pose Greater Threat to the Environment Than Conventional Plastics November 5, 2024 DEC Declares Drougt Watch for 15 New York Counties November 6, 2024 Mexico City’s Floating Gardens Have Fed People for Hundreds of Years. Now They’re Threatened November 6, 2024 Turkey Prices Low Ahead of Thanksgiving Holiday November 6, 2024 One Step Closer to an Alternative Fruit and Vegetable Treatment Option November 5, 2024 Carl Sagan’s Scientific Legacy Extends Far Beyond ‘Cosmos’ November 5, 2024 Native Warm Season Grasses: A Drought-Resistant Forage? November 5, 2024 YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE... Indiana November Crop Production ForecastNovember 11, 2024 Michigan 2024 Potato Production ForecastNovember 11, 2024 USDA Seeks Public Input on Climate Benefits of Conservation Practice StandardsNovember 11, 2024 USDA Announces Dates for the California Almond Continuance ReferendumNovember 11, 2024 Northwest Region November Crop Production EstimatesNovember 11, 2024 FooterMORNING AG CLIPS Contact Us Sponsors About Us Advertise with Us Privacy Statement Terms of Service Write For Us CONNECT WITH US Like Us on Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Twitter YouTube TikTok TRACK YOUR TRADE Markets & Economy Cattle Updates Dairy News Policy & Politics Corn Alerts QUICK LINKS Account Portal Membership Just Me, Kate Morning Ag Communications Weather Beef Blueprints Submissions Get the MAC App Today! © 2024 Morning Ag Clips, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Stay In The Know! Subscribe to Your Favorite Newsletter! Click here to Subscribe today by selecting your desired edition and scrolling down to click “All Set!” From the field to your inbox, the Weekend Edition of the Morning Ag Clips features stories, trends, and unique perspectives from the farming community. Morning Ag Clips. All Ag. All the time. CLOSE Search Post Post Filter Apply Filters Close CLOSE Search Post Post Filter Apply Filters Close CLOSE Mac Calendar Contest Photo Contest Name(Required) First Last Email(Required) Enter Email Confirm Email Your Photo Entry(Required) Drop files here or Select files Accepted file types: jpg, jpeg, png, Max. file size: 50 MB, Max. files: 5. Please attach a high-resolution image that is at least 900 by 500 pixels. Please provide a caption for your photo along with town and state you are located in.(Required)Competition Terms and Conditions(Required)Terms and Conditions are outlined below in the Terms and Conditions section of the Calendar Photo Contest page I agree to the competition terms and conditions.CAPTCHA ×Pediatric RSV led to higher hospitalization rates than omicron or flu: Study - ABC News ABC NewsVideoLiveShowsElections538ShopStream onLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 11, 10:39 PM ETNational Election Results: presidential Projection: Trump is President-elect226312226312Harris71,744,902270 to winTrump74,952,771Expected vote reporting: 95%Recent ProjectionsCalif. Dist. 27Projected WinnerGeorge Whitesides•D1 hour agoColo. Dist. 8Projected WinnerGabe Evans•R1 day agoNational Election Results: house206214206214Dem.214 up for electionLost: 1218 for controlestimateRep.221 up for electionGained: 1Undecided races of the 2024 election: Live results and analysisLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 11, 4:53 PM ET4:53 PMRep. Stefanik’s U.N. appointment to trigger special election in New York3:24 PMHow all the intraparty House races turned outPediatric RSV led to higher hospitalization rates than omicron or flu: StudyHospitalization rates were 81.7% for RSV and 27.7% for flu, the study found.ByKatherine Kahn | MedPage TodayDecember 27, 2023, 3:08 PMNaN:NaNAn electron micrograph shows the morphologic traits of the Respiratory Syncytial Virus Rsv.BSIP/UIG Via Getty Images, FILEThis is a MedPage Today story..A retrospective study revealed that hospital admission rates were far higher for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) than for the omicron strain of SARS-CoV-2 or influenza A/B in children presenting at Swedish emergency departments (EDs) from August 2021 to September 2022.Hospitalization rates were 81.7% for RSV, 31.5% for omicron, and 27.7% for influenza, Dr. Pontus Hedberg and researchers from the Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm reported. The results appeared in a JAMA Pediatrics."That RSV can be dangerous for both infants and young children is well-known, but the major differences in hospitalization rates observed for RSV compared with both SARS-CoV-2 omicron and influenza A/B across all age groups were surprising," Hedberg told MedPage Today by email.MORE: Respiratory viruses increasing as Americans prepare to gather for the holidays: CDCIntensive care unit (ICU) admission rates were low for all three illnesses, but highest for RSV. Of the 2,596 children included in the study, 2.9% with RSV were admitted to the ICU compared with 0.9% for influenza and 0.7% for omicron. Mortality within 30 days after admission was also low. However, two patients with omicron and one with RSV died.The odds of newborns and infants up to 1 year of age with RSV being hospitalized were about 11 times greater than those diagnosed with omicron. Children ages 2 to 4 years and youth ages 5 to 17 with RSV also had a far higher odds of hospitalization than those with omicron.An electron micrograph shows the morphologic traits of the Respiratory Syncytial Virus Rsv.BSIP/UIG Via Getty Images, FILEAsthma, congenital abnormalities and perinatal conditions were common among the hospitalized children, the study showed.Dr. Richard Malley, an infectious diseases specialist at Boston Children's Hospital, told MedPage Today that the roughly 80% hospital admission rate for RSV reported in the study seemed high, but that healthcare system practices often vary substantially across countries."Depending on where you live, going to the ER might be a last resort," whereas in some areas, people may seek emergency care when primary care options are not accessible, he explained.The CDC estimates that RSV leads to 58,000 to 80,000 hospitalizations and 100 to 300 deaths each year in children under 5 years of age.The high hospitalization rates in the study were not a surprise to Dr. Stanley Spinner, chief medical officer at Texas Children's Pediatrics in Houston. He told MedPage Today in an email that rates were similar to those seen at his center.In addition to taking steps to prevent RSV in children, "these [study] findings also emphasize that need to continue to educate about the importance of influenza and COVID prevention in the pediatric population," he said.Earlier this year, the FDA approved the first maternal RSV vaccine to protect newborns from serious RSV infection.MORE: Protecting babies from RSV this holiday season: What parents need to knowThe FDA also approved the monoclonal antibody nirsevimab (Beyfortus) to protect all newborns and infants in or entering their first RSV season, as well as children up to 2 years old who are vulnerable to severe RSV disease. However, in October, the CDC issued a health advisory that nirsevimab was in short supply and could leave many children at risk."Ultimately RSV is a major contributor to illness in young children and ... the modalities that we have now to prevent RSV could, if applied wisely and broadly, really reduce hospitalizations and RSV morbidity," Malley said.The study included 896 children with omicron, 426 with influenza A/B, and 1,274 with RSV. Most of the children with RSV and omicron were younger than 2 years of age (77.7% and 72.3%, respectively) while 81% of children with the flu were older.Researchers used multiplex PCR testing to test for SARS-CoV-2, influenza A/B, and RSV all at once, which reduced potential diagnostic bias, Hedberg said.Limitations of the study included its retrospective design and potential underreporting of provided respiratory support. Also, patients with mild disease might have been missed due to underdiagnosis, the authors wrote.Related TopicsRSV casesPopular ReadsTrump's plan for education in his second termNov 11, 4:56 PMSotomayor has no plans to resign: SourcesNov 10, 4:27 PMArrest in fatal shooting at Tuskegee UniversityNov 10, 6:35 PMMissing American tourist in Hungary killed: PoliceNov 9, 1:36 PM538's final forecasts for the 2024 electionNov 5, 7:49 AMABC News Live24/7 coverage of breaking news and live eventsABC News NetworkAbout Nielsen MeasurementChildren's Online Privacy PolicyContact UsDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationInterest-Based AdsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseYour US State Privacy Rights © 2024 ABC NewsCOVID-19 and influenza infections on the rise in New Hampshire Skip to content NOWCAST News 9 Tonight Live Now Menu Search Homepage Local News National News Weather Commitment 2024 Closings Interactive Radar Forecasting Our Future CloseUP Conversation with the Candidate Get the Facts Get the Facts - Commitment 2024 Matter of Fact Very Local News 9 Investigates Homeless in New Hampshire Consumer News Sports High School Sports Project CommUNITY NH Chronicle Home At Last Health Dartmouth Health Talk State of Addiction Entertainment Viewers’ Choice Community Calendar Adopt This Pet Traffic ulocal News We Love Upload Contests Editorials Belletetes Builds NH News Team Contact About Us Advertise with WMUR MeTV Privacy Notice Terms of Use SUBSCRIBE TO EMAIL Weather Search Press enter to search Type to Search Search location by ZIP code ZIP Advertisement COVID-19 and influenza infections on the rise in New Hampshire Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 8:33 PM EST Dec 30, 2023 Arielle Mitropoulos News Anchor/Reporter COVID-19 and influenza infections on the rise in New Hampshire Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 8:33 PM EST Dec 30, 2023 IT SETS UP IN MANCHESTER. ROSS KETSCHKE, WMUR NEWS NINE. AFTER WEEKS OF PEOPLE SEEING FAMILY AND TRAVELING FOR THE HOLIDAYS, NEW STATE WASTEWATER DATA SHOWS THAT MORE PEOPLE ARE GETTING SICK WITH COVID AGAIN. THE NUMBER OF COVID POSITIVE PATIENTS BEING TREATED AT A HOSPITAL IN NEW HAMPSHIRE HAS INCREASED. THE STATE ALSO REPORTS THAT WHILE RSV INFECTIONS. APPEAR TO BE PLATEAUING, FLU INFECTIONS ARE, AND I QUOTE DRAMATICALLY RISING. BUT DOCTORS SAY THAT. WE’RE STILL IN A BETTER PLACE THAN WE WERE IN PAST YEARS. I THINK WE’RE IN A VERY DIFFERENT SPOT WITH, UM, WITH COVID 19 THAN WE HAVE BEEN IN. YEARS PAST. UM, AND LOTS OF TOOLS IN OUR TOOLBOX TO. HELP PREVENT BUT ALSO TREAT INFECTIONS FROM THESE, UM, MAJOR CIRCULATING RESPIRATORY VIRUSES. AND IF YOU DO END UP GETTING SICK, CHANCE SAYS THAT USING TOOLS LIKE TAMIFLU FOR THE F GET LOCAL BREAKING NEWS ALERTS The latest breaking updates, delivered straight to your email inbox. Your Email AddressSubmit Privacy Notice Advertisement COVID-19 and influenza infections on the rise in New Hampshire Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 8:33 PM EST Dec 30, 2023 Arielle Mitropoulos News Anchor/Reporter After weeks of people seeing family and traveling for the holidays, new state wastewater data shows that more people are getting sick with COVID-19 again.Data from the New Hampshire Dept. of Health and Human Services shows the number of COVID-19-positive patients being treated at hospitals in New Hampshire has also increased.State Epidemiologist Dr. Benjamin Chan said flu infections are dramatically rising in New Hampshire, but the state is in a better place compared to previous years. "I think we're in a very different spot with COVID-19, then we have been in years past and lots of tools in our toolbox to help prevent, but also treat infections from these major circulating respiratory viruses," Chan said. Chan also said that using tools like Tamiflu for the flu or Paxlovid for COVID-19 can help people avoid getting as sick. MANCHESTER, N.H. — After weeks of people seeing family and traveling for the holidays, new state wastewater data shows that more people are getting sick with COVID-19 again.Data from the New Hampshire Dept. of Health and Human Services shows the number of COVID-19-positive patients being treated at hospitals in New Hampshire has also increased. Advertisement State Epidemiologist Dr. Benjamin Chan said flu infections are dramatically rising in New Hampshire, but the state is in a better place compared to previous years. "I think we're in a very different spot with COVID-19, then we have been in years past and lots of tools in our toolbox to help prevent, but also treat infections from these major circulating respiratory viruses," Chan said. Chan also said that using tools like Tamiflu for the flu or Paxlovid for COVID-19 can help people avoid getting as sick. Top Picks Get the Facts: The shifting veteran landscape Walmart is already starting Black Friday deals. Here’s what you need to know Firefighter's quick action saves newborn's life at SeaWorld Happy Veterans Day! Here are some retro stories celebrating those who served Loading more articles... WMUR Manchester Contact Us News Team Apps & Social Email Alerts Careers Internships Advertise Digital Advertising Terms & Conditions Broadcast Terms & Conditions RSS EEO Reports Captioning Contacts Public Inspection File Public File Assistance FCC Applications News Policy Statements Hearst Television participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites. ©2024, Hearst Television Inc. on behalf of WMUR-TV. Privacy Notice Your California Privacy Rights Interest-Based Ads Terms of Use Site MapHealth experts report increased flu threat in Virginia | WRIC ABC 8News Skip to content WRIC ABC 8News Richmond 57° Sign Up Richmond 57° Sponsored By Toggle Menu Open Navigation Close Navigation Search Please enter a search term. Primary Menu NEWS Local News Virginia News Sign up for email news alerts Taking Action: 8News Investigates Capitol Connection Politics from The Hill Crime Nature and Outdoors U.S. and World 8News en Español Food BestReviews Press Releases Report It Speak Up WEATHER Today’s Outlook StormTracker 8 Weather University VIPIR Virginia Weather Radar Hourly & 8-Day Forecast Temperatures in Virginia Watch the James River in downtown Richmond Richmond Weather Cams Traffic Road Projects & Closures Closings & Delays Report a Closing Weather Alerts Sign up for StormTracker8 weather alerts SPORTS WATCH WRIC NOW – Livestreaming Events Watch ABC 8News Newscasts Watch the James River in downtown Richmond Watch All Videos Lift Off: Your Business Launchpad TV Listings Children’s Programming COMMUNITY Events Calendar Positively Richmond Health Matters Sponsored by Bon Secours Showcase Richmond Lottery Horoscopes Walk to End Alzheimer’s 2024 Remarkable Women 2025 804 EXPERTS Crawl Space Repair Expert Cremation Expert Fencing & Railings Expert Financial Services Expert Heating & Air Conditioning Expert Home Generator Expert Non-Profit Food Bank Outreach Center Expert Window Replacement Expert Wood Floor Refinishing Expert CONTESTS Remarkable Women Contest Home for the Holidays Contest Winners Sign up for contest email alerts ABOUT 8NEWS Contact Us Meet the WRIC ABC 8News Team Advertise With Us Work for 8News Sign up for email newsletters Download the free 8News and StormTracker 8 mobile apps! Regional News Partners About BestReviews Privacy Policy Rescan your TV REPORT IT SPEAK UP JOBS Find a Job Post a Job Search Please enter a search term. Virginia News Health experts report increased flu threat in Virginia by: Tannock Blair Posted: Dec 29, 2023 / 03:01 PM EST Updated: Dec 29, 2023 / 03:01 PM EST by: Tannock Blair Posted: Dec 29, 2023 / 03:01 PM EST Updated: Dec 29, 2023 / 03:01 PM EST SHARE RICHMOND, Va. (WRIC) — The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has reported a steady increase in influenza activity in Virginia, with a peak in the most recently reported week. The report — which covers the week ending on Saturday, Dec. 23 — labeled Virginia as having a “Very High” influenza-like illness (ILI) activity level. Weekly US Map: Influenza Summary Update for the week ending on Dec. 23, 2023. (Courtesy of the CDC) According to the Virginia Department of Health (VDH), emergency department and urgent care visits for flu-like illnesses in Virginia made up 6.9% of total visits during the week ending on Dec. 23. For young children and school-aged children that percentage was even higher at 14.7% and 13.2% of all visits. During the week ending on Dec. 23, Virginia received 2,646 positive confirmatory lab reports. So far over the 2023-24 flu season, there have been 7,636 reported infections with one influenza-associated pediatric death. RELATED: COVID-19 cases in central Virginia back on the rise this holiday season Seven of the total 26 influenza outbreaks during the 2023-24 flu season occurred on the week of Dec. 23. Close Thanks for signing up! Watch for us in your inbox. Subscribe Now 8News Breaking News Alerts SIGN UP NOW Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ✕ Read next > Read next > Next ✕ ✕ Read next > Next story in Cancel Read next > Next story in Cancel The best blankets, quilts and throws for cozy season Bedding / 3 days ago Throw blankets can be found in almost any size, fabric and color, with numerous options for electric or weighted blankets to keep warm this season. Starbucks’ holiday menu is back — here’s what’s on … Coffee & Accessories / 5 days ago It’s the most wonderful time of the year! Starbucks rolls out its annual holiday menu on Nov. 7. Best warm activewear for winter workouts Sports Apparel / 7 days ago There is winter exercise apparel for every part of your body, with plenty of styles and colors available. View All BestReviews Top Stories Voter turnout down across Va., especially in blue … Judge rules use of Flock cameras in robbery case … Otieno’s family again requests federal investigation Couple reunited after rescue pilot threatened in … The history of Hollywood Cemetery’s iron dog Top Stories More Stories Fire crews on both US coasts battle wildfires Anti-government protesters blame rampant corruption … Round 2 in the Trump-vs-Mexico matchup looks ominous … New Zealand’s leader formally apologizes to survivors … North Korea ratifies major defense treaty with Russia Clear and cooler tonight Trump asks Rep. Mike Waltz, China hawk, to be his … Dominion Energy brings honeybees to Virginia solar … More Stories WRIC ABC 8News Video John’s Monday Overnight Forecast 1 hour ago More Videos Trending Stories No light display at RVA Christmas House this year Walmart closed, evacuated due to possible fire The Temptations & The Four Tops bring iconic R&B … Gunshots at Tuskegee University sent terrified students … Clear and cooler tonight Tractor-trailer driver flown to hospital after I-81 … Richmond rapper Mad Skillz nominated for a Grammy Va. veterans can access services in new ‘one-stop … 25-year-old woman shot dead at home, boyfriend charged Every VA county voted the same as 2020–except for … More Trending Stories no iframe support! BestReviews.com - Top picks to make everyone happy The best early Black Friday gifts under $50 Holiday / 6 hours ago The best early Best Buy Black Friday deals Holiday / 7 hours ago Wayfair’s Black Friday Sneak Peek has deals up to … Holiday / 8 hours ago Walmart’s early Black Friday sale is starting today Holiday / 4 hours ago All the best Veterans Day freebies and deals Holiday / 10 hours ago The best Black Friday deals at PetSmart Holiday / 3 days ago View All BestReviews Picks Local Events 8News is your source for local news and weather in Richmond and Central Virginia News Richmond Weather from StormTracker8 Taking Action Investigations Watch Video Community 804 Experts Sports Contests About 8News About Our Ads EEO Report FCC Public File Children’s programming Get News App Get the iOS app Get the Android app from Google Play Stay Connected Haystack Privacy Policy 06/27/2024 Terms Of Use FCC Applications Public File Assistance Contact The Hill NewsNation BestReviews Content Licensing Nexstar Digital Journalistic Integrity Sitemap Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information © 1998 - 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. | All Rights Reserved. ✕Feeling sick? It’s not just you. COVID and flu on the rise in Mass. - masslive.com Skip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseQuick Look-Change your current location »Current -Mostly SunnyTonightLow -Mostly SunnyTomorrowHigh -Mostly SunnyView full weather reportSubscribeNewsFeeling sick? It’s not just you. COVID and flu on the rise in Mass.Updated: Dec. 29, 2023, 4:10 p.m.|Published: Dec. 29, 2023, 2:32 p.m.Photo by Tina Franklin/Flickr.comPhoto by Tina Franklin/Flickr.comBy Dave Eisenstadter | deisen@masslive.comIf you’re feeling sick or just got over an illness, you’re not alone. And if you have yet to come down with something this season — take care.The severity level of influenza, more commonly known as the flu, was upgraded to “high” this week by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, which reports disease indicators weekly on its website.In addition to the flu, COVID-19 cases have been on a steady increase in the state, rising from just over 5,600 cases in the week ending on Dec. 16 to more than 6,000 cases in the week ending on Dec. 23 — the most recent data available. That number has been steadily rising since the end of October, according to state data.Read more: Exposed at Christmas dinner? Here’s how to get free COVID testsWastewater surveillance, which was determined to be a good indicator of the level of COVID-19 infection in an area, also increased last week, rising to a statewide average concentration of more than 2 million copies of the virus for the first time in the second half of the year.The most recent data covers a time before the Christmas holiday, when many families had indoor gatherings.The data comes amid a lag in vaccination this season. Whereas more than 41% of people had received a flu shot by this point last year, less than 37% have gotten a flu shot this year, state data said.For COVID-19, the number of people with a new vaccination is about 18%.Hospitals have been responding to the increase in infectious disease by reinstating mask mandates. Signs on the walls of Baystate Medical Center in Springfield say masks are required at all times. This is a change from the guidelines in the fall when visitors were required to wear a mask in patients’ rooms and “patient care areas.” Masks were optional in common spaces such as cafeterias and corridors.Masking policies at other Massachusetts hospitals are being updated, as well.Influenza-like illnesses are at a high level across the state and are at a “very high” level in north shore, south shore, and Cape and Island communities, according to state data.Acute respiratory diseases were the cause of 16.7% of emergency department visits in the state during the week of Dec. 17-23, including COVID-19, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus, known as RSV. That number decreased slightly from the previous week, where it was 17.3%.While the overall number went down, the number of emergency department visits for influenza went up, from 2% to 2.7% of all visits.If you purchase a product or register for an account through a link on our site, we may receive compensation. By using this site, you consent to our User Agreement and agree that your clicks, interactions, and personal information may be collected, recorded, and/or stored by us and social media and other third-party partners in accordance with our Privacy Policy.Footer NavigationContact UsContact MassLiveContact The RepublicanSubscriptionsMassLive.comNewslettersBreaking news push alertsThe RepublicanE-edition LoginSubscriptions and CirculationMassLive MediaAbout MassLive MediaAdvertise with usSponsor ContentAccessibility StatementFollow UsFacebookWorcester FacebookRed Sox FacebookPatriots FacebookBruins FacebookTwitterYouTubeHS Sports TwitterSports TwitterInstagramHS Sports InstagramRSSMassLive.com SectionsNewsSportsEntertainmentPoliticsOpinionHigh School SportsBettingLivingReal EstateObituariesClassifiedsAutosJobsMore on MassLive.comCareers at MassLiveArchivesCommunity rulesThe Republican ArchivesThe Republican Special SectionsPlace an adCookie Settings|Privacy Policy|User Agreement|Ad ChoicesDisclaimerUse of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement, (updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights (updated 7/1/2024).© 2024 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.Ad ChoicesFirst reported flu deaths for Spokane County’s 2023-24 flu season | Spokane Regional Health District First reported flu deaths for… | Spokane Regional Health District Contact/Directory | About SRHD | For Health Care Providers | Complaints | Careers/Volunteers Health Topics Birth & Death Certificates Data & Reports Cards, Permits & Inspections Programs & Services How Do I... Diseases & Conditions Environmental Health Healthy Living Injury, Violence, & Safety Workplace All Health Topics Health Topics Topics associated with the health district's mission Birth Certificates Death Certificates All Certificates Frequently Asked Questions Birth & Death Certificate FAQs Demographics Environment Healthy Behaviors Health Care Health Status Infectious Diseases Injury & Violence Local Community Issues Program Reports & Evaluations Reproductive Health Specific Populations View All Data & Reports Reports and fact sheets about community health issues Drinking Water (Private Wells) Food Establishment Permits Food Worker Cards On-Site Sewage (Septic Systems) Pool Operators School Health & Safety View All Cards, Permits & Inspections Helping to ensure health and safety standards are met Administration/Operations Animals & Insects Community & Family Health Disease Prevention Drowning Prevention Emergency Preparedness Environmental Hazards & Resources Food Safety Healthy Behaviors Opioid Treatment Services Pools, Water Recreation Facilities School Health & Safety On-Site Sewage All Programs Apply for Employment or volunteer Food worker card Attend Board of Health meetings SRHD events Do business with SRHD Bid and contract opportunities Work with SRHD Get a vaccination COVID-19 vaccines SRHD vaccination events Find out what you need Get a permit Food establishments On-site sewage/septic systems Pools Private wells Find support Child abuse and neglect New parents Nutrition for women, infants, and children (WIC) Opioid treatment services Learn about Diseases and conditions Environmental health Healthy living Injury, violence, and safety School health and safety What to do in an emergency Order birth and death certificates Birth certificates Death certificates Report Complaint or concern Food safety concern Illegal dumping/solid waste handling concern Request Public records Medical records View Clinical information for healthcare professionals Programs and services overview Program directory Regional health data ... More SRHD News News Blogs Events First reported flu deaths for Spokane County’s 2023-24 flu season Dec 27, 2023 Kelli Hawkins, SRHD | khawkins@srhd.org | 509.324.1539, c. (509) 994.8968 SPOKANE, Wash. – The flu virus claimed the life of two Spokane County residents this past week — Spokane County’s first flu-related deaths this season, according to Spokane Regional Health District (SRHD). The patients were in their 60s with underlying health conditions. They were two of 44 Spokane County residents who have been hospitalized due to flu symptoms this season. "Unfortunately, this is a sad example of how serious flu can be," said Dr. Francisco Velázquez, Spokane County health officer. “Our hearts are with the family and friends who are grieving this terrible loss.” The flu is a contagious respiratory illness caused by viruses that infect the nose, throat and lungs. Some people, such as those over the age of 65, young children, pregnant women, American Indian/Alaska Natives and those with certain health conditions, are at higher risk for serious flu complications. During the 2022-2023 season (Oct. 1-Sept. 30), there were a total of 272 flu-related deaths in Washington state as reported by the Washington State Department of Health in their Washington State Influenza Update. In Spokane County, there were 22 deaths, one of which was a child under the age of 10, and 413 Spokane County residents were hospitalized with flu last season. People who have the flu often feel some or all of these symptoms: Fever or chills Cough Sore throat Runny or stuffy nose Muscle or body aches Headaches Extreme fatigue (very tired) “Your best chance at protecting yourself and others is to get the flu vaccine,” said Velázquez. Flu vaccines are designed to protect against the most common flu viruses. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends everyone 6 months of age and older get immunized against flu. The vaccine promotes antibody protection within two weeks. Flu shots are available at numerous locations throughout Spokane County, including healthcare provider offices, local pharmacies and grocery stores. It can be administered at the same time as the COVID-19 bivalent booster, which is now authorized for everyone ages 5 and older. Velázquez says, “Since some vaccines are intended for certain groups, talk to your provider or pharmacist about the vaccine that is best for you.” For more information about influenza, influenza vaccine, and the differences between the flu and COVID-19, visit srhd.org/flu-season where a full influenza report is published weekly. Spokane Regional Health District (SRHD) is a leader and partner in public health by protecting, improving and promoting the health and well-being of all people through evidence-based practices. SRHD is one of 34 local public health agencies serving Washington state’s 39 counties. Visit www.srhd.org for comprehensive, updated information about SRHD and its triumphs in making Spokane a safer and healthier community. Like SRHD on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to receive safety and wellness tips. Spokane Regional Health District 1101 W. College Ave. Spokane, WA 99201Phone: 509.324.1500 Web Archive | Notice of Privacy Practices Contact | News | Blogs | Events | Services and Building Hours | Media Hub Copyright Spokane Regional Health District 2024Die-off of wood ducks in SC due to Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza, officials say Skip to contentAccess CarolinaThings to DoAs Seen OnLotteryLiveVideosNewsWeatherHelene RecoverySusan SmithElectionsOperation Coat DriveInvestigationsEn EspañolHomeElection ResultsPresidential Election MapSouth Carolina Interactive ResultsNorth Carolina Interactive ResultsGeorgia Interactive ResultsWatch LiveLatest VideosNewsCrimeHelene RecoverySouth CarolinaNorth CarolinaGeorgiaFOX Carolina InvestigatesNationalNoticias en EspañolPoliticsDemocracy In DepthAs Seen OnWhat's Clicking30 to LifeElectionsWeatherDownload the AppRadarWeather CamsWeather or Not! PodcastClosingsWeather AlertsTropics TrackerTrafficGas PricesSportsScoreboardClemson All AccessDabo PresserTailgate TastesFriday Night BlitzCarolina PanthersClemsonFurman PaladinsWofford TerriersGreenville DriveGreenville LibertyGreenville TriumphMost WantedAccess CarolinaShare Photos or VideoCommunityOperation Coat DriveSchool Supply JamThings to DoBirthday AnnouncementsFour Legged FriendsFOX FitSurprise SquadSC Domestic Violence ResourcesUpstate Mental Health ResourcesGrant Me HopeMemorialsGetting AnswersReport a Road ProblemTangled Web: LowcountryMurdaugh CasesStephen Smith InvestigationGloria Satterfield CaseDeadly 2019 Boat CrashContact UsMeet the TeamProgramming ScheduleOur AppsSign up for our NewslettersCareersAdvertise with UsContestsZeam - News StreamsCircle CountryGray DC BureauInvestigateTVWatching Your WalletPowerNationDigital MarketingDie-off of wood ducks in SC due to Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza, officials sayOfficials say that while HPAI is considered low-risk for transmission to humans, it may affect the economically important poultry industry in South Carolina.(SC Department of Natural Resources)By FOX Carolina News StaffPublished: Dec. 24, 2023 at 10:58 AM ESTEmail This LinkShare on FacebookShare on X (formerly Twitter)Share on PinterestShare on LinkedInCOLUMBIA, S.C. (FOX Carolina) - The South Carolina Department of Natural Resources (SCDNR) and the United States Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) announced they have received numerous calls regarding the die-off of wood ducks.According to officials, preliminary testing indicates the die-off of the animals in waterfowl impoundments and river swamps in Clarendon, Colleton and Williamsburg counties can be attributed to highly pathogenic Eurasian H5 avian influenza. Results are currently pending from additional die-off locations.According to officials, Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza was first detected in the United States in January 2022 in two wild ducks harvested by a hunter in Colleton County, South Carolina, and one wild duck in Hyde County, North Carolina.Prior to these findings, HPAI had not been detected in a wild bird in the United States since 2016. Officials said following the detection of HPAI in early 2022, portions of the United States experienced large die-off events of snow geese and eiders.“Since 2022, the greatest impact on wild birds in South Carolina has been seen in black vultures and bald eagles,” said Molly Kneece, SCDNR state waterfowl biologist in a release. “Up to this point, we had not experienced any noticeable die-offs of waterfowl species in South Carolina. These recently reported wood duck die-offs seem to be localized but do have potential to spread into other counties and to other waterfowl species given the social and migratory behaviors of wood ducks.”Officials said hunters should be aware that HPAI is present in the environment, and it is also showing up in an APHIS sampling effort of hunter harvested birds. However, they said it is still safe to pursue and consume wild fowl this season.USDA Veterinary and Wildlife Services recommends hunters and others to take precautions to protect themselves and the domestic birds they may encounter from the virus:Do not harvest or handle wild birds that are obviously sick or found dead without latex gloves.Dress your game birds in the field whenever possible. If you must dress birds at home, clean them in an area in which your poultry and pet birds have no access.Keep a separate pair of shoes to wear only in your game cleaning area. If this is not possible, wear rubber footwear and clean/disinfect your shoes before entering or leaving the area.Do not eat, drink or smoke while cleaning game.Always wear rubber gloves while cleaning game or cleaning bird feeders.Wash hands with soap and water immediately after handling game or cleaning bird feeders. If soap and water are not available, use alcohol wipes.Use dedicated tools for cleaning game, whether in the field or at home. Do not use those tools around your poultry or pet birds.Wash all tools and work surfaces with soap and water and then disinfect them.Avoid cross-contamination. Keep uncooked game in a separate container, away from cooked or ready-to-eat foods.Cook game meat thoroughly; poultry should reach an internal temperature of 165 degrees Fahrenheit to kill disease organisms and parasites.Double bag the offal and feathers. Tie the inner bag; be sure to take off your rubber gloves and leave them in the outer bag before tying it closed.Place the bag in a trash can that poultry and pet birds cannot access. This trash can should also be secure against access by children, pets or other animals.South Carolina hunters and landowners can help SCNDR and APHIS monitor this potential HPAI event by reporting sightings of dead wood ducks or other waterfowl to SCDNR (800-922-5431 or webmaster@dnr.sc.gov, Subject Line: HPAI). Of notable interest will be the location of the die-off, number of individuals affected, species, and habitat type. HPAI testing will be done on a case-by-case basis, but it will be very helpful to know where any waterfowl die-offs are occurring and to what extent.For more information about HPAI, click here.Copyright 2023 WHNS. All rights reserved.Most ReadMattel apologizes after ‘Wicked’ misprint found on dolls’ packaging directs customers to adult film site Buc-ee’s to open second South Carolina location Officials: 18-year-old hit, killed by truck while squatting in Greenville roadway Photos: SUV plunges down I-40 embankment after driving around barriers Deadly crash into car lot in Greer leaves one passenger dead Coroner: NC man passes away at Upstate hospital after hit by car outside home 10-year-old girl makes over $2,000 selling chickens, but the bank kept the money, family says Greenville public house/brewery announces closure in December after 14 yearsLatest News Federal funding paving the way for 193 new affordable housing units in Greenville Lake Lure community comes together to recoverFederal funding paving the way for 193 new affordable housing units in Greenville Atmospheric River hits, impacts across entire U.SSearch continues for escaped monkeysFrench Broad Chocolates recognized on Oprah’s list for drink collection 30 monkeys from Beaufort Co. facility that receives taxpayer funding recapturedClemson wins third straight in new Poppie eraNewsWeatherSportsTrafficThings to DoContact UsCareersWHNS21 Interstate CourtGreenville, SC 29615(864) 213-2100Public Inspection Filekelli.radcliff@foxcarolina.com - 864-213-2103FCC ApplicationsEEO StatementTerms of ServicePrivacy PolicyAdvertisingDigital MarketingClosed Captioning/Audio DescriptionAt Gray, our journalists report, write, edit and produce the news content that informs the communities we serve. Click here to learn more about our approach to artificial intelligence.A Gray Local Media Station © 2002-2024NY flu tracker: Data shows cases on the rise, could grow exponentially in January - silive.com Skip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseQuick Look-Change your current location »Current -Mostly SunnyTonightLow -Mostly SunnyTomorrowHigh -Mostly SunnyView full weather reportSubscribeHealthNY flu tracker: Data shows cases on the rise, could grow exponentially in JanuaryUpdated: Dec. 28, 2023, 10:02 a.m.|Published: Dec. 27, 2023, 12:30 p.m.New York flu cases are on the rise in the 2023-2024 season. (Chuck Crow/The Plain Dealer) Chuck Crow/The Plain DealerBy Kayla Simas | KSimas@siadvance.comFlu season got off to a slow start, but that doesn’t necessarily mean it will turn out to be a dud.New York’s flu tracker shows cases are beginning to jump up around the state, rising from just around 1,000 statewide cases per week in late October and early November to nearly 17,000 the week ending Dec. 16 -- the latest data available.Still, the number of flu cases in New York is low compared to the same time period last year, when the two mid-December weeks turned out to be the season’s peak. During the 2022-2023 flu season, that peak saw more than 50,000 New York cases per week, before a rapid decline by the end of January.New York’s late start most likely means we can expect cases to grow exponentially in January 2024 as we approach the peak for the season.NBC News reported that Dr. Mandy Cohen, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, reported a “sharp increase” in flu in December -- although the worst of it so far has been in the southern part of the county.A CDC map shows the worst areas of flu outbreak in the U.S. during the week ending December 16, 2023.Screenshot“We’re seeing RSV peak a bit sooner, but we do not believe we’re near yet at the peak of flu or Covid,” Cohen told the news outlet.Most of the time, flu activity peaks between December and February, although significant activity can last as late as May.The flu is a contagious respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses that infect the nose, throat, and sometimes the lungs, the CDC stated. It can cause mild to severe illness, and at times, can lead to death.New York State, season to date, has seen 50,227 cases of the flu reported, with 16,920 of those reported the week ending Dec. 16. Nearly half of the reported cases that week were in New York City: 8,132 cases.The breakdown of cases from the week of Dec. 16 included 15,063 cases of Influenza A, 1,200 cases of Influenza B, and 327 cases of influenza in which the type was not specified, according to the data for season to date.STATEN ISLAND FLU CASESAs in other parts of New York, flu numbers have been dramatically increasing on Staten Island each week since the end of October. There were 329 reported flu cases on the borough in the most recent reporting week ending in Dec. 16, according to New York State Health Department data.This is a drastic increase from the week prior (ending on Dec. 9), which reported 225 cases of the flu on Staten Island, an increase of 51% week-over-week.While flu cases reported on Staten Island currently reach over 1,000 this season so far, according to state data, residents can expect flu season to continue into January.To put things in perspective, there were 1,045 Staten Island flu cases reported so far during the 2023-2024 flu season, 6,440 total cases in the 2022-2023 season, and 2,788 total cases in the 2021-2022 season.Here are the reported cases on Staten Island each week this season so far, according to state data:Week ending on Dec. 9 - 225 casesWeek ending on Dec. 2 - 173 casesWeek ending on Nov. 25 - 111 casesWeek ending on Nov. 18 - 72 casesWeek ending on Nov. 11 - 26 casesWeek ending on Nov. 4 - 26 casesWeek ending on Oct. 28 - 35 casesWeek ending on Oct. 21 - 16 casesWeek ending on Oct. 14 - 19 casesWeek ending on Oct. 7 - 23 casesFLU SHOT STILL AVAILABLEThe CDC recommends that everyone 6 months and older get the flu shot each year, ideally by the end of October. Vaccination should continue as long as flu viruses may circulate. And for those who live in a community where flu activity has already begun, there’s still time to be vaccinated.According to NBC’s report, this year’s flu vaccine seems to be a good match for circulating strains. The outlet writes that CDC data shows the shot reduced the risk of flu hospitalizations by 52% in the Southern Hemisphere.RECOMMENDED•silive.comThe Seaport unveils festive holiday experiences with tree lighting, ice skating rink and moreNov. 6, 2024, 9:00 p.m.‘He’s with me wherever I go’: NYPD honors fallen S.I. heroes who died from 1922 to 2022 (187 photos)Nov. 10, 2024, 10:35 a.m.Flu shots have been shown to reduce flu-related illnesses and the risk of serious flu complications that can result in hospitalization or death.The CDC also recommends everyday preventive actions, like hand-washing, covering coughs and sneezes and staying away from people who are sick, to help slow the spread of germs.You can find a flu vaccine by visiting vaccines.gov and entering your zip code.If you purchase a product or register for an account through a link on our site, we may receive compensation. By using this site, you consent to our User Agreement and agree that your clicks, interactions, and personal information may be collected, recorded, and/or stored by us and social media and other third-party partners in accordance with our Privacy Policy.Footer NavigationAbout UsCommunity RulesContact UsAdvertise with usAbout SILive.comAccessibility StatementSubscriptionsSILive.comStaten Island AdvanceNewslettersAlready a SubscriberManage Your SubscriptionPlace a Vacation HoldMake a PaymentDelivery FeedbackReprintsView E-EditionSILive.com SectionsEntertainmentHigh School SportsBusinessSportsBettingNewsOpinionRentalsAutosClassifiedsObituariesJobsReal EstateMobileMobile appsMore on SILive.comVideosWeather NewsPost a jobArchivesLocal LifeSpecial SectionsPost a classified adSellent your homeSearchSell your carSponsor ContentFollow UsFacebookTwitterYouTubeInstagramRSSCookie Settings|Privacy Policy|User Agreement|Ad ChoicesDisclaimerUse of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement, (updated 8/1/2024) and acknowledgement of our Privacy Policy, and Your Privacy Choices and Rights (updated 7/1/2024).© 2024 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.YouTube's privacy policy is available here and YouTube's terms of service is available here.Ad ChoicesAre pheasants susceptible to the bird fluSkip to main content HomeHigh SchoolVarsity PrimeCollegeOttersSeawolvesOutdoorsColumnsGolfSportsbookWireMMA JunkieGolf Week Avian influenza outbreak changes winter pheasant stockings across state. Here's howBrian Whipkey Pennsylvania Outdoors ColumnistShow Caption Hide Caption Insights on Pennsylvania's upcoming pheasant seasonMichael Booher, superintendent of the Southwest State Game Farm, and Ian Gregg, Wildlife Operations Division chief for the Pennsylvania Game Commission, talk Sept. 20, 2023 about the pheasants being raised for the 2023-2024 hunting seasonsBrian Whipkey, Erie Times-NewsThe latest outbreak of the bird flu has caused the Pennsylvania Game Commission to release some of its winter pheasants earlier than planned and about 4,000 other birds will be kept for potential brooding stock for next year.On Christmas Eve, the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture announced the detection of a new case of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) at Martz’s Game Farm in Lower Mahanoy Township, Northumberland County. While the Game Commission does not use Martz’s Game Farm, it is located in the same county where the agency does purchase pheasant hatchlings at Mahantongo Game Farm.The disease is fatal to poultry and is highly contagious to other birds. As a result of that detection, the Game Commission said Wednesday it plans to release fewer winter pheasants statewide than initially planned. And in the eastern part of the state, pheasant releases will occur only this week and not next, with properties that receive birds essentially seeing their final two releases of the year combined as one.The agency reports these adjustments are being made to significantly reduce the risk of an HPAI outbreak with potentially devastating impacts for pheasant hunters. The commission reports the proximity of HPAI to the facility where it purchases hatchlings represents a concern. If there was an HPAI outbreak there, agricultural regulations would require euthanasia of many or all of the breeding pheasants that provide stock for the Game Commission’s program, jeopardizing the program’s future.The precautionary measures include having the agency hold onto all of the hen pheasants, and about 5% of the roosters, that had been slated for the final two pheasant releases of 2023-24. That equates to roughly 4,000 birds. This summer the commission raised 237,300 pheasants to release over nine stockings this fall and winter.Fall preview: 237,000 pheasants headed to Pa.'s fields, forests. What hunters need to know to find them.Then, if HPAI remains undetected through continued testing of birds at Mahantongo Game Farm, pheasants there will be temporarily transferred to the Game Commission’s Loyalsock Game Farm. The counties served by Loyalsock will get their final two releases all at once this week to make room for those birds coming into the farm.Loyalsock Game Farm serves the following counties to be stocked this week: Adams, Berks, Bradford, Carbon, Centre, Columbia, Cumberland, Franklin (State Game Lands 235 only), Lackawanna, Lehigh, Luzerne, Lycoming, Monroe, Montgomery, Northumberland, Perry, Pike, Schuylkill, Snyder, Sullivan, Susquehanna, Union, Wayne, Wyoming and York.The remaining counties are served by the Southwest Game Farm in Armstrong County, and rooster-only pheasant releases in those counties will continue as scheduled in each of the next two weeks.A list of properties scheduled to receive pheasants in the next two weeks can be found on the 2023 Pheasant Allocation page at www.pgc.pa.gov.“This wasn’t a decision the Game Commission took lightly, because we know that pheasant hunters have been looking forward to the late small game season pheasant releases and will be inconvenienced by our making these adjustments on short notice,” Ian Gregg, Wildlife Operations Division Chief, said in a news release. “However, we believe this precautionary approach is the right thing to do because it will significantly reduce the risk of disease impacts that would be far more devastating to pheasant hunting in the long run.”It is the second natural-occurring event in two years to challenge the Game Commission’s pheasant program. A mid-October snowstorm in 2022 damaged the nets that hold in the pheasants at the Southwest Game Farm in Armstrong County just days before the season opened Oct. 22. The weather knocked down some of the fencing and the agency estimated about 10,000 birds escaped. Through trapping and corralling efforts, the agency reported they recovered about 6,000.The staff has since improved some of the netting areas with support wire to strengthen them for future weather events. Pheasant huntingIn addition to a general hunting license, hunters must buy a pheasant permit that costs $26.97 for adults. The fees help the agency offset the cost of raising birds for the four-month season. The pheasant permit is free to junior license holders ages 12-17.The agency estimates it costs about $15 to $16 for each stocked bird.Bird flu“While the commonwealth has not had a case of HPAI since March 17, 2023, the Shapiro Administration and industry have remained vigilant and prepared,” Agriculture Secretary Russell Redding said in a news release. “In partnership with USDA and PA Animal Diagnostic Laboratory System, we quickly responded to the incident. This case is a reminder that this disease can strike anywhere, at any time, and that poultry owners must protect their birds through biosecurity and planning.” Samples from this detection are being forwarded to the USDA National Veterinary Services lab for confirmatory testing. However, the department has worked with the premises operator to respond immediately and mitigate the impact. Poultry and eggs continue to be safe to eat. Human health is not at risk. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, avian influenza does not present an immediate public health concern. The department has quarantined the farm and established a 6.2-mile control area around the farm.Brian Whipkey is the outdoors columnist for USA TODAY Network sites in Pennsylvania. Contact him at bwhipkey@gannett.com and sign up for our weekly Go Outdoors PA newsletter email on this website's homepage under your login name. Follow him on Facebook @whipkeyoutdoors, and Instagram at whipkeyoutdoors. Facebook Twitter EmailHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices© Copyright Gannett 2024Ohio child dies from the flu. Officials say flu activity is ‘high’ Log InLog InLog InePaperSign up for our newslettersSubscriber BenefitsDigital Help CenterLocalLocalElectionsBusinessInvestigationsOpinionLifeFoodSportsObituariesClassifiedsLegal NoticesePaperQuick LinksePaperNewslettersSubscriber BenefitsDigital Help CenterLocalCommunity GemsCrimeMental Health MattersDaily Law JournalGreene County NewsLocal School NewsMontgomery County NewsWarren County NewsMore CommunitiesTrafficWeatherNewsMilitary NewsNation & WorldElectionsPoliticsOhio NewsBusinessInvestigationsPath Forward.OpinionHomesPlusLifeBest of DaytonCelebrationsHealthDayton HistoryLatest PhotosLatest VideosPuzzles & GamesThings to DoFoodSportsLatest ScoresTom ArchdeaconCincinnati BengalsCincinnati RedsCleveland BrownsDayton DragonsUD FlyersHigh SchoolsOSU BuckeyesWSU RaidersObituariesClassifiedsFind a JobCars for SaleLegal NoticesNewspaper ArchivesDigital Help CenterSign Up for NewslettersNewsLocalObituariesWeatherOhio LotteryNIE Teacher AccessNewslettersNewspaper ArchivesCustomer ServiceContact the Dayton Daily NewsOur ProductsFeedbackFAQsDigital Help CenterWork HereMarketplaceClassifiedsJobsCars for SaleHomesPlusAdvertiseLegal NoticesFollow Us© 2024 Dayton Daily News. All Rights Reserved.By using this website, you accept the terms of our Terms of Use, Privacy Policy, CCPA, and understand your options regarding Ad Choices.Learn about Careers at Cox Enterprises.Ohio child dies from the flu. Officials say flu activity is ‘high’Ohio has recorded its first death of a child from the flu for the 2023-2024 flu season and health officials are encouraging people to get a flu vaccine. FILELocal NewsBy Cornelius FrolikDec 29, 2023XOhio has recorded its first death of a child from the flu for the 2023-2024 flu season, and public health officials are urging community members and families to get vaccinated to try to prevent other flu-related deaths.Ohio already has had more than 900 influenza-associated hospitalizations, including 134 in Butler, Clark, Champaign, Greene, Miami, Montgomery and Warren counties, according to state health department data.“If you haven’t gotten a flu vaccine, now is a good time,” Ohio Department of Health Director Bruce Vanderhoff in a prepared statement. “We are in the heart of flu season, and a vaccine may help prevent you or your loved ones from contracting a serious case of the disease.”A 9-year-old girl from Clermont County has died after contracting the flu, the state health department said on Friday.Ohio had six flu-related pediatric deaths in the 2022-2023 flu season, after unusually low death counts in the prior two seasons, during the height of the COVID pandemic.The state reported four to five pediatric flu-related deaths in each of the previous three flu seasons.Flu activity across the state has been increasing since early December, and the state health department has designated the activity level as “high.”Montgomery County has reported 70 flu-related hospitalizations this season, while Butler County reported 28; Miami County, 12; Warren County, 10; Greene County, eight; Clark County, six; and Champaign County, zero.The flu season began on Oct. 1.The state says flu-related hospitalizations so far are below the five-year average for this time in the season.Health officials say that in addition to getting vaccines other effective ways to avoid catching and spreading include frequent hand washing or regular use of hand sanitizer.Ohioans also are encouraged to cover their mouths and noses when they cough or sneeze, avoid touching their eyes nose and mouth and residents should stay home when they are sick.In Other News1Amber Alert canceled for 7-year-old abducted from NE Ohio2 3 injured, CareFlight called to crash involving school bus in Darke...3 Dayton Art Fair is reimagining of former Annual Art Auction hosted by...4Longtime Miamisburg restaurant announces new ownership5What’s next for redistricting reform in Ohio after Issue 1′s failureAbout the AuthorCornelius FrolikCookie SettingsOhio health officials report first pediatric flu death of season was 9-year-old from Clermont County Skip to content NOWCAST WLWT News 5 at 11:00 Live Now Menu Search Homepage Local News National News Weather Radar Commitment 2024 Alerts Map Room Forecasting Our Future Editorials Get the Facts Traffic Sports High School Sports Bengals Reds FC Cincinnati Ruth Lyons Matter of Fact Very Local Investigate Health State of Addiction Entertainment Money Monday Let's Talk Cincy News We Love Upload ulocal Project CommUNITY Home Furnishings Mental Health Resources Homearama 2023 Pre-Owned Autos News Team Contact Advertise with WLWT MeTV Privacy Notice Terms of Use SUBSCRIBE TO EMAIL Weather Search Press enter to search Type to Search Search location by ZIP code ZIP Advertisement Ohio health officials report first pediatric flu death of season was 9-year-old from Clermont County Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 5:15 PM EST Dec 29, 2023 Emily Sanderson Digital Media Manager Courtis Fuller Anchor/Reporter Ohio health officials report first pediatric flu death of season was 9-year-old from Clermont County Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 5:15 PM EST Dec 29, 2023 ALL. RIGHT KEVIN, THANK YOU. NEW ON WLWT, THE OHIO HEALTH DEPARTMENT HAS REPORTED ITS FIRST CHILD FLU DEATH OF THE SEASON. THE DEPARTMENT SAYS A NINE YEAR OLD GIRL FROM CLERMONT COUNTY DIED. WLWT NEWS FIVE’S CURTIS COURTIS IS LIVE WITH HEALTH OFFICIALS MESSAGE THIS FLU SEASON. CURTIS WELL, MIKE, YOU KNOW, IT IS A COMMON SENSE MESSAGE. DON’T LET YOUR GUARD DOWN. FLU RELATED ILLNESSES ARE LURKING AND SADLY, TODAY, A REMINDER THIS CAN BE DEADLY. IT’S MY UNDERSTANDING THEY STARTED SEEING FLU SYMPTOMS AS FLU AND THEN GOT HOSPITALIZED. UM, STARTED THE TREATMENT AND, UM, UH, UNFORTUNATELY IT RESULTED IN THE DEATH OF THE CHILD THAT FROM THE CLERMONT COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT’S ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, REFERRING TO AN INVESTIGATION INTO THE DEATH OF A NINE YEAR OLD CHILD, FIRST OF ALL, OUR SINCERE CONDOLENCES TO THE CHILD’S FAMILY, UH, ON THIS TRAGIC LOSS, PARTICULARLY AROUND THIS TIME OF THE YEAR. UNFORTUNATELY, I CANNOT DISCLOSE ANY OTHER ADDITIONAL INFORMATION. UM, THERE ARE VERY SPECIFIC ON THE CASE. THE FLU SEASON NORMALLY BEGINS IN OCTOBER AND PEAKS BETWEEN DECEMBER AND FEBRUARY. IN A STATEMENT FROM THE OHIO DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SINCE THE START OF THE SEASON, OVER 900 INFLUENZA ASSOCIATED HOSPITALIZATIONS HAVE BEEN REPORTED IN OHIO, WHICH IS ACTUALLY BELOW THE FIVE YEAR AVERAGE FOR THIS TIME IN THE SEASON. AND CONSIDER THIS IT’S COMMON FOR UP TO A HALF DOZEN INFLUENZA RELATED PEDIATRIC DEATHS REPORTED EVERY YEAR, AND THAT IS, UM, NOT GOOD. UM, UNFORTUNATELY, THIS IS A, UM, PEAK FLU SEASON. SO WE DO SEE SPIKE AROUND THIS TIME OF THE YEAR. AND HERE ARE SOME BASIC SIGNS YOU SHOULD LOOK FOR THAT MIGHT RAISE SOME CONCERNS AS SOON AS THEY START SEEING SYMPTOMS, PARTICULARLY, UM, FATIGUE, UM, HIGH FEVER, SORE THROAT. UM, IT’S BEST TO CALL YOUR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER. SO HERE’S JUST SOME BASIC ADVICE. THEY SAY THAT IF YOU HAVE NOT GOTTEN A FLU SHOT YET, NOW IS STILL A GOOD TIME TO DO THAT. AND AGAIN, IT GETS BACK TO SOME COMMON SENSE THINGS. YOU KNOW, IF YOU’RE COUGHING AND SNEEZING, OF COURSE, COVER YOUR YOUR NOSE AND MOUTH. AND THEN THEY ALSO SAY, YOU KNOW, THIS, UH, GETS BACK TO, TO WHAT WE WERE SAYING, UH, DURING COVID, YOU KNOW, IF YOU ARE SICK, STAY AT HOME, BE CAREFUL IN LARGE GATHERINGS. AND OF COURSE, WE’RE GOING TO SEE THAT, UH, A LOT THIS WEEKEND REPORTING LIVE. GET LOCAL BREAKING NEWS ALERTS The latest breaking updates, delivered straight to your email inbox. Your Email AddressSubmit Privacy Notice Advertisement Ohio health officials report first pediatric flu death of season was 9-year-old from Clermont County Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 5:15 PM EST Dec 29, 2023 Emily Sanderson Digital Media Manager Courtis Fuller Anchor/Reporter The Ohio Department of Health reported the state’s first flu-associated pediatric death of the 2023-24 flu season Friday.The patient was a 9-year-old girl from Clermont County, health officials reported. Clermont County Public Health is investigating the death.Health officials said flu activity usually peaks between December and February, and in Ohio, flu activity has been increasing since early December, and current activity is high. Since the start of the season, over 900 influenza-associated hospitalizations have been reported in Ohio, which is below the five-year average for this time in the season, health officials stated. Ohio generally reports between one and six influenza-associated pediatric deaths each year.“If you haven’t gotten a flu vaccine, now is a good time,” ODH Director Bruce Vanderhoff, M.D., MBA, said in a statement. “We are in the heart of flu season, and a vaccine may help prevent you or your loved ones from contracting a serious case of the disease.”Health officials advise Ohioans to stay up to date on vaccines and avoid spreading illness by washing hands frequently or using alcohol-based hand sanitizer; covering coughs and sneezes with tissues or coughing or sneezing into elbows; avoiding touching eyes, nose and mouth; and staying home when sick.More information about flu and flu activity in Ohio is available at www.flu.ohio.gov. COLUMBUS, Ohio — The Ohio Department of Health reported the state’s first flu-associated pediatric death of the 2023-24 flu season Friday.The patient was a 9-year-old girl from Clermont County, health officials reported. Clermont County Public Health is investigating the death. Advertisement Health officials said flu activity usually peaks between December and February, and in Ohio, flu activity has been increasing since early December, and current activity is high. Since the start of the season, over 900 influenza-associated hospitalizations have been reported in Ohio, which is below the five-year average for this time in the season, health officials stated. Ohio generally reports between one and six influenza-associated pediatric deaths each year.“If you haven’t gotten a flu vaccine, now is a good time,” ODH Director Bruce Vanderhoff, M.D., MBA, said in a statement. “We are in the heart of flu season, and a vaccine may help prevent you or your loved ones from contracting a serious case of the disease.”Health officials advise Ohioans to stay up to date on vaccines and avoid spreading illness by washing hands frequently or using alcohol-based hand sanitizer; covering coughs and sneezes with tissues or coughing or sneezing into elbows; avoiding touching eyes, nose and mouth; and staying home when sick. More information about flu and flu activity in Ohio is available at www.flu.ohio.gov. Top Picks Get the Facts: The shifting veteran landscape Walmart is already starting Black Friday deals. Here’s what you need to know Firefighter's quick action saves newborn's life at SeaWorld Happy Veterans Day! Here are some retro stories celebrating those who served Loading more articles... WLWT CINCINNATI Contact Us News Team Apps & Social Email Alerts Careers Internships Advertise Digital Advertising Terms & Conditions Broadcast Terms & Conditions RSS EEO Reports Captioning Contacts Public Inspection File Public File Assistance FCC Applications News Policy Statements Hearst Television participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites. ©2024, Hearst Television Inc. on behalf of WLWT-TV. Privacy Notice Your California Privacy Rights Interest-Based Ads Terms of Use Site MapWe asked doctors how rid a lingering cough after a cold, the flu, or COVID Skip to content NOWCAST WBAL-TV 11 News Tonight Live Now Menu Search Homepage Local News National News Weather Radar Closings Map Room Traffic Commitment 2024 Alerts Webcams Forecasting Our Future Weather Champion Project CommUNITY 11 News Investigates Get the Facts Matter of Fact Very Local Rossen Reports Health Sports ulocal Entertainment Play Puzzmo News We Love Upload News Team Contact Advertise with WBALTV 11 TV Hill Editorials MeTV Baltimore Studio 11 Weekend Videos Privacy Notice Terms of Use SUBSCRIBE TO EMAIL Weather Search Press enter to search Type to Search Search location by ZIP code ZIP Advertisement How to get rid of a lingering cough after a cold, the flu, or COVID, according to doctors We asked top doctors for their best tricks for getting rid of a lingering cough Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 1:48 PM EST Dec 24, 2023 How to get rid of a lingering cough after a cold, the flu, or COVID, according to doctors We asked top doctors for their best tricks for getting rid of a lingering cough Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 1:48 PM EST Dec 24, 2023 Temperatures are dropping and we are in the middle of the season where everyone begins to get sick. There are *** variety of respiratory illnesses going around like the flu, COVID and RSV. As we spend more time indoors, there has reportedly also been an uptick in *** persistent cough that doctors say does not fall in any of these categories. Baltimore, Doctor Janet o'mahoney told the Huffington Post that these links coughs may be purely viral and caused by the regular viruses that cause colds like Rhinovirus. Another doctor told the site that *** persistent cough is most likely due to prolong inflammation in the airways which can last anywhere from two weeks to two months after initially getting sick. Experts say it could also be sinus congestion, *** sore throat and postnasal drip if your symptoms persist for *** couple of weeks. Doctors say it's important to continue to follow up with your physician. GET LOCAL BREAKING NEWS ALERTS The latest breaking updates, delivered straight to your email inbox. Your Email AddressSubmit Privacy Notice Advertisement How to get rid of a lingering cough after a cold, the flu, or COVID, according to doctors We asked top doctors for their best tricks for getting rid of a lingering cough Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 1:48 PM EST Dec 24, 2023 Coughing is annoying — especially when it lingers after you’re no longer sick.But as bothersome as it may be, a cough is a sign that your body is taking care of you. “Coughing is a natural reflex to protect us against aspiration and clear foreign matter or mucus from the airway,” says Shumon Dhar, M.D., an otolaryngologist at UT Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. Still, you’re probably eager to get rid of the hacking. (And not just for your own comfort: It can be tricky to convince people that you’re no longer sick when you’re still coughing!), so we asked top doctors for their best tricks for getting rid of a lingering cough.Related video above: Here's Why You May Have A Persistent Cough That's Not COVIDHow to get rid of a lingering coughEnjoy some honeyWarm tea with honey can calm a scratchy throat; the hot liquid breaks up mucus in the chest and sinuses, and honey has natural antibacterial properties that may help fight the infection. A spoonful of honey may ease a cough on its own — one study found that in children 2 and older, it can be as effective as dextromethorphan, one of the main ingredients in OTC cough suppressants.Do a saline rinseA neti pot can wash out your nasal passages with salt water to quell inflammation and flush mucus away,” says Raj Dasgupta, M.D., an associate professor of clinical medicine at USC Keck School of Medicine. Follow the product instructions to be sure you don’t go overboard; doing this too frequently may dry out nasal passages or cause sinus problems.Taking a decongestant or an antihistamine (if you’re dripping from allergies) may also help.Try a steam facialThere’s a reason a piping hot shower feels so nice when you’re sick — hot, humid air helps clear up cough-inducing mucus and moisturizes nasal passages and airways for easier breathing. Eucalyptus has antiviral and antimicrobial properties that can give steam a boost, so add leaves or a few drops of essential oil to boiling water, then inhale deeply. Get some medsWhen you really can’t stop coughing, try OTC medications with antitussives (cough suppressants) and expectorants (mucus thinners); if they don’t help, your doctor can prescribe something stronger. You should only use over-the-counter cold medicines for one week. After that, these meds become less effective, so it’s better to suck on a lozenge to soothe your itchy throat.Stay hydratedSure, drinking water isn’t going to magically make your cough go away, but being dehydrated will work against you. In fact, Omid Mehdizadeh, M.D., an otolaryngologist and laryngologist at Providence Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, California, says that “proper hydration” and tea is one of the “most effective ways to manage a cough.” Why? If you’re dehydrated, your oral mucosa (the mucous membrane lining inside of your mouth) dries out, and that can make you feel more irritated, Dr. Russo says.Be smart about bedtime“Sleep slightly sitting up in a recliner or elevate your head with pillows to reduce postnasal drip,” says Darria Long, M.D., a clinical assistant professor at the University of Tennessee School of Medicine. Taking a steamy shower before bed or running a humidifier can also provide relief by keeping your airway moistened, adds Dr. Dhar.Train yourself to stop a coughAfter a lengthy illness, your voice box can become more sensitive to inflammation or irritants that normally wouldn’t bother it, making things like exercise and talking potential triggers. “Do 30 to 60 seconds of relaxed breathing through your nose, consciously resisting the urge to cough. Also, try humming and then swallowing to relax your throat,” says Dr. Dhar.What causes a lingering cough?Doctors say there are a few things that can be behind your lingering cough. “A cough can linger longer than other symptoms because the immune system is still trying to get the airways back to normal,” says Nicole M. Tyer, M.D., an internal medicine specialist at Cedars Sinai Medical Group in Los Angeles.That can leave some lingering inflammation and even damage, which then makes you feel like you need to cough, Dr. Russo says. “You have a tendency to cough when this happens because those surfaces are very irritable,” he explains.As your congestion clears up, postnasal drip can also trigger a cough, if you happen to have it, says Kathryn Boling, M.D., a primary care physician at Baltimore's Mercy Medical Center.There’s also this to consider, per Dr. Boling: You could end up developing a cough due to something else. “I see a lot of people who get sick with a viral illness in the spring, and then they have allergies afterward,” she says. “That can also cause a cough.” Even gastric reflux can cause a cough that you may assume is linked to your viral illness, she says.And, of course, it’s possible to develop a secondary bacterial infection like bronchitis or sinusitis after your viral illness is over. “That often involves different symptoms, though, like sinus pain and a fever,” Dr. Russo says.How long will your lingering cough last?It depends. Dr. Russo says it’s not out of the ordinary for a cough to last for “weeks, even up to a month” after a viral illness while your body heals. “It can be a long, meddlesome process,” he says. How to prevent a lingering coughProtect yourselfThe easiest way to ward off a lingering cough is to avoid getting sick in the first place. Be vigilant about washing your hands after being out in public, touching common surfaces, or being around ill people. It’s also important to be up to date on your COVID-19 and flu vaccines. If you do feel symptoms creeping up, try zinc or elderberry; studies suggest that both may shorten a cold when taken at the first sign of symptoms.Rest upSleep is when your body naturally repairs itself, and when you’re sick, it gives your immune system time to fight. “Resting can help reduce the overall duration of symptoms,” says Dr. Tyer. If your cough keeps you awake, prop your head up about 15 degrees with extra pillows; this helps open up air passages so you can breathe more easily and may prevent mucus buildup in your throat.Be mindful of your airWhen you’re hacking away, avoid irritants that can worsen your cough or make it linger longer. Steer clear of smoke, perfume, and anything you’re allergic to. Air purifiers can remove dust, dander, and other particles that may tickle your throat. Heaters dry air out, which can irritate a cough, so a humidifier can help by adding back moisture.When to see a doctor for a lingering coughIf you have a cough after you recover from an illness, but it seems to be getting better over time, Dr. Boling says it’s pretty safe to assume it’s just a “post-inflammatory cough.” But, if your cough continues at the same level and it’s not getting better, she recommends consulting your doctor. You’ll also want to call if you’ve developed a fever, pain, or other new symptoms, Dr. Russo says. Coughing is annoying — especially when it lingers after you’re no longer sick.But as bothersome as it may be, a cough is a sign that your body is taking care of you. “Coughing is a natural reflex to protect us against aspiration [food or drink entering the airway] and clear foreign matter or mucus from the airway,” says Shumon Dhar, M.D., an otolaryngologist at UT Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. Still, you’re probably eager to get rid of the hacking. (And not just for your own comfort: It can be tricky to convince people that you’re no longer sick when you’re still coughing!), so we asked top doctors for their best tricks for getting rid of a lingering cough. Advertisement Related video above: Here's Why You May Have A Persistent Cough That's Not COVIDHow to get rid of a lingering coughEnjoy some honeyWarm tea with honey can calm a scratchy throat; the hot liquid breaks up mucus in the chest and sinuses, and honey has natural antibacterial properties that may help fight the infection. A spoonful of honey may ease a cough on its own — one study found that in children 2 and older, it can be as effective as dextromethorphan, one of the main ingredients in OTC cough suppressants. Do a saline rinse A neti pot can wash out your nasal passages with salt water to quell inflammation and flush mucus away,” says Raj Dasgupta, M.D., an associate professor of clinical medicine at USC Keck School of Medicine. Follow the product instructions to be sure you don’t go overboard; doing this too frequently may dry out nasal passages or cause sinus problems.Taking a decongestant or an antihistamine (if you’re dripping from allergies) may also help.Try a steam facialThere’s a reason a piping hot shower feels so nice when you’re sick — hot, humid air helps clear up cough-inducing mucus and moisturizes nasal passages and airways for easier breathing. Eucalyptus has antiviral and antimicrobial properties that can give steam a boost, so add leaves or a few drops of essential oil to boiling water, then inhale deeply. Get some medsWhen you really can’t stop coughing, try OTC medications with [elated]Stay hydratedSure, drinking water isn’t going to magically make your cough go away, but being dehydrated will work against you. In fact, Omid Mehdizadeh, M.D., an otolaryngologist and laryngologist at Providence Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, California, says that “proper hydration” and tea is one of the “most effective ways to manage a cough.” Why? If you’re dehydrated, your oral mucosa (the mucous membrane lining inside of your mouth) dries out, and that can make you feel more irritated, Dr. Russo says.Be smart about bedtime“Sleep slightly sitting up in a recliner or elevate your head with pillows to reduce postnasal drip,” says Darria Long, M.D., a clinical assistant professor at the University of Tennessee School of Medicine. Taking a steamy shower before bed or running a humidifier can also provide relief by keeping your airway moistened, adds Dr. Dhar.Train yourself to stop a coughAfter a lengthy illness, your voice box can become more sensitive to inflammation or irritants that normally wouldn’t bother it, making things like exercise and talking potential triggers. “Do 30 to 60 seconds of relaxed breathing through your nose, consciously resisting the urge to cough. Also, try humming and then swallowing to relax your throat,” says Dr. Dhar. For years, he couldn't donate at the blood center where he worked. Under new FDA rules, now he can What causes a lingering cough?Doctors say there are a few things that can be behind your lingering cough. “A cough can linger longer than other symptoms because the immune system is still trying to get the airways back to normal,” says Nicole M. Tyer, M.D., an internal medicine specialist at Cedars Sinai Medical Group in Los Angeles.That can leave some lingering inflammation and even damage, which then makes you feel like you need to cough, Dr. Russo says. “You have a tendency to cough when this happens because those surfaces are very irritable,” he explains.As your congestion clears up, postnasal drip can also trigger a cough, if you happen to have it, says Kathryn Boling, M.D., a primary care physician at Baltimore's Mercy Medical Center.There’s also this to consider, per Dr. Boling: You could end up developing a cough due to something else. “I see a lot of people who get sick with a viral illness in the spring, and then they have allergies afterward,” she says. “That can also cause a cough.” Even gastric reflux can cause a cough that you may assume is linked to your viral illness, she says.And, of course, it’s possible to develop a secondary bacterial infection like bronchitis or sinusitis after your viral illness is over. “That often involves different symptoms, though, like sinus pain and a fever,” Dr. Russo says. FDA says it's seized 'thousands of units' of counterfeit Ozempic How long will your lingering cough last?It depends. Dr. Russo says it’s not out of the ordinary for a cough to last for “weeks, even up to a month” after a viral illness while your body heals. “It can be a long, meddlesome process,” he says. How to prevent a lingering coughProtect yourselfThe easiest way to ward off a lingering cough is to avoid getting sick in the first place. Be vigilant about washing your hands after being out in public, touching common surfaces, or being around ill people. It’s also important to be up to date on your COVID-19 and flu vaccines. If you do feel symptoms creeping up, try zinc or elderberry; studies suggest that both may shorten a cold when taken at the first sign of symptoms.Rest upSleep is when your body naturally repairs itself, and when you’re sick, it gives your immune system time to fight. “Resting can help reduce the overall duration of symptoms,” says Dr. Tyer. If your cough keeps you awake, prop your head up about 15 degrees with extra pillows; this helps open up air passages so you can breathe more easily and may prevent mucus buildup in your throat.Be mindful of your airWhen you’re hacking away, avoid irritants that can worsen your cough or make it linger longer. Steer clear of smoke, perfume, and anything you’re allergic to. Air purifiers can remove dust, dander, and other particles that may tickle your throat. Heaters dry air out, which can irritate a cough, so a humidifier can help by adding back moisture.When to see a doctor for a lingering coughIf you have a cough after you recover from an illness, but it seems to be getting better over time, Dr. Boling says it’s pretty safe to assume it’s just a “post-inflammatory cough.” But, if your cough continues at the same level and it’s not getting better, she recommends consulting your doctor. You’ll also want to call if you’ve developed a fever, pain, or other new symptoms, Dr. Russo says. How to understand the COVID-19 alphabet soup Top Picks Get the Facts: The shifting veteran landscape Walmart is already starting Black Friday deals. Here’s what you need to know Firefighter's quick action saves newborn's life at SeaWorld Happy Veterans Day! Here are some retro stories celebrating those who served Loading more articles... WBAL-TV 11 Baltimore Contact Us News Team Apps & Social Email Alerts Careers Internships Advertise Digital Advertising Terms & Conditions Broadcast Terms & Conditions MD Digital Political Ad Disclosures RSS EEO Reports Captioning Contacts Public Inspection File Public File Assistance FCC Applications News Policy Statements Hearst Television participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites. ©2024, Hearst Television Inc. on behalf of WBAL-TV. Privacy Notice Your California Privacy Rights Interest-Based Ads Terms of Use Site MapInfluenza, Stomach Flu And 5 Common Winter Illnesses That May Affect Kids Travel By India.com Screenbox The Health Site Bollywood Life Cricket Country Petuz Techlusive My-Lord Follow us on: We are on Telegram now click this icon for latest updates Switch to हिंदी Latest Travel Sports Entertainment Webstories Videos Viral Photos more nav India World States Uttar Pradesh Madhya Pradesh Karnataka Bihar Rajasthan Maharashtra Delhi West Bengal Tamil Nadu Telangana Education Autoz Lifestyle Health Women Topics Business more Follow Us Home HealthInfluenza, Stomach Flu And 5 Common Winter Illnesses That May Affect Kids Influenza, Stomach Flu And 5 Common Winter Illnesses That May Affect Kids It is important to keep your children protected from major winter aliments. Here are 5 major diseases that may affect kids during cold weather. Published: December 26, 2023 11:50 AM IST By India.com Lifestyle Staff | Edited by Onam Gupta Follow Us Influenza, Stomach Flu And 5 Common Winter Illnesses That May Affect Kids As the winter season sets in, the months bring chills and several health challenges, especially for kids. Parents often find themselves grappling with a common concern- why are kids more susceptible to illnesses during winter? Several factors including low immunity, excessive exposure to cold weather, respiratory issues and inadequate ventilation may lead to a child’s ability to fend off illnesses. However, early recognition of symptoms and prompt medical attention can alleviate the impact. In this article, we will inform about those 5 major winter diseases that can affect children’s health. 5 MAJOR WINTER DISEASES THAT MAY AFFECT CHILDREN Influenza: The flu characterised by fever, cold, cough, sore throat and body aches tends to be more prevalent during winter. Children, especially those with weaker immune systems, are more prone to this infection. Common Cold: The common cold is a common problem that occurs to almost everyone during the winter. It may also lead to a viral fever. A kid may suffer from viral fever for a period of 1 week to 2 weeks. During this time, the child should be kept in intense comfort and care as this kind of illness can lead to extreme weakness. Stomach Flu: It is mainly a viral intestinal infection and is caused by norovirus. It can last from 2 days to even a week. Common symptoms that may detect the illness in kids are water diarrhoea, vomiting, mild fever, fatigue and headache Cold-Weather Skin Conditions: Dry air and cold temperatures can bring their own set of skin problems for kids such as eczema, flare-ups and chapped lips. Regular moisturisation and keeping the skin covered reduce the risks. Respiratory Syncytial Virus: This is a common problem of a respiratory infection that happens in kids who are less than 2 years of age. A runny nose, fever, congestion, rapid breathing and cough are symptoms of this illness. The symptoms may stay for as much as 3 weeks before getting cured. While winter poses its challenges, there are proactive steps parents can take to safeguard their children’s health. Encouraging good hygiene practices, ensuring adequate nutrition, maintaining a balanced indoor and timely vaccination can assist in preventing major winter illnesses. Also Read: Ever heard about saree cancer? How six yards can put your health at risk Unlock The Antioxidant Power Of Cranberries For Better Heart Health How Argan Oil Can Transform Your Skin And Hair Health For breaking news and live news updates, like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter and Instagram. Read more on Latest Health News on India.com. Topics Common winter illnesses that may affect kids children healthHealthkids healthWinter Health Problemswinter skin problems More Stories People Are Also Reading Latest In Health Weight loss at night: 5 things to do before be to shed kilos How exercise can lower high blood pressure? Diabetes management: 6 things to follow and avoid low blood sugar in morning Shalini Passi starts her day with a ghee shot, drinks red juice, and swears by one ingredient that is... Ever heard about saree cancer? How six yards can put your health at risk Related Stories Ever heard about saree cancer? How six yards can put your health at risk How many almonds should you eat daily to control bad cholesterol? Heart health diet: Add these 6 superfoods in everyday meal to unclog arteries and keep cholesterol in control Sharda Sinha, popular Padma Bhushan Bihari folk singer, dies Can air pollution increase obesity? Here is what we know By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts Cookies Policy. Reject All Accept All CookiesWeek 51 review - 18 to 24 December 2023 - The Luxembourg Government Aller au menu principal Aller au menu principal Aller au contenu The Luxembourg Government gouvernement.lu Select language - Please use the arrow keys (up and down) to navigate menu en fr de lb Menu main News Conseils de gouvernement All of the news Schedule Conseils de gouvernement The Government FRIEDEN Luc BETTEL Xavier HANSEN Martine MEISCH Claude DELLES Lex BACKES Yuriko HAHN Max ROTH Gilles DEPREZ Martine GLODEN Léon OBERTIN Stéphanie MISCHO Georges WILMES Serge MARGUE Elisabeth THILL Eric Former Members of Government Ministries Departments Topics Political system Head of State Government Electoral system Chamber of Deputies Council of State Court of Auditors The Economic and Social Council Professional chambers Courts and tribunals Political parties European Union and international organisations High Council for Sustainable Development Show hide search Search Search The Luxembourg Government gouvernement.lu Select language - Please use the arrow keys (up and down) to navigate menu en fr de lb Show hide search Search Search News Conseils de gouvernement All of the news Schedule Conseils de gouvernement The Government FRIEDEN Luc BETTEL Xavier HANSEN Martine MEISCH Claude DELLES Lex BACKES Yuriko HAHN Max ROTH Gilles DEPREZ Martine GLODEN Léon OBERTIN Stéphanie MISCHO Georges WILMES Serge MARGUE Elisabeth THILL Eric Former Members of Government Ministries Departments Topics Political system Head of State Government Electoral system Chamber of Deputies Council of State Court of Auditors The Economic and Social Council Professional chambers Courts and tribunals Political parties European Union and international organisations High Council for Sustainable Development Your shopping cart contains 0 Item(s) ( €) Partage Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Linkedin Share By Email Copy the link Home News All of the news Week 51 review - 18 to 24 December 2023 Week 51 review - 18 to 24 December 2023 Press release Created on 29.12.2023 Last update 29.12.2023 The weekly retrospective gives a summary of trends in acute respiratory infections, including COVID-19 and influenza (influenza virus) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Trends of the week COVID-19: slight decrease in the number of cases and the positivity rate of COVID-19. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV): slight decrease in the number of RSV cases. Influenza: increase in the number of influenza cases. COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2 From 18 to 24 December 2023 (week 51), the number of people testing positive for SARS-CoV-2 dropped to 686 cases, compared to 790 cases the previous week (-13%). The positivity rate fell to 26% compared to 30% the previous week. The viral concentration detected in wastewater is decreasing[1]. The latest sequencing data available for weeks 46-48 show a preponderance of the BA.2.86 variant (43.9%) (95% CI: 34.8-53.0%) followed by the XBB.1.9 variant (29.8%) (95% CI: 21.4-38.2%). [2] Influenza For the week of 18 to 24 December 2023 (week 51), the number of influenza cases reported by laboratories increased to 375 cases compared to 254 cases in the previous week, presenting an increase of 48%. This data largely overlaps with LNS sentinel surveillance, which indicates a high circulation of RSV, influenza viruses, rhinoviruses and SARS-CoV-2. [2] Communiqué par le ministère de la Santé et de la Sécurité sociale [1] https://www.list.lu/en/covid-19/coronastep/ [2] https://lns.lu/publications/ For more information Positivity rate for reports of SARS-CoV-2 - Week 51 (Png, 65 Kb) Number of reported cases of SARS-CoV-2- Week 51 (Png, 48 Kb) Number of reported influenza cases - Week 51 (Png, 96 Kb) Organisation Ministry of Health and Social Security Health directorate Topic Coronavirus Health - Well-being Research - Science - Innovation Statistics Event date 29.12.2023 Related articles Week 50 review - 11 to 17 December 2023 Publication date 21.12.2023 The weekly retrospective gives a summary of trends in acute respiratory infections, including COVID-19 and influenza (influenza virus) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Footer Sections News The Government Ministries Departments Topics Political system Publications Support Contact Sitemap About this site General Legal Notice (GTCU) Declaration of Accessibility Cookies management Stay informed Twitter Facebook Instagram Youtube RSS Newsletter Fields marked with an asterisk (*) are mandatory. E-mail* 🡒 Back to topWave of Respiratory Illness in Iceland Skip to content Best price guarantee on tours Tours and Activities - Iceland Review News Magazine Features Deep North Podcast Ask Iceland Review In Focus Opinions & Columns Topic: Reykjavík Travel Basics Trip Ideas Places Travelogues Partnerships Family Owned Events See all Travel Book Tours New: Volcano Tours Tours Multi-day Food & Drink Car Rentals Flights Airport Transfer Subscribe My account Menu News Magazine Features Deep North Podcast Ask Iceland Review In Focus Opinions & Columns Topic: Reykjavík Travel Basics Trip Ideas Places Travelogues Partnerships Family Owned Events See all Travel Book Tours New: Volcano Tours Tours Multi-day Food & Drink Car Rentals Flights Airport Transfer Subscribe My account News Magazine Features Deep North Podcast Ask Iceland Review In Focus Opinions & Columns Topic: Reykjavík Travel Basics Trip Ideas Places Travelogues Partnerships Family Owned Events See all Travel Book Tours New: Volcano Tours Tours Multi-day Food & Drink Car Rentals Flights Airport Transfer Subscribe My account Menu News Magazine Features Deep North Podcast Ask Iceland Review In Focus Opinions & Columns Topic: Reykjavík Travel Basics Trip Ideas Places Travelogues Partnerships Family Owned Events See all Travel Book Tours New: Volcano Tours Tours Multi-day Food & Drink Car Rentals Flights Airport Transfer Subscribe My account News, Sci & Tech Wave of Respiratory Illness in Iceland By Steindor Gretar Jonsson Photo: Almannavarnir/Facebook. The Chief Epidemiologist has urged people to get vaccinated.. December 24, 2023 Many people in Iceland are sick with respiratory illnesses and the situation is expected to continue. The peak of infections has not been reached, according to Chief Epidemiologist Guðrún Aspelund, as fewer people than expected received vaccinations for Covid and influenza this fall. “It’s been Covid, influenza, RSV, and other respiratory infections and viruses,” she told Vísir. New Covid variant spreads The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified JN.1, an Omicron variant, as a Covid “variant of interest” due to its rapid spread. “Covid is highly infectious and it’s causing illnesses and many people get very sick,” Guðrún said. The symptoms of JN.1 are similar to previous variants, Guðrún added, but there has been no uptick in hospital admissions as a result of this wave. However, many people have been admitted for other illnesses. “We always have some people admitted with Covid,” Guðrún said. “There’s also been an uptick in admissions where people have influenza or RSV. Especially young children.” Campaign to get people vaccinated Guðrún urges people to get vaccinated for influenza and Covid. Health care providers still offer this service and it is strongly recommended for people over 60 years of age. “The participation has unfortunately not been very good this fall, but there was an increase last week when the health care centres campaigned to urge people to come,” Guðrún said. She added that even though people may have become tired of the discussion about Covid vaccinations, it remains important to get shots. “These are well-researched vaccines that billions of people have used,” Guðrún said. “They’ve been shown to be effective and protect against serious illnesses and deaths.” COVID in Iceland, covid vaccine, health care, vaccinations Sign up for our weekly newsletter Get news from Iceland, photos, and in-depth stories delivered to your inbox every week! Email Sign up Subscribe to Iceland Review In-depth stories and high-quality photography showcasing life in Iceland! Subscribe Related News News Two Women Develop AIDS After Failure to Test News Foreign-born Health Care Staff Vital, Administrator Says News Economic Inequality Impacting Health Care in Iceland From the Travel Desk Places The Golden Circle | Iceland’s Favourite Sightseeing Route Partnerships Find South Iceland Souvenirs at UNA Local Product in Hvolsvöllur Travel Take Flight with Helicopter Tours in Iceland Latest news Iceland News Review: Adopted Reindeer Living Her Best LifeIcelandic Manuscripts Receive Police EscortIcelanders Polled on Whaling and Iceland’s Image AbroadHealth Care, Economy & Housing Matter Most to Icelandic VotersOne Year From Evacuation, Grindavík’s Future Remains Uncertain Iceland Review – Helping you discover since 1963 News Magazine Ask Iceland Review In Focus Travel ↪ News Magazine Ask Iceland Review In Focus Travel ↪ About Us Work with Us Privacy Policy Our History Sign Up For Our Newsletter About Us Work with Us Privacy Policy Our History Sign Up For Our Newsletter Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube © 2024 - Iceland Review ehf. All rights reserved. About Us Privacy and Cookie policy About Us Privacy and Cookie policy Manage your privacy To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions.Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Statistics Marketing Features Always active Always active Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny Manage options Save preferences Manage options {title} {title} {title} Manage your privacy To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Statistics Marketing Features Always active Always active Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny Manage options Save preferences Manage options {title} {title} {title} Manage consent Manage consentPacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W51 2023 (Dec 17 - Dec 23) - Fiji | ReliefWeb Skip to main content Help Log in ReliefWeb Content Search What are you looking for? Search|t Updates Countries Disasters Organizations Topics Jobs Training Informing humanitarians worldwide 24/7 — a service provided by UN OCHA Fiji + 22 more Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W51 2023 (Dec 17 - Dec 23) Format Situation Report Source WHO Posted 25 Dec 2023 Originally published 25 Dec 2023 Attachments Download Report (PDF | 501.18 KB) Alerts : AFR: Fiji (1), Samoa (1) COVID-19 : Cook Islands (9), Samoa (56), RMI (24) Influenza-like Illness (ILI) PSSS, EPI – WK 50, 2023 Influenza-like Illness (ILI) cases compared to WK 49, 2023 ILI cases are as tabulated as below for comparison. For an added perspective on the figures and trends percentage, country sentinel sites reporting for WKs 49 & 50 are also shown. Please refer Seasonal Influenzafor Pacific Island Countries and Territories (PICTs) - ILI Surveillance Actual increase in the number of ILI cases has been seen in RMI, Cook Islands, CNMI and New Caledonia for the week. The increased ILI cases seen in Samoa may be due to the increased number of sites reporting for the week. The reduction in the number of ILI cases has been seen in Fiji, Wallis & Futuna and no changes reported in the number of ILI cases in Tonga. No reports were available from Kiribati, French Polynesia, FSM, Guam, Niue, Pitcairn Islands Tokelau, Tuvalu and Vanuatu for the week. American Samoa and Nauru have not participated in the surveillance. Surveillance figures are not intended to capture all country cases but to describe trends over time and are invaluable when trends rise beyond country baselines which should then trigger alerts and timely actions to characterize the actual nature and magnitude of the disease. Influenza updates from PICs: Fiji identified 12 Flu AH3 cases from 62 samples tested. During WK 50, out of 122 tests conducted (comprising 68 Point-of-Care tests and 54 CHCC Laboratory tests), there were 7 cases of FLU A, 2 cases of FLU A & B, and two SARI case hospitalizations. Additionally, there were two confirmed RSV cases, both individuals being over 30 years old. On December 19, 2023, the CNMI CHCC received emailed results for the COVIDSeq (SARS-CoV-2 NGS Test) Lineage (EG.5.1) Omicron (XBB-like), with a collection date of November 21, 2023.(Situation report WK 50 ends 18/12/2023) The World Health Organization (WHO) alerted on Tuesday (19/12/2023) that, along with COVID-19, other respiratory illnesses like influenza, RSV, and common childhood pneumonia are increasing, advising individuals at risk to adopt precautionary measures. Refer here. In the meantime, WHO advises the population to take preventive measures for influenza and practice proper respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette. CDC reports rising levels of SARS-CoV-2, flu, and RSV, but stable hospital occupancy. An alert urges increased vaccination to mitigate severity and potential impact on healthcare systems. The CDC is closely monitoring JN.1 for its immune-evasive potential. Read more Avian Influenza Weekly Update** :**Between 1 and 7 December 2023, there has been no human infection with avian influenza reported in the region. SARI (Severe Acute Respiratory Illness) Severe acute respiratory illness (SARI) as reported from sentinel surveillance (3/19) sites through PSSS. COVID -19 (Monthly Update -WHO) From November 20 to December17, 2023, over a 28-day period, 105 countries reported COVID-19 cases, while 50 countries reported COVID-19 deaths globally. It's important to note that these figures may not represent the true extent of cases or deaths, as some countries have suspended or delayed the reporting of this data. Over the past 28 days (from November20 to December17, 2023), reported COVID-19 cases and deaths have declined significantly, with more than half a million new cases and over 4,700 new deaths. This marks a 52% increase in cases and a 8% decrease in deaths compared to the previous 28-day period (23 October to 19 November 2023, 2023). However, it's essential to interpret these trends cautiously, as many countries are experiencing reduced testing, sequencing, and reporting delays. Regarding SARS-CoV-2 PCR percent positivity, sentinel sites on the expanded Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) platform have consistently reported a stable 7.6% as of 10 December,2023. From November 13 to December 10, 2023, there were over 118,000 new COVID-19 hospitalizations and 1600 new ICU admissions, reflecting a 23% and 51% overall increase, respectively, in countries consistently reporting data across current and past periods. As of December 18, 2023, JN.1, a sub-lineage of the BA.2.86 Omicron variant, has been designated a separate variant of interest (VOI) due to its rapid prevalence increase. Globally, EG.5 continues to be the most reported VOI. Monthly update in detail here The World Health Organization has upgraded the classification of the new COVID-19 variant JN.1 to a standalone "variant of interest" due to its rapid global spread. Officials emphasize that JN.1 has not shown different or more severe symptoms compared to previous variants. While the variant is expected to contribute to an increase in SARS-CoV-2 cases, especially in countries entering the winter season, the WHO considers the global public health risk to be "low." Previously part of the BA.2.86 sublineages, JN.1 is now recognized independently as a VOI. Refer here The Pacific Island Countries COVID-19 situation report from the Pacific COVID-19 JIMT is attached herewith as a reference for operational purposes. The slides contain data that are subject to change as investigations are ongoing, and sources of data are noted within the slides. Also refer to Pacific dashboard COVID-19 . India reported 614 new Covid-19 cases in the past 24 hours, the highest since May 21, attributed to the JN.1 sub-variant first detected in Kerala. The death toll reached 5,33,321, with three deaths reported from Kerala within 24 hours. Source WHO is launching an updated Global WHO Coronavirus (COVID-19) Dashboard on 21 December 2023. The dashboard will be available in a new link with a renewed interface starting from 25 December 2023 and will progressively incorporate new data elements throughout 2024**. **Refer here Please note that the COVID-19 Epidemiological Update will be provided every four weeks*. *Please refer to the linkhttps://covid19.who.int/where disaggregated data is available for download. The previous editions of Weekly COVID-19 Epidemiological Update are accessible at the following link here Dengue Like Illness: Latest Dengue Situation Updates 2023 for the Western Pacific from PSSS weekly report here. Pacific Island Countries and Areas (PICs), Fiji, Palau, Samoa, and Solomon Islands have reported higher Dengue-Like illness (DLI) cases compared to the same period in 2022. Dengue Between January 1, 2023, and December 7, 2023, over 500,000 dengue cases and 750 deaths were reported in the WHO Western Pacific Region, with the Philippines (167,355 cases, 575 deaths) and Viet Nam (149,557 cases, 36 deaths) being the most affected. Dengue is endemic in several countries in the region. In Pacific Island countrieserritories, dengue-like illness cases increased by 28% in 2023, with Fiji reporting a significant rise from 8,418 cases in 2022 to 11,522 cases in 2023.Read more Typhoid The Ministry of Health and Medical Services alerts the public to a typhoid fever outbreak in Lau Settlement, Ra. From September to December, six cases, distributed as 2 in September, 2 in November, and 2 in December, were reported among three linked households. Three individuals were hospitalized in Rakiraki, resulting in one fatality, while the remaining five have recovered. Typhoid fever, caused by Salmonella typhi bacteria, spreads through fecal contamination of food or water. Source Polio The thirty-seventh meeting of the Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) took place on December 12, 2023. The meeting, convened by the WHO Director-General, involved face-to-face and video conference discussions with Committee members, advisers, and affected countries, supported by the WHO Secretariat. The Committee assessed data on wild poliovirus (WPV1) and circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses (cVDPV) concerning the global eradication target for WPV and the cessation of cVDPV2 outbreaks. Technical updates were provided for Afghanistan, Egypt, Guinea, Mauritania, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Zimbabwe. Refer here Others: Chinese scientists have reportedly published the first study on long COVID, three years after the primary infection, wrote Global Times. Researchers reported in Antimicrobial Stewardship & Healthcare Epidemiology higher mortality in patients with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) bloodstream infection (PA-BSI) and COVID-19 co-infection, wrote CIDRAP. Report details Primary country Fiji Other countries American SamoaCook IslandsFrench Polynesia (France)GuamKiribatiMarshall IslandsMicronesia (Federated States of)NauruNew Caledonia (France)New ZealandNiue (New Zealand)Northern Mariana Islands (The United States of America)PalauPapua New GuineaPitcairn IslandsSamoaSolomon IslandsTokelauTongaTuvaluVanuatuWallis and Futuna (France) Source World Health Organization Format Situation Report Theme Health Disaster type Epidemic Languages EnglishFrench Share Share this on Facebook Share this on X Post this on LinkedIn Related Content Fiji + 29 more Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W44 2024 (Oct 28-Nov 8) [EN/FR] Format Situation Report Source WHO Posted 11 Nov 2024 Originally published 11 Nov 2024 Vanuatu Vanuatu: Watery Diarrhoea in Efate- Situation Update 02 - Report Date: 08 November 2024 I Covering Period from 01 January - 03 November 2024 Format News and Press Release Source Govt. Vanuatu Posted 8 Nov 2024 Originally published 8 Nov 2024 PNG DTM Aiya Local Level Government, Southern Highlands Province, Papua New Guinea - Round 01 - Flooding and Landslip Rapid Assessment Report | 01-Nov-2024 Format Assessment Source IOM Posted 8 Nov 2024 Originally published 1 Nov 2024 Kiribati + 3 more AUD 4.9 million to fortify Pacific region against health impacts of climate change Format News and Press Release Source SPREP Posted 8 Nov 2024 Originally published 8 Nov 2024 Blog Labs About Us Terms Contact Facebook X LinkedIn Instagram Telegram OCHA Services Related Platforms Humanitarian Action Central Emergency Response Fund Other OCHA Services Financial Tracking Service Humanitarian Data Exchange Humanitarian ID ReliefWeb Response Inter-Agency Standing Committee OCHA website ReliefWeb Virtual OSOCC More OCHA Services Opens in a new window Service provided by United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs UN OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OCHA coordinates the global emergency response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. ReliefWeb's Terms & Conditions. © 2024 all rights reserved.B.C. issues warning after 2 children die of flu-related illness | Globalnews.ca SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT In the news Remembrance Day Counterfeit Coins University Shooting Cuba Earthquake Global News Home Subscribe Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark Live Search Site theme toggle. Switch between light or dark mode Light Dark GlobalNews home WatchWorldCanadaLocalPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News B.C. issues warning after 2 children die of flu-related illness Click to return to homepage Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Full Menu Search Menu Home Trending Watch Local Menu Menu Close Submit Search Topics WatchWorldCanadaLocalChange locationPoliticsMoneyHealthEntertainmentLifestylePerspectivesSportsShoppingCommentaryContestsPodcastsU.S. News TV Programs Global NationalWest BlockThe Morning ShowVideo CentreMore… Connect Email alertsAlexaBreaking News Alerts from Global NewsLicense ContentContact Us National Change Close Change Close BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram Go Back Close Local your local region National BarrieBCCalgaryDurhamEdmontonGuelphHalifaxHamiltonKingstonKitchenerLethbridgeLondonMontrealNew BrunswickOkanaganOttawaPeterboroughReginaSaskatoonTorontoWinnipeg Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Calendar Close Calendar Close All event types Comedy Festival Food Health Music Sports Theatre Virtual Other Search Close Submit search Quick Search Trending Now Add Global News to Home Screen Close Instructions: Press the share icon on your browser Select Add to Home Screen Press Add Comments Close comments menu Want to discuss? Please read our Commenting Policy first. Video link Headline link Advertisement Close X Click to scroll back to top of the page Backto top Health B.C. issues warning after 2 children die of flu-related illness By Simon Little Global News Posted December 29, 2023 9:09 pm Updated December 31, 2023 12:25 pm 1 min read If you get Global News from Instagram or Facebook - that will be changing. Find out how you can still connect with us. Hide message bar 1:13 Two children in B.C. dead due to flu related illness The B.C. Centre for Disease Control is warning of a rise in respiratory illnesses after the deaths of two children – Dec 29, 2023 Leave a comment Share this item on Facebook Share this item via WhatsApp Share this item on Twitter Send this page to someone via email See more sharing options Share Close Share this item on Facebook facebook Share this item on Twitter twitter Send this page to someone via email email Share this item via WhatsApp whatsapp Share this item on Pocket pocket Share this item via Telegram telegram Share this item on Reddit reddit Copy article link Copy link Descrease article font size Increase article font size The B.C. Centre for Disease Control has issued a public warning about an uptick in respiratory illnesses, following the deaths of two children. The agency said Friday that levels of influenza and RSV were at their highest so far this year, and have reached peaks seen before the COVID-19 pandemic.The two deaths involved youth under the age of 19, and early findings suggest they were a result of secondary bacterial infections associated with the flu. 4:27 Health Matters: Flu and RSV cases on the rise “We’re just seeing more activity, more kids that are getting sick,” said Dr. Aamir Bharmal, medical director of the BCCDC. Story continues below advertisement “With influenza sometimes, and fortunately rarely, people, particularly children, can die.” Get weekly health news Receive the latest medical news and health information delivered to you every Sunday. Sign up for weekly health newsletter Sign Up By providing your email address, you have read and agree to Global News' Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy. The BCCDC says the deaths were both recorded within the last two weeks, and are the only influenza-related deaths reported so far this year.Bharmal said parents should be cautious, and keep a close eye on symptoms if their children do fall ill.“If a child has any preexisting illnesses or chronic conditions, to just be on the lookout for fever, particularly a fever that’s persisting — or if a child gets sick very quickly, very fast,” he said.“Other things to watch out for are drowsiness, or increased work of breathing, and if a child isn’t able to keep fluids down, that would be another reason to seek out some emergency care.” Trending Now Ukraine attacks Moscow with 34 drones, biggest strike on the Russian capital 1.4M Honda vehicles may see engines fail, prompting U.S. probe 4:09 Over 1 million influenza vaccines administered already, Dr. Bonnie Henry says The BCCDC is also urging people to step up precautions to prevent them from getting ill in the first place. Story continues below advertisement The agency highly recommends getting the flu vaccine, which it says is well-matched to the strains of virus that are circulating this year.It is also reminding people to stay home if they are feeling ill, to consider wearing a mask in indoor public settings and to practice good hygiene, including regularly washing hands. More on Health More videos From 300 lbs to 100K races: How this mom of 4 took up ultramarathons Veteran mental health highlighted on Remembrance Day: ‘It’s hard to say I’m not OK’ With B.C. teen sick in hospital with suspected bird flu, what should parents know? Bird flu: What we know about Canada’s 1st human case detected in B.C. H5 avian influenza: B.C. reports 1st suspected human case of bird flu Should parents be concerned about avian flu in B.C. schools? Health Matters: Asthma linked to memory deficits in children Health Canada talks Radon Action Month Journalistic standards Comment Report an error © 2023 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Sponsored content More from Global News Veteran mental health highlighted on Remembrance Day: ‘It’s hard to say I’m not OK’ With B.C. teen sick in hospital with suspected bird flu, what should parents know? Advertisement Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Trending RCMP report reveals new details on GTA man and his ‘camel-toe’ fake toonies 48,456 Read How Canadian consumers can spot counterfeit $2 coins 31,397 Read From 300 lbs to 100K races: How this mom of 4 took up ultramarathons 12,459 Read One person is dead and 16 are injured after a shooting at Tuskegee University 11,049 Read Ukraine attacks Moscow with 34 drones, biggest strike on the Russian capital 10,679 Read 1.4M Honda vehicles may see engines fail, prompting U.S. probe 7,619 Read Top Videos From overweight to ultramarathoner: How an Alberta woman transformed her life 89 Viewed 26,000+ fake toonies seized in CBSA bust 32 Viewed CRTC takes action to make international roaming fees more affordable 29 Viewed Hope for resolution in B.C. port dispute fades as talks break down 29 Viewed Veteran mental health highlighted this Remembrance Day 28 Viewed Quebec man who imported 26K fake toonies gets jail time 27 Viewed More Videos Stay in the loop The latest health and medical news emailed to you every Sunday. Sign up for Health IQ newsletter Sign Up Advertisement Report an Error Subscribe here AdChoices Global News Facebook Pages Global News Twitter Accounts Global News Youtube Channel Global News on Instagram Global News on LinkedIn Global News on TikTok Global News on Telegram AboutPrinciples & PracticesBranded ContentContact usRSSNewslettersNotificationsSmart homeAdvertisers Election RegistryGlobal News Licensing RequestsCookie consent ©2024 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Corus News. All rights reserved. Privacy PolicyCopyrightTerms of UseAdvertiseAdvertising Standards TermsCorus EntertainmentAccessibility Advertisement2 children die from flu-related illnesses: B.C. Centre for Disease Control - Victoria Times Colonist Skip to content × Join our Newsletter Join Our Newsletter Sign in or register for your free account Messages Post a Listing Your Listings Your Profile Your Subscriptions Payment History Sign Out Registered Users Already have an account? Sign In New Users Create a free account. Register Sign up for Daily Headlines Sign up for Notifications Contact Us HomeNewsLocal NewsBC Votes 2024B.C.NationalWorldBusiness WireNational BusinessLocal SportsNational SportsCovid-19Opioid CrisisAnimal StoriesOpinionOpinionLettersSubmit a LetterBlogsEventsLife & ArtsLifeEntertainmentFood and DrinkThe MixDrivingMore LifestylesFeaturesIslanderTravelHomesSponsoredGo Vancouver IslandCharitiesContestsCrosswordLocal EventsSpecial SectionsGuidedBySpotlightsGas PricesPropertiesClassifiedsClassifiedsCelebrationsPlace an AdObituariesView ObituariesPlace an ObituaryConnectContact UsDaily Headlines EmailSubscribeE-Edition Search Type Site Listings Search Join our Newsletter Home B.C. News 2 children die from flu-related illnesses: B.C. Centre for Disease Control VANCOUVER — The B.C. Centre for Disease Control says two children have died from complications related to influenza. Canadian Press Dec 30, 2023 2:06 PM Dec 30, 2023 2:35 PM Share by Email Share on Facebook Share on X Share on LinkedIn Print Share via Text Message A staff member at a vaccine clinic looks outside the clinic for people waiting to get their shot, in Mississauga, Ont., on Wednesday, April 13, 2022. The B.C. Centre for Disease Control says two children have died from complications related to influenza. THE CANADIAN PRESS/Nathan Denette Listen to this article 00:01:12 VANCOUVER — The B.C. Centre for Disease Control says two children have died from complications related to influenza. The centre is reminding people to take steps to reduce their risk of serious illness, noting the province is currently logging influenza and RSV activity similar to levels recorded before the COVID-19 pandemic. An advisory posted online by the centre says early findings indicate the two children -- who both died in the last two weeks -- experienced secondary bacterial infections contributing to severe illness, which can be a complication of the flu. It says influenza activity in children is currently at the highest levels recorded in British Columbia since the start of this respiratory illness season. The centre says this year’s influenza vaccine appears to be well matched to the viruses circulating in the province. It is recommending people get vaccinated, stay home if they are sick and wash their hands regularly. This report by The Canadian Press was first published Dec. 30, 2023 The Canadian Press See a typo/mistake? Have a storyip? This has been shared 0 times 0 Shares Share by Email Share on Facebook Share on X Share on LinkedIn Print Share via Text Message More B.C. News B.C. veteran, 101, recalls danger, discipline of war, as Vancouver cenotaph turns 100 Nov 11, 2024 4:22 PM Surrey police transition deal still in works, less than three weeks before handover Nov 11, 2024 4:05 PM B.C. RCMP arrest man after short standoff along Highway 1 Nov 11, 2024 3:56 PM Featured Flyer NewsLocal NewsBC Votes 2024B.C.NationalWorldBusiness WireNational BusinessLocal SportsNational SportsCovid-19Opioid CrisisAnimal StoriesOpinionOpinionLettersSubmit a LetterBlogsEventsLife & ArtsLifeEntertainmentFood and DrinkThe MixDrivingMore LifestylesFeaturesIslanderTravelHomesSponsoredGo Vancouver IslandCharitiesContestsCrosswordLocal EventsSpecial SectionsGuidedBySpotlightsGas PricesPropertiesClassifiedsClassifiedsCelebrationsPlace an AdObituariesView ObituariesPlace an ObituaryConnectContact UsDaily Headlines EmailSubscribeE-Edition About ContactSubscribeAboutAdvertisePrivacy PolicyTerms and ConditionsDaily Colonist 1858-1980Victoria Daily Times 1884-1940Political Ads RegistrySponsorships Visit our network of sites: Bowen Island Undercurrent Burnaby Now Business in Vancouver Castanet Coast Reporter Delta Optimist Lethbridge Herald Medicine Hat News New West Record North Shore News Pique Newsmagazine Powell River Peak REW.ca Richmond News Squamish Chief The Orca Times Colonist TriCity News Vancouver is Awesome Western Investor Airdrie City View/Rocky View Weekly Cochrane Eagle Lakeland Today Rocky Mountain Outlook St. Albert Gazette The Albertan Town and Country Today Western Wheel © 2024 Times Colonist