Episode #90 - Influenza Skip to main content World Health Organization Global Regions World Health Organization WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English Donate Donate Home Health Topics All topicsABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Resources Fact sheets Facts in pictures Multimedia Podcasts Publications Questions and answers Tools and toolkits Popular Dengue Endometriosis Excessive heat Herpes Mental disorders Mpox Countries All countriesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Regions Africa Americas Europe Eastern Mediterranean South-East Asia Western Pacific WHO in countries Data by country Country presence Country strengthening Country cooperation strategies Newsroom All news News releases Statements Campaigns Events Feature stories Press conferences Speeches Commentaries Photo library Headlines Emergencies Focus on Cholera Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Greater Horn of Africa Israel and occupied Palestinian territory Mpox Sudan Ukraine Latest Disease Outbreak News Situation reports Weekly Epidemiological Record WHO in emergencies Surveillance Operations Research Funding Partners Health emergency appeal International Health Regulations Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee Data Dashboards Triple Billion Progress Health Inequality Monitor Delivery for impact COVID-19 dashboard Data collection Classifications SCORE Surveys Civil registration and vital statistics Routine health information systems Harmonized health facility assessment GIS centre for health Reports World Health Statistics UHC global monitoring report About WHO About WHO Partnerships Committees and advisory groups Collaborating centres Technical teams Organizational structure Who we are Our work Activities Initiatives General Programme of Work WHO Academy Funding Investment in WHO WHO Foundation Accountability External audit Financial statements Internal audit and investigations Programme Budget Results reports Governance Governing bodies World Health Assembly Executive Board Member States Portal Home/ Podcasts/ Series/ Science in 5/ Episode #90 - Influenza #NoExcuse podcast 24 Episodes Science in 5 128 Episodes #NoExcuse podcast 24 Episodes List of episodes Episode #90 - Influenza 12 January 2023 | video (webinar) How does the vaccine combat the Influenza virus? How does WHO track influenza across the world to decide the composition of the vaccine? Dr Sylvie Briand also explains why we are seeing a spike in respiratory diseases in Science in 5. Presented by Vismita Gupta-Smith Produced by Department of Communications (DCO) 05:56 Alternative media Transcript VGS We are talking about influenza today. How does the vaccine combat the influenza virus? How is the composition of the vaccine decided? And how does WHO track the influenza virus across the world? Hello and welcome to Science in 5. I am Vismita Gupta-Smith. We are talking to Dr Sylvie Briand today. Welcome Sylvie. Before we talk about influenza, speak to us, please Sylvie, about this spike in respiratory disease that we are seeing and the reasons for it.SB Indeed we are seeing a spike in respiratory viruses, all kind of viruses, COVID 19, Influenza, RSV. This is not a surprise. We always see an increase in respiratory diseases in winter time for the northern hemisphere. Why? Firstly because most of the 175 types of circulating respiratory viruses prefer cold and humid weather. Most of them produce mild disease, but some of them like COVID-19, influenza or RSV can produce severe disease leading to hospitalization and even death.Secondly, when the weather is cold or humid people tend to gather indoor, in less ventilated spaces and thus are more exposed to infection.However, this year is a bit special. We are seeing more respiratory diseases than usual. We think that this increase is due to at least 2 factors:In the past three years people were applying personal protective measures like mask, washing hands, less gatherings. But this year, in many countries, most of these preventive measures are not applied anymore.In addition, people have probably lost some of their immunity against respiratory viruses in general, given the low circulation of respiratory viruses in the past years thanks to the protective measures. VGS Sylvie, talk to us about the influenza virus and how the vaccine combats it? SB There are many influenza viruses circulating. We know at least three big families: AH1N1, AH3N2 and B viruses. What is important to know is that these viruses evolve constantly. As they multiply in human cells, viruses are changing. This is like having a “parent virus” making many children and then having many grandchildren and many great grandchildren. The influenza vaccine, it's like a picture of the virus: a picture of the enemy that is shown to our internal defenses, the antibodies. When the antibodies have seen the picture of the virus. They can recognize it. So when the virus enters the body, the antibody can push it out. This is how the influenza vaccine works. However, because of the constant evolution of the virus, we need to update the influenza vaccine composition regularly, so that the picture of the enemy that is shown to the antibodies is not the picture of the parent virus that was circulating last year but the picture of the great grandchild viruses that are circulating this year.VGS Sylvie, speak to us about how WHO tracks the influenza virus across the world? And how is the composition of the vaccine decided? SB The WHO has a network of laboratories around the world called GISRS, the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System.This network is composed of more than 150 laboratories in 137 countries. Those laboratories are collecting and monitoring influenza viruses throughout the year. The collected viruses at the national level are then sent regularly to WHO collaborating centers for global assessment. Experts meet regularly to monitor the circulating viruses, assess which ones are predominant and then define which ones should be considered for the vaccine, so that the picture of the enemy is the best possible picture to train our antibodies to fight the virus. This represents an enormous amount of work. But many countries in the world are participating in this effort because influenza is an important public health issue and is killing between 200 to 600 thousand people every year which represents nearly 8000 deaths per week on average. So the influenza vaccine is safe and very effective to protect against severe disease, hospitalizations and death.It is strongly recommended for people at risk of severe disease such as elderly, people with underlying conditions and co-morbidities like immunosuppression, diabetes, chronic respiratory and cardiac diseases and so on.Influenza vaccine is also recommended for pregnant women and young children. We also encourage health care workers to get vaccinated as they are more exposed to the virus in their professional practice, and they are less likely to infect their patients when vaccinated.VGS Thank you, Sylvie. That was Science in 5 today. Until next time then, stay safe, stay health and stick with science. Speaker key SB Sylvie Briand VGS Vismita Gupta-Smith View all episodes Regions Africa Americas Eastern Mediterranean Europe South-East Asia Western Pacific Policies Cybersecurity Ethics Information disclosure Permissions and licensing Preventing sexual exploitation Terms of use About us Careers Frequently asked questions Library Newsletters Procurement Publications Contact us Report misconduct Privacy policy © 2024 WHOAn mRNA universal vaccine for influenza Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature reviews drug discovery research highlights article RESEARCH HIGHLIGHT 11 January 2023 An mRNA universal vaccine for influenza By M. Teresa Villanueva M. Teresa Villanueva View author publications You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar Twitter Facebook Email Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Influenza viruses infect 10–15% of the world population annually, causing approximately 500,000 deaths. Current seasonal vaccines are effective at mitigating morbidity and mortality but provide little protection beyond the viral strains targeted by the vaccines. Now, Arevalo et al. have developed an mRNA lipid nanoparticle (LNP) vaccine that contains antigens from all 20 known subtypes of influenza A and B viruses. The vaccine elicited high levels of antibodies in mice and ferrets, and protected animals against disease symptoms and death after infection. Access options Access through your institution Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription 24,99 € / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscription info for Korean customersWe have a dedicated website for our Korean customers. Please go to natureasia.com to subscribe to this journal.Go to natureasia.comRent or buy this articlePrices vary by article typefrom$1.95to$39.95Learn morePrices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 22, 98 (2023) doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41573-023-00013-z ReferencesArevalo, C. P. et al. A multivalent nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccine against all known influenza virus subtype. Science 378, 899–904 (2022)Article PubMed Google Scholar Download references Related Articles mRNA vaccines for infectious diseases: principles, delivery and clinical translation Subjects Vaccines Immunology Drug discovery Biotechnology Latest on: Vaccines Evolving antibody response to SARS-CoV-2 antigenic shift from XBB to JN.1 Article 07 NOV 24 Mumps is rising in some nations — but a fresh dose of vaccine might help Research Highlight 14 OCT 24 Mpox vaccine roll-out begins in Africa: what will success look like? News Q&A 04 OCT 24 Immunology Evolving antibody response to SARS-CoV-2 antigenic shift from XBB to JN.1 Article 07 NOV 24 Immune responses in checkpoint myocarditis across heart, blood and tumour Article 06 NOV 24 Endogenous self-peptides guard immune privilege of the central nervous system Article 30 OCT 24 Drug discovery AI protein-prediction tool AlphaFold3 is now open source News 11 NOV 24 How ‘miracle’ weight-loss drugs will change the world News Feature 05 NOV 24 Chemists make ‘impossible’ molecules that break 100-year-old bonding rule News 01 NOV 24 Jobs Independent junior research group leader registration number: ZE-0104-mikrokos-nwgl-2024 Entry date: as soon as possible Application deadline: 2024-12-15 Salary: E 15 TV-H Duration: 3 year... 35037, Marburg (DE) Philipps-Universität Marburg Research associate (Postdoc) Registration number: fb20-0239-wmz-2024 Entry date: as soon as possible Application deadline: 2024-12-01 Salary: E 13 TV-H Duration: 2 years Volume... Marburg, Hessen (DE) Philipps-Universität Marburg Doctoral positions at International Max Planck Research School for Biology and Computation, Berlin The IMPRS for Biology and Computation, Berlin, offers several PhD positions to outstanding students at the interface between biology and computation. Berlin (DE) Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (MPI-MG) 2024 Recruitment notice Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology: Shenzhen, China The wide-ranging expertise drawing from technical, engineering or science professions... Shenzhen,China Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology Southeast University Future Technology Institute Recruitment Notice Professor openings in mechanical engineering, control science and engineering, and integrating emerging interdisciplinary majors Nanjing, Jiangsu (CN) Southeast University Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Related Articles mRNA vaccines for infectious diseases: principles, delivery and clinical translation Subjects Vaccines Immunology Drug discovery Biotechnology Sign up to Nature Briefing An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday. Email address Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Sign up Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Editorial policies About the Editors Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Journal Credits Editorial input and checks Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Publishing model Conferences Posters Web Feeds Contact Publish with us For Authors For Referees Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Reviews Drug Discovery (Nat Rev Drug Discov) ISSN 1474-1784 (online) ISSN 1474-1776 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedUSDA ERS - Chart Detail Skip to navigation Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( LockA locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Economic Research Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Menu Home Topics Topics Animal Products Crops Farm Bill Farm Economy Farm Practices & Management Food & Nutrition Assistance Food Choices & Health Food Markets & Prices Food Safety International Markets & U.S. Trade Natural Resources & Environment Rural Economy & Population Data Products Data Products View by Topic: Animal Products Crops Farm Economy Farm Practices & Management Food & Nutrition Assistance Food Choices & Health Food Markets & Prices Food Safety International Markets & U.S. Trade Natural Resources & Environment Rural Economy & Population Publications Publications View by Topic: Animal Products Crops Farm Economy Farm Practices & Management Food & Nutrition Assistance Food Choices & Health Food Markets & Prices Food Safety International Markets & U.S. Trade Natural Resources & Environment Rural Economy & Population Newsroom Newsroom Contact ERS Press Office Trending Topics Multimedia Calendar Calendar Today's Releases This Month's Releases Next Month's Releases Amber Waves Magazine Amber Waves Magazine Amber Waves Home All Articles About ERS Careers at ERS FAQs Contact Us Search small Search Home Data Products Chart Gallery Chart Detail Avian influenza outbreaks reduced egg production, driving prices to record highs in 2022 Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI)—a disease infecting birds and poultry—struck egg-laying hens throughout 2022. As a result of recurrent outbreaks, U.S. egg inventories were 29 percent lower in the final week of December 2022 than at the beginning of the year. By the end of December, more than 43 million egg-laying hens were lost to the disease itself or to depopulation since the outbreak began in February 2022. Losses were spread across two waves: from February to June (30.7 million hens) and from September to December (12.6 million hens). On constrained supplies, wholesale egg prices (the prices retailers pay to producers) were elevated throughout the year. The HPAI recurrences in the fall further constrained egg inventories that had not recovered from the spring wave. Moreover, the latest outbreak wave came at a point when the industry seasonally adjusts the egg-laying flocks to meet the increasing demand for eggs associated with the winter holiday season. Lower-than-usual shell egg inventories near the end of the year, combined with increased demand stemming from the holiday baking season, resulted in several successive weeks of record high egg prices. The average shell-egg price was 267 percent higher during the week leading up to Christmas than at the beginning of the year and 210 percent higher than the same time a year earlier. During the last week of 2022, inventory sizes started to rise, and prices fell. Going forward, wholesale prices are expected to decrease as the industry moves past the holiday season and continues rebuilding its egg-laying flocks. This chart first appeared in the USDA, Economic Research Service’s Livestock, Dairy, and Poultry Outlook: December 2022. Embed this chart Download larger size chart (2048 pixels by 1950, 96 dpi) Related Data Livestock and Meat Domestic Data Related Reports Livestock, Dairy, and Poultry Outlook: December 2022 Gallery Related Topics Poultry & Eggs Last updated: Wednesday, January 11, 2023 For more information, contact: Adriana Valcu-Lisman Return to top ERS Links ERS Home Accessibility Careers Contact Us E-Mail Updates Help Information Quality Site Map Privacy Policy & Non-Discrimination Statement USDA Links FOIA Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline Inspector General Plain Writing USDA.gov USA.gov WhiteHouse.gov Sign Up for Updates Subscribe Economic Research Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Please enable JavaScript to signup for an api.data.gov API key.Developing mucosal vaccines for respiratory viruses | National Institutes of Health (NIH) Skip to main content U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Search the NIH Website Virtual Tour Staff Directory En Español Site Menu Home Health Information Health Care Providers & Facilities Health Info Lines HealthCare.gov Science Education Resources NIH Clinical Research Trials and You Talking to Your Doctor More » Search Health Topics Quick Links MedlinePlus Health Info NIH News in Health Wellness Toolkits Grants & Funding Grants Home Page Find Funding Due Dates How to Apply About Grants Policy & Compliance Grants News/Blog Contracts Loan Repayment More » Quick Links RePORT eRA Commons NIH Common Fund News & Events News Releases Digital Media Kits Media Resources Media Contacts Images and B-roll Events Social Media More » Quick Links NIH News in Health NIH Research Matters NIH Record Research & Training Medical Research Initiatives Science Highlights Science Education Research in NIH Labs & Clinics Training Opportunities Library Resources Research Resources Clinical Research Resources Safety, Regulation and Guidance More » Quick Links PubMed Stem Cell Information OppNet NIDB NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research Institutes at NIH List of Institutes and Centers NIH Office of the Director Directors of NIH Institutes and Centers NIH Institute and Center Contact Information More » Quick Links NCI NEI NHLBI NHGRI NIA NIAAA NIAID NIAMS NIBIB NICHD NIDCD NIDCR NIDDK NIDA NIEHS NIGMS NIMH NIMHD NINDS NINR NLM CC CIT CSR FIC NCATS NCCIH About NIH Who We Are What We Do Jobs at NIH Visitor Information Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us More » Quick Links The NIH Director Take the Virtual Tour NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health® Impact of NIH Research Science, Health, and Public Trust You are hereHome » News & Events » News Releases News Releases Media AdvisoryWednesday, January 11, 2023Developing mucosal vaccines for respiratory viruses NIH experts offer perspective on next-generation approaches. Illustration shows 3D renditions of three dangerous respiratory virusesNIAID What Vaccines that provide long-lasting protection against influenza, coronaviruses and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) have proved exceptionally difficult to develop. In a new review article in Cell Host & Microbe, researchers from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), part of the NIH, explore the challenges and outline approaches to improved vaccines. Anthony S. Fauci, M.D., former NIAID director, is an author along with Jeffery K. Taubenberger, M.D., Ph.D., and David M. Morens, M.D. Unlike the respiratory viruses that cause measles, mumps and rubella—for which vaccination or recovery from illness provides decades-long protection against future infection—flu, RSV, SARS-CoV-2 and “common cold” coronaviruses share several characteristics that enable them to cause repeated re-infections. These include very short incubation periods, rapid host-to-host transmission and replication in the nasal mucosa rather than throughout the body. This last feature—non-systemic replication—means these viruses do not stimulate the full force of the adaptive immune response, which typically takes a week or more to mount. A next generation of improved vaccines for mucosa-replicating viruses will require advances in understanding on several fronts, the authors say. For instance, more must be learned about interactions between flu viruses, coronaviruses and RSV and the components of the immune response that operate largely or exclusively in the upper respiratory system. Over time, these interactions have evolved and led to “immune tolerance,” wherein the human host tolerates transient, limited infections by viruses that are generally non-lethal to avoid the destructive consequences of an all-out immune system attack. The authors note that mucosal immunization appears to be an optimal route of vaccination for the viruses of interest, when feasible. However, to develop useful mucosal vaccines, significant knowledge gaps must be filled including finding ideal vaccine formulations; determining dosage size, frequency and timing; and developing techniques for overcoming immune tolerance. The NIAID authors urge fellow researchers to “think outside the box” to make strides toward vaccines that can elicit durable protection against these viruses of considerable public health impact. They conclude, “we are excited and invigorated that many investigators…are rethinking, from the ground up, all of our past assumptions and approaches to preventing important respiratory viral diseases and working to find bold new paths forward.” Article DM Morens et al. Rethinking next-generation vaccines for coronaviruses, influenza viruses, and other respiratory viruses. Cell Host & Microbe DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2022.11.016 (2023). Who Co-authors Dr. Jeffery K. Taubenberger, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, NIAID, and Dr. David M. Morens, Office of the Director, NIAID, are available to discuss their paper. Contact To schedule interviews, please contact Anne A. Oplinger, (301) 402-1663, NIAIDNews@niaid.nih.gov. NIAID conducts and supports research—at NIH, throughout the United States, and worldwide—to study the causes of infectious and immune-mediated diseases, and to develop better means of preventing, diagnosing and treating these illnesses. News releases, fact sheets and other NIAID-related materials are available on the NIAID website.About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov. NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health®### Institute/CenterNational Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)Contact Anne A. Oplinger 301-402-1663 Connect with Us Subscribe to news releases RSS Feed Connect with Us Contact Us X Facebook Instagram YouTube Flickr More Social Media from NIH Footer NIH Home Virtual Tour En Español Visitor Information Frequently Asked Questions Privacy Policy Disclaimers Accessibility NIH Website Archives Nondiscrimination Notice Freedom of Information Act No Fear Act HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Office of Inspector General USA.gov NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health® National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, Maryland 20892 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Back to TopFrontiers | Antiviral effects of Atractyloside A on the influenza B virus (Victoria strain) infection Skip to main content Top bar navigation Frontiers in Microbiology About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Search Frontiers in Microbiology Sections Sections Ancient DNA and Forensic MicrobiologyAntimicrobials, Resistance and ChemotherapyAquatic MicrobiologyBiology of ArchaeaExtreme MicrobiologyFood MicrobiologyInfectious Agents and DiseaseMicrobe and Virus Interactions with PlantsMicrobial Physiology and MetabolismMicrobial SymbiosesMicrobiological Chemistry and GeomicrobiologyMicrobiotechnologyMicroorganisms in Vertebrate Digestive SystemsPhage BiologySystems MicrobiologyTerrestrial MicrobiologyVirology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Frontiers in Microbiology Sections Sections Ancient DNA and Forensic MicrobiologyAntimicrobials, Resistance and ChemotherapyAquatic MicrobiologyBiology of ArchaeaExtreme MicrobiologyFood MicrobiologyInfectious Agents and DiseaseMicrobe and Virus Interactions with PlantsMicrobial Physiology and MetabolismMicrobial SymbiosesMicrobiological Chemistry and GeomicrobiologyMicrobiotechnologyMicroorganisms in Vertebrate Digestive SystemsPhage BiologySystems MicrobiologyTerrestrial MicrobiologyVirology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Frontiers in Microbiology Sections Sections Ancient DNA and Forensic MicrobiologyAntimicrobials, Resistance and ChemotherapyAquatic MicrobiologyBiology of ArchaeaExtreme MicrobiologyFood MicrobiologyInfectious Agents and DiseaseMicrobe and Virus Interactions with PlantsMicrobial Physiology and MetabolismMicrobial SymbiosesMicrobiological Chemistry and GeomicrobiologyMicrobiotechnologyMicroorganisms in Vertebrate Digestive SystemsPhage BiologySystems MicrobiologyTerrestrial MicrobiologyVirology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Submit your research Search Download article Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) Share on Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex 1,6K Total views 706 Downloads 5 Citations Citation numbers are available from Dimensions View article impact View altmetric score Share on Edited by Mookkan Prabakaran Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, Singapore Reviewed by Ahmed Mostafa National Research Centre (Egypt), Egypt Irene Ramos Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, United States Table of contents Abstract Introduction Materials and methods Results Discussion Data availability statement Ethics statement Author contributions Funding Acknowledgments Conflict of interest Publisher's note Supplementary material References Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex Check for updates Download article Download Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) ORIGINAL RESEARCH article Front. Microbiol., 10 January 2023 Sec. Virology Volume 13 - 2022 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.1067725 This article is part of the Research Topic Innovative Antiviral Strategy against Immune Evasion View all 8 articles Antiviral effects of Atractyloside A on the influenza B virus (Victoria strain) infection Jicheng Han1,2Xiangyu Zhu1,3Zihan Gao1,2Yan Xiao1,2Jinxin Zhang1,2Peng Wang1,3Jinbo Fang2Yiquan Li2Yilong Zhu2Yue Li1,2Ningyi Jin1,2*Huijun Lu1*Dazhuan Lin4*Wenshen Liu1* 1Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changchun, China 2Academician Workstation, Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun, China 3College of Animal Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun, China 4College of Pharmaceuticals and Food, Changchun Medical College, Changchun, China Influenza viruses pose a serious threat to human health, infecting hundreds of millions of people worldwide each year, resulting in a significant increase in global morbidity and mortality. Influenza activity has declined at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, but the genetic diversity of B/Victoria lineage viruses has increased significantly during this period. Therefore, the prevention and treatment of the influenza B Victoria strain virus should continue to attract research attention. In this study, we found that Atractyloside A (AA), one of the effective components in Atractylodes lancea (Thunb.) DC shows potential antiviral properties. This study shows that AA not only possesses anti-influenza B virus infection effects in vivo and in vitro but also can regulate macrophage polarization to the M2 type, which can effectively attenuate the damage caused by influenza B virus infection. Therefore, Atractyloside A may be an effective natural drug against B/Victoria influenza infection. Introduction Influenza is an acute respiratory infection caused by the influenza virus (Huang et al., 2022). There are four types of influenza viruses: A, B, C, and D (Yamayoshi and Kawaoka, 2019); of these, A and B tend to cause seasonal epidemics (Petrova and Russell, 2018). Influenza B viruses are currently divided into two antigenically distinct lineages, Victoria and Yamagata. Unlike influenza A virus subtypes that have periodically emerged from animals caused pandemics and circulated as single major antigenic variants, the Victoria and Yamagata lineages emerged as antigenic variants after the differentiation of influenza B viruses in the early 1980s. Since 2001, influenza B began to circulate globally (Shaw et al., 2002). Currently, the emergence of a large number of mutant influenza B viruses has been reported worldwide, indicating significant changes in the evolution and epidemiology of the influenza B viruses (Huang et al., 2022). Therefore, influenza B should be prominently monitored on the global health radar. Influenza activity declined sharply at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and gradually increased in 2021, but the intensity of activity remained lower than before the COVID-19 pandemic (Huang et al., 2022). Since the emergence of COVID-19, the diversity of circulating influenza virus (sub)types has decreased compared to previous seasons and almost exclusively involves the B/Victoria lineage viruses, while the genetic diversity of B/Victoria lineage viruses has increased significantly during this period (Huang et al., 2022). Safe and effective vaccines and antiviral drugs are available for influenza prevention and treatment. Increasing influenza vaccination rates can significantly reduce influenza-related morbidity and mortality (Paules and Subbarao, 2017; Feng et al., 2018). In 2012, the World Health Organization (WHO) began recommending a quadrivalent influenza vaccine, which contains two lineages of influenza B viruses; however, influenza vaccines have so far failed to fundamentally successfully block or eliminate the spread of influenza viruses in the human population. On the one hand, this stems from the suboptimal immunogenicity of the vaccine itself (Jackson et al., 2017; Uyeki, 2017; Paules et al., 2018). On the other hand, other factors are involved, such as the mismatch between the vaccine and circulating strains (Belongia et al., 2016), and vaccination timing (Ferdinands et al., 2017). Therefore, the development of effective antiviral drugs against the influenza virus is necessary. Currently, there are three classes of antiviral drugs used to treat influenza: transmembrane ion channel (M2 protein) blockers, neuraminidase inhibitors, and a cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitor that interferes with viral RNA transcription and blocks viral replication (Han et al., 2018). The WHO recommends the prompt administration of oseltamivir as a first-line treatment for those with suspected or confirmed influenza virus infection or those at risk of severe illness. However, during the 2017–2018 influenza epidemic, the proportion of patients aged 14 years or older treated with oseltamivir was significantly reduced and the clinical manifestations of the disease were more severe. Therefore, it is necessary to develop high-yield and effective anti-seasonal influenza drugs. Drug repurposing is a common strategy used in antiviral drug research to achieve rapid applications during times of public emergency (Al-Karmalawy et al., 2021). AA is an important natural compound present in Atractylodes lancea (Thunb.) DC (AL). Studies have shown that AA exhibits various pharmacological effects including antihypertensive, antiglycemic, anti-tumor, and intestinal mucosal barrier protection (Tu et al., 2020). The effects of AA on the influenza virus have not yet been reported. In this study, AA was tested for its anti-influenza properties against infection with the B Victoria strain and to examine its in vivo effects on influenza B virus-related pneumonia. We found that AA exhibits anti-influenza virus activity in vitro and in vivo and activates macrophages in vivo, thereby effectively improving the potential damage of influenza virus pneumonia on the body. As such, AA is a potential anti-influenza B virus drug. Materials and methods Cells and animals The human lung cancer cell line A549 and the canine kidney cell line MDCK were purchased from BeNa Culture Collection. A549 and MDCK cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 and DMEM medium containing 10% FBS, respectively. Influenza B virus (IBV) was stored in the Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences. Atractyloside A (AA) was purchased from MedChemExpress (Cat#HY-N0237). The C57BL/6 mice used in this study were purchased from Beijing Wei Tong Li Hua Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd. Cell viability assay A549 or MDCK cells were cultured in a 96-well plate (1 × 104 cells/well) in an incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 12 h and then treated with different concentrations of Atractyloside A (AA); four replicate wells were used for each test group. After treatment for 24 h and 48 h, CCK-8 was added and cells were further cultured for 2 h; the OD450 value was detected, and cell viability was calculated. Half maximal inhibitory concentration assay MDCK cells were plated in 96-well plates and assigned to an IBV group, IBV+ different concentrations of AA (50, 75, 100, 125, and 150 μM) group, or a control group. Seventy-two hours after infection of the MDCK cells with 0.05 MOI IBV, half maximal inhibitory concentration assay (IC50) was obtained by colorimetric CCK-8 assay and calculated using non-linear regression analysis in GraphPad Prism 9 software. Immunofluorescence analysis A549 or MDCK cells were plated in 12-well plates and assigned to an IBV group, an IBV+AA group, or a control group. Each experimental group was treated with the corresponding solution and placed in a cell incubator for 24 h. Immunofluorescence assays were then performed. After incubation, the culture mixture was discarded and cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min, treated with 0.1% Triton X-100, and blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA). After blocking, the cells were stained with primary antibody for 2 h at room temperature and then stained with fluorescent secondary antibody for 1 h in the dark. Finally, the samples were stained with DAPI solution for 10 min before observation. The antibody used in this study was the Anti-Influenza B Virus Nucleoprotein from Abcam (Cat#ab20711). Virus yield reduction assay After the A549 or MDCK cells were plated in 12-well plates and incubated for 12 h, 0.1 MOI of IBV was added with different concentrations of AA. Twenty-four hours after IBV infection + treatment, cellular RNA was extracted and subjected to the quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) utilizing a quantitative PCR instrument (ABI7500). The plasmid pUC57-HA (2896bp) was constructed based on the HA gene of IBV, and the plasmid was diluted to 102-109 copies as a standard to calculate the viral copy number after IBV infection. The primers used in this study were 5′-ATTTTGCAAAYCTCAAAGGAACA-3′ (Forward) and 5′-TTGTTCTRTCGTGCATTATAGG-3′ (Reverse). The IBV-Victoria probe used in this study was 5′-VIC-TGGGYAGACCAAAATGCACRG-BHQ1-3′. Hemagglutination assay (HA) After the A549 or MDCK cells were plated in 12-well plates and incubated for 12 h, 0.1 MOI of IBV was added with different concentrations of AA. Twenty-four hours after IBV infection + treatment, the culture supernatant was collected for a hemagglutination assay (HA). In 12 wells of a 96-well V-shaped microplate, 25 μl of PBS was added to each well. Twenty-five microliters of cell culture solution were added to the first well and then serially diluted 10 times. After serial multiple dilutions, 25 μl of 1% chicken red cell suspension was added to each well, mixed well, and incubated for 40 min at room temperature for result determination. Western blot A549 cells were inoculated with 0.1 MOI of IBV, and the IBV+AA treatment group and control group were started simultaneously. Twenty-four hours after infection of the A549 cells with IBV, the cells were collected, and total proteins were extracted from the cells. Each group sample was loaded at 25 μg of total protein for detection. After SDS-PAGE was transferred to a PVDV membrane and blocked at room temperature for 2 h, the corresponding primary antibody was added for incubation at 4°C overnight. Then, the membrane was incubated with goat anti-rabbit or goat anti-mouse secondary antibody for 50 min. The primary antibodies used in this study were the Anti-Influenza B Virus Nucleoprotein from Abcam (Cat#ab20711) and the Rig-I Pathway Antibody Sampler kit from Cell Signaling Technology (Cat#8348). Luciferase assay A total of 293 cells were transfected together with pIFN-β-Luc plasmids and Renilla plasmids (pRL-TK). Two hundred ninety-three cells were infected with 0.05 MOI of IBV before harvesting, together with the addition of AA (40 μM) as the intervention. The luciferase activity was tested using the Dual-Lumi™ Luciferase Assay kit (Beyotime, RG088M) after IBV infection for 24 h. pIFN-β-Luc (Cat#ZT206) and pRL-TK (Cat#BR018) plasmids were from the Hunan Fenghui Biotechnology Co., Ltd. In vivo challenge Six-week-old female C57BL/6 SPF-grade mice were used for intranasal inoculation with 50 μl of PBS containing 1 × 104.5 TCID50 of IBV. Animals were divided into four groups (six mice for each group): an IBV infection group, an IBV infection + AA treatment group (10 mg/kg and 30 mg/kg), and a control group. AA was administered orally over 14 consecutive days, starting 1 day before IBV inoculation. IBV infection and control groups were orally treated with a placebo solution (0.2 ml saline) over 14 consecutive days. Body weight, food intake, and mortality were then monitored; death was defined at ≥35% weight loss. Fourteen days after the IBV infection, the animals were euthanized, and the lung tissue was collected and placed in tissue fixative for histopathological analysis. The fixed lung tissue was utilized for HE staining, immunohistochemical analysis using the nucleoprotein of the IBV antibody, and immunofluorescence analysis using the F4/80 and the nucleoprotein of the IBV antibodies. Analysis software (Image-Pro Plus 6.0, Media Cybernetics) was used to analyze the average signal density of stained samples. The analysis software analyzes each image to derive the IOD (integrated optical density) value for each area (pixel area of tissue). The average optical density value IOD/area (Mean Density) was also derived. The antibodies used in this study were the Anti-Influenza B Virus Nucleoprotein antibody from Abcam (Cat#ab20711) and the Anti-F4/80 antibody from Cell Signaling Technology (Cat# 70076S). Macrophage activation and polarization To test the ability of AA to activate macrophages, we used 6-week-old SPF-grade C57BL/6 mice to isolate and obtain primary bone marrow-derived cells. For the specific experimental methods, we refer to previous studies (Han et al., 2021). The obtained primary macrophages were plated and incubated in a 6-well plate for 8 h and then separated into three groups: Atractyloside A, LPS, and the mock control. After adding the corresponding treatment solution, each experimental group was placed in a 37°C cell incubator for 48 h. After incubation, the cells were collected and stained with APC-F4/80 (BioLegend, Cat#157306), FITC-MHCII (BioLegend, Cat#107696), FITC-CD40, PE-CD80 (BioLegend, Cat#104708), and FITC-CD86 (BioLegend, Cat#105006) flow antibodies for flow cytometry analysis to identify macrophage phenotypes. To further analyze the effect of AA on macrophage polarization in vivo, IBV-infected mice were euthanized after 7 days and mononuclear cells in the lungs were isolated and analyzed by flow cytometry. Mononuclear cells were obtained from lung tissue isolated from three mice for flow-through antibody staining. Then, the isolated cells were stained with APC-F4/80 (BioLegend, Cat#157306), Percp-CD11c (BioLegend, Cat#117326), and FITC-CD206 (BioLegend, Cat#141704) flow antibodies for the flow cytometry analysis. Statistical analysis All experiments were performed at least three times independently. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) and compared between groups using t-tests. Univariate and multivariate ANOVAs were used to calculate between-group differences. A p < 0.05 was used to determine significance; significance levels are presented as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001. Results Atractyloside A shows antiviral effects against IBV infection in vitro MDCK and A549 cells were plated on 96-well plates with various concentrations of AA (Figure 1A) and incubated in a cell culture incubator at 37°C. Cell viability assays were conducted by a colorimetric CCK-8 assay after 24 h and 48 h. We found that A549 cells treated with 30 uM AA had over 90% cell viability at 24 h (Figure 1B) and MDCK cells treated with 100 uM AA had over 90% cell viability at 24 h and 48 h (Figure 1C). Cytotoxic concentration 50 (CC50) and cytotoxic concentration 90 (CC90) for each group were calculated using GraphPad Prism 9 software. At 24 h, the CC90 of A549 and MDCK cells were 829.9 μM and 265.9 μM, respectively. The CC50 of A549 and MDCK cells were 184.1 μM and 180.7 μM, respectively. MDCK and A549 cells were then plated on 12-well plates, infected with 0.1 MOI of IBV, and incubated with AA for 48 h. After incubation, crystal violet staining was performed (Figure 1D). MDCK cells were then plated on 96-well plates, infected with 0.05 MOI of IBV, and incubated with AA for 72 h. After incubation, half maximal inhibitory concentration assay was obtained by colorimetric CCK-8 assay, showing that the IC50 for A549 and MDCK cells were 22.4 μM and 81.34 μM (Figure 1E). FIGURE 1 Figure 1. Cell viability of Atractyloside A on MDCK and A549 cells. (A) Chemical structure of Atractyloside A. Cell viability of Atractyloside A on A549 (B) and MDCK (C) cells. (D) Crystal violet staining of MDCK and A549 cells infected with IBV, or with Atractyloside A +IBV, or mock control. (E) Half maximal inhibitory concentration assay (IC50). To further explore the ability of AA to inhibit viral infection in vitro, we performed immunofluorescent staining, HA assay, and viral copy number analysis after IBV infection for 24 h in vitro. MDCK and A549 cells were infected with 0.1 MOI of IBV and treated with various concentrations of AA. Immunofluorescence was observed by a fluorescence microscope (Olympus BX53). We found that after IBV infection, with increasing AA concentration, nucleoprotein immunofluorescence decreased significantly (Figure 2A). Immunofluorescence analysis of A549 cells infected with IBV+AA for 24 h after treatment showed positive rates of 43.11%, 9.89%, 6.99%, and 4.68% for the IBV, IBV+AA (20 μM), IBV+AA (30 μM), and IBV+AA (40 μM) groups, respectively. Immunofluorescence analysis of MDCK cells showed positive rates of 98.03%, 10.54%, 7.28%, and 6.70% for the IBV, IBV+AA (75 μM), IBV+AA (100 μM), and IBV+AA (150 μM) groups, respectively. FIGURE 2 Figure 2. Antiviral effects of Atractyloside A against IBV infection in vitro. MDCK and A549 cells were infected with 0.1 MOI of IBV and treated with various concentrations of AA for 24 h. (A) Immunofluorescence analysis of the expression of IBV nucleoprotein after infection. Hemagglutination test (B) and virus copy number detection (C) after IBV infection. The results are presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001). The results of HA detection and virus copy number detection are shown in Figures 2B, C. With increasing AA concentration, HA and virus copy numbers decreased significantly. Compared with the IBV group, virus copy numbers in A549 cells decreased by 1.23 × (20 μM), 10.99 × (30 μM), and 4.17 × 106× (40 μM) with increasing AA concentrations. With increased AA concentrations, virus copy numbers in MDCK cells decreased by 1.88×, 885.9×, and 2.59× 103× compared with the IBV group. Compared with the IBV group, HA in A549 cells decreased by 1.28×, 1.5×, and 2× with increased AA concentrations. With increasing AA concentrations, HA in MDCK cells decreased by 1.31×, 1.89×, and 2.12× compared with the IBV group. Combined with the above results, AA could attenuate IBV infection in vitro. Atractyloside A can increase levels of phosphorylation of IRF3 to inhibit IBV replication A549 cells were infected with IBV at 0.1 MOI, and various AA concentrations were added. After incubation for 24 h, A549 cells from each group were collected for protein extraction, and the extracted proteins were used to analyze changes in type I interferon pathway proteins. We found that increasing concentrations of AA reduced the expression of the IBV nucleoprotein (Figure 3A). This indicated that AA could attenuate IBV infection. To analyze the underlying mechanism, we quantified type I interferon pathway-related proteins. We found that A549 infected IBV, and with increasing AA concentrations, the levels of p-IRF3 were increased (Figure 3B). At the same time, we also found that AA could also increase the levels of p-IRF3 in the absence of IBV infection (Supplementary Figure S1). These results showed that AA can activate the production of type I interferon. For further analysis, we performed immunofluorescence analysis with images captured by confocal microscopy (Zeiss Axio observer 7). We found that AA could increase the phosphorylation of IRF3 and its nuclear translocation to activate type I interferon after IBV infection (Figure 3C). IFN-β-Luc showed that the expression of IFN-β-Luc was enhanced after adding AA (Figure 3D). We then further explored the ability of AA to activate interferon in vivo. We found that the IBV+AA-treated mouse group showed higher expression of IFN-β in the serum compared to the IBV-infected group (p < 0.05) and the control group (p < 0.001) (Figure 3E). This finding further validated that AA can increase IRF3 phosphorylation to inhibit IBV replication. FIGURE 3 Figure 3. Atractyloside A can increase levels of phosphorylation of IRF3 to inhibit IBV replication. (A) Western blot analysis of nucleoprotein expression after IBV infection in Atractyloside A treatment groups with different drug concentrations. (B) Western blot analysis of RIG-I pathway proteins after IBV infection in Atractyloside A treatment groups with different drug concentrations. (C) Laser confocal observation of p-IRF3 expression after IBV infection in the different groups. (D) IFNβ luciferase activity was analyzed after IBV infection in the different groups. (E) Levels of IFN-β in the serum. The results are presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001). Atractyloside A exhibits favorable antiviral effects against IBV infection in vivo To explore the anti-IBV effects of AA in vivo, challenge experiments were performed as shown in Figure 4A. Food intake and body weight in the IBV and AA treatment groups trended down and then up again, but the recovery in body weight was significantly faster in the 30 mg/kg AA treatment group compared to the IBV group (Figures 4B, C). Survival was 100% in the high-dose AA group, compared with 87.5% in the low-dose group and 62.5% in the IBV group (Figure 4D). The above results show that AA can effectively improve survival following influenza virus infection. To further analyze the anti-influenza virus effects of AA in vivo, conducted pathological analyses of the lung tissue of experimental animals. H&E staining results showed that the AA treatment group showed less tissue damage (Figure 4F). Immunohistochemical analyses of IBV nucleoprotein showed that AA could effectively reduce the replication of IBV in the lungs (Figure 4G). The aforementioned results suggest that AA can resist IBV infection in vivo. FIGURE 4 Figure 4. Antiviral effects of Atractyloside A against IBV infection in vivo. (A) Efficacy evaluation of Atractyloside A and infection procedure in mice. Changes in body weight (B) and feed intake (C) after infection in mice. (D) The survival rate of mice after infection. (E) Lung tissue of mice infected with IBV in the different groups. H&E (F) and immunohistochemical (G) analysis of lung tissue after infection. The results are presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001). Atractyloside A can activate macrophages To explore the effect of AA against IBV infection, lung tissue was analyzed using immunofluorescence. We found that more macrophages (green fluorescence, F4/80 protein) were present in the lung tissue of the AA treatment group and this was associated with significant inhibition of IBV replication (red fluorescence, nucleoprotein of IBV) (Figure 5A). FIGURE 5 Figure 5. Levels of activation and polarization of macrophages. (A) Immunofluorescence analysis of lung tissue after infection. The intensity of green (FITC) fluorescence represents the expression of F4/80 protein, while the intensity of red (APC) fluorescence represents the expression of IBV nucleoprotein. (B) The analysis of Atractyloside A induced macrophage activation. Flow cytometry was performed to analyze the proportions of F4/80+MHC-II+, F4/80+CD80+, F4/80+CD40+, and F4/80+CD86+ expressing macrophages. (C) Effect of Atractyloside A treatment on the polarization levels of macrophages in vitro. Flow cytometry was performed to analyze the proportions of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs). (D) Effect of Atractyloside A treatment on the polarization levels of macrophages in lung tissue after IBV infection in vivo. Flow cytometry was performed to analyze the proportions of F4/80+CD11c+CD206- (M1 macrophages) and F4/80+CD11c-CD206+ (M2 macrophages) macrophages. The results are presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001). To further analyze the ability of AA to activate macrophages, we performed in vitro assays. The isolated bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) were plated on 6-well plates in three groups: AA group, LPS group, and mock control group. Each experimental group was treated with the respective solution and incubated for 48 h. Cells were then collected and stained with F4/80, MHCII, CD40, CD80, and CD86 flow antibodies for flow analysis. Flow cytometry results are shown in Figure 5B. BMMs in the AA-induced group showed greater expression of MHCII compared to the control group (p < 0.001). BMMs in the AA-induced group showed increased expression of CD40 (p < 0.0001), CD80 (p < 0.01), and CD86 (p < 0.0001) compared to the mock control group (Figure 5B), indicating that AA-activated macrophages. The above results indicate that Atractyloside A can effectively activate macrophages. Atractyloside A can alter macrophage polarization To analyze the effect of AA on macrophages in vivo, IBV-infected mice were euthanized after 7 days and mononuclear cells in the lungs were isolated and analyzed by flow cytometry. We found that the AA treatment group had a reduced proportion of M1 macrophages (F4/80+CD11c+CD206-) compared to the IBV group (p < 0.001). The proportion of M2 macrophages (F4/80+CD11c-CD206+) was higher in AA compared to the IBV (p < 0.01) and mock groups (p < 0.001). We also analyzed the effect of AA on macrophage polarization in vitro (Figure 5C), and the results were similar to those in vivo (Figure 5D). The above results suggest that AA can regulate macrophage polarization, thereby affecting IBV infection. Discussion Influenza viruses pose a serious threat to human health, infecting hundreds of millions of people worldwide each year with marked impacts on global morbidity and mortality. According to the World Health Organization, the annual seasonal influenza can infect 5–10% of adults and 20–30% of children worldwide, among which 3–5 million are considered to be severe cases (Keech and Beardsworth, 2008; Reed et al., 2015). The related respiratory deaths seriously affect the health of the population and cause huge damage to human health and socioeconomic development every year (Keech and Beardsworth, 2008; Reed et al., 2015). Although vaccination against the influenza virus is one of the most effective preventive strategies against seasonal influenza infections, these vaccines may not adequately protect against new strains due to the high variability and recombination of influenza viruses (Webster et al., 1992; Yoon et al., 2014; Wille and Holmes, 2020). Antiviral drugs play a critical role in stopping the progression and spread of influenza, especially in children, the elderly, and immunocompromised individuals (Han et al., 2018). However, the development of effective vaccines and drugs is challenged by the emergence of new virus subtypes due to constant mutation and genome segment rearrangements (Lyons and Lauring, 2018; Jiang et al., 2020). At present, the main types of drugs used in the clinical treatment of influenza are NA inhibitors and M2 channel ion blockers (Shen et al., 2015; Yen, 2016; Yin et al., 2021). Among these, oseltamivir, peramivir, and zanamivir are the most commonly utilized NA inhibitors, while the M2 channel ion blockers include drugs such as amantadine and rimantadine (Yin et al., 2021). Recent studies on amantadine treatment effects have shown a significant increase in drug resistance between 2005 and 2007 (Mozhgani et al., 2018); as such, its efficacy against influenza B is inadequate. At present, natural anti-influenza virus drugs remain in the exploratory stages of development. In clinical use, traditional Chinese medicines have shown antiviral activity against the influenza virus without signs of drug resistance (Yin et al., 2021). Studies have provided support for effective antiviral activity in honeysuckle, Radix isatidis, T Terminalia chebula, puerarin, Yin qiao power, and other herbals (Yin et al., 2021). In this study, the anti-IBV in vitro effects of AA were first tested on MDCK and A549 cell lines. Following infection with IBV at 0.1 MOI, we found that the IBV nucleoprotein expression decreased significantly with increased AA concentration (Figures 2A, 3A), indicating that AA can effectively resist IBV infection. To further test whether AA helps to resist IBV infection, we detected HA and the virus copy number. Our results paralleled those from our immunofluorescence and WB analyses; the infectivity of IBV was decreased with an increase in the concentration of AA (Figures 2B, C). Taken together, the above results indicate that AA can help resist IBV infection in vitro. IRF3 is normally present in the cytoplasm in an inactive state. However, in response to viral infection, it is phosphorylated to translocate to the nucleus and activate the transcription of IFNα and IFNβ to mount antiviral infection defenses (Banete et al., 2021). To further analyze the antiviral effects of AA, we analyzed type I interferon-related pathway proteins. We found that after IBV infection of cells, the addition of AA increased the levels of p-IRF3 protein (Figure 3B). At the same time, we also found that AA could also increase the levels of p-IRF3 in the absence of IBV infection (Supplementary Figure S1). Thus, we used immunofluorescence to test whether p-IRF3 could translocate into the nucleus to activate the type I interferon pathway. We found greater p-IRF3 in the nucleus after AA was added (Figure 3C). IFN-β-Luc in cells in vitro (Figure 3D) and serum INF-β in vivo (Figure 3E) both indicated that AA can effectively induce the production of type I interferon. Currently, a large number of studies have shown that type 1 interferon is an effective viral inhibitor. Our work suggests that AA can increase the phosphorylation of IRF3 to induce the expression of IFN-β to resist IBV infection. To further demonstrate this, it is necessary to block the IFN receptor or IFN production to observe whether the AA effects are eliminated. Unfortunately, we did not conduct this experiment in the present study. Therefore, we can only speculate that AA activates the type I interferon pathway to inhibit the replication of IBV. We will further analyze the relationship between AA and type I interferon antiviral in subsequent experiments. Our in vivo study of the anti-IBV effects of oral AA administration showed that drug administration was associated with improvements in body weight and food intake and other signs of IBV infection. The IBV-infected group had a protection rate of 62.5% after infection, and survival was significantly improved (to 100%) with AA treatment (Figure 4D). Our post-viral lung pathology analyses showed that AA can effectively attenuate the lung damage caused by the influenza virus and reduce the potential damage of viral pneumonia (Figures 4E, F). At the same time, we also performed an immunohistochemical analysis of IBV nucleoprotein and found that AA can effectively inhibit IBV in the lungs. The above results showed that AA can resist IBV infection. Macrophages are important immunoregulatory cells that play a critical role in the development of inflammation and responses to viral infection including the development of pneumonia. Therefore, we tested AA's effects on macrophage activation and polarization. We isolated primary bone marrow-derived BMMs and performed flow cytometry analysis to assess macrophage responses to AA administration. We found that AA effectively induced the expression of MHCII and the costimulatory molecules CD40, CD80, and CD86 on BMMs (Figure 5B). Activation of macrophages can facilitate virus recognition and immunomodulation that then facilitates T-cell responses to the pathogen (Banete et al., 2021). These results indicate that AA can effectively activate macrophages to phagocytose and deal with pathogens. Macrophage polarization changes occur in response to environmental stimuli; M1-type polarization of activated macrophages is associated with Th1 cytokines, and M2-type macrophage polarization is associated with Th2 cytokines (Yunna et al., 2020; Banete et al., 2021). Therefore, we analyzed the effect of AA on macrophage polarization in lung tissue. We found that after infection with IBV, the proportion of M1-type macrophages in the AA-treated group was significantly reduced, while the proportion of M2-type macrophages was increased (Figure 5C). Previous studies have shown that M1-type macrophages can facilitate the ability of influenza viruses to use the inflammatory response to support their replication, while M2-type macrophages can have anti-inflammatory and tissue repair-promoting effects (Banete et al., 2021). Therefore, we infer that AA can reduce the M1-type polarization of macrophages, reduce the inflammatory response, and inhibit the replication of the influenza virus in the lung. By increasing M2 polarization, AA may promote anti-inflammatory and lung tissue repair mechanisms. In conclusion, in this study, the inhibitory effects of AA on IBV were explored by utilizing in vivo and in vitro models. We found that AA has anti-IBV effects. In addition, we identified novel AA effects on macrophage function in the context of IBV infection. This study provides a new theoretical basis for the development of anti-IBV drugs. Data availability statement The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/Supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding authors. Ethics statement The animal study was reviewed and approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Changchun University of Chinese Medicine. Author contributions DL, WL, HL, and JH were responsible for the experiment design and drafting of the manuscript. JH, XZ, ZG, PW, JZ, YX, and YuL performed experiments. JH, JF, YiL, and YZ analyzed data. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. Funding This study was supported by the Changchun Science and Technology Development Project [Grant No. 21ST03], the Jilin Province Traditional Chinese Medicine Science and Technology Project [Grant No. 2022129], the Jilin Province Young Science and Technology Talent Support Project [Grant No. QT202228], and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation [Grant No. 2022M713867]. Acknowledgments The authors would like to express their gratitude to EditSprings (https://www.editsprings.cn) for the expert linguistic services provided. Conflict of interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher's note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Supplementary material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2022.1067725/full#supplementary-material Supplementary Figure S1. Effect of AA on the expression of IRF3 and p-IRF3. (A) Western blot analysis of IRF3 and p-IRF3 protein expression changes after Atractyloside A treatment of A549. References Al-Karmalawy, A. A., Soltane, R., Abo Elmaaty, A., Tantawy, M. A., Antar, S. A., Yahya, G., et al. (2021). Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) control between drug repurposing and vaccination: a comprehensive overview. Vaccines (Basel) 9. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111317 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Banete, A., Barilo, J., Whittaker, R., and Basta, S. (2021). The activated macrophage - a tough fortress for virus invasion: how viruses strike back. Front. Microbiol. 12, 803427. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.803427 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Belongia, E. A., Simpson, M. D., King, J. P., Sundaram, M. E., Kelley, N. S., Osterholm, M. T., et al. (2016). Variable influenza vaccine effectiveness by subtype: a systematic review and meta-analysis of test-negative design studies. Lancet Infect. Dis. 16, 942–951. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(16)00129-8 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Feng, L. Z., Peng, Z. B., Wang, D. Y., Yang, P., Yang, J., Zhang, Y. Y., et al. (2018). Technical guidelines for seasonal influenza vaccination in China, 2018-2019. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi 39, 1413–1425. PubMed Abstract | Google Scholar Ferdinands, J. M., Fry, A. M., Reynolds, S., Petrie, J., Flannery, B., Jackson, M. L., et al. (2017). Intraseason waning of influenza vaccine protection: evidence from the US Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness Network, 2011-12 through 2014-15. Clin. Infect. Dis. 64, 544–550. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciw816 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Han, J., Perez, J., Schafer, A., Cheng, H., Peet, N., Rong, L., et al. (2018). Influenza virus: small molecule therapeutics and mechanisms of antiviral resistance. Curr. Med. Chem. 25, 5115–5127. doi: 10.2174/0929867324666170920165926 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Han, J. C., Li, Q. X., Fang, J. B., Zhang, J. Y., Li, Y. Q., Li, S. Z., et al. (2021). GII.P16-GII.2 recombinant norovirus VLPs polarize macrophages into the M1 phenotype for Th1 immune responses. Front. Immunol. 12, 781718. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.781718 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Huang, W. J., Cheng, Y. H., Tan, M. J., Liu, J., Li, X. Y., Zeng, X. X., et al. (2022). Epidemiological and virological surveillance of influenza viruses in China during 2020-2021. Infect. Dis. Poverty 11, 74. doi: 10.1186/s40249-022-01002-x PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Jackson, M. L., Chung, J. R., Jackson, L. A., Phillips, C. H., Benoit, J., Monto, A. S., et al. (2017). Influenza vaccine effectiveness in the United States during the 2015-2016 season. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 534–543. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1700153 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Jiang, D., Wang, Q., Bai, Z., Qi, H., Ma, J., Liu, W., et al. (2020). Could environment affect the mutation of H1N1 influenza virus? Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17. doi: 10.3390/ijerph17093092 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Keech, M., and Beardsworth, P. (2008). The impact of influenza on working days lost: a review of the literature. Pharmacoeconomics 26, 911–924. doi: 10.2165/00019053-200826110-00004 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Lyons, D. M., and Lauring, A. S. (2018). Mutation and epistasis in influenza virus evolution. Viruses 10. doi: 10.3390/v10080407 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Mozhgani, S. H., Zarei Ghobadi, M., Moeini, S., Pakzad, R., Kananizadeh, P., Behzadian, F., et al. (2018). Prevalence of human influenza virus in Iran: evidence from a systematic review and meta-analysis. Microb. Pathog. 115, 168–174. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.12.064 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Paules, C., and Subbarao, K. (2017). Influenza. Lancet 390, 697–708. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30129-0 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Paules, C. I., Sullivan, S. G., Subbarao, K., and Fauci, A. S. (2018). Chasing seasonal influenza - the need for a universal influenza vaccine. N. Engl. J. Med. 378, 7–9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp1714916 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Petrova, V. N., and Russell, C. A. (2018). The evolution of seasonal influenza viruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 16, 60. doi: 10.1038rmicro.2017.118 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Reed, C., Chaves, S. S., Daily Kirley, P., Emerson, R., Aragon, D., Hancock, E. B., et al. (2015). Estimating influenza disease burden from population-based surveillance data in the United States. PLoS ONE 10, e0118369. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118369 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Shaw, M. W., Xu, X., Li, Y., Normand, S., Ueki, R. T., Kunimoto, G. Y., et al. (2002). Reappearance and global spread of variants of influenza B/Victoria/2/87 lineage viruses in the 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 seasons. Virology 303, 1–8. doi: 10.1006/viro.2002.1719 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Shen, Z., Lou, K., and Wang, W. (2015). New small-molecule drug design strategies for fighting resistant influenza A. Acta. Pharm. Sin. B. 5, 419–430. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.07.006 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Tu, J., Xie, Y., Xu, K., Qu, L., Lin, X., Ke, C., et al. (2020). Treatment of spleen-deficiency syndrome with Atractyloside A from bran-processed Atractylodes lancea by protection of the intestinal mucosal barrier. Front. Pharmacol. 11, 583160. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.583160 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Uyeki, T. M. (2017). Influenza. Ann. Intern. Med. 167, ITC33–ITC48. doi: 10.7326/AITC201709050 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Webster, R. G., Bean, W. J., Gorman, O. T., Chambers, T. M., and Kawaoka, Y. (1992). Evolution and ecology of influenza A viruses. Microbiol. Rev. 56, 152–179. doi: 10.1128/mr.56.1.152-179.1992 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Wille, M., and Holmes, E. C. (2020). The ecology and evolution of influenza viruses. Cold Spring. Harb. Perspect. Med. 10. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a038489 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Yamayoshi, S., and Kawaoka, Y. (2019). Current and future influenza vaccines. Nat. Med. 25, 212–220. doi: 10.1038/s41591-018-0340-z PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Yen, H. L. (2016). Current and novel antiviral strategies for influenza infection. Curr. Opin. Virol. 18, 126–134. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2016.05.004 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Yin, H., Jiang, N., Shi, W., Chi, X., Liu, S., Chen, J. L., et al. (2021). Development and effects of influenza antiviral drugs. Molecules 26. doi: 10.3390/molecules26040810 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Yoon, S. W., Webby, R. J., and Webster, R. G. (2014). Evolution and ecology of influenza A viruses. Curr. Top Microbiol. Immunol. 385, 359–375. doi: 10.1007/82_2014_396 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Yunna, C., Mengru, H., Lei, W., and Weidong, C. (2020). Macrophage M1/M2 polarization. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 877, 173090. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2020.173090 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Keywords: Atractyloside A, antiviral drugs, macrophage polarization, influenza virus, influenza B virus (IBV) Citation: Han J, Zhu X, Gao Z, Xiao Y, Zhang J, Wang P, Fang J, Li Y, Zhu Y, Li Y, Jin N, Lu H, Lin D and Liu W (2023) Antiviral effects of Atractyloside A on the influenza B virus (Victoria strain) infection. Front. Microbiol. 13:1067725. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1067725 Received: 12 October 2022; Accepted: 08 December 2022; Published: 10 January 2023. Edited by: Mookkan Prabakaran, Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, Singapore Reviewed by: Ahmed Mostafa, National Research Centre, Egypt Irene Ramos, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, United States Copyright © 2023 Han, Zhu, Gao, Xiao, Zhang, Wang, Fang, Li, Zhu, Li, Jin, Lu, Lin and Liu. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. *Correspondence: Ningyi Jin, ningyik@126.com; Huijun Lu, huijun_lu@126.com; Dazhuan Lin, 184312788@qq.com; Wenshen Liu, liuws85952@163.com Disclaimer: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Footer Guidelines Author guidelinesEditor guidelinesPolicies and publication ethicsFee policy Explore ArticlesResearch Topics Journals Outreach Frontiers Forum Frontiers Policy Labs Frontiers for Young Minds Connect Help centerEmails and alerts Contact us SubmitCareer opportunities Follow us © 2024 Frontiers Media S.A. All rights reserved Privacy policy | Terms and conditionsWhy flu and strep A can be so serious in children - ABC News ABC NewsVideoLiveShowsElections538ShopStream onLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 11, 8:23 PM ETNational Election Results: presidential Projection: Trump is President-elect226312226312Harris71,584,833270 to winTrump74,896,505Expected vote reporting: 95%Recent ProjectionsColo. Dist. 8Projected WinnerGabe Evans•R1 day agoAriz.PresidentProjected WinnerDonald Trump•R2 days agoNational Election Results: house205214205214Dem.214 up for electionLost: 2218 for controlestimateRep.221 up for electionGained: 2Undecided races of the 2024 election: Live results and analysisLive resultsUpdated: Nov. 11, 4:53 PM ET4:53 PMRep. Stefanik’s U.N. appointment to trigger special election in New York3:24 PMHow all the intraparty House races turned outWhy flu and strep A can be so serious in children The CDC has been monitoring a rise in strep A cases in kids compared to normal.ByMary KekatosJanuary 13, 2023, 5:10 AM1:35STOCK PHOTO/Getty ImagesAmid a flu season that started earlier than expected there's also been a higher number of strep A cases in children this year.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued an advisory warning last month about the increase to make sure clinicians and public health authorities know how to identify and treat the infection.While each disease can turn into a serious case on its own, in rare cases, the two can infect people, particularly children, at once and lead to severe, or even fatal, complications, according to health experts.MORE: Is the US facing a potential 'tripledemic' of flu, RSV and COVID-19?A 5-year-old boy from Greenville, Michigan, died on New Year's Eve after testing positive for the flu and then developing strep A, according to ABC News Grand Rapids affiliate WZZM.Public health experts said influenza can weaken the immune system, which can then make people -- including children -- susceptible to secondary infections.STOCK PHOTO/Getty Images"Influenza is a respiratory virus, meaning it infects the nasal passages, the passages of the back of your throat, and then the lining of the lungs," Dr. Lori Handy, an attending physician in the division of infectious diseases at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, told ABC News. "Anytime those areas are particularly irritated, they break down some of your normal immune defenses that would protect against secondary bacterial infections and the bacteria really take advantage of that breakdown and go ahead and enter your body."There are several pathways by which the immune system response can breakdown as a result of flu infection. One Yale University study found flu triggers an increase in levels of serum glucocorticoid, a steroid hormone, which suppresses the immune system.Dr. Sam Dominguez, an infectious disease specialist at Children's Hospital Colorado, said there is also evidence the flu can decrease macrophages, a type of immune system cell that destroys bacteria and other organisms, or that the virus allows bacteria to adhere better to respiratory cells."That allows bacteria to gain entry into the body more easily and so that's an advantage that the bacteria can utilize if you had an influenza infection," he told ABC News.Although it's not incredibly common to see children with this type of co-infection, doctors said they do see cases every year.MORE: Nearly all states reporting 'very high' or 'high' levels of flu-like illness: CDCDominguez said he and his colleagues in the hospital are "definitely seeing more cases this year than last year."Children's hospitals and health agencies across the U.S. have been observing an increase in cases of invasive group A strep infections among kids.Strep A typically causes about 1,500 to 2,300 deaths in the U.S. every year, according to the CDC.The CDC told ABC News it has seen childhood strep A infections in late 2022 return to levels seen during pre-pandemic years, and that it is monitoring the situation."CDC issued a health advisory on Dec. 22 to notify clinicians and public health authorities about an increase in pediatric invasive group A streptococcal, or iGAS, infections. The advisory highlights the importance of early recognition and appropriate treatment of these diseases," the CDC said in its statement.STOCK PHOTO/Getty Images"It's too soon to say whether iGAS case numbers are rising beyond what we would normally expect from GAS seasonal patterns, pre-pandemic. The overall number of iGAS cases is relatively low and iGAS infections are rare," the statement continued.The experts stressed the importance of making sure parents get their children vaccinated against the flu if they haven't done so already.As of Dec. 24 -- the latest date for which data is available -- 47.5% of all children have received a flu vaccine, according to CDC data."The influenza vaccine is very good at preventing severe disease in terms of saving you from getting hospitalized or dying of influenza and then, second of all, it prevents you from getting the secondary bacterial infections on top of that," Dominguez said.MORE: Health officials make urgent push for flu and COVID shots as hospitals feel the strainWhile young children and children with underlying health conditions are at higher risk for severe flu disease or hospitalization, even relatively healthy children can develop complications."While parents may feel like, 'My child generally doesn't get sick, I'm going to skip vaccine this year,' we see generally healthy children get severely ill both from influenza and then complicated bacterial infections after," Handy said. "So, we really need everybody to be vaccinated to keep everybody out of the hospital, and also just reduce transmission within the community. So, it's about both protecting yourself but then protecting all of those people you come in contact with."They also recommended that families follow the same advice offered throughout the course of the pandemic including thoroughly washing your hands, staying home when sick and speaking to your primary care doctor.ABC News' Emma Egan, Nicole Wetsman and Dr. Nicole McLean contributed to this report.Related TopicsFlu SeasonPopular ReadsTrump's plan for education in his second term3 hours agoSotomayor has no plans to resign: SourcesNov 10, 4:27 PMArrest in fatal shooting at Tuskegee UniversityNov 10, 6:35 PMMissing American tourist in Hungary killed: PoliceNov 9, 1:36 PM538's final forecasts for the 2024 electionNov 5, 7:49 AMABC News Live24/7 coverage of breaking news and live eventsABC News NetworkAbout Nielsen MeasurementChildren's Online Privacy PolicyContact UsDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationInterest-Based AdsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseYour US State Privacy Rights © 2024 ABC NewsEC approves influenza antiviral for children over one years old RecommendedNew webinar with Fujifilm: Monocyte activation test (MAT): Insight into examining regulations and markets prospectsNew webinar: The path to optimisation in pharmaceutical microbiologyJoin our webinar: An alternative medium to support sterility testing using the Growth Direct® Rapid Sterility SystemDiscover more in our new application note: validating recombinant cascade reagents in 3 simple steps About us | Advertise with us | Contact us MenuHomeAI HubNewsArticlesVideosPodcastsPublicationsWhitepapers/App Notes/PostersWebinarsContent HubsEventsThe Future of Bio Pharmaceutical Analysis 2024 (Online Summit)PHARMA MICROBIOLOGY – Navigating Compliance and Best Practices (Online Summit)Pharma 4.0: Breakfast BriefingThe Future of Pharmaceutical Analysis 2023 (Online Summit)Industry EventsAnalytical techniquesBiopharmaDrug deliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegs & Legs newsEC approves influenza antiviral for children over one years old0SHARES Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardPosted: 12 January 2023 | Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) | No comments yetXofluza® offers the first novel mechanism of action for an influenza antiviral to be approved by the European Commission in almost 20 years. The European Commission (EC) has approved Xofluza® (baloxavir marboxil) in children aged one year and above for uncomplicated influenza and post-exposure prophylaxis of influenza. The European Commission’s approvalThe agency’s regulatory approval, based on the results of two Phase III studies, marks the first single-dose, oral influenza medicine approved in Europe for children.Dr Levi Garraway, PhD, Roche’s Chief Medical Officer and Head of Global Product Development explained the oral antiviral “… offers patients the first novel mechanism of action for treating influenza approved in Europe in almost 20 years.” Phase III studies for Xofluza®The miniSTONE-2 study showed that compared with oseltamivir, Xofluza® reduced the length of time that influenza was released from the body by more than two days compared with oseltamivir (viral replication; median time of 24.2 hours versus 75.8 hours, respectively). Xofluza was well tolerated with no new safety signals identified. The Phase III study evaluated a single-dose of Xofluza® in otherwise healthy children aged one to less than 12 years with influenza infection and displaying influenza symptoms for no more than 48 hours (temperature of 38°C or over, and one or more respiratory symptoms).In the BLOCKSTONE study, compared with placebo, Xofluza® reduced the risk of people developing influenza after exposure to an infected household member by 86 percent versus placebo after just a single oral dose. The proportion of households, who developed laboratory-confirmed clinical influenza was 1.9 percent in participants treated with Xofluza® and 13.6 percent in the placebo-treated group. Xofluza® was well tolerated in this study and no new safety signals were identified.“We are delighted that the European Commission has approved Xofluza® for children aged one year and above, as influenza can be particularly dangerous for younger children,” added Dr Garraway.Xofluza® is the first in a class of antivirals designed to inhibit the cap-dependent endonuclease protein, which is essential for viral replication, according to research published in the New England Journal of Medicine.Related topicsBig Pharma, Biopharmaceuticals, Clinical Trials, Dosage, Drug Development, Drug Safety, Regulation & Legislation, Research & Development (R&D), Therapeutics, VirusesRelated organisationsEuropean Commission (EC), RocheRelated drugsXofluzaRelated peopleDr Levi GarrawayRelated diseases & conditionsInfluenza, prophylaxis By Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review)12 January 2023No comments yetShares0 Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardRelated topicsBig Pharma, Biopharmaceuticals, Clinical Trials, Dosage, Drug Development, Drug Safety, Regulation & Legislation, Research & Development (R&D), Therapeutics, VirusesRelated organisationsEuropean Commission (EC), RocheRelated drugsXofluzaRelated peopleDr Levi GarrawayRelated diseases & conditionsInfluenza, prophylaxis Most popular...Final Chapter text published for early adoptionFirst-of-a-kind EU approval granted for eosinophilic esophagitis medicineEncouraging data revealed for schizophrenia long-acting injectablesInnovative static culturing method developedSingle-use bioreactor market to witness favourable expansion to 2030 Read the latest issueAll subscriptions include online membership, giving you access to the journal and exclusive content. Download free copyRelated content webinarDefining the right digital strategy for oncology: What do you want to measure?By newsUK needs RNA workforce “fit for the future”By Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) articleAre we set for the revised EU GMP Annex 1?By newsNew polymer-based drug delivery system developed for tuberculosisBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsVaccines “essential” for addressing AMR, says WHOBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment *Name * Email * Website ContentNewsArticlesMagazineWhitepapers & App NotesEventsWebinarsVideosCompany ProfilesTopicsAnalytical TechniquesBiopharmaDrug DeliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegulation & LegislationAdvertising & EditorialAdvertising OpportunitiesAdvertising Tech SpecsAdvisory BoardInformation for AuthorsMedia PlannerPermission to reuse our contentWrite for us | Advertise with us Contact Subscribe TodayT: +44 (0)1959 563311 F: +44 (0)1959 563123 Company InformationEuropean Pharmaceutical Review is published by: Russell Publishing Ltd.Court LodgeHogtrough HillBrasted, Kent, TN16 1NUUnited KingdomAboutCareers @ Russell PublishingTerms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyManage your cookies© Russell Publishing Limited, 2010-2024. All rights reserved.Website development by e-Motive Media Limited. This website uses cookies to enable, optimise and analyse site operations, as well as to provide personalised content and allow you to connect to social media. By clicking "I agree" you consent to the use of cookies for non-essential functions and the related processing of personal data. You can adjust your cookie and associated data processing preferences at any time via our "Cookie Settings". Please view our Cookie Policy to learn more about the use of cookies on our website.Manage your cookies I agreeCookie Settings Close Cookie SettingsThis website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as ”Necessary” are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. For our other types of cookies “Advertising & Targeting”, “Analytics” and “Performance”, these help us analyse and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these different types of cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. You can adjust the available sliders to ‘Enabled’ or ‘Disabled’, then click ‘Save and Accept’. View our Cookie Policy page. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncookielawinfo-checkbox-advertising-targetingThe cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Advertising & Targeting".cookielawinfo-checkbox-analyticsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Analytics".cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessaryThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".cookielawinfo-checkbox-performanceThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Performance".PHPSESSIDThis cookie is native to PHP applications. The cookie is used to store and identify a users' unique session ID for the purpose of managing user session on the website. The cookie is a session cookies and is deleted when all the browser windows are closed.viewed_cookie_policyThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data.zmember_loggedThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls whether you are able to see content which is only available to logged in users. Performance performancePerformance cookies are includes cookies that deliver enhanced functionalities of the website, such as caching. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncf_ob_infoThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and, in conjunction with the cookie 'cf_use_ob', is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.cf_use_obThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.free_subscription_onlyThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls which types of content you are able to access.ls_smartpushThis cookie is set by Litespeed Server and allows the server to store settings to help improve performance of the site.one_signal_sdk_dbThis cookie is set by OneSignal push notifications and is used for storing user preferences in connection with their notification permission status.YSCThis cookie is set by Youtube and is used to track the views of embedded videos. Analytics analyticsAnalytics cookies collect information about your use of the content, and in combination with previously collected information, are used to measure, understand, and report on your usage of this website.CookieDescriptionbcookieThis cookie is set by LinkedIn. The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.GPSThis cookie is set by YouTube and registers a unique ID for tracking users based on their geographical locationlangThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.lidcThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.lisscThis cookie is set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.vuidWe embed videos from our official Vimeo channel. When you press play, Vimeo will drop third party cookies to enable the video to play and to see how long a viewer has watched the video. This cookie does not track individuals.wow.anonymousIdThis cookie is set by Spotler and tracks an anonymous visitor ID.wow.scheduleThis cookie is set by Spotler and enables it to track the Load Balance Session Queue.wow.sessionThis cookie is set by Spotler to track the Internet Information Services (IIS) session state.wow.utmvaluesThis cookie is set by Spotler and stores the UTM values for the session. UTM values are specific text strings that are appended to URLs that allow Communigator to track the URLs and the UTM values when they get clicked on._gaThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. It stores information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors._gatThis cookies is set by Google Universal Analytics to throttle the request rate to limit the collection of data on high traffic sites._gidThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visited in an anonymous form. Advertising & Targeting advertising-targetingAdvertising and targeting cookies help us provide our visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns.CookieDescriptionadvanced_ads_browser_widthThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the browser width.advanced_ads_page_impressionsThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the number of previous page impressions.advanced_ads_pro_server_infoThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets geo-location, user role and user capabilities. It is used by cache busting in Advanced Ads Pro when the appropriate visitor conditions are used.advanced_ads_pro_visitor_referrerThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets the referrer URL.bscookieThis cookie is a browser ID cookie set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.IDEThis cookie is set by Google DoubleClick and stores information about how the user uses the website and any other advertisement before visiting the website. This is used to present users with ads that are relevant to them according to the user profile.li_sugrThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used for tracking.UserMatchHistoryThis cookie is set by Linkedin and is used to track visitors on multiple websites, in order to present relevant advertisement based on the visitor's preferences.VISITOR_INFO1_LIVEThis cookie is set by YouTube. Used to track the information of the embedded YouTube videos on a website. Save & AcceptEnhancing the protection of influenza virus vaccines with BECC TLR4 adjuvant in aged mice | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Enhancing the protection of influenza virus vaccines with BECC TLR4 adjuvant in aged mice Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 13 January 2023 Enhancing the protection of influenza virus vaccines with BECC TLR4 adjuvant in aged mice Robert Haupt1,2 nAff8, Lauren Baracco1,2, Erin M. Harberts3, Madhumathi Loganathan4, Lucas J. Kerstetter1, Florian Krammer4,5,6, Lynda Coughlan1,7, Robert K. Ernst3 & …Matthew B. Frieman1,2 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 13, Article number: 715 (2023) Cite this article 1891 Accesses 3 Citations 3 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects VaccinesViral infection AbstractInfluenza A virus (IAV) is a leading cause of respiratory disease worldwide often resulting in severe morbidity and mortality. We have previously shown that the Bacterial Enzymatic Combinatorial Chemistry (BECC) adjuvants, BECC438 and BECC470, formulated with an influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) protein vaccine, offer greater protection from influenza virus challenge in mouse respiratory models using adult mice than standard HA:adjuvant combinations. In this study, we determined that immunization with HA + BECC adjuvants also significantly broadened the epitopes targeted on HA as compared with other adjuvants, resulting in increased titers of antibodies directed against the highly conserved HA stalk domain. Importantly, we demonstrate that BECC470 combined with an influenza virus HA protein antigen in a prime-only immunization regimen was able to achieve complete protection from challenge in a ~ 12-month-old mouse aged model. Together, this demonstrates the heightened protection provided by the BECC470 adjuvant in an influenza virus vaccine model and shows the enhanced immune response, as compared to other adjuvants elicited by the formulation of HA with BECC470. Similar content being viewed by others Effective inactivated influenza vaccine for the elderly using a single-stranded RNA-based adjuvant Article Open access 07 June 2021 Mastoparan-7 adjuvanted COBRA H1 and H3 hemagglutinin influenza vaccines Article Open access 14 June 2024 A vaccine combination of lipid nanoparticles and a cholera toxin adjuvant derivative greatly improves lung protection against influenza virus infection Article 17 August 2020 IntroductionInfluenza viruses cause mild to severe respiratory infections in humans and are a major public health problem. According to the World Health Organization, seasonal influenza viruses, including the H1N1 and H3N2 influenza A viruses (IAV), as well as influenza B viruses, cause approximately 3–5 million severe cases and 290,000–650,000 deaths each year worldwide1. The standard quadrivalent influenza virus vaccine most prevalent in use today in the US consists of four different HA antigens (15 μg per HA antigen, depending on vaccine formulation) derived from individual influenza viruses; two influenza A viruses and two influenza B viruses and is administered to individuals greater than 6 months of age and is normally unadjuvanted2. The Center for Disease Control (CDC) reports that vaccination reduces the risk of influenza illness by between 40 and 60% among the overall population during seasons when most circulating influenza viruses are well-matched to the influenza vaccine3.Disadvantages of current seasonal influenza vaccines are the fact that they elicit largely strain-specific antibody responses directed towards the antigenically variable HA head domain. In addition to the globular head domain, the HA trimer possesses a highly conserved stalk domain. The amino acid sequence of the HA stalk is reasonably well conserved between distinct influenza viruses, and it is therefore a major target for universal influenza virus vaccines4. As such, there is great interest in exploring adjuvants which could increase both the magnitude and breadth of the humoral immune response elicited by conventional HA-based vaccines. Older adults display significantly reduced influenza-specific antibody responses compared with young adults and/or fail to maintain durable antibody titers indicative of immune protection (termed “seroprotection”)5,6,7,8,9,10. For individuals 65 and older, Fluzone high-dose quadrivalent includes a dose of 60 μg of HA, or FLUAD™, specifically designed as a trivalent vaccine (now also available as a quadrivalent) with a standard dose of the HA antigen (15 μg of each HA antigen) formulated with the adjuvant MF5911,12. MF59 is an oil-in-water emulsion of squalene oil, which helps create a more potent and durable immune response after vaccination in elderly individuals13.Adjuvants boost immune protectionAdjuvants are components used in vaccines to enhance an immune response14. Recombinant protein-based vaccines in general as well as some inactivated viral vaccines—especially when split or partially purified, while more tolerable to the vaccinee, are often poorly immunogenic and require additional components to help stimulate the production of protective antibodies and effector T cell functions15. These vaccines can be formulated with adjuvants to enhance their immunogenicity.We have used the Bacterial Enzymatic Combinatorial Chemistry (BECC) technology to generate novel lipid A based adjuvants16,17. More specifically, BECC438 and BECC470 were derived from the backbone structure of non-immunogenic Y. pestis lipid A and screened using reporter cell lines and flow cytometry for the ability to activate NFκB and cytokine production13,14. BECC438 is bis-phosphorylated (1 and 4′ position) with two secondary C16 acyl-chains at the 2 and 2′ positions14,15. BECC470 is mono-phosphorylated (1′ position) and has a C14 secondary acyl-chain added at the 4′ position along with a secondary C16 acyl-chain at the 2 position. These differences in BECC adjuvant lipid A structure have been shown to stimulate an innate immune response greater than phosphorylated hexa-acyl disaccharide (PHAD), a monophosphorylated lipid A, but less than E. coli16,17.Previously, we showed that novel BECC-derived BECC438 and BECC470 stimulate a balanced Th1/Th2 immune response and elicit protection from homologous influenza virus infection and in 6–8-week-old mice, with either prime-boost or prime only vaccination schedule18. BECC’s balanced response provided superior protection from weight loss, lung viral titer reduction, and reduction of adverse lung pathology, when compared to the Th2-driven adjuvant alhydrogel (alum), an aluminum salt or Th1-driven PHAD, a toll like receptor (TLR) 4 ligand and synthetic monophosphoryl lipid A (4′ position).In this manuscript, we demonstrate that BECC470 combined with an influenza virus HA from A/California/04/09 (Cal/09, H1N1) is able to protect ~ 12-month-old mice using a prime only or prime/boost vaccination schedule, that passive transfer of antibody from vaccinated mice can partially protect naïve mice, and that the BECC470 adjuvant broadens antibody responses towards conserved epitopes on the HA stalk. Identifying vaccine candidates or formulations which can elicit antibodies directed towards the HA stalk domain, is a major goal for universal influenza virus vaccine development19,20. We find that a significant increase in stalk binding antibodies are induced with BECC470/HA vaccination compared to other adjuvants combined with the same HA antigen. Together this demonstrates the unique effect of the BECC470 adjuvant in an influenza virus vaccine model in mice.ResultsProtection in aged mice with BECC-adjuvanted vaccineUsing young adult (6–8-week-old) mice, we previously reported protection from IAV challenge after vaccination with H1 (A/California/04/2009) formulated with BECC438 and BECC47016; 0.04 μg rHA elicited protection from homologous challenge in formulations adjuvanted with 50 μg BECC438 or BECC470, unlike those adjuvanted with 100 μg of alum or 50 μg PHAD16. As a follow-up to these experiments, we wanted to assess adjuvant induced protection in aged (~ 12-month-old) mice to determine if immunosenescence observed in aging could be recovered through the use of the BECC-based adjuvant system.To assess protection in aged animals, we prime-boost vaccinated groups of mice (5/group) with 0.04 μg rHA in combination with 100 μg alum, 50 μg PHAD, 50 μg BECC438, or 50 μg BECC470 and measured H1-specific antibody responses by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). While total and isotype subclass specific H1-specific IgG titers from day 28 sera showed high titers of BECC-induced antibody in the younger adult mice (not shown), in aged mice only the BECC470 adjuvanted vaccine stimulated a strong response in H1-specific total IgG (p < 0.0001), IgG2a (p = 0.0022) and IgG1 (p = 0.0013) (Fig. 1a–c enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) line graphs and corresponding Fig. 1d–f AUC bar graphs). After homologous challenge with 32,000 plaque forming units (PFU) of IAV A/Netherlands/602/09 (NL/09, H1N1, antigenically similar to Cal/09, all groups of aged mice including the BECC438 group, lost weight similar to the sham infected cohort with the exception of those vaccinated with the BECC470 adjuvant (Fig. 1g). Correspondingly, significant lung viral titers were detected in all groups except those mice vaccinated with BECC470 (Fig. 1h). Despite reduced lung viral titers, histology and inflammation scoring showed some moderate bronchiolar and periarterial inflammation in the BECC470 group (Supplemental Fig. 1 and Fig. 1i).Figure 1Protection of aged mice following prime + boost vaccination (0.04 μg HA). (a) Pre-infection day 28 H1-specific serum ELISA total IgG, (b) isotype subclass specific IgG2a and (c) IgG1 of aged BALB/c mice vaccinated with 0.04 µg Cal/09 rHA protein in combination with 100 µg alum, 50 µg PHAD, 50 BECC438 or 50 µg BECC470 adjuvant in prime + boost schedule (mean ± SEM). Area under the curve (AUC) (mean ± standard error of the mean) of above serum ELISA curves for (d) total IgG (****p < 0.0001), (e) IgG2a (**p = 0.0022) and (f) IgG1 (**p = 0.0013). (g) 7-day weight loss in BALB/c mice (5 per group) after infection with 32,000 PFU of NL/09 (mean ± SEM). (h) Virus titer of lung homogenate 7-days post infection (mean ± SEM) with (i) pathology inflammation scoring of lung histology slides (mean ± SEM). Prism 9 used to calculate mean + SEM and AUC ± standard error.Full size imagePrime only dose of BECC-adjuvanted vaccine provides protection in aged micePreviously, in 6–8-week-old mice, we showed that a single, prime-only dose of either BECC438 or BECC470-adjuvanted vaccine provides protection from homologous IAV challenge. In that study, mice displayed minimal to no weight loss when immunized with 5 μg rHA in combination with either 50 μg BECC438 or BECC470. In this study, we used a prime-only vaccination schedule to assess the immune response and/or protection with a single dose in an aged mouse cohort using 12-month-old, female, BALB/c, retired breeder mice (5/group). Mice were immunized with 5 μg of rHA in combination with either 50 μg BECC438 or BECC470. Serum from day 28 (pre-infection) vaccination groups was assessed for H1-specific total IgG (Fig. 2a,d) and isotype subclass specific IgG2a (Fig. 2b,e) and IgG1 (Fig. 2c,f). Total IgG, IgG2a and IgG1 antibody production was minimal in both the sham and rHA-only groups, however, significantly higher antibody titers were found in BECC470 adjuvanted groups (p = 0.0258, p = 0.0484 and p = 0.0259 respectively). At day 28, these aged mice were infected with 32,000 PFU of IAV H1N1 NL/09 and weighed for seven days. Protection from morbidity (i.e. weight loss) in BECC adjuvanted groups was superior to the sham and rHA-only groups, with minimal weight loss for + BECC groups as compared with > 20% weight loss for rHA-only and sham animals which were not protected. Interestingly, while prime-boost vaccination with 50 μg of BECC438 adjuvant in combination with 0.04 μg rHA was not protective in aged mice (as shown in Fig. 2), a single, day 0 vaccination with 50 μg of BECC438 adjuvant in combination with a higher dose of 5 μg rHA antigen was now sufficient to protect from weight loss. Again, BECC470 adjuvanted vaccine weight loss protection was superior to BECC438 (Fig. 2g). Virus titer was approximately 1 × 105 PFU/g in both the sham and rHA only groups, whereas the BECC438 and BECC470 adjuvanted groups showed no detectable viral titer in day 7 lung homogenates (Fig. 2h). Histology for the sham group was similar to the rHA only group, with pronounced bronchiolar and periarterial inflammation, and moderate bronchiolar necrosis. These pathologies were similar in the BECC438 group with decreased infiltration in the alveolar spaces. All pathology, however, was mitigated in the BECC470 group when 5 μg rHA was used (Supplemental Fig. 2). Inflammation scores in all but the BECC470 adjuvanted group were likewise elevated according to pathology with reduced bronchiolar and periarterial inflammation observed for the BECC470 group (Fig. 2i).Figure 2Protection of aged mice following prime-only vaccination (5 μg HA). (a) Pre-infection day 28 H1-specific serum ELISA total IgG, (b) isotype subclass specific IgG2a and (c) IgG1 of aged BALB/c mice vaccinated with 5 µg Cal/09 rHA protein in combination with 50 BECC438 or 50 µg BECC470 adjuvant in prime only schedule (mean ± SEM). (b) Area under the curve (AUC) (mean ± standard error) of ELISA curves for (d) total IgG (*p = 0.0258), (e) IgG2a (*p = 0.0484) and (f) IgG1 (*p = 0.0259). (g) 7-day weight loss in BALB/c mice (5 per group) after infection with 32,000 PFU of NL/09 (mean ± SEM). (h) Virus titer of lung homogenate 7-days post infection (mean ± SEM) with (i) pathology inflammation scoring of lung histology slides (mean ± SEM). Prism 9 used to calculate mean ± SEM and AUC ± standard error of the mean.Full size imageBECC adjuvant induced antibody reduces disease burdenTo test the protective capacity of antibody alone against weight loss, sera from vaccinated young adult mice was passively transferred intraperitoneally (IP) into groups of naïve, 6–8-week-old young adult BALB/c mice and these mice were then challenged with 3200 PFU of homologous IAV H1N1 NL/09. Serum from young adult mice was collected after a prime-boost immunization scheme (day 0 and day 14) with 0.04 μg rHA in combination with either 100 μg alum, 50 μg PHAD, 50 μg BECC438, or 50 μg BECC470. Briefly, whole blood was collected on day 28 via cardiac puncture, serum was separated and then pooled by group. Prior to transfer of pooled serum, we verified that H1-specific total IgG antibody titers. Total IgG levels were determined to be similar to sham in the rHA only, alum, and PHAD groups. The BECC adjuvanted groups, however, showed markedly higher H1-specific IgG antibody titers as compared to all other groups (Fig. 3a,b).Figure 3Protection from homologous H1N1 challenge with prophylactic or therapeutic passive transfer of vaccination sera. (a) Pooled, day-28 serum H1-specific ELISA total IgG of young adult BALB/c mice vaccinated with 0.04 µg Cal/09 rHA protein in combination with 100 µg alum, 50 µg PHAD 50 µg BECC438 or 50 µg BECC470 adjuvant in prime-boost schedule (mean ± SEM). (b) AUC of pooled, pre-infection total IgG antibody titer curve (mean). (c) 7-day weight loss (mean ± SEM) of BALB/c mice IP-injected with 100 µL vaccination sera (by group) and infected 2 h later with 3200 PFU NL/09 (**p = 0.008). (d) Virus titer (mean + SEM) of mouse lung homogenate in (c), 7-days post-infection. (e) Pathology inflammation scoring (mean ± SEM) of lung histology slides of mice in (c), 7-days post-infection. (f) 7-day weight loss (mean ± SEM) of BALB/c mice infected with 3200 PFU NL/09 and IP-injected with 100 µL vaccination sera (by group) at day 1 and day 3 post-infection (*p = 0.0288). (g) Virus titer (mean ± SEM) of mouse lung homogenate in (f), 7-days post-infection. (h) Pathology inflammation scoring (mean ± SEM) of mouse lung histology slides in (f), 7-days post-infection.Full size imageTo test how vaccine sera could protect aged mice, we IP-injected 100 μL of untreated serum from the full range of vaccine groups into adult mice (5/group), waited for two hours for antibody absorption then i.n. infected the mice with 3200 PFU of IAV NL/09 virus. By day 7 post-infection, the mice that received sera from BECC438 and BECC470 vaccinated mice showed a significant difference (p = 0.008) in weight loss protection over the rHA-only vaccination group (Fig. 3c). Although there was greater weight loss with passive transfer of sera as compared to prime-boost vaccination (Fig. 2g), there was still a significant improvement in BECC-adjuvanted weight loss protection over the other infected groups, even with similar virus titer (Fig. 3d), lung infiltration (Supplemental Fig. 3), and inflammation (Fig. 3e) as compared to non-BECC groups. Passive transfer of 100 µL of sera shows at least partial protection from weight loss, suggesting that multiple parameters of the immune response may contribute to overall protection from challenge21,22.We also evaluated the contribution of immune sera in a post-exposure, therapeutic model, in which we i.n. infected groups of adult mice (5/group) with 3200 PFU of IAV NL/09 virus and then IP-injected them with 100 μL of untreated BECC438 or BECC470 serum at day 1 and day 3 after infection (200 μL each mouse total). Mice given BECC470 convalescent serum showed significant protection from weight loss over the BECC438 group, which were similar to the sham “no sera” group (Fig. 3f). While the viral titers in all infected groups were similarly high (Fig. 3g), there was less (p = 0.0288) weight loss in the BECC470 group over those receiving BECC438 vaccine sera. Most striking are the open alveolar space inflammation in the BECC-470-adjuvanted H&E-stained slides, even with marked bronchiolar and periarterial inflammation. The No Sera and BECC438 groups showed marked inflammation and closed alveolar spaces (Fig. 3h and Supplemental Fig. 3).BECC adjuvant drives production of broadly protective HA stalk antibody in adult, but not aged miceThere is increasing interest in evaluating vaccines or adjuvants which are capable of increasing the breadth of the antibody response to influenza virus HA. Therefore, to assess adjuvant-induced production of HA stalk-reactive antibodies, we pooled (by vaccination group) day 28 sera collected from 6 to 8-week-old, female, BALB/c mice and used ELISA to measure total IgG binding to recombinant headless HA21,23. During vaccination, mice received prime (day 0) and boost (day 14) immunizations with 0.04 μg rHA alone or in combination with either 100 μg alum, 50 μg PHAD, 50 μg BECC438, or 50 μg BECC470 adjuvant. Total IgG antibody bound to HA stalk was low in sham and HA-only mice and slightly elevated in groups adjuvanted with alum and PHAD. However, there were significantly higher stalk-specific antibodies observed in groups adjuvanted with BECC438 (p = 0.0208) and BECC470 (p = 0.0136) as compared to PHAD (Fig. 4a,c).Figure 4BECC adjuvants increase binding to conserved HA stalk in young but not aged mice. (a) ELISA (mean) total IgG binding to stalk-only HA. Pooled sera (by group) from day-28 prime-boost vaccinated young adult BALB/c mice vaccinated with 0.04 µg Cal/09 rHA protein in combination with 100 µg alum, 50 µg PHAD, 50 µg BECC438 or 50 µg BECC470 adjuvant. (b) ELISA (mean) total IgG binding to stalk-only HA. Pooled sera from day-28 prime-boost vaccinated aged (12-month-old) BALB/c mice vaccinated with 0.04 µg Cal/09 rHA protein in combination with 100 µg alum, 50 µg PHAD, 50 BECC438 or 50 µg BECC470 adjuvant. (c) AUC (mean) of pre-infection total IgG antibody titer curves of young adult mice in figure (a) above (BECC438 *p = 0.0208 and BECC470 *p = 0.0136). (d) AUC (Mean) of pre-infection total IgG antibody titer curves of aged mice in figure (b) above (ns). (e) AUC (Mean) of pre-infection total IgG antibody titer in aged mice in (d) scaled to young adult mice in (c). (f) ELISA (mean) total IgG binding to HA1-only HA from young adult BALB/c mice pre-infection day-28 serum. (g) ELISA (mean) total IgG binding to HA1-only HA from aged BALB/c mice pre-infection day-28 serum. (h) AUC (mean) of pre-infection total IgG antibody titer curves of young adult BALB/c mice in figure (f) above (BECC438 ***p = 0.0008 and BECC470 ***p = 0.0002). (i) AUC (mean) of pre-infection total IgG antibody titer curves of aged mice in figure (g) above (***p = 0.0005). (j) AUC (mean) of pre-infection total IgG antibody titer in aged mice in (h) scaled to adult mice in (i).Full size imageAs a comparator, we also tested stalk-reactive antibody production to the headless HA antigen in aged, 12-month-old, retired breeder BALB/c mice. Using the same prime-boost vaccination protocol as with young adult mice, pooled day 28 sera from aged mice was evaluated via ELISA to discern any age-altered antibody binding. There was very low IgG binding to recombinant stalk HA in aged mouse sera (no significant difference) (Fig. 4b,d) and when scaled to younger mice the total IgG bound to recombinant stalk protein was negligible (Fig. 4e).Because there was BECC-adjuvanted vaccine protection in young adult mice18 and aged mice (Figs. 2g,h, 3g,h) we followed up stalk binding by testing antibody reactivity to commercially sourced HA1 antigen which includes the HA head domain, but lacks broadly cross-reactive stalk epitopes. In the sera of young adult mice, we not only found significantly higher levels of stalk antibody in BECC438 and BECC470-adjuvanted mice, but the same with HA1-only reactive antibody compared to PHAD (p = 0.0008 and p = 0.0002) (Fig. 4f,h). In aged mice, there was protection from weight loss and decreased pathology with very little stalk-reactive antibody present. In these aged mice, we hypothesize that sterilizing protection was provided by the robust HA1-only antibody which clearly shows a significant difference between the PHAD and BECC470 adjuvanted groups (p = 0.0005) (Fig. 4g,i), even when comparing production in aged mice to young adult mice (Fig. 4j).DiscussionWith age, there is an increasing impairment of our natural immune response to infection17,18. This impairment brings with it a significant health care burden as our population continues to get older. Additionally, due to antigenic drift of seasonal influenza viruses and potential for future emergence of pandemic strains, flexible vaccine production for a robust and broadly protective response is greatly needed in both quantity and quality for all age groups19. The use of an immunostimulating adjuvant could be beneficial for the development of effective B and T cell responses with increased breadth and durability.Several adjuvants have been used in humans to increase the immunogenicity of the accompanying antigen. The squalene-based oil-in-water emulsions, Addavax and MF59 have been used in approved vaccines as they have demonstrated increases in antibody titer when included. Each has an ability to modify the immune response after administration in a vaccine formulation. In this study, Aluminum salts (Alum) and synthetic Monophosphoryl Lipid A (called Phad) were used as adjuvants in our experiments. Addavax, a proprietary compound, and MF59 were not used as comparators due to their need for oil-in-water formulations. The BECC adjuvants allow for simple formulation and still high levels of immunogenicity when combined with antigen in a vaccine and are directly usable for pre-clinical experiments. Additional experiments using alternate BECC formulations will provide comparisons of immunogenicity for its paired antigen over other formulated adjuvants.In our prime-boost vaccine study in aged mice, we showed robust protection from weight loss, superior antibody production, and decreased lung viral titers with the BECC-adjuvanted vaccine (Fig. 1). The BECC470 and other BECC adjuvants have previously been evaluated in vitro for their ability to stimulate a balanced immune response, leading to their selection as adjuvants for analysis16. We have found that using BECC470 as an adjuvant in an Influenza HA vaccine model leads to high protection levels in adult aged mice18. In aged mice, while a low dose of recombinant HA antigen (0.04 μg) in combination with BECC438 did not protect, this same low dose of BECC470-adjuvanted vaccine showed superior protection in mice compared to vaccine adjuvanted with alum, which is widely used in FDA-approved vaccine formulations for human use. BECC470-adjuvanted vaccine likewise outperformed the adjuvant PHAD, another TLR4 agonist. Results in aged mice show superior protection with BECC470 adjuvanted vaccine compared to alum and PHAD, but with surprising lack of protection with BECC438—previously shown to be protective in younger18. These data suggest that adjuvant selection may need to be tailored to specific risk-groups to maximize their ability to enhance protection. Mechanistic studies to precisely determine the mechanism of action, and profile of immune response elicited in different age groups will advance the future clinical use of novel adjuvant formulations.Interestingly, with prime only vaccination using high-dose (5 μg) antigen adjuvanted with BECC438, we increased antibody production and recovered protection from weight loss in aged mice. In this same study, BECC470-adjuvanted vaccine mice maintained significantly higher H1-specific total and IgG specific antibody production and superior protection from weight loss compared to mice vaccinated with BECC438 (Fig. 2). The limited structural differences between BECC438 and BECC470 suggest different binding and signaling to MD2/TLR4 may be involved in this protection difference. Future studies looking at binding efficiency and signaling pathways would help shed light onto the specific causes of these differences and reasons for markedly higher antibody production and weight loss protection.Vaccine effectiveness is often associated with antibody production (e.g., as measured in the hemagglutinin inhibition assay for influenza virus) but, this is not always associated with protection. We have shown that prophylactic passive transfer of antibodies in sera from mice vaccinated with BECC adjuvants provided only partial protection from weight loss (albeit at a significantly higher rate) as compared to all other vaccination groups (Fig. 3). Weight loss, however, is only one part of the protection. While viral lung titer was high in all groups and all passive transfer experiments, in addition to weight loss, there was a marked difference inflammation when antibody treatment was given post-infection. Furthermore, several studies have suggested that effective protection from influenza virus challenge requires cooperation between several immune effectors (i.e. T cells and antibodies)21,22. In a post-exposure therapeutic model, doubling the volume of antibody by administering 100 μL on days 1 and 3 after infection did improve inflammation in the BECC470 group, but did not in the BECC438 group. The bolus of antibody may have reduced virus titer at the cell surface post-infection while there was ongoing viral replication within cells. This is consistent with the method by which stalk-specific antibodies can confer protection in vivo: they recognize HA on the surface of infected cells, bind to stalk epitopes and recruit effector cells such as alveolar macrophages, which facilitate viral clearance and the resolution of infection21,24. Decreased protection with both BECC-adjuvanted serum passive transfers was likely due to the absence of an effective cellular response when compared to protection seen with vaccination. We have shown throughout our experiments that BECC adjuvant has a clear role in amplifying the quantity of antibody production. These passive transfer experiments indicate that while quantity is important for early protection, “fine tuning” of the B and T cell population along with other effector cells is likely important in robust protection. As reported by Goodwin et al.25, the T-cell response is especially important in the aged population due to a diminished antibody production.In addition to stimulating neutralizing antibodies following infection or vaccination, antibodies with Fc-mediated effector function can also play an important role in conferring protection in vivo24,26,27,28. In recent years, it has been shown that non-neutralizing antibodies which target the HA stalk domain and are capable of mediating antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis (ADCP)and complement mediated cytotoxicity (CDC) are vitally important for breadth of protection. To shed light on BECC-adjuvanted vaccine’s role in immune stimulation, we evaluated the extent of antibody binding to recombinant headless HA protein. Stalk-reactive antibodies can result in broader and more robust protection from influenza virus challenge28,29. When we compared the sera from younger adult mice to aged mice, we found that BECC-adjuvanted sera in the younger cohort produced a robust stalk-reactive antibody response to the headless HA antigen. However, in the aged mice there was very little stalk-bound antibody in all groups (Fig. 4).BECC adjuvanted vaccines afford improved binding of the HA stalk in young adult mice. Stalk reactivity can potentially lead to greater effector innate cell involvement and as a result, viral elimination. Protection by stalk antibodies in animal models can be achieved through several mechanisms: stalk Abs can be neutralizing, preventing viral fusion and/or egress, or non-neutralizing HA stalk antibodies can confer protection in vivo through engagement of Fc-mediated effector functions, such as ADCC or ADCP24,27,30. The reduced evolutionary rate for stalk makes it a good target for broad vaccines, potentially eliminating the need for annual influenza vaccination and stretching high quality immune protection over multiple seasons, or against emerging influenza viruses4. One caveat in these studies is that the mice used in these experiments were not previously seroconverted by either vaccination or infection to Influenza virus unlike humans. The presence of memory B cells and T cells recognizing Influenza virus antigen may alter the immune responses to both vaccination and the results of infection. In this naïve mouse model, we can piece apart the mechanistic differences that an adjuvant can have on protection, but we do not know how well BECC470 will enhance vaccination when an individual is already seroconverted.While the goal of most Influenza vaccinations is to achieve sterilizing immunity through neutralizing antibody titers, there is a role for resident memory CD4 and CD8 T cell populations in rapidly controlling virus that has evaded neutralizing antibody. Adding to their value in the Influenza immune response, these T cell populations are known to provide heterosubtypic protection, responding to more conserved epitopes31. The use of adjuvants is known to shape the effector T cell response which directly influences the memory populations. Other adjuvants have been shown to more effectively generate CD4 and CD8 T cell resident memory in the context of vaccination32. As such, it will be important to evaluate how the cellular immune response is shaped following the use of BECC470 adjuvant, particularly in the aged population which is known to have measurably decreased cellular responses at baseline.Future studies delineating the cytokine and immune cell response could shed light onto the BECC adjuvant effect and superior protection over alum and PHAD. While the BECC adjuvants have a clear role in amplifying the quantity of antibody production, passive transfer experiments indicate that other components of the immune response to immunization may contribute to increased protection. Future studies should focus on determining if BECC adjuvants stimulate cellular immune responses or increase breadth of reactivity against heterologous and even more divergent heterosubtypic influenza group 1 HAs such as avian H5. BECC adjuvants stimulate not only protective antibodies towards the head of HA but appear to drive broader protection and stalk-reactive antibodies that have the potential to engage APCs and FcγR’s for superior protective outcomes.Materials and methodsRecombinant proteins and virus strainsrH1 (A/California/04/2009) with a C-terminal trimerization domain from fibritin foldon, used for immunizations, was expressed from baculovirus vectors in High Five cells (BTI-TN-5B1-4 cells; subclone from the Vienna Institute of Biotechnology33,34). For serological detection of H1-specific and HA stalk-specific antibody responses, recombinant H1 (A/California/04/2009) and MiniHA #4900 (based on H1 A/Brisbane/59/2007) were expressed in Expi293F cells, as previously described21,23. To avoid detection of antibodies binding the trimerization domain, both probes used for ELISA were engineered with an alternative C-terminal GCN4 isoleucine zipper trimerization domain from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Recombinant HA1 domain (A/California/04/2009), was purchased from Sino Biologics does not feature a trimerization domain (#11055-V08H4). A wildtype pH1N1 influenza virus A/Netherlands/602/2009 (H1N1) (NL/09) was used for challenge experiments.MiceAll animal studies were approved by the University of Maryland School of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and were carried out at The University of Maryland School of Medicine Biohazard suite. Our study was carried out in compliance with the ARRIVE guidelines and all methods were carried out in accordance with all relevant guidelines and regulations.Adjuvanted vaccine protection in aged mouse modelTo show protection from homologous challenge, aged (~ 12-month-old), female, retired breeder, BALB/c mice, purchased from Taconic Biosciences (Rensselaer, NY), were immunized intramuscular (IM) in the hind, caudal thigh with 100 mL vaccine solution at day 0 and day 14 (prime-boost schedule) with 0.04 µg of rHA or day 0 only (prime only schedule) with 5 µg of rHA of influenza A/California/04/2009 (pandemic H1N1) (Cal/09) adjuvanted with either 100 µg of alum, 50 µg PHAD, 50 µg BECC438, or 50 µg BECC470 (HA antigen and BECC adjuvants previously reported in16). On day 28 all groups were inoculated i.n. with 32,000 PFU of homologous A/Netherlands/602/2009 (H1N1) (NL/09) virus and weighed daily for seven days. Mice that fell below 70% of starting weight were euthanized per IACUC protocol. On day 7 post-infection mice were harvested for blood and lung tissue following IACUC protocols.Serum transfer protection from homologous challengeAs reported in Gregg et al.13, to assess the role of IgG in the protection induced by the vaccines with and without adjuvant, wild-type, 6–8 week-old, female, BALB/c mice (Charles River) were immunized IM in the hind, caudal thigh at day 0 and day 14 with 0.04 µg of rHA from influenza A/California/04/2009 (pandemic H1N1) (Cal/09) plus either 100 µg of alum, 50 µg PHAD, 50 µg BECC438, or 50 µg BECC470 or with unadjuvanted antigen or phosphate buffered saline (PBS). At day 28, mice were anesthetized using an isoflurane/oxygen mixture and bled via cardiac puncture. The serum within each group was pooled and frozen at − 80 °C. First, to assess antibody protection pre-infection, 100 µL of untreated sera was injected IP into each non-anesthetized, naïve mouse (by group). The mice were allowed to rest for two hours and then they were inoculated i.n. with 3200 PFU of homologous A/Netherlands/602/2009 (H1N1) (NL/09) virus and weighed daily for seven days. Mice that fell below 70% of starting weight were euthanized per IACUC protocol. On day 7 post-infection mice were harvested for blood and lung tissue following IACUC protocols. Next, to assess antibody protection from homologous challenge post-infection, we inoculated groups of mice i.n. with 3200 PFU of IAV NL/09 virus on day 0, then on day 1 and day 3 each post-infected, we IP-injected 100 µL serum from each above vaccination group (including non-immunized control groups) and weighed daily for seven days following IACUC protocols. On day 7 post-infection mice were harvested for blood and lung tissue following IACUC protocols.HA specific antibody titers by ELISABriefly (as described in detail in16), total IgG, IgG2a and IgG1 antibody titers were determined by ELISA in sera collected on day 28 of the vaccination schedule (pre-infection). Depending on the experiment, 50 μL of either full trimer Cal/09 rHA or group 1 H1 stalk Mini-HA or HA1 Subunit (Sino Biologicals #11055-V08H4) protein-coated 96-well plates (Nunc Maxisorp #44240421) were incubated at 4 °C overnight, washed, and then blocked in goat serum/milk/PBS-T for 1 h21,23. Blocking buffer was then removed and duplicates of 100 μL of serum, diluted in blocking buffer, was added in a ten point, two-fold dilution series starting with a 1:100 dilution. After two hours of incubation at RT, plates were washed and secondary antibody for either total IgG (goat anti-mouse IgG, KPL-474-1802, Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories, Gaithersburg, MD), IgG1 (1070-05, Southern Biotech, Birmingham, AL) or IgG2a (1080-05, Southern Biotech, Birmingham, AL) was added for one hour at RT. Plates were washed again and 50 μL of room temperature BD OptEIA 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) substrate (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) was added to the plates, incubated for 10 min at RT and the reaction stopped by adding 50 μL of 3 M HCl. An OD450 value was determined using a BioTek Instruments Synergy HTX plate reader using BioTek Instruments Gen5 software (BioTek Instruments, Winooski, VT). All analyses and graphs were made using Prism 9 for Mac OS X (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA). Antibody titer (mean + SEM) and area under the curve (AUC) (mean ± standard error, SEM) are individual mice readings with the blank subtracted from the readout. Prism computes the area under the curve using the Gagnon trapezoid rule with mean and SEM reported as a standard error and confidence interval for the AUC.Lung tissue histologyLung tissue fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) was processed for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) slides (University of Maryland—Baltimore EM and Histology Laboratory) to assess the histopathology and potential resolution of viral infection. Representative stained tissue sections were selected to most accurately portray the condition of the lungs within each group of vaccinated mice (Supplemental Figs. 1–4). A single pathologist assessed the selected sections for the presence of alveolar consolidations, peribronchial and perivascular inflammatory infiltrate, and bronchial necrosis then scored them for overall inflammation using the following scoring parameters: 0 = no inflammation, 1 = scant inflammation (< 5% multifocal or one small focus); 2 = prominent inflammation, < 25% parenchyma; 3 = pronounced inflammation, 25–50% parenchyma; 4 = diffuse inflammation, 50–75% parenchyma; 5 = widely diffuse inflammation, > 75% parenchyma. The scores of each group of vaccinated mice were averaged for comparison. All analyses and graphs (mean + SEM) were made using Prism 9 for Mac OS X (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA).Plaque assays for lung virus titerPlaque assays were used to determine the lung IAV titers from mice euthanized on day 7 post infection. Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were grown to confluence overnight at 37 °C on 6-well plates and a dilution series from 1 × 10–1 to 1 × 10–6 of lung homogenate were added to the wells and allowed to infect the cells for 1 h with period rocking. After one hour, cells were washed with Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD) supplemented with 1 × penicillin/streptomycin (Gemini Bio- Products, Sacramento, CA) and 1% l-glutamine (Gibco/Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). A 3-mL overlay of SeaKem LE Agarose (Lonza, Rockland, ME) mixed with 1:500 dilution of Tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-treated trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) in 2 × MEM (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD) was used to cover the cells in each well and the plates were incubated at 37 °C for three days. After this incubation period the agarose was removed, cells were fixed with 70% ethanol then stained with 0.05% crystal violet. Plaques were visualized and counted manually. All analyses and graphs (mean + SEM) were made using Prism 9 for Mac OS X (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA). Data availability The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. ReferencesKrammer, F. The human antibody response to influenza A virus infection and vaccination. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 19(6), 383–397 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Merced-Morales, A. et al. Influenza activity and composition of the 2022–23 influenza vaccine—United States, 2021–22 season. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 71(29), 913–919 (2022).Article CAS Google Scholar Chung, J. R. et al. Interim estimates of 2021–22 seasonal influenza vaccine effectiveness—United States, February 2022. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 71(10), 365–370 (2022).Article CAS Google Scholar Kirkpatrick, E. et al. The influenza virus hemagglutinin head evolves faster than the stalk domain. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 10432 (2018).Article ADS Google Scholar Esposito, S. et al. Efficacy and safety of a quadrivalent influenza vaccine in children aged 6–35 months: A global, multiseasonal, controlled, randomized Phase III study. Vaccine 40(18), 2626–2634 (2022).Article CAS Google Scholar Gustafson, C. E. et al. Influence of immune aging on vaccine responses. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 145(5), 1309–1321 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Kelly, H. et al. Quantifying benefits and risks of vaccinating Australian children aged six months to four years with trivalent inactivated seasonal influenza vaccine in 2010. Euro Surveill. 15(37), 19661 (2010).Article Google Scholar Mimura, W., Ishiguro, C. & Fukuda, H. Influenza vaccine effectiveness against hospitalization during the 2018/2019 season among older persons aged >/=75 years in Japan: The LIFE-VENUS Study. Vaccine 40(34), 5023–5029 (2022).Article CAS Google Scholar Mira-Iglesias, A. et al. Influenza vaccine effectiveness against laboratory-confirmed influenza in hospitalised adults aged 60 years or older, Valencia Region, Spain, 2017/18 influenza season. Euro Surveill. 24(31), 1800461 (2019).Article Google Scholar Pebody, R. G. et al. Uptake and effectiveness of influenza vaccine in those aged 65 years and older in the United Kingdom, influenza seasons 2010/11 to 2016/17. Euro Surveill. 23(39), 1800092 (2018).Article Google Scholar Cruz-Valdez, A. et al. MF59-adjuvanted influenza vaccine (FLUAD(R)) elicits higher immune responses than a non-adjuvanted influenza vaccine (Fluzone(R)): A randomized, multicenter, Phase III pediatric trial in Mexico. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 14(2), 386–395 (2018).Article Google Scholar Haber, P. et al. Post-licensure surveillance of trivalent adjuvanted influenza vaccine (aIIV3; Fluad), Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), United States, July 2016-June 2018. Vaccine 37(11), 1516–1520 (2019).Article Google Scholar Vesikari, T. et al. MF59-adjuvanted influenza vaccine (FLUAD) in children: Safety and immunogenicity following a second year seasonal vaccination. Vaccine 27(45), 6291–6295 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Pulendran, B., Arunachalam, P. S. & O’Hagan, D. T. Emerging concepts in the science of vaccine adjuvants. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 20(6), 454–475 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Coffman, R. L., Sher, A. & Seder, R. A. Vaccine adjuvants: Putting innate immunity to work. Immunity 33(4), 492–503 (2010).Article CAS Google Scholar Gregg, K. A. et al. Rationally designed TLR4 ligands for vaccine adjuvant discovery. MBio 8(3), e00492-17 (2017).Article Google Scholar Gregg, K. A. et al. A lipid A-based TLR4 mimetic effectively adjuvants a Yersinia pestis rF-V1 subunit vaccine in a murine challenge model. Vaccine 36(28), 4023–4031 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Haupt, R. E. et al. Novel TLR4 adjuvant elicits protection against homologous and heterologous influenza A infection. Vaccine 39(36), 5205–5213 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Coughlan, L. & Palese, P. Overcoming barriers in the path to a universal influenza virus vaccine. Cell Host Microbe 24(1), 18–24 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Paules, C. I. et al. The pathway to a universal influenza vaccine. Immunity 47(4), 599–603 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Bliss, C. M. et al. A single-shot adenoviral vaccine provides hemagglutinin stalk-mediated protection against heterosubtypic influenza challenge in mice. Mol. Ther. 30(5), 2024–2047 (2022).Article CAS Google Scholar Laidlaw, B. J. et al. Cooperativity between CD8+ T cells, non-neutralizing antibodies, and alveolar macrophages is important for heterosubtypic influenza virus immunity. PLoS Pathog. 9(3), e1003207 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Impagliazzo, A. et al. A stable trimeric influenza hemagglutinin stem as a broadly protective immunogen. Science 349(6254), 1301–1306 (2015).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar He, W. et al. Alveolar macrophages are critical for broadly-reactive antibody-mediated protection against influenza A virus in mice. Nat. Commun. 8(1), 846 (2017).Article ADS Google Scholar Goodwin, K., Viboud, C. & Simonsen, L. Antibody response to influenza vaccination in the elderly: A quantitative review. Vaccine 24(8), 1159–1169 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar DiLillo, D. J. et al. Broadly neutralizing anti-influenza antibodies require Fc receptor engagement for in vivo protection. J. Clin. Investig. 126(2), 605–610 (2016).Article Google Scholar DiLillo, D. J. et al. Broadly neutralizing hemagglutinin stalk-specific antibodies require FcgammaR interactions for protection against influenza virus in vivo. Nat. Med. 20(2), 143–151 (2014).Article MathSciNet CAS Google Scholar Tan, G. S. et al. Broadly-reactive neutralizing and non-neutralizing antibodies directed against the H7 influenza virus hemagglutinin reveal divergent mechanisms of protection. PLoS Pathog. 12(4), e1005578 (2016).Article Google Scholar Wohlbold, T. J. et al. Hemagglutinin stalk- and neuraminidase-specific monoclonal antibodies protect against lethal H10N8 influenza virus infection in mice. J. Virol. 90(2), 851–861 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Raymond, D. D. et al. Conserved epitope on influenza-virus hemagglutinin head defined by a vaccine-induced antibody. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115(1), 168–173 (2018).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Masopust, D. & Soerens, A. G. Tissue-resident T cells and other resident leukocytes. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 37, 521–546 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Kingstad-Bakke, B. et al. Polymeric pathogen-like particles-based combination adjuvants elicit potent mucosal T cell immunity to influenza A virus. Front. Immunol. 11, 559382 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Margine, I., Palese, P. & Krammer, F. Expression of functional recombinant hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins from the novel H7N9 influenza virus using the baculovirus expression system. J. Vis. Exp. 81, e51112 (2013). Google Scholar Krammer, F. et al. A carboxy-terminal trimerization domain stabilizes conformational epitopes on the stalk domain of soluble recombinant hemagglutinin substrates. PLoS One 7(8), e43603 (2012).Article ADS CAS Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported in part by funding as follows: REH is supported by the U.S. Army’s Long Term Health and Education Training Program, MBF is partially supported by BARDA# ASPR-20–01495 and NIH #75N93019C00051. LC is supported by R21AI146529. Funding for work in the Krammer laboratory was provided by the NIAID Collaborative Influenza Vaccine Innovation Centers (CIVIC) contract 75N93019C00051 and the NIAID Centers of Excellence for Influenza Research and Response (CEIRR) contract 75N93021C00014.Author informationAuthor notesRobert HauptPresent address: Therapeutic Discovery Branch, Molecular Biology Division, USAMRIID, Fort Detrick, MD, USAAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USARobert Haupt, Lauren Baracco, Lucas J. Kerstetter, Lynda Coughlan & Matthew B. FriemanCenter for Pathogen Research, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USARobert Haupt, Lauren Baracco & Matthew B. FriemanDepartment of Microbial Pathogenesis, School of Dentistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USAErin M. Harberts & Robert K. ErnstDepartment of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine, New York, NY, USAMadhumathi Loganathan & Florian KrammerCenter for Vaccine Research and Pandemic Preparedness (C-VARPP), Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAFlorian KrammerDepartment of Pathology, Molecular and Cell Based Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAFlorian KrammerCenter for Vaccine Development and Global Health (CVD), University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USALynda CoughlanAuthorsRobert HauptView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLauren BaraccoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarErin M. HarbertsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMadhumathi LoganathanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLucas J. KerstetterView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFlorian KrammerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLynda CoughlanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRobert K. ErnstView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMatthew B. FriemanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsR.H., E.H., L.C., M.F. wrote the manuscript text and was edited by all authors. R.H., L.B., M.L., L.K., L.C. performed experiments. F.K., L.C., R.E. and M.F. analyzed experiments. All authors reviewed the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Matthew B. Frieman.Ethics declarations Competing interests The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai has filed patent applications regarding influenza virus vaccines which list FK as inventor. In addition, FK is currently consulting for Pfizer, Third Rock Ventures and Avimex. MF received royalties/licenses from Aikido Pharma for antiviral drug patent licensing, consulting fees from Aikido Pharma, Observatory Group, for consulting for COVID-19, and participation on Scientific Advisory Board for Aikido Pharma, outside the submitted work. All other authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Legends.Supplementary Figure 1.Supplementary Figure 2.Supplementary Figure 3.Supplementary Figure 4.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleHaupt, R., Baracco, L., Harberts, E.M. et al. Enhancing the protection of influenza virus vaccines with BECC TLR4 adjuvant in aged mice. Sci Rep 13, 715 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-27965-xDownload citationReceived: 10 October 2022Accepted: 10 January 2023Published: 13 January 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-27965-xShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Molecular mechanisms of cellular metabolic homeostasis in stem cells Xiaoyu LiOu JiangSonglin Wang International Journal of Oral Science (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyHow long is flu contagious after fever breaks? | Norton Healthcare Louisville, Ky. Skip to content Find Care Locations Search All Locations Emergency Departments Hospitals Norton Prompt Care Clinics Immediate Care Centers Primary Care Pharmacies Norton Specialty Pharmacy Coming Soon Norton West Louisville Hospital Regional Locations Elizabethtown Frankfort Providers Find a Provider Specialty Centers Classes & Events Find a Class or Event Services Our Services Arm and Hand Behavioral Health Brain Tumor Breast Health Cancer Care Diabetes & Endocrinology Gastroenterology General Surgery Geriatric Care Heart & Vascular Hematology Home Health Imaging Diagnostics Immediate Care Infectious Diseases Kidney, Bladder & Urinary Liver & Pancreas Lymphedema Maternal-Fetal Medicine Neuroscience Occupational Medicine Orthopedics Pain Management Palliative Care Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Prevention & Wellness Primary Care Prompt Care Clinics Pulmonary Rehabilitation Research & Clinical Trials Rheumatology Sleep Center Spine Care Sports Health Telehealth Weight Management Women’s Health Wound Care Patient Resources View All Patient Resources Billing Information Cost Estimates Get Healthy News Gift Shops Hospital Transportation Language & Translation Services LGBTQ+ Inclusion Resources Living Wills & Advance Directives Norton MyChart Norton eCare Norton Now Patient & Family Advisory Councils Pastoral Care Preparing for Surgery Price Transparency Quality Report Say Thanks Standard Hospital Charges Telehealth Appointment Transitions in Care Continuum United Community Care Network Visitor Policy Wave of Light: Honoring Pregnancy and Infant Loss I Want To… Find a Provider Find a Career Learn How to Help Pay My Bill Refer a Patient Access Medical Records / Images Request an Appointment Sign-Up / Sign-In to Norton MyChart Find a Class or Event Cancel my Class/Event Registration Volunteer Health Equity Norton West Louisville Hospital Contracting Opportunities Institute for Health Equity, a Part of Norton Healthcare Equity, Inclusion and Belonging LGBTQ+ Inclusion Resources English Español Even when your fever goes away, you still can spread the flu for about 24 hours Home / News / Even when your fever goes away, you still can spread the flu for about 24 hours Even when your fever goes away, you still can spread the flu for about 24 hours The flu is contagious for about 24 hours after your fever breaks. Find out more about avoiding the spread of the flu and when you’re contagious. Author: Norton Healthcare Published: January 9, 2023 | Updated: April 12, 2024 The flu is contagious for about 24 hours after your fever breaks. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advises staying home for at least 24 hours after your fever goes away without the help of ibuprofen (Motril or Advil) or acetaminophen (Tylenol). “Overall, you can be contagious or were contagious the day before you noticed any symptoms. You still can spread the flu for about a week after you started feeling sick or as long as you have symptoms,” said Rachel Alexander, APRN, nurse practitioner with Norton eCare. Cover coughs and sneezes and wash hands even after you return to work or school. Keep in mind that even if your symptoms don’t include a fever, you still may have the flu and may be contagious. Norton Now Get the care you need now with more urgent care options than ever. Choose our Norton Prompt Care clinics or Norton Immediate Care Centers, or use Norton eCare to see a provider from the comfort of home. Find a location or time that works best for you and book online. Book now Typically, you’re most contagious during the first three to four days after you start feeling ill. Infants and people with weakened immune systems may be contagious with the flu for more than a week. Flu symptoms Those who have the flu can have all or some of the following symptoms. Even if you don’t have a fever, you still may have influenza. FeverCoughSore throatRunny or stuffy noseBody achesHeadacheChillsFatigueDiarrhea and vomiting Emergency flu symptoms The flu should be taken seriously. The following symptoms are an emergency needing medical care right away. In children: Fast breathing or trouble breathingBluish skin colorNot drinking enough fluidsNot waking up or not interactingBeing so irritable that the child does not want to be heldFlu-like symptoms that improve but then return with fever and worse coughFever with a rash In adults: Difficulty breathing or shortness of breathPain or pressure in the chest or abdomenSudden dizzinessConfusionSevere or persistent vomiting Read more on the flu 5 things to do if you have a fever COVID-19 or flu? Each has some similar symptoms, but there are key differences What’s the best time to get a flu shot? Share on Subscribe to Newsletter Categories Flu Infectious Disease Norton Childrens Medical Associates Norton Community Medical Associates Norton Now Related Stories Foods that trigger gout: What to avoid and what to eat How do you know if you have thyroid issues? Norton Healthcare, Madison Consolidated Schools bring telemedicine to students Types of blood tests and what they mean for your health Excessive thirst and what it means: Symptoms you shouldn’t ignore Norton Healthcare For more than 130 years, Norton Healthcare’s faith heritage has guided its mission to provide quality health care to all those it serves. Today, Norton Healthcare is a leader in serving adult and pediatric patients from throughout Greater Louisville, Southern Indiana, the commonwealth of Kentucky and beyond. AboutCareers at Norton Healthcare Get Healthy About Norton Healthcare Norton Healthcare Foundation Quality Report Refer a Patient N-Store ConnectDonate For the media Healthcare professionals Employee resources Contact Get Healthy Newsletter Enter your information below to sign up for our free Get Healthy e-mail newsletter. Once a week, you'll receive stories and insights from the Norton Healthcare family, right in your e-mail inbox. Enter your e-mail Please enter your email address. I would like to receive updates and information from Get Healthy Please confirm you want to receive Norton Healthcare Get Healthy newsletters. Español Price Transparency Privacy Policy HIPAA Disclaimer Price Transparency - Audubon Price Transparency - Brownsboro Price Transparency - Children's Price Transparency - Clark Price Transparency - Norton Hospital Price Transparency - Scott Price Transparency - Women's & Children's 200 E. Chestnut St. Louisville, KY 40202 • (502) 629-1234 © 2024 • Norton Healthcare Schedule an Appointment Select an appointment date and time from available spots listed below.Susan Swain receives grant to explore harnessing B cells for a universal flu vaccine for older adults Skip to main content Skip to search Skip to main menu Skip to footer area Site Menu Close Search the UMass Chan News site Search A-Z | Search All UMass Chan Sites CONTACT US FOR MEDIA Ambros Nobel The Conversation Video Podcast Magazine Additional Resources Office of Communications UMass Chan Home Page News Home Archives Search Close Search News x UMass Chan News Susan Swain receives grant to explore harnessing B cells for a universal flu vaccine for older adults Share this story Susan Swain receives grant to explore harnessing B cells for a universal flu vaccine for older adults By Susan E.W. Spencer January 11, 2023 Susan Swain, PhD Susan L. Swain, PhD, professor of pathology, has received a $460,000 two-year exploratory grant from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases to advance the ability to harness the unique B cells in older mice for an improved influenza vaccine for older adults. The goal is to ultimately provide a blueprint for a vaccine that would recognize evolving influenza strains and provide long-lasting immunity to people throughout the life cycle, particularly among older adults, whose immune responses become weaker as they age. Approximately 90 percent of flu-related deaths and 50 to 70 percent of flu-related hospitalizations occur in people 65 or older, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “I’ve tried to figure out how to make the best possible T and B cell memory (part of the adaptive immune response) for most of my career,” said Dr. Swain. “It’s really very striking that there are a lot of changes that occur with aging. They make it harder for an immune response to anything new to get started. It’s actually a restructuring of the system to avoid unnecessary responses.” T cells release chemical signals called cytokines in response to an infectious agent. These cells help prime the maturation of B cells, which produce antibodies. Once the infectious agent has been fought off, memory T and B cells lie dormant until activated to protect against reinfection. Swain found that in older mice, a recently discovered type of B cell called age-associated B cells are the only B cells that can respond and that they respond differently than B cells in younger mice. “They require a lot more of the pathogen-mediated signals that enhance immune responses,” she said. “That’s probably a good thing. But it means that our vaccines need to supply these signals.” A universal vaccine would work on all people and elicit the kind of immune response that lasts longer and is more durable, according to Swain. The current protein-based vaccine only provides about 32 percent protection. “The vaccines we do have don’t look like pathogens at all,” she said. “If you just have antigens and you don’t have all the other characteristics of a pathogen, you get a smaller response and only short-lived protection.” Swain said her group will take investigation of this pathway to the next step, to show whether age-associated B cells, which are the only cells that respond in animals equivalent to age 70 or more in human years, can be harnessed to become memory cells that will give long-term protection against infection. Related UMass Chan news story:UMass Chan participating in clinical trials of Pfizer’s modified RNA influenza vaccine Sign up for weekly news emails Sign up Follow us! Home About Contact Us Videos Archives Intranet This is an official page of UMass Chan Medical School Office of Communications • UMass Chan Medical School • 55 Lake Avenue North • Worcester, MA 01655 Questions or Comments? E-mail: UMassChanCommunications@umassmed.edu Phone: 508-856-2000 • 508-856-3797 (fax) Privacy Statement Back To Top ▲New insights into deadly fungal invasion in people with compromised immune systems Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member New insights into deadly fungal invasion in people with compromised immune systems Download PDF Copy Reviewed Reviewed by Emily Henderson, B.Sc.Jan 12 2023 Fungi such as Aspergillus are so common in our surroundings that we breathe in hundreds to thousands of spores every day. In healthy people, fungi typically pose no threat, but they can cause deadly infections in those with compromised immune systems. However, it is increasingly recognized that viral infections such as influenza or SARS-CoV-2 can increase the risk of invasive Aspergillus infections even in healthy people. The World Health Organization (WHO) has stated that invasive fungal infections are an increasing threat to human health and reiterated that more research is needed. Until now little was known about how the Aspergillus fungus was able to take root, and what could be done to get rid of it. Researchers at the University of Calgary working with researchers at McGill University have provided new insight on why the immune system fails. "We discovered that influenza and COVID-19 destroy a previously unknown natural immunity that we need to resist invasive fungal infections," says Nicole Sarden, a PhD candidate at the University of Calgary and first author on the study. The findings published in Science Translational Medicine show that two types of white blood cell (neutrophils and a unique type of B cells) normally work together to fight fungal infection. However, viruses like SARS-CoV-2 and influenza impede the special B cells from doing their job. Working with mice and human blood and tissue samples, the researchers were able to see that following a viral infection, neutrophils sensed a fungal infection and were gathering nearby, but weren't acting to destroy the invader as expected. The scientists delved further and learned that viral molecules were rendering these B cells apathetic, preventing them from cooperating with neutrophils as they normally would, and thus protecting the fungi from destruction. Understanding this process led to the next discovery. "We also found that current therapies exist that could be repurposed in a realistic and meaningful way to replace the natural antibodies not being produced by the virally-damaged B cells and re-establish the neutrophils ability to fight these infections," says Sarden. This research was sparked by a young man I cared for in the ICU on life support who died of influenza-associated aspergillosis, where every therapy we tried failed. Our findings are very timely given the high numbers of patients affected by multiple respiratory viruses including influenza." Dr. Bryan Yipp, MD, clinician researcher at the Cumming School of Medicine and senior author on the study Related StoriesSeasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicInside the Alzheimer's Association: Dr. Heather Snyder on Driving Research and CollaborationNew research explores how antimicrobial exposure affects Parkinson’s disease riskSarden and Yipp believe these findings will lay the groundwork for new diagnostic tests, based on natural antibody levels to predict who is at the highest risk for invasive fungal infections, and that currently available antibody replacement strategies could be tested to treat Aspergillus infections in future clinical trials. "These discoveries provide a new understanding of how we can best support the body to fight off deadly fungal infections," says Yipp. Source:University of CalgaryJournal reference:Sarden, N., et al. (2022) A B1a-natural IgG-neutrophil axis is impaired in viral- and steroid-associated aspergillosis. Science Translational Medicine. doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abq6682. Posted in: Medical Science News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Antibodies, Antibody, Aspergillosis, B Cell, Blood, Cell, covid-19, Diagnostic, Fungal Infection, fungi, Immune System, immunity, Influenza, Medicine, Neutrophils, Research, Respiratory, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Steroid, White Blood Cell Comments (3) Download PDF Copy Suggested Reading Leritrelvir shows high efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 protease mutationsStudy shows large language models susceptible to misinformationNew trial shows felzartamab reduces proteinuria in IgA nephropathy patientsPhase 3 trial assesses clazakizumab in kidney transplant recipients with caAMRNew research explores how omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids may impact cancer ratesElevated antibody responses to Epstein-Barr virus linked to increased risk of multiple sclerosisResearch suggests no need for yellow fever vaccine booster after initial doseResearch identifies respiratory transmission potential of H5N1 virus Comments Masks Jessica Element says: January 15, 2023 at 12:29 PM Breathing in a mask all the time can create fungus and bad bacteria... So people are being breathing bad air... people are being jabbed, get their immunity suppressed because of it and they are not breathing fresh air! No wonder people are getting sick with all sorts of things now! Wake the fuck up and don't wear your mask, stop taking the covid vaccines and you will get healthier by having a better diet, exercising and BREATHING FRESH AIR!!!! WHAT IS WRONG WITH THIS WORLD ???? HELLLOOOOO WAKE UUPPP!!! 1 1 Reply >Breathing in a mask all the time can create fungus and bad bacteria... So Current Bias says: January 20, 2023 at 2:21 AM >Breathing in a mask all the time can create fungus and bad bacteria... So people are being breathing bad air...Imagine coming onto a medical science news website and saying something like this without any evidence or without any consideration that people might be replacing their disposable masks oftenIf you aren't going to get a vaccine, which you absolutely do not have to do, but you *do* believe the virus is a real thing you can inhale, then the one thing you absolutely *should* be doing is masking. Sars-cov-2 hitches a ride on water droplets that n95s filter easily. You aren't going to get sick by wearing a mask -- surgeons do it almost every day for hours on end. What kind of world did you suddenly wake up into where established medical science just stopped being true? 0 0 Reply (And that's aerosolized, i.e. airborne droplets to be clear) Current Bias says: March 21, 2023 at 2:57 PM (And that's aerosolized, i.e. airborne droplets to be clear) 0 0 Reply The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive health Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsNew discovery reveals how mutant RAS genes drive tumor growthTargeted degradation of Pin1 shows promise for pancreatic cancer treatmentFrailty increases a person's risk of dementia, study findsDiscrimination may drive postpartum weight retention in Black womenResearchers develop new antibody with potential to treat several types of cancer Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Medical Device (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × SARS-CoV-2 hijacks host proteins to escape immune clearanceSimple Steps to Help Children in Child Care Stay Safe & Healthy During Flu Season - HealthyChildren.org You may be trying to access this site from a secured browser on the server. Please enable scripts and reload this page. Turn on more accessible mode Turn off more accessible mode Skip Ribbon Commands Skip to main content Turn off Animations Turn on Animations Our Sponsors Log in | Register Menu Log in | Register Home Our Sponsors Ages & StagesAges & StagesAges and StagesYour Child’s CheckupsPrenatalDecisions to MakeDelivery and BeyondBaby (0-12 mos.)Bathing ＆ Skin CareBreastfeedingCrying ＆ ColicDiapers ＆ ClothingFormula FeedingNutritionPreemieSleepTeething ＆ Tooth CareToddler 1-3yrs.FitnessNutritionToilet TrainingPreschool 3-5yrsNutrition ＆ FitnessGrade School 5-12yrs.FitnessNutritionPubertySchoolTeen 12-18yrs.Dating ＆ SexFitnessNutritionYoung Adult 18-21yrs.Healthy LivingHealthy LivingHealthy LivingEmotional WellnessBuilding ResilienceFitnessGrowing HealthyNutritionOral HealthSleepSportsSafety & PreventionSafety & PreventionSafety and PreventionAll AroundAt HomeMedication SafetyAt PlayImmunizationsOn The GoFamily LifeFamily LifeFamily LifeFamily DynamicsCommunication ＆ DisciplineTypes of FamiliesGetting Involved in Your CommunityMediaMedical HomePediatric SpecialistsPower of PlayWork ＆ Child CareHealth IssuesHealth IssuesHealth IssuesConditionsAbdominalADHDAllergies ＆ AsthmaAutismChest ＆ LungsChronic ConditionsCleft ＆ CraniofacialCOVID-19Developmental DisabilitiesEar, Nose ＆ ThroatEmotional ProblemsEyesFeverFluFrom Insects or AnimalsGenitals and Urinary TractHead, Neck ＆ Nervous SystemHeartInfectionsLearning DisabilitiesSeizuresSexually Transmitted InfectionsSkin ConditionsTreatmentsInjuries ＆ EmergenciesSports InjuriesVaccine Preventable DiseasesNewsNewsTips & ToolsTips & ToolsTips and ToolsAsk The PediatricianAsthma Action TrackerAAP Family Media PlanFind a PediatricianHealthy Children MagazineHealthy Children PodcastHealthy Children Texting ProgramMotor Delay ToolNewslettersPhysical Activity CheckerSymptom CheckerWebinarsOur MissionOur MissionOur MissionAAP in ActionMedical Editor & ContributorsSponsorsSponsorship OpportunitiesSpread the WordShop AAP Find a Pediatrician Health Issues Conditions Abdominal ADHD Allergies & Asthma Autism Cancer Chest & Lungs Chronic Conditions Cleft & Craniofacial COVID-19 Developmental Disabilities Ear Nose & Throat Eyes Fever Flu From Insects or Animals Genitals and Urinary Tract Glands & Growth Head Neck & Nervous System Heart Infections Learning Disabilities Mental Health Conditions Obesity Orthopedic Prevention Seizures Sexually Transmitted Skin Surgical Conditions Tobacco Treatments Injuries & Emergencies Vaccine Preventable Diseases In This Section Healthy Children > Health Issues > Conditions > Flu > Simple Steps to Help Children in Child Care Stay Safe & Healthy During Flu Season Health Issues Simple Steps to Help Children in Child Care Stay Safe & Healthy During Flu Season Page Content By: Andrew N. Hashikawa, MD, MS, FAAP We have learned a lot recently about how to help kids in child care avoid getting sick when respiratory illnesses are spreading. Still, infants in child care under age 6 months are too young to get flu (influenza) or COVID vaccines. Children younger than 2 years are too young to wear a mask. Masks are recommended in areas with medium and high community levels of COVID and any time spread is more likely. What can be done to keep children healthy? Get a flu shotFor kids in child care settings, staying up to date on vaccines like flu vaccinations is key. Flu shots will not prevent COVID, the cold, or respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). But like these illnesses, the flu can make babies and young children very sick. Nearly every flu season, very young children are hit the hardest by the flu. In 2019-2020 (before the pandemic), a record-breaking 199 children died from the flu. Most who died that year had not received flu vaccinations. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), by Dec. 31, the flu already led to 74 deaths among children this season. Flu vaccines protect babies and young kids. That way, it is much less likely they will need hospital care or die from flu complications. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends flu vaccines for babies and children 6 months of age and older. Your child can catch up on all immunizations at a well-child visit.And remember, parents and child care staff need annual flu shots, too. Child care staff may have received their COVID vaccines. But COVID shots do not protect us from the flu. It's not too late!Many children still need to get a flu shot this season. The timing of flu season can change each year. Flu season usually starts in October, peaks in February and may last into May. Children are also still getting infected with COVID. Children eligible for a flu shot and COVID shot can get both at the same visit. The AAP recommends COVID vaccines for everyone age 6 months and older. Adults and kids who are eligible should get an updated COVID vaccine, too, when it is time. (Read about COVID vaccines for kids here.)Flu shots protect the people around us. What happens at daycare when everyone is up to date on vaccinations?Kids can stay in school and other activities. Adults will not have to miss work or obligations. We protect children who are too young to get vaccinated.Community immunity through influenza vaccination helps keep those around us safe—people at high risk of serious illness, like cancer patients and our grandparents. Older people (65 years and older) need flu shots, too. They are at higher risk of getting very sick from the flu. Being up to date on vaccines protects infants in child care who are too young to get vaccinated.Serious flu illness and death can be (mostly) avoided. We all know that little kids like to put everything in their mouths! Young children's immune systems are not fully developed. Flu shots equip protect young kids' immune systems to resist influenza virus in child care. So why do some children with the flu end up in the hospital? The flu can make their body very weak and dehydrated—much more than a common cold. Children may need hospital care if their body becomes too weak from the flu. Sometimes, children develop complications from being sick, like pneumonia (when the infection spreads to the lungs). There is no cure for the flu. Antiviral medicine can shorten the time that a person is sick. But they do not replace the need to get a flu shot.RememberAs we have learned from the COVID-19 pandemic, there is not one way to prevent illnesses at child care. But layers of protection will keep us safe. This includes: teaching young children how to wash their hands and use hand sanitizer when developmentally ready,making sure that eligible children and staff are vaccinated keeping everyone informed about child care sick-child policies so they know when a sick child should stay homecontacting your pediatrician if you have any questions about getting the flu shot. When we all do our part, it keeps us healthy. It keeps our friends healthy—and it protects those at highest risk, too. More information Reducing the Spread of Illness in Child CarePrevent the Flu: Tips for Parents & Child Care ProvidersAbout Dr. Hashikawa Andrew Hashikawa, M.D., M.S., FAAP, is a clinical professor in the departments of Emergency Medicine and Pediatrics at Michigan Medicine and a practicing pediatric emergency medicine physician at Mott Children's Hospital at the University of Michigan. He is a member of the American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Early Childhood Executive Committee and is an early childhood champion and child care health consultant. His research focuses on infectious disease surveillance in child care programs. Article Body Last Updated 1/10/2023 Source American Academy of Pediatrics (Copyright © 2023) The information contained on this Web site should not be used as a substitute for the medical care and advice of your pediatrician. There may be variations in treatment that your pediatrician may recommend based on individual facts and circumstances. Follow Us Donate Contact Us About Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Editorial Policy © Copyright 2024 American Academy of Pediatrics. All rights reserved. Back to Top‘Tripledemic:’ What Happens When Flu, RSV, and COVID-19 Cases Collide? > News > Yale Medicine Skip to Main Content1-877-YALEMDSSearch forSpecialistsFact SheetsDepartmentsClinical TrialsNewsPatient ToolsFor Medical Professionals1-877-YALEMDS‘Tripledemic:’ What Happens When Flu, RSV, and COVID-19 Cases Collide?BY CARRIE MACMILLAN January 12, 2023Doctors share tips on how to stay healthy this winter.[Originally published: Nov. 22, 2022. Updated: Jan. 12, 2023] Note: Information in this article was accurate at the time of original publication. Because information about COVID-19 changes rapidly, we encourage you to visit the websites of the Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC), World Health Organization (WHO), and your state and local government for the latest information. Last fall, as a common respiratory virus surged in children across the country, flu﻿ cases climbed, and COVID-19﻿ simmered in the background, some medical experts worried about a potential “tripledemic.” There’s no scientific definition for this term; it simply refers to a collision of RSV﻿ (respiratory syncytial virus), flu, and COVID-19 to the extent that it might overwhelm hospital emergency departments. While all three viruses are present right now, they aren’t each peaking at the same time. Pediatric RSV and flu cases are now down; COVID-19 continues to increase in adults; and cases of adults with flu are declining in the elderly and somewhat stable among younger adults. A big part of the flu increase in November, explains Scott Roberts, MD﻿, a Yale Medicine infectious diseases specialist, was our lack of immunity from having not been exposed to the virus for several seasons due to masking and other precautions, many of which have fallen to the wayside. We asked Dr. Roberts and Thomas Murray, MD, PhD﻿, a Yale Medicine pediatric infectious diseases physician, more questions about how we can stay safe, especially as we spend more time indoors this winter.What is happening with RSV and children?RSV is a common and highly contagious respiratory virus that causes cold-like symptoms. Most kids are exposed to the virus by their second birthday and therefore develop a degree of immunity that makes future cases less troublesome. Typically, kids and adults (who can still get it) recover within a week or two. “For the average healthy child, being under age 2 increases the risk of hospitalization. But even having said that, the vast majority of kids do not get hospitalized,” says Dr. Murray. However, it can be more serious for the extremely young and very old, as well as anyone with a compromised immune system or underlying health conditions, such as congenital heart disease or cancer. Plus, because of COVID-19 precautions, many young children haven’t been exposed to the virus in the last few years, but now with restrictions lifted, many are being infected. And in younger children, especially those less than 3 years old, it can lead to breathing difficulties because their lungs aren’t fully developed. The good news, says Dr. Murray, is that this is not a new virus and health care providers know exactly how to take care of kids with RSV. The problem last fall, Dr. Murray says, was the volume of sick children. “Kids can get quite sick from it, but we know how to help them,” he says. “Children are admitted to the hospital for extra oxygen or other supportive measures such as positive pressure to help with breathing and keep the lungs open.” There is no vaccine for RSV but there are several in development. Babies born prematurely or with an underlying medical condition may qualify for RSV antibody injections to help prevent severe disease.What steps can we take to prevent illness?Flu, COVID-19, and RSV are all respiratory viruses, but there are differences in how they spread. “With COVID, we have appropriately focused on air quality, but many of these viruses can also spread by touching contaminated surfaces, which makes handwashing ﻿and cleaning contaminated surfaces really important,” Dr. Murray says. Dr. Roberts agrees. “At the beginning of the pandemic, we were wiping down our fruit, vegetables, and everything with bleach, until we found out that COVID doesn’t spread through surfaces—but rather from sneezing, coughing, and expelling respiratory droplets and aerosols,” he says. “RSV spreads much more through contaminated surfaces. A kid rubs snot on their hands and puts the hand on someone else, and then that kid puts their hand in their mouth, and they can be infected. Handwashing and cleaning surfaces are more critical with RSV than with COVID.” Flu, on other hand, is somewhere in the middle, and can spread from respiratory droplets, aerosols, and through contaminated surfaces, Dr. Roberts says. It’s important, therefore, to practice what the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) calls “respiratory etiquette,” Dr. Murray says. “That means coughing into a tissue and disposing of it immediately in the garbage,” he says. It may sound obvious, but the best prevention advice for all three illnesses is to avoid others who are sick. “And if you or your child is sick, stay away from others until you are improving and fever-free,” Dr. Murray says. “And if you have a baby, especially a newborn, be very careful about who visits in their first couple months of life. You only want people who are washing their hands and have no symptoms to be near the baby.” How can we gather safely with others?With colder weather keeping more people inside, it’s important to take certain precautions, doctors say. First and foremost, now is the time to get your flu shot and make sure you are up to date on your COVID-19 vaccination﻿, including the new bivalent booster. “The influenza vaccine may not completely prevent you from getting the flu, but it has a really good chance of keeping you from getting seriously ill and being hospitalized and dying,” Dr. Murray says. If you are going to an indoor gathering, Dr. Roberts advises taking extra precautions in the week leading up to it. “In other words, don’t go to a big, indoor concert with tons of people shouting, where your odds of exposure to COVID or something else will be very high,” he says. “Plus, you can take a rapid test﻿ right before you go in the room for a gathering. If everybody does that, it’s an added layer of security. And if you are traveling, wear a mask, even if nobody else does.” Dr. Murray says it’s also important to pay attention to symptoms. “If you have any symptoms, you really should not congregate with others. But if you insist, wear a mask and segregate yourself during activities such as eating, when you can’t be masked,” he says.What is happening with COVID-19?The COVID-19 variant XBB.1.5, yet another descendent of Omicron, is quickly spreading in the U.S. and has been described as the most transmissible form of the virus yet. However, there is not yet evidence to suggest that it causes any more severe disease than other Omicron strains. When should you call your child’s pediatrician?“When your child starts to have cough and fever, it's always good to reach out to your pediatrician, to be in touch, says Dr. Murray. “That's very important. With babies, if you see really fast breathing or any blueness around the lips or what we call use of accessory muscles, which is if you start to see the shoulder blades when they're breathing or see the belly really going up and down really fast, or if the baby looks uncomfortable, those are reasons to come to the emergency room,” he says. In the end, families need to be prepared that the hospital is a very busy place right now, he adds. “If your child still looks well, then it's really important to start with your pediatrician. But certainly, if you're concerned, the emergency room evaluates your child quickly to see how sick they are,” Dr. Murray says. “And if they're quite sick, they will be seen faster.”Information provided in Yale Medicine articles is for general informational purposes only. No content in the articles should ever be used as a substitute for medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician. Always seek the individual advice of your health care provider with any questions you have regarding a medical condition.Read more Yale Medicine newsRelated SpecialistsThomas MurrayMD, PhDScott RobertsMDRelated Fact SheetsRSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus)A highly contagious virus that causes respiratory tract inflammation with cold-like symptomsCroupA respiratory infection that mainly affects children and causes a barking cough, hoarseness, and breathing difficulties.MeaslesMeasles is a contagious virus commonly seen in children that causes fever, cough, runny nose, and pneumonia. Learn about symptoms and treatment.Related Terms:Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV)More news from Yale MedicineFamily HealthFamily HealthFamily HealthMore News From Yale MedicineAbout UsContact UsDonateReferring DoctorsClinical Keywords333 Cedar St.New Haven, CT 06510Yale School of MedicineYale UniversityWebsite FeedbackTerms & Privacy PoliciesAccessibility at YSMPatient RightsHIPAA at YaleManage Cookie PreferencesCopyright 2024 Yale Medicine [2419,8006,9736]{"namedChunks":["modules-news-news-details-components-NewsDetails-newsDetails"]}5 Things Older Adults Need to Know About RSV | Hopkins Bloomberg Public Health Magazine Skip to main content Hopkins Bloomberg Public Health Magazine Main navigation Menu Articles Archives Search 5 Things Older Adults Need to Know About RSV Along with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza, this virus has contributed to a brutal season for respiratory illness. By Amy Dusto Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is more than a pediatric problem. The CDC estimates that 60,000–120,000 adults 65 and older are hospitalized annually with the virus and 6,000–10,000 die in the U.S., outpacing the rates experienced by young children. Along with influenza, RSV surged in fall and winter with the return to more normal social interactions. Although this season’s RSV cases seem to have peaked, older adults should continue to be aware of the virus—and also have hope. Older adults are at high risk for severe RSV infection “For most adults, RSV will cause a mild cold. However, older adults, especially adults 65 and older and those with underlying conditions, are at increased risk for severe RSV,” says Laura Hammitt, MD, director of the Infectious Disease Program at the Center for Indigenous Health, where she works on an RSV surveillance program among Native Americans, who have historically experienced higher-than-average rates of infection. Hammitt notes that conditions that can increase the risk of severe RSV among adults include chronic heart or lung disease, or a weakened immune system. Severe RSV infection also increases the risk for secondary bacterial infections. One study by the Center for Indigenous Health found that RSV was associated with approximately 6% of pneumonia hospitalizations among Native American adults. RSV is in your community “RSV has been off the charts in many parts of the U.S. this year,” Hammitt says. In mid-November, total RSV infections hit nearly twice their previous highest peak in the last five years, which occurred in 2019, according to CDC data. Reinfection is possible, even within the same year. Although RSV cases for 2022–23 seem to have peaked, doctors are cautioning everyone—especially the more vulnerable—to remain vigilant: The risk for multiple or more severe infections is compounded by rising cases of influenza and COVID, which have not yet peaked this season. An RSV vaccine is on the way Multiple drug companies, including Moderna, Pfizer, Janssen, and GSK, are now in the late stages of clinical trials for RSV vaccines for older adults, with the FDA expected to begin reviewing them as early as spring 2023. “The data are very encouraging, showing that these RSV vaccines elicit a strong antibody response and prevent severe RSV disease in adults who are 60 and older,” Hammitt says, adding that she expects more vaccine candidates to follow quickly. “In addition to the vaccines for older adults, the FDA is also expected to review RSV vaccines for pregnant women and monoclonal antibodies for infants, both of which have been proven highly efficacious for prevention of severe RSV disease in young infants.” Given RSV’s severity and global presence, researchers have been seeking vaccine candidates for decades. But only recently have they discovered how to stabilize and target a protein on the surface of the virus before it enters cells and starts replicating. There are no RSV-specific treatments Unlike influenza and COVID, for which there are antiviral treatments, there is no specific treatment for RSV. Instead, patients are advised to take the same measures as with any other respiratory ailment: over-the-counter cold medicine, rest, and hydration. Hospitalized patients may receive oxygen or additional supports. Together with spiking rates of infection, this “makes the prospect of effective RSV [vaccines] all the more exciting,” Hammitt says. In the meantime, we can help prevent the spread of infection with good hand-washing and staying home when sick. Protecting yourself from RSV helps protect your loved ones “You may not feel susceptible, but [RSV] is really dangerous for kids,” says Rupali Limaye, PhD ’12, MPH, MA, an associate professor in International Health and deputy director of the International Vaccine Access Center who is studying ways to encourage patients to get an RSV vaccine when it becomes available. When the COVID vaccines rolled out, one messaging tactic was to encourage younger, lower-risk groups to inoculate to protect the elderly; for the RSV vaccine, older adults will need to be encouraged to vaccinate to protect themselves as well as babies and young children. “Especially now with RSV plus COVID circulating—both are attacking the lungs,” she says. “Pediatricians are worried about children getting both, or RSV, COVID, and the flu. The worry is that all three together could have devastating effects on small babies.” The CDC reports 2.1 million outpatient visits, 58,000–80,000 hospitalizations, and 100–300 deaths annually among children under 5 infected with RSV in the U.S. In fall 2022, the rate of hospitalization for children under 4 was nearly 2.5 times the peak rate for all of 2019–20. “If you have questions about RSV, talk to your provider,” Limaye says. “We want people to please reach out to a scientifically credible source—someone you trust, someone who understands the science behind the vaccine development.” Image at top: Nes/Getty Images “5 Things Older Adults Need to Know About RSV” was published January 9, 2023. Share your thoughts Contact the Editors You must have JavaScript enabled to use this form. Name First Name Last Name Email Address Message Johns Hopkins School of Public Health Footer About the Magazine Contact Us Archives Subscribe Awards Make a Gift ©2001-2024, Johns Hopkins University. All rights reserved.615 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205. Web policiesIndiana flu report January 2023 Skip to content Fox 59 Indianapolis 53° WATCH NOW FOX59 News at Six Sign Up Indianapolis 53° WATCH NOW Sponsored By Toggle Menu Open Navigation Close Navigation Search Please enter a search term. Primary Menu News Indiana News Crimetracker National and World Indy Unsolved Video on Demand FOX59 Investigates Habitat for Humanity IBJ Media/Inside INdiana Business Hispanic Heritage Month Veterans Voices Living Healthy Fentanyl Crisis NewsNation Now IN Focus Health BestReviews BestReviews Daily Deals Your Local Election Headquarters Politics from The Hill Hoosier Lottery Press Releases Automotive News Delphi Murders Trial Weather Indianapolis Forecast Indianapolis Weather Radar & Map Watches & Warnings School Closings and Delays Camera Network Submit Your Weather Closing Register Your School/Business Traffic Morning News Habitat for Humanity Wish Someone a Happy Birthday Pack the Pantries Where Is Sherman? Pay it Forward Kids First on FOX Home Zone Kylee’s Kitchen Furry Friday Angela Answers Mommy Magic Living Well Inspired Living Sports Indianapolis Colts Colts Blue Zone Podcast The Big Game High School Football Play of the Week Big Ten Sports Indiana Pacers Indy 500 Indy Now Be Our Guest Indy Monthly Marketplace Epic Discounts Find a Job Post a Job Contact Us Meet the Team Advertise with Us Hoosier Proud FOX59 Newsletter Send a News Tip Closed Captioning Work for us TV Schedule Community Calendar Regional News Partners Contests Contest Rules Search Please enter a search term. News After brutal start, flu season drops off in Indiana by: Jacob Burbrink Posted: Jan 13, 2023 / 12:43 PM EST Updated: Jan 13, 2023 / 12:43 PM EST by: Jacob Burbrink Posted: Jan 13, 2023 / 12:43 PM EST Updated: Jan 13, 2023 / 12:43 PM EST SHARE This is an archived article and the information in the article may be outdated. Please look at the time stamp on the story to see when it was last updated. INDIANAPOLIS — After Indiana saw a brutal start to the flu season, cases have started to drop off. On Friday, the Indiana Department of Health released its weekly influenza report, showing cases and deaths in the week ending January 7. The report shows a decrease in the percentage of patients with influenza-like illnesses in clinics. However, more people have died. Officials say 132 people have died from the flu so far this season. This is 38 more deaths than reported in the previous week. Of the deaths this season, the majority occurred in people who were 65 years old or older. So far, there have been 2 pediatric flu deaths in Indiana. Nationwide, there have been 79 pediatric deaths nationwide. Nationwide, there have been 12,409 people admitted to the hospital with influenza over the last week. This is the fourth straight week hospitals have seen a decrease in influenza hospitalizations. Flu starting to wane in US after brutal start to season While hospitalizations are going down, the CDC reports that the cumulative hospitalization rate was 1.8 times higher than the highest cumulative in-season hospitalization rate dating back to 2010-2011. However, it was still lower than end-of-season hospitalization rates for all but four pre-COVID-19 pandemic seasons. Photo//CDC Hospitals enacting visitation restrictions amid growing flu concerns So far this season, the CDC estimates there have been at least 24 million illnesses, 260,000 hospitalizations, and 16,000 deaths from flu. The CDC says the highest rate of hospitalization is among adults aged 65 and older followed by children aged 0-4 years. The CDC says the majority of influenza viruses tested are similar to those included in this season’s vaccine. That is why they are encouraging everyone older than 6 months to get vaccinated. The CDC says the best way to prevent illness is to avoid being exposed to this virus. However, as a reminder, CDC always recommends everyday preventive actions to help prevent the spread of respiratory diseases, including: Avoid close contact with people who are sick. Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth. Stay home when you are sick. Cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue, then throw the tissue in the trash. Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces using a regular household cleaning spray or wipe. Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after going to the bathroom; before eating; and after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing. If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol. Always wash hands with soap and water if hands are visibly dirty. Close Modal Suggest a Correction Your name(required) Your email(required) Report a typo or grammatical error(required) Submit Δ Suggest a Correction Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ✕ Read next > Read next > Next ✕ ✕ Read next > Next story in Cancel Read next > Next story in Cancel The best early Black Friday gifts under $50 Holiday / 4 hours ago BestReviews has assembled a collection of top-quality gifts priced under $50, currently available at discounts of up to 60% off. The best early Best Buy Black Friday deals Holiday / 4 hours ago Best Buy’s major Black Friday sale is happening now, and there are many more amazing discounts to be had. Wayfair’s Black Friday Sneak Peek has deals up to … Holiday / 5 hours ago BestReviews rounded up the best Wayfair Black Friday deals on furniture, kitchenware, appliances and pet products. View All BestReviews Top Stories Trump asks Rep. Mike Waltz, China hawk, to be his … Middle East latest: Israeli minister reports some … Trump asks Rep. Mike Waltz to be natl. security adviser The Latest: Fewer than 20 races to be called as control … Megan Fox is expecting a baby with Machine Gun Kelly Top Stories More Stories Fans disappointed by Darius Rucker’s appearance Trump is likely to name a loyalist as Pentagon chief … Ishiba survived a rare runoff to remain Japan’s prime … Trump asks Rep. Mike Waltz, China hawk, to be his … Middle East latest: Israeli minister reports some … Trump asks Rep. Mike Waltz to be natl. security adviser The Latest: Fewer than 20 races to be called as control … Megan Fox is expecting a baby with Machine Gun Kelly More Stories Fox 59 Video Concerns raised over new Indiana diploma requirements 1 hour ago Honoring Hoosier heroes on Veterans Day 2 hours ago Richard Allen’s attorneys leave Carroll County Courthouse … 3 hours ago FOX59 Russ McQuaid observes Richard Allen’s escort … 3 hours ago FOX59’s Russ McQuaid flags down Indiana State Police … 3 hours ago Former Madison County jail cook arrested after bringing … 3 hours ago Martinsville man killed in single-vehicle crash 3 hours ago Hendricks Co. Sheriff’s Office investigates fatal … 3 hours ago Large fire burns home in Monroe County 3 hours ago 6-year-old dead after crash on State Road 44 in Shelby … 3 hours ago Indy man shot to death at troubled apartment complex 3 hours ago Shane Steichen sticking with Joe Flacco as Colts’ … 3 hours ago More Videos More from Fox 59 Wisconsin Supreme Court grapples with whether state’s … Firefighter dies after falling up to 50 feet on hike Queen Bey and Yale: The Ivy League university is … New Zealand’s leaders formally apologize to survivors … Final high school diploma plan to be submitted Voters in California city reject measure allowing … Mooresville restaurant Zydeco’s Cajun to shut down Voters in Oakland oust Mayor Sheng Thao just 2 years … More from Fox 59 Most Popular Delphi murders: Jury finds Richard Allen guilty Mooresville restaurant Zydeco’s Cajun to shut down Boy, 13, shot in Greenwood; teenage shooter arrested Docs: Madison Co. jail cook brought drugs to inmates Indy man shot to death at troubled apartment complex Do you need an ID to vote in your state? Blood spatter expert weighs in on Delphi crime scene Current 53° Clear Tonight 39° Partly Cloudy Precip: 0% Tomorrow 54° Mostly Sunny Precip: 0% BestReviews.com - Top picks to make everyone happy The best early Black Friday gifts under $50 Holiday / 4 hours ago The best early Best Buy Black Friday deals Holiday / 4 hours ago Wayfair’s Black Friday Sneak Peek has deals up to … Holiday / 5 hours ago Walmart’s early Black Friday sale is starting today Holiday / 2 hours ago All the best Veterans Day freebies and deals Holiday / 7 hours ago The best Black Friday deals at PetSmart Holiday / 3 days ago View All BestReviews Picks Latest News Final high school diploma plan to be submitted Politics / 19 mins ago Mooresville restaurant Zydeco’s Cajun to shut down News / 2 hours ago Indy honors service members this Veterans Day Central Indiana News / 18 mins ago 1 hospitalized after house fire in Chesterfield News / 4 hours ago Shane Steichen sticking with Joe Flacco as Colts’ … News / 3 hours ago Indy man shot to death at troubled apartment complex Indianapolis Area Crime / 3 hours ago View All News Indianapolis News, Indiana Weather, Indiana News, Indiana Traffic, Indiana Local News, Indiana Sports, Community, Entertainment News Delphi Murders Trial Weather Traffic Morning News Sports Indy Now Marketplace Contact Us Contests Public File Help Online Public File EEO Report FCC Applications Get News App Get the iOS app Get the Android app from Google Play Get Weather App Get the iOS Weather app Get the Android Weather app from Google Play Stay Connected Haystack Privacy Policy 06/27/2024 Terms Of Use Public File Assistance Contact The Hill NewsNation BestReviews Content Licensing Nexstar Digital Journalistic Integrity Sitemap Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information © 1998 - 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. | All Rights Reserved. ✕News brief with the Colorado Sun: Bird flu wipes out flocks; Farm accused of unsafe conditions | KUNC Search Query Show Search News Colorado News 2024 Election Capitol Coverage Northern Colorado Center for Investigative Reporting Western Water Mountain West News Film Reviews NPR News COVID-19 Colorado News 2024 Election Capitol Coverage Northern Colorado Center for Investigative Reporting Western Water Mountain West News Film Reviews NPR News COVID-19 Shows & Podcasts Our Programs Full Schedule The Colorado Dream In The NoCo Thirst Gap Seminars at Steamboat Our Programs Full Schedule The Colorado Dream In The NoCo Thirst Gap Seminars at Steamboat Series & Special Reports Unseen but Everywhere The Middle with Jeremy Hobson Ten Years Later: The flood that changed the Front Range Sonic IDs Fire Risk In Crisis The Air We Need Who Watches the Watchdog? Safety Plan 2023 Year In Review Reflecting Colorado Photo Desk Unseen but Everywhere The Middle with Jeremy Hobson Ten Years Later: The flood that changed the Front Range Sonic IDs Fire Risk In Crisis The Air We Need Who Watches the Watchdog? Safety Plan 2023 Year In Review Reflecting Colorado Photo Desk Listen How To Listen Signal Status Schedule How To Listen Signal Status Schedule Support Become A Member Membership FAQ Donate Your Car Donate Stock IRA Charitable Rollover Donate Real Estate Leadership Circle Corporate Support Planned Giving Membership Hub Donor Privacy Policy Become A Member Membership FAQ Donate Your Car Donate Stock IRA Charitable Rollover Donate Real Estate Leadership Circle Corporate Support Planned Giving Membership Hub Donor Privacy Policy About About Us Career Opportunities Contact Us Diversity, Equity and Inclusion People Community Advisory Council Board of Directors Sweepstakes Rules Sonic IDs About Us Career Opportunities Contact Us Diversity, Equity and Inclusion People Community Advisory Council Board of Directors Sweepstakes Rules Sonic IDs Events © 2024 Menu NPR News, Colorado Stories Show Search Search Query Donate Play Live Radio Next Up: 0:00 0:00 0:00 0:00 Available On Air Stations On Air Now Playing KUNC On Air Now Playing The Colorado Sound All Streams News Colorado News 2024 Election Capitol Coverage Northern Colorado Center for Investigative Reporting Western Water Mountain West News Film Reviews NPR News COVID-19 Colorado News 2024 Election Capitol Coverage Northern Colorado Center for Investigative Reporting Western Water Mountain West News Film Reviews NPR News COVID-19 Shows & Podcasts Our Programs Full Schedule The Colorado Dream In The NoCo Thirst Gap Seminars at Steamboat Our Programs Full Schedule The Colorado Dream In The NoCo Thirst Gap Seminars at Steamboat Series & Special Reports Unseen but Everywhere The Middle with Jeremy Hobson Ten Years Later: The flood that changed the Front Range Sonic IDs Fire Risk In Crisis The Air We Need Who Watches the Watchdog? Safety Plan 2023 Year In Review Reflecting Colorado Photo Desk Unseen but Everywhere The Middle with Jeremy Hobson Ten Years Later: The flood that changed the Front Range Sonic IDs Fire Risk In Crisis The Air We Need Who Watches the Watchdog? Safety Plan 2023 Year In Review Reflecting Colorado Photo Desk Listen How To Listen Signal Status Schedule How To Listen Signal Status Schedule Support Become A Member Membership FAQ Donate Your Car Donate Stock IRA Charitable Rollover Donate Real Estate Leadership Circle Corporate Support Planned Giving Membership Hub Donor Privacy Policy Become A Member Membership FAQ Donate Your Car Donate Stock IRA Charitable Rollover Donate Real Estate Leadership Circle Corporate Support Planned Giving Membership Hub Donor Privacy Policy About About Us Career Opportunities Contact Us Diversity, Equity and Inclusion People Community Advisory Council Board of Directors Sweepstakes Rules Sonic IDs About Us Career Opportunities Contact Us Diversity, Equity and Inclusion People Community Advisory Council Board of Directors Sweepstakes Rules Sonic IDs Events Engineers will be performing maintenance in Granby on Tuesday, Nov. 12. Expect interruptions in service between 11 a.m. and the evening hours. News News brief with the Colorado Sun: Bird flu wipes out flocks; Farm accused of unsafe conditions KUNC Published January 10, 2023 at 4:25 PM MST Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Listen • 3:40 Chris Szagola / APWaterfowl and the raptors that dine on them, like this bald eagle and snow goose, have both been killed by the new bird flu virus. On Tuesdays, we talk with our colleagues at the Colorado Sun about the stories they are following. Avian Flu Nearly 6.4 million chickens have died from Colorado’s worst outbreak of avian influenza ever. Reporter David Krause says that number is up to almost 58 million birds nationally. Wild bird populations are also increasingly suffering, including the loss of bald eagles.Unsafe Farming ConditionsIn other news that shakes up Colorado agriculture, the recently-closed Colorado Mushroom Farm is in deep debt and owes thousands of dollars in unpaid wages, according to a bankruptcy filing from December. The company also faces allegations of unsafe working conditions and worker injuries. Produce from the facility supplied stores like King Soopers and Whole Foods. Krause says it’s hard to predict what will happen next.“The concern there is, 1: where are the new mushrooms going to come [from] for some of the Colorado grocery stores," Krause told KUNC. "But also, what’s going to happen to these workers, many of whom come from Guatemala?”Krause says multi-generational families of migrant workers have made homes in the area around the farm’s warehouse in Alamosa. It’s unclear if or when the farm will reopen. Tags News The Colorado SunBirdsFlu Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Latest Stories NPR News Trump plans to name Rep. Mike Waltz as national security adviser NPR News Trump picks former Rep. Lee Zeldin to be his EPA administrator NPR News Haiti swears in a new leader as gangs shoot at a flight landing in the main airport NPR News You might beat back phragmites, the scourge of wetlands, but then what? Sign up for our weekly newsletter Get top headlines and KUNC reporting directly to your mailbox each week when you subscribe to In The NOCO. * indicates required Email Address * First Name Last Name Stay Connected instagram youtube facebook © 2024 About Us Listening Options Career Opportunities DEI Statement FCC Public Inspection File Privacy Policy Donor Privacy Policy Contact Us Manage Your Membership The Colorado SoundGenentech: Stopping the Flu and COVID-19 Domino Effect Infectious Disease For Patients Our Medicines Genentech Patient Foundation Clinical Trials Patient Support Services Understanding Insurance Medicine Information Support Giving Patients a Voice Disease Education About Us Leadership Our Promise Policy & Advocacy Our Focus on Oncology Our Focus on Neuroscience Our Focus on Ophthalmology Awards & Recognition Investors Suppliers CA Transparency in Supply Compliance Overview Contact Us Call Us Email Us Visit Us Submit a Medical Inquiry Submit a Media Inquiry For Medical Professionals Our Medicines & Products Our Pipeline Medical Resources Clinical Trial Information Sunshine Act Compliance Product Security For Partners Our Approach What We Are Looking For Partner With Us Contact Us Our Stories For Scientists Our Scientists Our Pipeline Our Stories Our Podcast Publications MTA Program For Media News Features Press Releases Statements Company Information Sign Up For News Alerts For Good Giving Diversity & Inclusion Sustainability Diversity & Inclusion Advancing Inclusive Research Health Equity Fostering Belonging Transforming Society Our Diversity & Inclusion Report Now Hiring Find A Job Professional Areas — Your Privacy Choices Privacy Policy WA Consumer Health Data Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Accessibility © 2024 Genentech, Inc. All rights reserved. This site is intended for US residents only.Frontiers | Quantitative proteomics of differentiated primary bronchial epithelial cells from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and control identifies potential novel host factors post-influenza A virus infection Skip to main content Top bar navigation Frontiers in Microbiology About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Search Frontiers in Microbiology Sections Sections Ancient DNA and Forensic MicrobiologyAntimicrobials, Resistance and ChemotherapyAquatic MicrobiologyBiology of ArchaeaExtreme MicrobiologyFood MicrobiologyInfectious Agents and DiseaseMicrobe and Virus Interactions with PlantsMicrobial Physiology and MetabolismMicrobial SymbiosesMicrobiological Chemistry and GeomicrobiologyMicrobiotechnologyMicroorganisms in Vertebrate Digestive SystemsPhage BiologySystems MicrobiologyTerrestrial MicrobiologyVirology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Frontiers in Microbiology Sections Sections Ancient DNA and Forensic MicrobiologyAntimicrobials, Resistance and ChemotherapyAquatic MicrobiologyBiology of ArchaeaExtreme MicrobiologyFood MicrobiologyInfectious Agents and DiseaseMicrobe and Virus Interactions with PlantsMicrobial Physiology and MetabolismMicrobial SymbiosesMicrobiological Chemistry and GeomicrobiologyMicrobiotechnologyMicroorganisms in Vertebrate Digestive SystemsPhage BiologySystems MicrobiologyTerrestrial MicrobiologyVirology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Frontiers in Microbiology Sections Sections Ancient DNA and Forensic MicrobiologyAntimicrobials, Resistance and ChemotherapyAquatic MicrobiologyBiology of ArchaeaExtreme MicrobiologyFood MicrobiologyInfectious Agents and DiseaseMicrobe and Virus Interactions with PlantsMicrobial Physiology and MetabolismMicrobial SymbiosesMicrobiological Chemistry and GeomicrobiologyMicrobiotechnologyMicroorganisms in Vertebrate Digestive SystemsPhage BiologySystems MicrobiologyTerrestrial MicrobiologyVirology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Submit your research Search Download article Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) Share on Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex 3,1K Total views 1,4K Downloads 2 Citations Citation numbers are available from Dimensions View article impact View altmetric score Share on Edited by Nejat Duzgunes Arthur A. Dugoni School of Dentistry, University of the Pacific, United States Reviewed by Mira C. Patel Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), United States Liu Sidang Shandong Agricultural University, China Table of contents Abstract 1. Introduction 2. Materials and methods 3. Results 4. Discussion Conclusion Data availability statement Ethics statement Author contributions Funding Acknowledgments Conflict of interest Publisher’s note Supplementary material References Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex Check for updates Download article Download Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) ORIGINAL RESEARCH article Front. Microbiol., 11 January 2023 Sec. Virology Volume 13 - 2022 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.957830 This article is part of the Research Topic Influenza Viruses: Infection, Pathogenesis, and Host Responses View all 12 articles Quantitative proteomics of differentiated primary bronchial epithelial cells from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and control identifies potential novel host factors post-influenza A virus infection Misako Nakayama1,2Hannah Marchi3,4Anna M. Dmitrieva5Ashesh Chakraborty1Juliane Merl-Pham6Elisabeth Hennen1Ronan Le Gleut3Clemens Ruppert7Andreas Guenther7Kathrin Kahnert8Jürgen Behr8Anne Hilgendorff1Stefanie M. Hauck6Heiko Adler5,9*Claudia A. Staab-Weijnitz1* 1Institute of Lung Health and Immunity and Comprehensive Pneumology Center with the CPC-M BioArchive, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center of Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany 2Division of Pathogenesis and Disease Regulation, Department of Pathology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan 3Core Facility Statistical Consulting, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany 4Faculty of Business Administration and Economics, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany 5Research Unit Lung Repair and Regeneration, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center of Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany 6Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany 7Department of Internal Medicine, Medizinische Klinik II, Member of the German Center of Lung Research (DZL), Giessen, Germany 8Department of Medicine V, Ludwig Maximilian University (LMU) Munich, Member of the German Center of Lung Research, University Hospital, Munich, Germany 9Institute of Asthma and Allergy Prevention, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center of Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) collectively refers to chronic and progressive lung diseases that cause irreversible limitations in airflow. Patients with COPD are at high risk for severe respiratory symptoms upon influenza virus infection. Airway epithelial cells provide the first-line antiviral defense, but whether or not their susceptibility and response to influenza virus infection changes in COPD have not been elucidated. Therefore, this study aimed to compare the susceptibility of COPD- and control-derived airway epithelium to the influenza virus and assess protein changes during influenza virus infection by quantitative proteomics. Materials and methods: The presence of human- and avian-type influenza A virus receptor was assessed in control and COPD lung sections as well as in fully differentiated primary human bronchial epithelial cells (phBECs) by lectin- or antibody-based histochemical staining. PhBECs were from COPD lungs, including cells from moderate- and severe-stage diseases, and from age-, sex-, smoking, and history-matched control lung specimens. Protein profiles pre- and post-influenza virus infection in vitro were directly compared using quantitative proteomics, and selected findings were validated by qRT-PCR and immunoblotting. Results: The human-type influenza receptor was more abundant in human airways than the avian-type influenza receptor, a property that was retained in vitro when differentiating phBECs at the air–liquid interface. Proteomics of phBECs pre- and post-influenza A virus infection with A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (PR8) revealed no significant differences between COPD and control phBECs in terms of flu receptor expression, cell type composition, virus replication, or protein profile pre- and post-infection. Independent of health state, a robust antiviral response to influenza virus infection was observed, as well as upregulation of several novel influenza virus-regulated proteins, including PLSCR1, HLA-F, CMTR1, DTX3L, and SHFL. Conclusion: COPD- and control-derived phBECs did not differ in cell type composition, susceptibility to influenza virus infection, and proteomes pre- and post-infection. Finally, we identified novel influenza A virus-regulated proteins in bronchial epithelial cells that might serve as potential targets to modulate the pathogenicity of infection and acute exacerbations. 1. Introduction Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an umbrella term used to describe chronic and progressive lung diseases that cause limitations in lung airflow, which are not fully reversible. Currently, at least sixty-five million people suffer from moderate-to-severe COPD, with the prevalence being increasing and thus COPD has become the third leading cause of death worldwide (World Health Organization [WHO], 2021). The primary cause of COPD is tobacco smoke in high- and middle-income countries and biomass smoke and other fuels in low-income countries (Decramer et al., 2012). Exacerbation, defined as a sudden worsening of clinical manifestations and decrease in lung function, is related to a significantly worse survival outcome (Viniol and Vogelmeier, 2018), and the influenza virus is one of the respiratory viruses triggering COPD exacerbations (Bouquet et al., 2020). However, the underlying mechanisms of acute COPD exacerbations by influenza viruses have not been fully elucidated (Decramer et al., 2012; Viniol and Vogelmeier, 2018; Ji et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022). Respiratory viruses are associated with 40–64% of acute COPD exacerbations, and influenza virus infections cause substantial declines in lung function parameters (Smith et al., 1980). Seasonal influenza virus causes annual epidemics, with an estimation of 10% of the global population catching the disease, and the detection rates of influenza virus among hospitalized patients with acute exacerbation of COPD were reported as 8–36% (Mallia and Johnston, 2007; Viniol and Vogelmeier, 2018). Therefore, it is important to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the susceptibility and pathogenicity of influenza viruses in patients with COPD. Given that the airway epithelium provides the first-line antiviral defense, it is a highly relevant question whether or not susceptibility to virus infection and virus replication is altered in COPD airway cells. Different responses of airway epithelium upon infection have been reported in patients with COPD compared with healthy controls (Hsu et al., 2015, 2016), suggesting that targeted treatment of exacerbations might serve to improve the prognosis of COPD. Primary human bronchial epithelial cells (phBECs) differentiated at the air–liquid interface (ALI) represent a powerful tool to assess the airway-specific first-line defense against external stimuli. The resulting organotypic bronchoepithelium closely resembles the in vivo airway and is frequently used in studies of toxicology, infection, and drug delivery (Pezzulo et al., 2011; Lenz et al., 2014; Singanayagam et al., 2019; Berthold et al., 2022; Mastalerz et al., 2022). The fully differentiated epithelium, obtained 4 weeks after the airlift, contains all major bronchial epithelial cell types and displays physiologically important functional properties like mucus secretion and ciliary beating (Lodes et al., 2020). The model also allows for differentiating phBECs from different disease origins and assessing viral replication and antiviral epithelial responses after infection (Zarcone et al., 2017; Singanayagam et al., 2019). Sialic acids on the surface of airway epithelial cells serve as receptors for influenza A viruses. Human influenza A viruses preferentially bind to sialic acids bound to galactose by the α2,6 linkage (SAα2,6Gal), the human-type flu receptor, whereas avian influenza A viruses preferentially bind to SAα2,3Gal, the avian-type flu receptor (Ito et al., 1997). Although the human airway epithelium predominantly displays the human-type flu receptor, the avian-type flu receptor has also been reported to be displayed by a minor proportion of cells (Shinya et al., 2006; Davis et al., 2015; Hsu et al., 2016). Considering that a major natural reservoir of influenza A virus is wild aquatic birds and that several subtypes of avian influenza A viruses have crossed the species barrier resulting in higher mortality rates than those caused by human influenza A viruses (Krammer et al., 2018), not only the human-type but also the avian-type flu receptor was assessed in this study. The aims of this study were 2-fold. (1) To assess the susceptibility of airway epithelium of patients with COPD and controls to influenza virus. For this aim, we evaluated the expression of flu receptors in COPD and control lung sections as well as in a human organotypic model of the bronchial epithelium derived from COPD and control lung airway cells. (2) To identify novel molecular targets for the treatment of acute exacerbations caused by the influenza virus. Here, we performed quantitative proteomics in organotypic bronchoepithelia with phBECs derived from patients with COPD and controls. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Subjects Lectin-based and immunofluorescent staining of lung tissue was carried out in samples obtained from the UGMLC/DZL biobank, where biospecimen collection was approved by votes from the Ethics Committee of the Justus-Liebig-University School of Medicine (no. 111/08 and 58/15). Here, lung sections were from lung explants of patients with COPD, i.e., lungs with end-stage disease (GOLD stage IV; mean age 55 ± 6 years; three females, two males), or from donor’s lungs (mean age 52 ± 13 years, three females, two males). All phBECs used in this study were obtained from the CPC-M BioArchive. PhBECs were derived from patients with COPD and controls, and were selected based on the following criteria: (1) male, (2) age over 60 years, (3) ex-smoker (more than 5 years), (4) a smoking history of more than 11 pack-years, and (5) the definition and classification provided by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD). The majority of phBECs, including all controls and COPD-derived phBECS from GOLD stage II/III, were derived from patients undergoing lung tumor resections and isolated from histologically normal regions adjacent to the resected lung tumors as assessed by an experienced pathologist. For the patients with COPD (n = 4), one patient was from GOLD stage IV, another from GOLD stage III, and two patients from GOLD stage II. The patient with COPD stage IV was a recipient of a lung transplant who had his lung resected at the University Hospital of the Ludwig Maximilians University Munich. Other patients underwent lobectomy at Asklepios clinic, Munich-Gauting, with a lung tumor as the primary diagnosis. All control subjects (n = 3) had normal lung functions and also underwent lobectomy at Asklepios clinic with a lung tumor as the primary diagnosis (Table 1). These patients received different multiple medications (outlined in Supplementary Table 1). The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Germany (Ethic vote #333-10, #382-10). Written informed consent was obtained from all study participants. TABLE 1 Table 1. Patient information and bronchial diameter of specimens used for cell isolation. 2.2. Culture of primary human bronchial epithelial cells The primary human bronchial epithelial cells were expanded and cultured as described previously (Berthold et al., 2022; Mastalerz et al., 2022). For more details, refer to the online Supplementary material. 2.3. Lectin-based and immunohistochemical fluorescent staining 2.3.1. Sample preparation Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded lung sections were deparaffinized with xylene, rehydrated in 100–50% ethanol, and rinsed in tap water. Antigen retrieval was performed in 10 mM citrate buffer, pH 6, with heat (125°C for 30 s, followed by 90°C for 10 s). Slides were washed 3 times in 1 × Tris-buffered saline. Paraformaldehyde-fixed phBECs on membranes were washed once with PBS and cut into 1/6 of the whole membrane with a scalpel. 2.3.2. Lectin-based histochemical staining for detection of human-type flu receptor To prepare a negative control, slides/phBECs on membranes were incubated with neuraminidase from Arthrobacter ureafaciens (Merck KGaA, #10269611001) with a 1:100 dilution in acetic acid buffer, pH 5.5, for 20 h at 37°C. Slides/phBECs on membranes incubated with and without neuraminidase were then blocked with 5% BSA in PBS for 30 min at room temperature and incubated overnight at 4°C with fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated Sambucus nigra lectin (FITC-SNA) (SNAI, US Bio, S0071-20A.2) (1:50 in 5% BSA in PBS, final concentration 40 μg/ml). 2.3.3. Immunohistochemistry Slides/phBECs on membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C with antibodies against the avian-type flu receptor, acetylated tubulin (acTub), mucin 5AC (MUC5AC), club cell-specific protein 10 (CC10), or cytokeratin 5 (CK5) diluted in 5% BSA in PBS. After washing three times with PBS, slides/phBECs on membranes were incubated with secondary antibodies and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylidole (DAPI) (1:2,000 in 5% BSA in PBS) for 1 h at room temperature. For phBECs on membranes, cells were permeabilized in 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min at room temperature prior to applying primary antibodies for differentiation markers. Permeabilization was not performed to detect flu receptors, since the cell-surface display is important for the virus to attach. Primary and secondary antibodies are listed in Supplementary Tables 2, 3, respectively. After washing 3 times with PBS, lung sections on glass slides were covered with mounting medium (DAKO). Membranes with phBECs were put on glass slides, covered in mounting medium, and coverslips were placed on top. Fluorescent microscopy was performed using the Axiovert II (Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany). For phBECs, immunofluorescence quantification was performed using the Imaris 7.4.0 software (Bitplane). Briefly, z-stack images of stained transwell membranes were generated by fluorescent microscopy, and individual cells were analyzed for the positivity of specific markers, largely as described previously (Schamberger et al., 2015; Mastalerz et al., 2022). For patient lung sections, quantification was performed using NIS Elements version 5.41.00 (Nikon Solutions Co., Ltd.) as follows: the apical area of the bronchus was selected above the bronchial epithelial nuclear layer and along the apical surface to yield the bronchial region of interest (ROI). Pneumocytes were selected in three randomly selected alveolar walls to yield the alveolar/pneumocyte ROI. Areas positive for the human-type flu receptor (SNA, green) or avian-type flu receptor (HYB4, red) were detected by the same threshold in all samples and recorded as binary areas. Data are given as binary area/ROI area × 100%. 2.4. Transepithelial electrical resistance measurements The transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) measurements were largely performed as described previously (Mastalerz et al., 2022). For more details, refer to the online Supplementary material. 2.5. Infection of fully differentiated phBECs Transwell plates were placed in the 37°C incubator for 30 min with 500 μl of pre-warmed HBSS on the apical side. Mucus was carefully removed by pipetting up and down in each insert 5 times, followed by aspiration of HBSS and the addition of another 500 μl of HBSS on the apical side. This cycle was repeated for a total of 5 times to completely remove mucus. To each well, 1.25 × 105 TCID50 PR8 viruses in 100 μl of HBSS, or 100 μl of HBSS for mock infection, was added to the apical side of inserts (Zhang et al., 2005; Newby et al., 2006). The infectious dose was adapted from the procedure described by Wu et al. (2022). If all the cells in the insert were exposed to and susceptible to influenza A virus infection, this would correspond to a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of approximately 0.1. However, this MOI has to be seen in the context of three-dimensional cultures composed of different cell types (Newby et al., 2006): compared with two-dimensional cultures in which MOI indicates the number of infectious viral particles that can infect each cell, the organotypic bronchoepithelium includes multiple cell types, with basal cells not facing the apical surface. In addition, not all cell types express influenza A virus receptors. Following infection, plates were gently rocked several times and incubated at 37°C for 2 h. The apical side was gently washed with 500 μl of pre-warmed HBSS two times to remove unbound viral particles, and another 500 μl of HBSS was added and collected for viral titration for day 0. The basolateral side was washed two times with 1 ml of pre-warmed HBSS, and 1 ml of pre-warmed PneumaCult-ALI medium was added. For sample collection on days 1 and 3 post-infection, 500 μl of HBSS was added to the apical side of inserts, and plates were incubated for 30 min at 37°C in a humidified cell incubator at 37°C with 95% air and 5% CO2. After gently pipetting up and down 5 times, apical washes and phBECs on membranes were collected and stored at −80°C until RNA and protein extraction. 2.6. Quantitative mass spectrometry in data-independent acquisition mode Equal total protein amounts (10 μg) of the cell lysate were digested with a modified filter-aided sample preparation procedure (Wisniewski et al., 2009) using Lys-C and trypsin as proteases and Microcon® centrifugal filters (Sartorius Vivacon 500, 30 kDa) for buffer exchange and on-filter digest. Approximately 0.5 μg of peptides per sample were measured in a randomized manner on a Q-Exactive™ HF mass spectrometer online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific) in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode as described previously (Lepper et al., 2018; Mattugini et al., 2018). Briefly, peptides were automatically loaded on a trap column [300 μm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, LC Packings] prior to C18 reversed phase chromatography on the analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters) at 250 nl/min flow rate in a 105 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% in 0.1% formic acid. Profile precursor spectra from 300 to 1,650 m/z were recorded at 120,000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Subsequently, fragment spectra were recorded in 37 overlapping DIA isolation windows of variable size covering a total of 300–1,650 m/z, each at 30,000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and a normalized collision energy of 28. The recorded raw files were analyzed using the Spectronaut Pulsar software (Biognosys) (Bruderer et al., 2015) with a peptide and protein identification false discovery rate setting of < 1%, using an in-house human spectral library that was generated using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific), the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics), and the Swissprot Human database (release 2017_02). Quantification was based on MS2 area levels of all unique peptides per protein fulfilling the percentile 0.25 setting. Normalized protein quantifications were exported and used for calculations of fold changes and significance values. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al., 2022) partner repository with the data set identifier PXD031461. 2.7. Statistical analysis of quantitative mass spectrometry data For the whole protein expression analysis, we used R (version 4.0.4). The data was pre-processed by variance stabilization and normalization (vsn package) (Huber et al., 2002). A reduction in the dimension of the data using tSNE (Krijthe, 2015) allowed us to identify the different patients as a batch effect. The data were corrected from the patient effect using ComBat (Leek et al., 2012, 2020), and the interaction between time and condition as covariates. Due to the induced correlation structure in the corrected data, ComBat might lead to the exaggerated significance and, therefore, to higher FDR (Li et al., 2021). This might artificially increase the effect of condition and time when correcting the data from the batch effect. For protein expression analysis, we used the R package limma (Ritchie et al., 2015). We specified a generalized linear mixed model with a random intercept for patients and the interaction between condition and time as a fixed effect. For sensitivity analysis, we additionally built the model with adjustment for health state, which revealed very similar results. 2.8. Gene expression analysis by qRT-PCR and Western blot Real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and Western blot analysis were performed as described previously (Mastalerz et al., 2022). For more details including antibodies used for Western Blot analysis (Supplementary Tables 2, 3) and primers used for qRT-PCR (Supplementary Table 4), please refer to the online Supplementary material. 3. Results 3.1. The human-type flu receptor is detected more frequently than the avian-type in human lung sections and organotypic bronchoepithelia First, to assess the display of human- and avian-type flu receptors in the peripheral airway epithelium of patients with COPD and controls, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded lung sections (COPD n = 5, control n = 5) were stained with (1) FITC-SNA, which specifically binds to sialic acids bound to galactose by the α2,6 linkage (SAα2,6Gal), the human-type flu receptor (Ito et al., 1997) and (2) a monoclonal antibody (clone HYB4) that specifically binds to SAα2,3Gal, the avian-type flu receptor (Hidari et al., 2013). Pretreatment of a serial section with neuraminidase, an enzyme that cleaves sialic acids, resulted in a drastic reduction of the SNA signal, validating the specificity of the lectin-based histochemical staining (Supplementary Figure 1A). In the bronchial region, the human-type flu receptor was much more frequently detected than the avian-type flu receptor in patients with COPD and controls, while in alveolar regions, human- and avian-type flu receptors were displayed at similar levels (Supplementary Figures 1B, 2A, B). Despite considerable heterogeneity of flu receptor display across the samples, our results indicate that the levels of both humans- and avian-type flu receptors are decreased in patients with COPD compared with controls (Supplementary Figure 2). Staining with SNA targeting the human-type flu receptor in combination with antibodies against acetylated tubulin (acTub), mucin 5AC (MUC5AC), club cell-specific protein 10 (CC10), and cytokeratin 5 (CK5) demonstrated that the human-type flu receptor was not displayed by ciliated or basal cells, but rather by goblet and club cells (Figure 1A, Supplementary Figure 1B). The very infrequently detected avian-type flu receptor was not or little displayed by ciliated cells, never by the club or basal cells, but maybe by goblet cells (Supplementary Figure 1B). The latter was not directly assessed because both anti-MUC5AC and anti-SAα2,3Gal antibodies were of mouse origin (Supplementary Figure 1B). FIGURE 1 Figure 1. Detection of the human- and avian-type flu receptors in lung sections and organotypic bronchoepithelium from patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and controls. Human lung sections (COPD n = 5, control n = 5) and primary human bronchial epithelial cells (phBECs) from patients with COPD (n = 4) and controls (n = 3) were stained with Sambucus Nigra lectin (SNA) that specifically binds to sialic acids bound to galactose by the α2,6 linkage, SAα2,6Gal, the human-type flu receptor, and a monoclonal antibody (clone HYB4) that specifically binds to SAα2,3Gal, the avian-type flu receptor. (A) Detection of human-type flu receptor (green) in co-staining with antibodies directed toward acetylated tubulin (acTub), mucin 5AC (MUC5AC), or club cell-specific protein CC10 (red), for the identification of ciliated, goblet, or club cells, respectively, in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded human lung sections. The example shown is from a COPD lung explant. (B) Detection of human-type flu receptor (green) and avian-type flu receptor (red) in phBECs from COPD and control on days 0, 14, and 28 after airlift. (C) Quantification of the human- and avian-type flu receptors in phBECs on days 0, 14, and 28 after airlift. Panel (A) shows representative images for n = 5 (COPD) and n = 5 (control lung sections). Panel (B) shows representative images for n = 3 (control phBECs; here second control, see Table 1) and n = 4 (COPD phBECs; here GOLD stage III-derived phBECs); quantification of those data is given in panel (C). For panel (C), statistical analysis was performed using an unpaired, two-sided Mann–Whitney U test, but with a cutoff value of p < 0.05, no statistically significant differences were observed. Having confirmed the expression of flu receptors in small airways of patients with COPD and controls in lung sections, we made use of the organotypic model of phBECs differentiated at ALI. PhBECs from patients with COPD (n = 4) and controls (n = 3), matched for age and sex (Table 1), were differentiated for 28 days at ALI. Males were chosen considering the gender-specific prevalence of COPD (Ntritsos et al., 2018) as well as in efforts to reduce sample heterogeneity. Again, the specificity of lectin histochemistry in phBECs was confirmed by pretreating cells with neuraminidase (Supplementary Figure 1C). On ALI day 0, where the culture consists exclusively of basal cells, almost no expression of the human-type receptor was observed. The avian-type flu receptor, in contrast, was observed in all controls and patients with COPD at this time point, even if in relatively few cells only (up to 11%) (Figures 1B, C). On ALI days 14 and 28, in parallel to the emergence of all major differentiated cell types, the number of human-type flu receptor-positive cells increased in phBECs from controls and patients with COPD (Figures 1B, C). The avian-type receptor was still detectable in all cultures at similar levels at an intermediate time point of differentiation (day 14) but mostly lost at day 28 (Figure 1C). As opposed to the tissue section staining, flu receptor display was similar for COPD- and control-derived cells in vitro. The much higher prevalence of human-type to avian-type flu receptors, however, agreed well with our observations in human lung sections, supporting the usefulness of our in vitro model for studies with influenza A virus infection where flu receptors serve as a major determinant of host susceptibility. 3.2. Patients with COPD- and control-derived cells show similar differentiation potential The expression of differentiation markers assessed by immunofluorescence and qRT-PCR showed similar differentiation potential in cells from patients with COPD and controls. TEER value increased and reached a similar value on day 28 (Supplementary Figure 3). Ciliated cells continued to increase until day 28, goblet cells increased on day 14 and decreased on day 28, and club cells continued to increase until day 28 (Supplementary Figures 4A, B). FOXJ1, encoding a transcription factor specifically required for motile cilia, MUC5AC, and SCGB1A1 (CC10) were expressed at similar levels on days 14 and 28 (unpaired, two-sided Mann–Whitney U test, p > 0.05) (Supplementary Figure 4C). PhBECs from patients with COPD tends to show a more heterogeneous expression of differentiation markers compared with those from controls. 3.3. COPD- and control-derived fully differentiated phBECs display largely similar protein profiles pre-infection To compare the protein expression in fully differentiated phBECs from patients with COPD and controls, cells were collected on ALI day 28 (Figure 2A) and subjected to proteomic analysis. The heatmap displaying overall protein changes in all subjects demonstrated that COPD- and control-derived phBECs did not cluster separately. Interestingly, however, the COPD GOLD stage IV-derived phBECs without a tumor background stood out with a unique protein profile (Figure 2B). FIGURE 2 Figure 2. Proteomics pre- and post-influenza virus infection in fully differentiated primary human bronchial epithelial cells (phBECs). PhBECs from patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (n = 4) and controls (n = 3) were differentiated for 28 days at the air–liquid interface and either mock-infected or infected with influenza A virus PR8. Cells were harvested for proteomics on day 28 after airlift (pre-infection), and on days 1 and 3 post-infection. To examine viral replication, cells and apical washes were harvested on day 0 (after incubating the cells with the virus to allow attachment, and after removing the unattached virus by washing) and on days 1, 3, and 5 post-infection. (A) Scheme of culture, infection, and sample analysis. An illustration was created with biorender.com. TEER, transepithelial electrical resistance. (B) Heatmap of proteomics pre-infection. The protein profile of the COPD GOLD stage IV-derived phBECs is shown in the outermost left lane. (C) Principal component analysis of proteomics post-infection. (D) Heatmap of significantly altered proteins post-infection with all patients/controls and all time points (PR8 vs. mock, n = 7). A protein was considered to be differentially expressed if the comparison resulted in a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 5% with the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) correction to correct multiple testing. (E) Total RNA was extracted from cells and mRNA levels of PR8 nucleoprotein transcripts were examined by RT-qPCR. DHX8 was used as a housekeeping gene. (F) Infectious viral particles in apical washes were quantified by an end point dilution assay. TCID50: 50% tissue culture infectious dose. For panels (E,F), statistical analysis was performed using an unpaired, two-sided Mann–Whitney U test, but with a cutoff point of p < 0.05, no statistically significant differences were observed. 3.4. PhBECs derived from a COPD GOLD stage IV patient show distinct COPD-like features Having observed that the COPD GOLD stage IV-derived phBECs displayed a unique protein profile compared to control and COPD GOLD stage II/III phBECs, we assessed to which extent this may reflect a more advanced COPD airway phenotype. Indeed, in particular, at day 28, the phBECs derived from the GOLD stage IV patient (n = 1) displayed a striking COPD-like phenotype in comparison to the control and less severe stage-derived cells: cells from that patient showed a lower TEER value, reduced levels of human-type flu receptor, and fewer ciliated and more goblet cells (Supplementary Figure 5A–C). Finally, from a panel of 20 genes known to be upregulated in COPD airway epithelial cells (Steiling et al., 2013; Wei et al., 2015), 14 showed increased levels in the GOLD stage IV phBECs as compared to the GOLD stage II/III and control phBECs (Supplementary Figure 5D). However, following infection, the PR8 virus still replicated similarly in these cells (Supplementary Figure 5E), indicating little biological influence of these features on infection. 3.5. Viral replication after influenza A virus infection does not differ in COPD- and control-derived fully differentiated phBECs To evaluate the susceptibility and response of fully differentiated phBECs derived from patients with COPD and controls to influenza A virus infection, cells were infected with PR8, a widely used strain in in vitro studies (Kroeker et al., 2012, 2013; Short et al., 2016; Han et al., 2018). On ALI day 28, phBECs were infected with PR8 (Figure 2A) and proteomes were analyzed at days 1 and 3 post-infection (Figures 2C, D). Viral RNA of nucleoprotein within the cells and infectious viral particles in apical washes peaked at day 1 in phBECs from patients with COPD and controls and from then gradually decreased, with no statistical differences at any time point (unpaired, two-sided Mann–Whitney U test, Figures 2E, F). 3.6. COPD- and control-derived fully differentiated phBECs display similar protein profiles post-influenza A virus infection Cellular protein was collected from phBECs on days 1 and 3 post-infection and subjected to proteomic analysis (Figure 2A). Principal component analysis (PCA) and a heatmap displaying the significantly altered proteins showed a clear separation between PR8- and mock-infected cells (Figures 2C, D), but not between disease origin (health state: COPD vs. control). An alternative dimensionality reduction method, t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE), also indicated that only the condition effect (PR8-infected vs. mock-infected) separated the two groups, but not disease origin (COPD vs. control), time (day 1 vs. day 3 post-infection), or patients’ origin (Supplementary Figure 6). Moreover, the heatmap of significantly altered proteins on days 1 and 3 post-infection also did not indicate any separation between disease origin, and we found no significant changes in influenza virus-induced gene expression between control- and COPD-derived cells (Supplementary Figures 7, 8). 3.7. PhBECs display a robust antiviral response post-influenza A virus infection and upregulate several novel influenza virus-induced proteins Given the absence of disease-specific effects, we focused on differences between PR8- and mock-infected cells, independent of the disease origin (n = 7). In this analysis, 31 and 234 proteins were differentially expressed (adj. p < 0.05) on day 1 and day 3 post-infection (PR8/mock), respectively, with a robust upregulation of interferon (IFN)-regulated genes (Figure 3, Supplementary Figures 7, 8, and Supplementary Data file “Protein List,” data sheets “ConditionsDay1” and “ConditionsDay3”). Taking into account both time points, 290 proteins were differentially expressed post-infection (adj. p < 0.05) among the total 4,341 variables (PR8/mock; Supplementary data file “Protein List,” data sheet “ConditionsOverallTime”). Pathway enrichment analysis of those 290 proteins demonstrated that variants of the (innate) immune system and cytokine signaling, in particular IFN signaling, were the dominating top enriched pathways (Figure 4A). For instance, a strong upregulation of established IFN-regulated genes like interferon-regulatory factor 9 (IRF9), interferon-induced GTP-binding protein Mx1 (MX1), 2′–5′-oligoadenylate synthase 1 (OAS1), signal transducer and activator of transcription 1-α/β (STAT1), ubiquitin-like protein ISG15 (ISG15), and interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT1) was observed (Figures 4B–G). In addition to these drastically upregulated proteins demonstrating a robust antiviral response, several novel proteins appeared as significantly upregulated (adj. p < 0.05). Those proteins were phospholipid scramblase 1 (PLSCR1), human leukocyte antigen class I histocompatibility antigen, α chain F (HLA-F), cap-specific mRNA (nucleoside-2′-O-)-methyltransferase 1 (CMTR1), E3 ubiquitin–protein ligase DTX3L (DTX3L), and shiftless antiviral inhibitor of ribosomal frameshifting protein SHFL, previously called RyDEN (c19orf66) (Figure 5A). Upregulation of all these genes was assessed by RT-qPCR (Figure 5B) and, for PLSCR1, HLA-F, and DTX3L, by Western blot analysis (Figure 5C, Supplementary Figure 9). Upregulation on protein level was validated for all three proteins assessed, while upregulation on transcript level was only observed for PLSCR1 and HLA-F, demonstrating significant post-transcriptional regulation mechanisms. FIGURE 3 Figure 3. Volcano plot of significantly altered proteins in fully differentiated primary human bronchial epithelial cells (phBECs) on days 1 and 3 post-influenza virus infection. Fully differentiated phBECs from patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (n = 4) and controls (n = 3) were either mock-infected or infected with influenza A virus PR8. Cells were harvested for proteomics on days 1 and 3 post-infection (dpi). Volcano plot of significantly altered proteins (PR8/mock) on days 1 (left) and 3 (right) post-infection, independent of the disease state. A protein was considered to be differentially expressed if the comparison resulted in a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 5% with the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) correction to correct multiple testing. FIGURE 4 Figure 4. Upregulation of interferon-regulated pathways and proteins in fully differentiated primary human bronchial epithelial cells (phBECs) independent of disease state post-influenza virus infection. (A) Pathway analysis performed using the tool PANTHER and all 290 differentially expressed proteins post-infection, independent of disease state and taking account of both time points. (B–G) Box plots of interferon-regulated proteins depicting the median (middle horizontal line), the 25 and 75% percentile (lower and upper edge of the box), and the range between largest and smallest value up to a maximum of 1.5 × interquartile range (vertical lines). Data points beyond that range are regarded as outliers and are shown as individual points. IRF9, interferon-regulatory factor 9; MX1, Interferon-induced GTP-binding protein Mx1; OAS1, 2’–5’-oligoadenylate synthase 1; STAT1, signal transducer and activator of transcription 1-α/β; ISG15, ubiquitin-like protein ISG15; IFIT1, interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1. FIGURE 5 Figure 5. Novel proteins upregulated in fully differentiated primary human bronchial epithelial cells (phBECs) independent of disease state post-influenza virus infection. (A) Box plots of significantly upregulated novel proteins in fully differentiated phBECs on days 1 and 3 post-influenza virus infection (dpi). PLSCR1, phospholipid scramblase 1; HLA-F, human leukocyte antigen class I histocompatibility antigen, α chain F; CMTR1, cap-specific mRNA (nucleoside-2′-O-)-methyltransferase 1; DTX3L, E3 ubiquitin–protein ligase DTX3L; SHFL, shiftless antiviral inhibitor of ribosomal frameshifting protein. Box plots depict the median (middle horizontal line), the 25 and 75% percentile (lower and upper edge of the box), and the range between the largest and smallest value up to a maximum of 1.5 × interquartile range (vertical lines). Data points beyond that range are regarded as outliers and are shown as individual points. (B) mRNA expression of novel genes 1 and 3 dpi (PR8/mock). For some COPD phBECs samples, the obtained amount of RNA was insufficient to cover all qPCR reactions, restricting the COPD-derived samples to n = 3 and n = 2 on 1 dpi. Symbol legend (in analogy to panels A and C): Cyan squares, ctrl samples; red squares, COPD samples. (C) Western blots of PLSCR1, HLA-F, and DTX3L. VCL (vinculin) was used as a loading control. Irrelevant parts of the Western blot images were cropped to only present the areas of interest. Uncropped Western blot images are given in Supplementary Figure 9. 4. Discussion Studies comparing proteomes between COPD- and control-derived phBECs in fully differentiated organotypic bronchoepithelia pre- and post-influenza virus infection are lacking. Performing such a comparison, we have not found disease-dependent changes. Independent of disease status, we have, however, observed a robust IFN-mediated antiviral response and identified several upregulated proteins following PR8 infection, which have not or only recently been linked to the host response to the influenza virus. Notably, those proteins have not been reported in studies where undifferentiated primary normal human bronchotracheal epithelial cells were infected with influenza virus PR8 (Kroeker et al., 2012, 2013). Our study has thus identified novel influenza-regulated proteins in the fully differentiated bronchial epithelium that may qualify as targets to modulate the pathogenicity of infection and acute exacerbation caused by the influenza virus. In agreement with previously published reports, we observed that the human-type flu receptor is much more frequent in human airways and fully differentiated phBECs than the avian-type (Shinya et al., 2006; Davis et al., 2015; Hsu et al., 2016) and predominantly localized on bronchial secretory cells (Matrosovich et al., 2004). The specific bronchial epithelial cell types presenting the avian-type flu receptor, however, remain poorly identified. While the display of the avian-type flu receptor on ciliated cells has been reported by others (Matrosovich et al., 2004), our results do not provide evidence for this (Supplementary Figure 1B). However, it must be acknowledged that the overall low presentation of the avian-type flu receptor in the human airway (Matrosovich et al., 2004; Nicholls et al., 2007; Davis et al., 2015) represents a challenge for a systematic assessment of the cell types displaying it. In addition, discrepancies between studies may also stem from different detection systems and protocols. For instance, it has been reported that Maackia amurensis agglutinin (MAA) lectins, frequently used to detect the avian-type flu receptor, differ in their binding affinity to SAα2,3 depending on supplier and MAA isoform used (Matrosovich et al., 2004; Nicholls et al., 2007). Here, we took advantage of a more recently developed specific monoclonal mouse antibody (HYB4) (Hidari et al., 2013; Supplementary Figure 1B), which allowed for circumventing the known variability in lectin binding but restricted our choice of specific antibodies to co-stain with. Therefore, even if our results, by way of exclusion, suggest display of the avian-type receptor by goblet cells in human bronchial epithelium, we have not been able to directly demonstrate this. The cell types displaying the avian-type flu receptor thus remain elusive and need further investigation. Interestingly, despite considerable patient heterogeneity, fluorescent staining-based quantification suggested that flu receptors overall may be downregulated in patients with COPD. Also, the thickened mucus layer and increased expression of mucins in patients with COPD may protect them from influenza virus infection both because cell membranes are less accessible and because heavily sialylated mucins act as decoy receptors (Ehre et al., 2012; Wallace et al., 2021). Here, before in vitro infection of phBECs, we removed the mucus layer in effort to focus on cell-associated differences in virus susceptibility. Furthermore, as opposed to flu receptors in patients’ epithelium, we did not see any significant changes in flu receptor display in COPD-derived vs. control-derived phBECs in vitro. These two aspects may explain why viral replication was similar for control- and COPD-derived phBECs in vitro. Flu receptor display not being conserved in COPD-derived cells in vitro could, on the one hand, be due to optimized growth and differentiation conditions that certainly do not reflect the microenvironment in COPD airways. On the other hand, a decrease in flu receptor display may also only manifest in later stages of COPD: while we mainly used COPD GOLD stage II/III-derived cells for differentiation, lung specimens used for staining and quantification of flu receptors in vivo were derived from end-stage patients with COPD. In support of this, human-type flu receptor display is drastically reduced in phBECs derived from a COPD GOLD stage IV patient (n = 1, Supplementary Figure 5B). Overall, these observations rather support a lower susceptibility of patients with COPD to influenza virus infection. However, interestingly, during the differentiation of phBECs, we regularly observed more avian-type receptors at early time points, where basal cells are overrepresented and where the culture thus reflects properties of a regenerating bronchial epithelium (Schamberger et al., 2015; Mastalerz et al., 2022). This suggests that, under conditions of acute airway injury and ongoing regeneration or in smoking-induced airway basal cell hyperplasia (Crystal, 2014), bronchial epithelial cells may be more susceptible to infection by the avian influenza viruses. These observations warrant further studies in models of airway regeneration and hyperplasia. Comparisons between COPD- and control-derived phBECs have been done by direct transcriptomic analysis of bronchial brushings, identifying several differentially expressed genes that characterized COPD-derived phBECs (Steiling et al., 2013). It has also been shown that phBECs derived from GOLD stage IV patients differentiate differently relative to control cells, resulting in altered cell type compositions (Gohy et al., 2019). Here, we selected phBECs from age-, sex-, and smoking history-matched control and COPD lungs (GOLD stage II/III), all isolated from non-tumorous airways in the context of a lung tumor resection, except for one GOLD stage IV specimen from an end-stage explant. However, in our differentiated organotypic bronchoepithelia, we did not find any statistically significant differences between COPD- and control-derived phBECs in terms of proteomes and differentiation potential. Identification of such differences may have been hampered by the following limitations in our study design: first, we included phBECs from different COPD GOLD stages, including mild-to-moderate COPD. Several large COPD cohort studies showed that the COPD GOLD stage is not necessarily a stable or progressive criterion (due to diagnosis by spirometry and work-related lung function diagnostics). Especially patients who initially meet the criteria for mild-to-moderate COPD are sometimes later diagnosed with lower COPD GOLD stages or even with normal lung function, or vice versa, over a series of annual visits (Aaron et al., 2017). This suggests reversibility of disease stage unless cells are from severe or very severe patients with COPD, which may in part be reflected by the capacity of airway epithelial cells to differentiate normally in vitro when given the appropriate growth factors. Second, given the known individual variations in patient-derived cells including a highly diverse medication history (Supplementary Table 1), the low number of control- and COPD-derived phBECs used in our study may have been insufficient to detect significant differences (Mindaye et al., 2017). Third, it cannot be completely excluded that tumor environment-derived factors may have ultimately masked COPD-specific effects for all but phBECs from the stage IV patient without a tumor background. Although influenza A virus infection has been studied using proteomics in basal-like phBECs under submerged conditions (Kroeker et al., 2012, 2013), an advantage of our study is that we used fully differentiated phBECs, which reflect the cell type complexity of the bronchial epithelium in vivo and thus recapitulate the orchestration of numerous host factors better than undifferentiated cells or cell lines. Nevertheless, our in vitro model does not recapitulate all features of the bronchial epithelium in vivo including epithelial–immune cells or epithelial–mesenchymal crosstalk. Such interactions, however, may be key in the context of acute exacerbation and COPD progression (Barnes, 2019; Guo-Parke et al., 2020). Therefore, future studies on influenza virus infection should make use of phBECs derived from very severe or severe COPD GOLD stage lungs, which typically retain a disease phenotype in vitro, ideally in combination with non-tumorous and, in terms of age and sex, well-matched control samples. Furthermore, the influence of deregulated immune or mesenchymal cells should be studied in more advanced organoid co-culture models. Next to a strong and mostly IFN signaling-related antiviral response, we discovered several influenza virus-induced proteins that have not or only recently been linked to influenza virus infection and may thus represent novel host factors in that context. PLSCR1, for instance, is an IFN-regulated gene with multiple functions including the regulation of viral uptake and replication by interacting with viral proteins at the plasma membrane as well as within the cytoplasm (Dal Col et al., 2022). The few studies that addressed its role in influenza virus infection have demonstrated binding to nucleoprotein NP and prevention of its nuclear translocation (Luo et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2022). Interestingly, PLSCR1 has also been described to be secreted and interact with extracellular matrix protein 1 (ECM1) in the dermal–epidermal junction of human skin (Merregaert et al., 2010). This raises the intriguing hypothesis that PLSCR1 could also play a role in epithelial–mesenchymal crosstalk and, for instance, promote small airway fibrosis upon influenza virus infection. Notably, small airway fibrosis is increasingly recognized as the major driver of COPD progression, but the underlying causative mechanisms remain poorly understood (Hogg et al., 2017; Barnes, 2019). Hence, further investigation is warranted to assess the role of this protein in the context of airway fibrosis. Cap-specific mRNA (nucleoside-2’-O-)-methyltransferase 1 (CMTR1) and SHFL have been described as host factors that facilitate the expression of viral proteins. Upon influenza A virus infection, CMTR1 is required for efficient cap snatching and regulation of a cell’s autonomous immune response (Li et al., 2020). A function of SHFL has not yet been described in the context of influenza virus infection, but it is known to promote programmed-1 ribosomal frameshift (−1 PRF) in SARS-CoV-2 viral gene expression (Baggen et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021). Importantly, an inhibitor of −1 PRF, merafloxacin, restricted SARS-CoV-2 replication in VERO E6 cells (Sun et al., 2021). Taken together, these observations warrant further studies into CMTR1 and SHFL as potential influenza virus host factors and targets to modulate influenza pathogenicity. E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase DTX3L (DTX3L), an E3 ubiquitin–protein ligase, has been little investigated in the context of virus infection, except for a study that reports protein mono-ADP-ribosyltransferase PARP9 (PARP9)-DTX3L ubiquitin ligase to target host histone and viral protease to enhance IFN signaling (Zhang et al., 2015). It is known that the ubiquitin–proteasome system is important for the replication of influenza A viruses and that ubiquitination also plays an essential role in innate immunity to the influenza A virus (Rudnicka and Yamauchi, 2016). DTX3L may thus be a hitherto unidentified factor in this context. Finally, recent studies have been revealing the significance of natural killer (NK) cells in maintaining immune system homeostasis and their involvement in COPD pathogenesis (Rao et al., 2021). NK cells, as innate immune cells, provide the first line of defense at the border of airway epithelium and the microenvironment. HLA-F, upregulated in our model upon influenza virus infection, has been the least investigated among the HLA class I family; it has only recently been demonstrated to exert an important role in immune regulation by presenting peptides and regulating immunity through interactions with NK cells (Dulberger et al., 2017; Lin and Yan, 2019). Interestingly, increased protein levels of HLA-F and interaction with NK cells have been indicated after infection with BK polyomavirus, HIV, and HCV (Lunemann et al., 2018; Kiani et al., 2019; Koyro et al., 2021). Our study indicates a role for HLA-F after influenza virus infection in the human airway, presumably by interaction with NK cells. Since the functions of NK cells in COPD have remained unclear (Rao et al., 2021), the differentiated organotypic bronchoepithelia might serve as a simplified model to unravel the interaction of NK cells with HLA-F upon viral infection. Conclusion Our study demonstrated the dominant presentation of human-type vs. avian-type flu receptors in human lung sections and in fully differentiated phBECs. COPD- and control-derived cells showed similar differentiation potential, similar susceptibility to influenza A virus infection, and similar proteomes pre- and post-infection. Pooling all post-infection proteome data enabled us to identify novel influenza A virus-regulated proteins. Our results warrant further studies of these proteins’ functions in the context of the pathogenicity of infection and acute exacerbation caused by the influenza virus. Data availability statement The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repositoryepositories and accession number(s) can be found below: http://www.proteomexchange.org/, PXD031461. Ethics statement The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by Ethics Committee of the Justus-Liebig-University School of Medicine, Gießen, Germany, Ethics Committee of the Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, Germany. The patients/participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study. Author contributions MN, HA, and CS-W conceived and designed the research and wrote the manuscript. HA and CS-W supervised the project. MN, CS-W, HA, AD, AC, and EH planned and performed the experiments and analyzed the data. JM-P and SH performed the proteomics and data analysis. HM and RL performed the statistical analysis on proteomics data. CR, AG, KK, JB, and AH provided the clinical samples, patient parameters, and resources. All authors read and approved the manuscript. Funding This work was supported by the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR, 1328-570, to CS-W), the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), the German Research Foundation (DFG) in the context of GRK2338 (CS-W and AH), and the Helmholtz Association. MN was supported by an overseas grant from the Shiga University of Medical Science and the Uehara Memorial Foundation. Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge the provision of human biomaterial and clinical data from the CPC-M BioArchive and its partners at the Asklepios Biobank Gauting, the LMU Hospital, and the Ludwig Maximilians Universität München as well as from the UGMLC/DZL biobank, Gießen. We thank the patients and their families for their support. We also thank Prof. Dr. med. Susanne Herold (University of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center), Prof. Dr. Silke Meiners, Dr. Ilona Kammerl for providing PR8, and Drs.Takahisa Nakayama and Takaaki Kinoshita for meaningful discussions. We are grateful to Dr. Andrea Schamberger for providing the protocols related to cell culture, Ms. Beatrix Steer, Ms. Heike Hofmann, Dr. Gerald Burgstaller, Ms. Daniela Dietel, and Ms. Marisa Neumann for their technical help. Conflict of interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Supplementary material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2022.957830/full#supplementary-material References Aaron, S. D., Tan, W. C., Bourbeau, J., Sin, D. D., Loves, R. H., Macneil, J., et al. (2017). Diagnostic instability and reversals of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease diagnosis in individuals with mild to moderate airflow obstruction. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 196, 306–314. doi: 10.1164ccm.201612-2531OC PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Baggen, J., Vanstreels, E., Jansen, S., and Daelemans, D. (2021). Cellular host factors for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nat. Microbiol. 6, 1219–1232. doi: 10.1038/s41564-021-00958-0 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Barnes, P. J. (2019). Small airway fibrosis in COPD. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 116:105598. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2019.105598 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Berthold, E. J., Ma-Lauer, Y., Chakraborty, A., Von Brunn, B., Hilgendorff, A., Hatz, R., et al. (2022). Effects of immunophilin inhibitors and non-immunosuppressive analogs on coronavirus replication in human infection models. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 12:958634. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.958634 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Bouquet, J., Tabor, D. E., Silver, J. S., Nair, V., Tovchigrechko, A., Griffin, M. P., et al. (2020). Microbial burden and viral exacerbations in a longitudinal multicenter COPD cohort. Respir. Res. 21:77. doi: 10.1186/s12931-020-01340-0 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Bruderer, R., Bernhardt, O. M., Gandhi, T., Miladinovic, S. M., Cheng, L. Y., Messner, S., et al. (2015). Extending the limits of quantitative proteome profiling with data-independent acquisition and application to acetaminophen-treated three-dimensional liver microtissues. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 14, 1400–1410. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.044305 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Crystal, R. G. (2014). Airway basal cells. The “smoking gun” of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 190, 1355–1362. doi: 10.1164ccm.201408-1492PP PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Dal Col, J., Lamberti, M. J., Nigro, A., Casolaro, V., Fratta, E., Steffan, A., et al. (2022). Phospholipid scramblase 1: A protein with multiple functions via multiple molecular interactors. Cell Commun. Signal. 20:78. doi: 10.1186/s12964-022-00895-3 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Davis, A. S., Chertow, D. S., Moyer, J. E., Suzich, J., Sandouk, A., Dorward, D. W., et al. (2015). Validation of normal human bronchial epithelial cells as a model for influenza A infections in human distal trachea. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 63, 312–328. doi: 10.1369/0022155415570968 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Decramer, M., Janssens, W., and Miravitlles, M. (2012). Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Lancet 379, 1341–1351. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60968-9 CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Dulberger, C. L., Mcmurtrey, C. P., Hölzemer, A., Neu, K. E., Liu, V., Steinbach, A. M., et al. (2017). Human leukocyte antigen F presents peptides and regulates immunity through interactions with NK-cell receptors. Immunity 46, 1018–1029.e1017. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2017.06.002 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Ehre, C., Worthington, E. N., Liesman, R. M., Grubb, B. R., Barbier, D., O’neal, W. K., et al. (2012). Overexpressing mouse model demonstrates the protective role of Muc5ac in the lungs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109, 16528–16533. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1206552109 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Gohy, S., Carlier, F. M., Fregimilicka, C., Detry, B., Lecocq, M., Ladjemi, M. Z., et al. (2019). Altered generation of ciliated cells in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Sci. Rep. 9:17963. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-54292-x PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Guo-Parke, H., Linden, D., Weldon, S., Kidney, J. C., and Taggart, C. C. (2020). Mechanisms of virus-induced airway immunity dysfunction in the pathogenesis of COPD disease, progression, and exacerbation. Front. Immunol. 11:1205. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01205 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Han, J., Perez, J. T., Chen, C., Li, Y., Benitez, A., Kandasamy, M., et al. (2018). Genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen identifies host factors essential for influenza virus replication. Cell Rep. 23, 596–607. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.045 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Hidari, K. I., Yamaguchi, M., Ueno, F., Abe, T., Yoshida, K., and Suzuki, T. (2013). Influenza virus utilizes N-linked sialoglycans as receptors in A549 cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 436, 394–399. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.05.112 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Hogg, J. C., Paré, P. D., and Hackett, T. L. (2017). The contribution of small airway obstruction to the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Physiol. Rev. 97, 529–552. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00025.2015 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Hsu, A. C., Parsons, K., Moheimani, F., Knight, D. A., Hansbro, P. M., Fujita, T., et al. (2016). Impaired antiviral stress granule and IFN-beta enhanceosome formation enhances susceptibility to influenza infection in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease epithelium. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 55, 117–127. doi: 10.1165cmb.2015-0306OC PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Hsu, A. C., Starkey, M. R., Hanish, I., Parsons, K., Haw, T. J., Howland, L. J., et al. (2015). Targeting PI3K-p110 alpha suppresses influenza virus infection in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 191, 1012–1023. doi: 10.1164ccm.201501-0188OC PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Huber, W., Von Heydebreck, A., Sultmann, H., Poustka, A., and Vingron, M. (2002). Variance stabilization applied to microarray data calibration and to the quantification of differential expression. Bioinformatics 18, S96–S104. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/18.suppl_1.S96 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Ito, T., Suzuki, Y., Takada, A., Kawamoto, A., Otsuki, K., Masuda, H., et al. (1997). Differences in sialic acid-galactose linkages in the chicken egg amnion and allantois influence human influenza virus receptor specificity and variant selection. J. Virol. 71, 3357–3362. doi: 10.1128/jvi.71.4.3357-3362.1997 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Ji, S., Dai, M. Y., Huang, Y., Ren, X. C., Jiang, M. L., Qiao, J. P., et al. (2022). Influenza a virus triggers acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by increasing proinflammatory cytokines secretion via NLRP3 inflammasome activation. J. Inflammat. 19:8. doi: 10.1186/s12950-022-00305-y PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Kiani, Z., Bruneau, J., Geraghty, D. E., and Bernard, N. F. (2019). HLA-F on autologous HIV-infected cells activates primary NK cells expressing the activating killer immunoglobulin-like receptor KIR3DS1. J. Virol. 93, e00933–e919. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00933-19 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Koyro, T. F., Kraus, E., Lunemann, S., Hölzemer, A., Wulf, S., Jung, J., et al. (2021). Upregulation of HLA-F expression by BK polyomavirus infection induces immune recognition by KIR3DS1-positive natural killer cells. Kidney Int. 99, 1140–1148. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2020.12.014 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Krammer, F., Smith, G. J. D., Fouchier, R. A. M., Peiris, M., Kedzierska, K., Doherty, P. C., et al. (2018). Influenza. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 4:3. doi: 10.1038/s41572-018-0002-y PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Krijthe, J. H. (2015). Rtsne: T-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding using barnes-hut implementation. R package version 0.16 ed. Google Scholar Kroeker, A. L., Ezzati, P., Coombs, K. M., and Halayko, A. J. (2013). Influenza A infection of primary human airway epithelial cells up-regulates proteins related to purine metabolism and ubiquitin-related signaling. J. Proteome Res. 12, 3139–3151. doi: 10.1021/pr400464p PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Kroeker, A. L., Ezzati, P., Halayko, A. J., and Coombs, K. M. (2012). Response of primary human airway epithelial cells to influenza infection: A quantitative proteomic study. J. Proteome Res. 11, 4132–4146. doi: 10.1021/pr300239r PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Leek, J. T., Johnson, W. E., Parker, H. S., Fertig, E. J., Jaffe, A. E., Zhang, Y., et al. (2020). Sva: Surrogate variable analysis. R package version 3.36.0 ed. Google Scholar Leek, J. T., Johnson, W. E., Parker, H. S., Jaffe, A. E., and Storey, J. D. (2012). The sva package for removing batch effects and other unwanted variation in high-throughput experiments. Bioinformatics 28, 882–883. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts034 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Lenz, A. G., Stoeger, T., Cei, D., Schmidmeir, M., Semren, N., Burgstaller, G., et al. (2014). Efficient bioactive delivery of aerosolized drugs to human pulmonary epithelial cells cultured in air-liquid interface conditions. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 51, 526–535. doi: 10.1165cmb.2013-0479OC PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Lepper, M. F., Ohmayer, U., Von Toerne, C., Maison, N., Ziegler, A. G., and Hauck, S. M. (2018). Proteomic landscape of patient-derived CD4+ T cells in recent-onset type 1 diabetes. J. Proteome Res. 17, 618–634. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00712 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Li, B., Clohisey, S. M., Chia, B. S., Wang, B., Cui, A., Eisenhaure, T., et al. (2020). Genome-wide CRISPR screen identifies host dependency factors for influenza A virus infection. Nat. Commun. 11:164. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13965-x PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Li, T., Zhang, Y., Patil, P., and Johnson, W. E. (2021). Overcoming the impacts of two-step batch effect correction on gene expression estimation and inference. Biostatistics [Preprint]. doi: 10.1101/2021.01.24.428009 CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Lin, A., and Yan, W. H. (2019). The emerging roles of human leukocyte antigen-F in immune modulation and viral infection. Front. Immunol. 10:964. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00964 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Liu, Y., Lin, S., Xie, Y., Zhao, L., Du, H., Yang, S., et al. (2022). ILDR1 promotes influenza A virus replication through binding to PLSCR1. Sci. Rep. 12:8515. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-12598-3 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Lodes, N., Seidensticker, K., Perniss, A., Nietzer, S., Oberwinkler, H., May, T., et al. (2020). Investigation on ciliary functionality of different airway epithelial cell lines in three-dimensional cell culture. Tissue Eng. 26, 432–440. doi: 10.1089en.tea.2019.0188 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Lunemann, S., Schöbel, A., Kah, J., Fittje, P., Hölzemer, A., Langeneckert, A. E., et al. (2018). Interactions between KIR3DS1 and HLA-F activate natural killer cells to control HCV replication in cell culture. Gastroenterology 155, 1366–1371.e1363. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2018.07.019 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Luo, W., Zhang, J., Liang, L., Wang, G., Li, Q., Zhu, P., et al. (2018). Phospholipid scramblase 1 interacts with influenza A virus NP, impairing its nuclear import and thereby suppressing virus replication. PLoS Pathog. 14:e1006851. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006851 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Mallia, P., and Johnston, S. L. (2007). Influenza infection and COPD. Int. J. Chron. Obstruct. Pulmon. Dis. 2, 55–64. doi: 10.2147/copd.2007.2.1.55 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Mastalerz, M., Dick, E., Chakraborty, A., Hennen, E., Schamberger, A. C., Schroppel, A., et al. (2022). Validation of in vitro models for smoke exposure of primary human bronchial epithelial cells. Am. J. Physiol. 322, L129–L148. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00091.2021 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Matrosovich, M. N., Matrosovich, T. Y., Gray, T., Roberts, N. A., and Klenk, H. D. (2004). Human and avian influenza viruses target different cell types in cultures of human airway epithelium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101, 4620–4624. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0308001101 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Mattugini, N., Merl-Pham, J., Petrozziello, E., Schindler, L., Bernhagen, J., Hauck, S. M., et al. (2018). Influence of white matter injury on gray matter reactive gliosis upon stab wound in the adult murine cerebral cortex. Glia 66, 1644–1662. doi: 10.1002/glia.23329 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Merregaert, J., Van Langen, J., Hansen, U., Ponsaerts, P., El Ghalbzouri, A., Steenackers, E., et al. (2010). Phospholipid scramblase 1 is secreted by a lipid raft-dependent pathway and interacts with the extracellular matrix protein 1 in the dermal epidermal junction zone of human skin. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 37823–37837. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.136408 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Mindaye, S. T., Ilyushina, N. A., Fantoni, G., Alterman, M. A., Donnelly, R. P., and Eichelberger, M. C. (2017). Impact of influenza A virus infection on the proteomes of human bronchoepithelial cells from different donors. J. Proteome Res. 16, 3287–3297. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00286 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Newby, C. M., Rowe, R. K., and Pekosz, A. (2006). Influenza A virus infection of primary differentiated airway epithelial cell cultures derived from Syrian golden hamsters. Virology 354, 80–90. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2006.06.024 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Nicholls, J. M., Bourne, A. J., Chen, H., Guan, Y., and Peiris, J. S. (2007). Sialic acid receptor detection in the human respiratory tract: Evidence for widespread distribution of potential binding sites for human and avian influenza viruses. Respir. Res. 8:73. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-8-73 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Ntritsos, G., Franek, J., Belbasis, L., Christou, M. A., Markozannes, G., Altman, P., et al. (2018). Gender-specific estimates of COPD prevalence: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. J. Chron. Obstruct. Pulmon. Dis. 13, 1507–1514. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S146390 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Perez-Riverol, Y., Bai, J., Bandla, C., Garcia-Seisdedos, D., Hewapathirana, S., Kamatchinathan, S., et al. (2022). The PRIDE database resources in 2022: A hub for mass spectrometry-based proteomics evidences. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, D543–D552. doi: 10.1093ar/gkab1038 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Pezzulo, A. A., Starner, T. D., Scheetz, T. E., Traver, G. L., Tilley, A. E., Harvey, B. G., et al. (2011). The air-liquid interface and use of primary cell cultures are important to recapitulate the transcriptional profile of in vivo airway epithelia. Am. J. Physiol. 300, L25–L31. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00256.2010 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Rao, Y., Le, Y., Xiong, J., Pei, Y., and Sun, Y. (2021). NK cells in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Front. Immunol. 12:666045. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.666045 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Ritchie, M. E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C. W., Shi, W., et al. (2015). Limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 43:e47. doi: 10.1093ar/gkv007 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Rudnicka, A., and Yamauchi, Y. (2016). Ubiquitin in influenza virus entry and innate immunity. Viruses 8:293. doi: 10.3390/v8100293 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Schamberger, A. C., Staab-Weijnitz, C. A., Mise-Racek, N., and Eickelberg, O. (2015). Cigarette smoke alters primary human bronchial epithelial cell differentiation at the air-liquid interface. Sci. Rep. 5:8163. doi: 10.1038/srep08163 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Shinya, K., Ebina, M., Yamada, S., Ono, M., Kasai, N., and Kawaoka, Y. (2006). Avian flu: Influenza virus receptors in the human airway. Nature 440, 435–436. doi: 10.1038/440435a PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Short, K. R., Kasper, J., Van Der Aa, S., Andeweg, A. C., Zaaraoui-Boutahar, F., Goeijenbier, M., et al. (2016). Influenza virus damages the alveolar barrier by disrupting epithelial cell tight junctions. Eur. Respir. J. 47, 954–966. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01282-2015 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Singanayagam, A., Loo, S. L., Calderazzo, M., Finney, L. J., Trujillo Torralbo, M. B., Bakhsoliani, E., et al. (2019). Antiviral immunity is impaired in COPD patients with frequent exacerbations. Am. J. Physiol. 317, L893–L903. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00253.2019 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Smith, C. B., Kanner, R. E., Golden, C. A., Klauber, M. R., and Renzetti, A. D. Jr. (1980). Effect of viral infections on pulmonary function in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases. J. Infect. Dis. 141, 271–280. doi: 10.1093/infdis/141.3.271 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Steiling, K., Van Den Berge, M., Hijazi, K., Florido, R., Campbell, J., Liu, G., et al. (2013). A dynamic bronchial airway gene expression signature of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung function impairment. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 187, 933–942. doi: 10.1164ccm.201208-1449OC PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Sun, Y., Abriola, L., Niederer, R. O., Pedersen, S. F., Alfajaro, M. M., Silva Monteiro, V., et al. (2021). Restriction of SARS-CoV-2 replication by targeting programmed -1 ribosomal frameshifting. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118:e2023051118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2023051118 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Viniol, C., and Vogelmeier, C. F. (2018). Exacerbations of COPD. Eur. Respir. Rev. 27:170103. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0103-2017 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Wallace, L. E., Liu, M., Van Kuppeveld, F. J. M., De Vries, E., and De Haan, C. A. M. (2021). Respiratory mucus as a virus-host range determinant. Trends Microbiol. 29, 983–992. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.03.014 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Wei, L., Xu, D., Qian, Y., Huang, G., Ma, W., Liu, F., et al. (2015). Comprehensive analysis of gene-expression profile in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Int. J. Chron. Obstruct. Pulmon. Dis. 10, 1103–1109. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S68570 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Wisniewski, J. R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2009). Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat. Methods 6, 359–362. doi: 10.1038meth.1322 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar World Health Organization [WHO] (2021). Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Available online at: https://www.who.intews-room/fact-sheets/detail/chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease-(copd) (accessed Nov 26, 2021). Google Scholar Wu, W., Alexander, J. S., and Metcalf, J. P. (2022). In vivo and in vitro studies of cigarette smoke effects on innate responses to influenza virus: A matter of models? Viruses 14:1824. doi: 10.3390/v14081824 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Zarcone, M. C., Van Schadewijk, A., Duistermaat, E., Hiemstra, P. S., and Kooter, I. M. (2017). Diesel exhaust alters the response of cultured primary bronchial epithelial cells from patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae. Respir. Res. 18:27. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0510-4 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Zhang, L., Bukreyev, A., Thompson, C. I., Watson, B., Peeples, M. E., Collins, P. L., et al. (2005). Infection of ciliated cells by human parainfluenza virus type 3 in an in vitro model of human airway epithelium. J. Virol. 79, 1113–1124. doi: 10.1128/JVI.79.2.1113-1124.2005 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Zhang, Y., Mao, D., Roswit, W. T., Jin, X., Patel, A. C., Patel, D. A., et al. (2015). PARP9-DTX3L ubiquitin ligase targets host histone H2BJ and viral 3C protease to enhance interferon signaling and control viral infection. Nat. Immunol. 16, 1215–1227. doi: 10.1038i.3279 PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar Keywords: organotypic, proteomics, flu receptor, primary human bronchial epithelial cells, COPD Citation: Nakayama M, Marchi H, Dmitrieva AM, Chakraborty A, Merl-Pham J, Hennen E, Le Gleut R, Ruppert C, Guenther A, Kahnert K, Behr J, Hilgendorff A, Hauck SM, Adler H and Staab-Weijnitz CA (2023) Quantitative proteomics of differentiated primary bronchial epithelial cells from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and control identifies potential novel host factors post-influenza A virus infection. Front. Microbiol. 13:957830. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.957830 Received: 31 May 2022; Accepted: 19 December 2022;Published: 11 January 2023. Edited by: Nejat Duzgunes, University of the Pacific, United States Reviewed by: Liu Sidang, Shandong Agricultural University, China Mira C. Patel, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United States Copyright © 2023 Nakayama, Marchi, Dmitrieva, Chakraborty, Merl-Pham, Hennen, Le Gleut, Ruppert, Guenther, Kahnert, Behr, Hilgendorff, Hauck, Adler and Staab-Weijnitz. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. *Correspondence: Heiko Adler, h.adler@helmholtz-muenchen.de; Claudia A. Staab-Weijnitz, staab-weijnitz@helmholtz-muenchen.de; https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1211-7834 Disclaimer: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Footer Guidelines Author guidelinesEditor guidelinesPolicies and publication ethicsFee policy Explore ArticlesResearch Topics Journals Outreach Frontiers Forum Frontiers Policy Labs Frontiers for Young Minds Connect Help centerEmails and alerts Contact us SubmitCareer opportunities Follow us © 2024 Frontiers Media S.A. All rights reserved Privacy policy | Terms and conditionsWhy Are Egg Prices Still So High? It’s Not The Reason You ThinkSubscribe To NewslettersBETATHIS IS A BETA EXPERIENCE. OPT-OUT HEREBreaking1 hour agoTrump’s Cabinet: Here’s Who He’s Picked For White House Roles—Mike Waltz, Lee Zeldin, Stephen Miller And More2 hours agoNorthern Taurids Meteor Shower Peak Starts Tonight—Here’s How To Watch5 hours agoWill Trump Eliminate The Department Of Education? What We Know As Elon Musk Applauds ‘Good Idea.’5 hours agoHow All Of Trump’s Criminal Cases Fell Apart, Explained5 hours agoDelphi Double Murder Verdict: Richard Allen Found Guilty On All Counts5 hours agoShaboozey’s ‘Bar Song’ Now Longest-Running No. 1 Hit This Decade—Two Weeks From All-Time Record6 hours agoThese Stocks Are Outperforming Tesla As The Biggest Trump Trade Winners9 hours agoStephen Miller Will Reportedly Lead Trump’s Policy Agenda—Here’s Who Else Could Help Him9 hours agoWhat To Know About Trump’s New ‘Border Czar’ Tom Homan10 hours agoElon Musk Now $50 Billion Richer Post-Election As Tesla Stock Up Another 9%11 hours agoRepublicans Only Four Seats Away From House Control—But Key Races Too Close To Call11 hours agoUpdated Northern Lights Forecast: Here’s Where Aurora Borealis Will Be Visible Tonight13 hours ago‘Pure Fiction’: Kremlin Denies Trump Called Putin And Warned Against Escalation In Ukraine15 hours agoBitcoin Crosses $82,000 For The First Time—Boosted By Trump’s Win18 hours agoTrump Says He’ll Nominate Key Ally Rep. Elise Stefanik For UN Ambassador Role18 hours agoTrump Says Former ICE Head Tom Homan Will Serve As His ‘Border Czar’—Here’s What He’s Said About Mass Deportations+1 day agoRick Scott Shores Up MAGA Support In Senate Leadership Race—Here’s What To Know+1 day agoNorthern Lights Forecast: Aurora Borealis May Be Visible In These States Tonight+1 day agoTrump Allies Ramaswamy, Jordan Downplay Revenge Threats+1 day agoKate Middleton Joins Royal Family At Remembrance Event—As Queen Camilla Recovers From Illness (Photos)+1 day agoUniversal Music Group Shuts Down Bill Ackman’s Request To Delist From Amsterdam Stock ExchangeEdit StoryForbesMoneyBreakingWhy Are Egg Prices Still So High? It’s Not The Reason You ThinkAnthony TellezFormer StaffJan 12, 2023,01:30pm ESTUpdated Jan 24, 2023, 01:30pm ESTShare to FacebookShare to TwitterShare to LinkedinTopline The median cost of a dozen eggs in the U.S. remains $4.25—over twice what it was a year ago—and while increased inflation in 2022 has contributed somewhat, the real reason egg costs remain high (as inflation otherwise eases) is an avian flu that has decimated chicken farmers, causing as many as 58 million chickens to be affected. Cartons of eggs are seen for sale in a Kroger grocery store. Egg prices steadily climb in the U.S. ... [+] as inflation continues impacting grocery stores nationwide.Getty Images Key Facts In a report from the U.S. Department of Agriculture that tracks food price outlook, eggs have risen up to 59% in December 2022, the highest year over year rise in prices among food items. The main reason egg prices remain high is the spread of an avian influenza virus which started in early 2022 and has already affected more birds than the 2015 outbreak, according to the Centers for Disease Control. The avian flu affects more than 100 species of birds and can spread quickly, with a mortality rate of 90% to 100% in chickens, according to the CDC. So far, there have been 57 million birds culled because of the influenza virus across 47 states, according to data from the USDA, compared to the 50 million birds affected across 21 states in 2015. Avian influenza does occur from time to time and has been associated with human death in Asia, Africa, Europe, the Pacific and, while rare, some cases of the avian flu have caused illness in North America, says the CDC. In December, when egg demand was at an all-time high due to the beginning of the holiday season—and with inflation still high—the median price for a dozen eggs across the country was at $4.25, more than twice the year before ($1.78), according to data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. In some states, like California, egg prices are as high as $7 for a dozen, mainly attributed to a state law which requires egg producers to raise cage-free hens, that went into effect last year and so far, the bird flu has killed 4 million cage-free hens alone keeping supplies low as demand remained high. Consumer eating habits also play a part in the sudden rise in egg prices as egg consumption has risen 17% between 2012 and 2021 according to a report from the USDA and has even outpaced red meats. As consumers wind down their egg consumption after the holidays, egg prices will begin to lower as egg producers have more time to stock up and focus on how to deal with the avian influenza virus before the next holiday demand in April according to an egg market overview by the USDA. Surprising Fact While the cage-free requirement has kept California egg prices high, in other states that have more lax rules for egg producers, organic or cage free might actually be the cheaper option. An earnings report from Cal-Maine Foods, a top U.S. wholesale egg producer, noted conventional eggs went from $1.15 in 2021 to $2.88 in 2022 while specialty eggs (organic or cage-free) went from $1.81 in 2021 to only $2.37 in 2022. Crucial Quote “The flu is the most important factor affecting egg prices,” said Maro Ibarburu, a business analyst at the Egg Industry Center at Iowa State University told The Washington Post. “We need to see if more birds are affected by influenza. In the event we get the outbreak under control, it will be better every month,” he said about egg prices. Key Background The avian influenza which has affected a majority of bird and egg producers across the U.S. started in February with Iowa, the largest egg producer in the U.S., hit the hardest. The previous outbreak, which lasted between initial detection of the HPAI virus in December 2014 and final detection June 2015, had been one of the most significant animal health events in the U.S., according to a report from the USDA. A recent eggs market overview report from the USDA says that while wholesale prices of carton eggs begins to lower and demand loosens from holiday levels, consumer demand remains higher entering the new year compared to 2022, and average price is $4.25 per dozen. Contra On January 19, Farm Action—a farm-led advocacy group—called on the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to investigate egg producers over egg prices. The group has accused egg producers of using inflation and the avian flu as “an opportunity to extract egregious profits” in a letter to the FTC. The letter also claims that egg producers such as Cal-Maine Foods and Rose Acre Farms have profited as much as 40% during what it claimed was a “price gauge.” Egg producers have denied the claims. Follow me on Twitter. Send me a secure tip. Anthony TellezEditorial StandardsForbes AccoladesJoin The ConversationComments One Community. Many Voices. Create a free account to share your thoughts. Read our community guidelines here.Forbes Community GuidelinesOur community is about connecting people through open and thoughtful conversations. We want our readers to share their views and exchange ideas and facts in a safe space.In order to do so, please follow the posting rules in our site's Terms of Service. We've summarized some of those key rules below. Simply put, keep it civil.Your post will be rejected if we notice that it seems to contain:False or intentionally out-of-context or misleading informationSpamInsults, profanity, incoherent, obscene or inflammatory language or threats of any kindAttacks on the identity of other commenters or the article's authorContent that otherwise violates our site's terms.User accounts will be blocked if we notice or believe that users are engaged in:Continuous attempts to re-post comments that have been previously moderatedejectedRacist, sexist, homophobic or other discriminatory commentsAttempts or tactics that put the site security at riskActions that otherwise violate our site's terms.So, how can you be a power user?Stay on topic and share your insightsFeel free to be clear and thoughtful to get your point across‘Like’ or ‘Dislike’ to show your point of view.Protect your community.Use the report tool to alert us when someone breaks the rules.Thanks for reading our community guidelines. Please read the full list of posting rules found in our site's Terms of Service.Rapid tests for Covid, RSV and flu are available in Europe. What's stopping them in the U.S.?IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Skip to ContentNBC News Logo2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsShare & Save —My NewsManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearchSearchProfile My NewsSign Out Sign InCreate your free profileSectionsU.S. NewsDecision 2024PoliticsWorldLocalBusinessSportsInvestigationsCulture & TrendsHealthScienceTech & MediaWeatherVideo FeaturesPhotosNBC SelectNBC Asian AmericaNBC BLKNBC LatinoNBC OUTtvTodayNightly NewsMSNBCMeet the PressDatelineFeaturedNBC News NowNightly FilmsStay TunedSpecial FeaturesNewslettersPodcastsListen NowMore From NBCCNBCNBC.COMNBCU AcademyPeacockNEXT STEPS FOR VETSNBC News Site MapHelpFollow NBC News news AlertsThere are no new alerts at this timeSearchSearchFacebookTwitterEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardPinterestLinkedinLatest Stories2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsHealth newsRapid tests for Covid, RSV and the flu are available in Europe. Why not in the U.S.?Experts say the FDA's lengthy regulatory process and concerns about people being able to self-test properly have stalled an important public-health tool.A rapid test for Covid-19, the flu and RSV.MeasieJan. 6, 2023, 8:37 PM UTC / Updated Jan. 10, 2023, 2:37 PM UTCBy Aria BendixSander Brus didn't expect a photo of his friend's grandfather's flu diagnosis to go viral. But when he shared the image on Twitter in December, he was bombarded with messages, he said.People in the U.S. wanted to know how to purchase the rapid test in the picture, which simultaneously screened people for three common respiratory viruses: Covid, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and two types of influenza, A and B. The viruses have circulated widely this winter and share many of the same symptoms, meaning they're often indistinguishable without a diagnostic test. But unlike Covid tests, which are available over the counter, RSV and flu tests must be performed at a doctor’s office or ordered via prescription. And the FDA hasn't authorized an at-home test that can rapidly detect all three viruses at once.The rapid test from Brus' photo, however, is available in the European Union, and the manufacturer has certified that it meets the E.U.'s health and safety standards.Brus is the founder of Measie, a diagnostics vendor that sells the test online. The test costs 6.5 euros ($6.92), and the company has sold around 10,000 of them thus far, Brus said.The test’s manufacturer, Shenzhen Microprofit Biotech Co. Ltd., says it captures 100% of cases that are negative for Covid, flu or RSV — meaning it won't produce false positives — and picks up on 90% of influenza B cases, 92% of influenza A cases, 93% of Covid cases and 95% of RSV cases. Brus said that that performance should be sufficient to secure authorization in the U.S. “A test performed in Amsterdam, where I’m from, will give exactly the same result as a test performed in New York. There shouldn’t be a difference based on geography," he said. "But still, people in the U.S. cannot use it and I can."Sheng Tang, the vice general manager at Shenzhen Microprofit Biotech, said the company has no plans to apply for emergency authorization for its test in the U.S. Tang said in an email that he doesn't think the Food and Drug Administration would grant the authorization, given its regulatory constraints.Dr. Susan Butler-Wu, an associate professor of clinical pathology at the University of Southern California, said rapid tests for multiple viruses are "the way of the future," and would help more people get access to the appropriate treatments. But the U.S. has historically fallen behind Europe in terms of authorizing new diagnostics, she said.“It’s not unusual to see things that have been approved in other countries that are great products and we don’t have them here. That’s just the reality of the situation," she said. "It takes time to go through the process and get approval."The FDA has authorized one nonprescription test that allows people to simultaneously swab themselves for flu, Covid and RSV, but the swab must be mailed to Labcorp. The test costs $169 for people without insurance.The FDA said it strongly supports at-home tests for respiratory viruses, including combination tests for flu and Covid. But the agency declined to comment on whether it had received or was evaluating any applications for these tests from manufacturers."When the data are sound, the FDA has not hesitated to move quickly to authorize tests, with at-home tests of all areas being a high priority for the agency," an FDA spokesperson said. The agency pointed to one roadblock, though: At-home flu tests have traditionally required people to swab high up in their nose, which usually means that a clinician should administer them. Unlike Covid tests, Butler-Wu said, there have been fewer opportunities to study whether rapid flu tests can be administered in the shallower part of the nose and maintain their accuracy."You don’t want to have people just touch the outside of their nose and not actually get the benefit of the test," said Joshua Sharfstein, a former FDA deputy commissioner, now a professor of health policy and management at Johns Hopkins University.Dr. Michael Mina, the chief science officer for the at-home testing company eMed, said the FDA tends to have strict requirements for over-the-counter tests. The agency often asks manufacturers to conduct studies that demonstrate that people can administer at-home tests properly — a process that may cost millions of dollars and delay the test’s authorization by months or years, Mina said. “It’s taken a very long time in the past to get new self-tests authorized, like HIV tests or even pregnancy tests," he said. "They’ve taken years and years and years and years. We have a pretty conservative regulatory approach."In real life, Mina isn't worried about combo tests for respiratory viruses being user-friendly.“We know that Americans can swab their nose because it’s been done millions and millions and millions and millions of times now for Covid," he said.Even if a doctor administers a rapid test, however, the FDA may still have reservations about its accuracy. Butler-Wu said rapid flu tests given by medical professionals are generally about 60% sensitive, meaning they produce false negatives about 40% of the time. For RSV, that performance is "a little bit better," but still unreliable, she said.“There are longstanding issues with the performance of antigen testing for flu and for RSV that have been extremely well documented," Butler-Wu said. "In 2009, when novel H1N1 emerged, the sensitivity of antigen tests for flu A was the same as a flip of a coin. We’re talking 50%."As long as a test is accurate and easy to use, however, the FDA's data requirements "are not that onerous," Sharfstein said. The agency is usually able to make a decision about a test within months of an application being submitted, he added.“Tests with high sensitivity and specificity will not have difficulty getting cleared by the FDA, but it is important for the FDA to understand how that was determined, what the procedures were, and to actually look at the data,” Sharfstein said.Mina said he's hopeful that the FDA will authorize a combined at-home Covid and flu test this month or next, but it might not look like the version in Europe. The test could still involve two separate swabs — one for each virus — that are packaged together, he said."The FDA is a little bit less comfortable with getting that totally combined test into people’s homes right away," Mina said. "I don’t really understand that part of it. I don’t think there’s good logic behind it.”But public-health experts haven't given up hope that a combination rapid test for Covid, the flu and RSV will reach consumers one day.The FDA is "feeling a lot of pressure from Americans," Mina said. "Americans and are now seeing Europeans having these tests available and, just like in Covid, there’s now a push to say, 'Why don’t we have these? Why aren’t they available to us?' The agency is starting to understand that and actually be somewhat amenable to working with the manufacturers to see them get it through.”Aria BendixAria Bendix is the breaking health reporter for NBC News Digital.AboutContactHelpCareersAd ChoicesPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023)NBC News SitemapClosed CaptioningAdvertiseSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday LogoWhy did the flu hit San Diego County so hard at the end of 2022? | KPBS Public Media Search Query Show Search News Public Matters Local En español: Política y Elecciones National International San Diego News Now Podcast All News Sections Public Matters Local En español: Política y Elecciones National International San Diego News Now Podcast All News Sections Arts & Culture Arts & Culture Stories Arts Calendar Fall Arts Guide 2024 Cinema Junkie One Book, One San Diego The Parker Edison Project Podcast Port of Entry Podcast Everybody's Doing It With Miss Lolly Podcast Freeway Exit Podcast Black Arts & Culture Weekend Arts Preview Art in the Open Families Hub Arts & Culture Stories Arts Calendar Fall Arts Guide 2024 Cinema Junkie One Book, One San Diego The Parker Edison Project Podcast Port of Entry Podcast Everybody's Doing It With Miss Lolly Podcast Freeway Exit Podcast Black Arts & Culture Weekend Arts Preview Art in the Open Families Hub TV & Radio Watch KPBS On-Demand KPBS Evening Edition KPBS Midday Edition KPBS News: This Week KPBS Roundtable Kids TV Podcasts Radio Reading Service Radio Shows Radio 89.5 Schedule TV Highlights TV Schedules TV Shows Classical San Diego Schedule Watch KPBS On-Demand KPBS Evening Edition KPBS Midday Edition KPBS News: This Week KPBS Roundtable Kids TV Podcasts Radio Reading Service Radio Shows Radio 89.5 Schedule TV Highlights TV Schedules TV Shows Classical San Diego Schedule Podcasts Rap Diego Free Jane Stripper Energy San Diego News Now KPBS Midday Edition Freeway Exit KPBS Roundtable Cinema Junkie KPBS Investigates Port of Entry The Parker Edison Project Everybody's Doing It With Miss Lolly San Diego Conversations The KPBS Summer Music Series Rad Scientist My First Day Device Rap Diego Free Jane Stripper Energy San Diego News Now KPBS Midday Edition Freeway Exit KPBS Roundtable Cinema Junkie KPBS Investigates Port of Entry The Parker Edison Project Everybody's Doing It With Miss Lolly San Diego Conversations The KPBS Summer Music Series Rad Scientist My First Day Device Support KPBS Membership Information KPBS Passport Directors Club Producers Club Major Giving Building on Trust: The Campaign for KPBS Vehicle Donation Giving Property Corporate Support Other Ways to Give Our Corporate Sponsors Membership Information KPBS Passport Directors Club Producers Club Major Giving Building on Trust: The Campaign for KPBS Vehicle Donation Giving Property Corporate Support Other Ways to Give Our Corporate Sponsors Events Events Calendar Submit an Event Events Calendar Submit an Event Watch Live Newsletters Public Matters Help Menu Show Search Search Query Give Now Play Live Radio Next Up: 0:00 0:00 Available On Air Stations On Air Now Playing KPBS Radio Full Schedule On Air Now Playing Classical San Diego Watch Live All Streams News Public Matters Local En español: Política y Elecciones National International San Diego News Now Podcast All News Sections Public Matters Local En español: Política y Elecciones National International San Diego News Now Podcast All News Sections Arts & Culture Arts & Culture Stories Arts Calendar Fall Arts Guide 2024 Cinema Junkie One Book, One San Diego The Parker Edison Project Podcast Port of Entry Podcast Everybody's Doing It With Miss Lolly Podcast Freeway Exit Podcast Black Arts & Culture Weekend Arts Preview Art in the Open Families Hub Arts & Culture Stories Arts Calendar Fall Arts Guide 2024 Cinema Junkie One Book, One San Diego The Parker Edison Project Podcast Port of Entry Podcast Everybody's Doing It With Miss Lolly Podcast Freeway Exit Podcast Black Arts & Culture Weekend Arts Preview Art in the Open Families Hub TV & Radio Watch KPBS On-Demand KPBS Evening Edition KPBS Midday Edition KPBS News: This Week KPBS Roundtable Kids TV Podcasts Radio Reading Service Radio Shows Radio 89.5 Schedule TV Highlights TV Schedules TV Shows Classical San Diego Schedule Watch KPBS On-Demand KPBS Evening Edition KPBS Midday Edition KPBS News: This Week KPBS Roundtable Kids TV Podcasts Radio Reading Service Radio Shows Radio 89.5 Schedule TV Highlights TV Schedules TV Shows Classical San Diego Schedule Podcasts Rap Diego Free Jane Stripper Energy San Diego News Now KPBS Midday Edition Freeway Exit KPBS Roundtable Cinema Junkie KPBS Investigates Port of Entry The Parker Edison Project Everybody's Doing It With Miss Lolly San Diego Conversations The KPBS Summer Music Series Rad Scientist My First Day Device Rap Diego Free Jane Stripper Energy San Diego News Now KPBS Midday Edition Freeway Exit KPBS Roundtable Cinema Junkie KPBS Investigates Port of Entry The Parker Edison Project Everybody's Doing It With Miss Lolly San Diego Conversations The KPBS Summer Music Series Rad Scientist My First Day Device Support KPBS Membership Information KPBS Passport Directors Club Producers Club Major Giving Building on Trust: The Campaign for KPBS Vehicle Donation Giving Property Corporate Support Other Ways to Give Our Corporate Sponsors Membership Information KPBS Passport Directors Club Producers Club Major Giving Building on Trust: The Campaign for KPBS Vehicle Donation Giving Property Corporate Support Other Ways to Give Our Corporate Sponsors Events Events Calendar Submit an Event Events Calendar Submit an Event Watch Live Newsletters Public Matters Help VOTER HUB: Get live local, state and national results of the 2024 General Election. Why did the flu hit San Diego County so hard at the end of 2022? By Claire Trageser / Deputy Investigations Team and Digital Fellowship Editor, Prakshal Doshi / Investigative Student Assistant Contributors: Mike Damron / Video Journalist Published January 12, 2023 at 6:00 AM PST This story was published more than 1 year ago. Facebook WhatsApp Email Listen • 10:33 So far, this flu season has been a doozy. By the time November was over, it might have felt like everyone you knew had the flu.Local data on influenza cases in many ways backs up that feeling. San Diego County recorded more cases of the flu in 2022 than in any other year over the past decade, according to data from the county’s Health and Human Services Agency. What’s more:The nearly 23,000 cases recorded in 2022 beat 2020, the next highest year, by nearly 6,000 cases.There were nearly 19,000 cases recorded in Fall 2022, which is more than the total number of cases in every year over the past decade.During five weeks this past fall, there were more cases than in all of 2021.it’s not just perception — the flu did hit San Diego early and hard this season, said Dr. Davey Smith, an infectious disease specialist at UC San Diego. Advertisement Become a KPBS sponsor “Usually people get the flu when they go to the East Coast over the holidays to visit their relatives and then bring it back to San Diego," Smith said. "That's what usually kicks off our flu season, and it usually lasts a couple of months. This flu season right now really did start quite early. I don't know why.”The mask effectExperts are still debating why the flu peaked so early, with theories ranging from decreased immunity due to COVID-19 and increased socializing to an earlier flu season in other parts of the world.But one thing is clear, said Rebecca Fielding-Miller, an epidemiology professor at UC San Diego: people are interacting without masks far more than at any point during the pandemic. This has led to the increased spread of a number of viruses. RELATED: COVID, influenza cases on the rise, even before likely Thanksgiving bump City News Service “In previous years, people were masking, people were being really conscientious about airborne spread of disease, people weren't gathering as much, especially in enclosed spaces, and this year is different,” Fielding-Miller said. “And so we're seeing this huge resurgence of the flu that we haven't seen in the last few years.” Advertisement Become a KPBS sponsor She added that flu cases were so low the two prior seasons, that scientists weren’t able to fully study the effectiveness of the flu vaccines in those years. Another factor driving the peak this season is kids being in school without masks. “Last year when we had such high levels of masking and kids were back in school in person for the most part, and we still didn't see this spread of flu,” Fielding-Miller said.Almost half of the cases were in kids 17 and under, whereas in 2020 and 2021 more than half the cases were in the 18 to 49 population, the data show. Kids were a smaller portion of cases in almost every season before COVID-19.How COVID impacted immunityAnother factor experts are still trying to figure out is whether COVID-19 alters the body’s immune system to make it more susceptible to other illnesses like influenza. UC San Diego’s Smith said it might.“My thought is that it increases the activation of cells to be able to get infected for the flu,” he said. “It increases the susceptibility to the flu.”Overall, the lack of widespread flu across the community in 2020 and 2021 could also make the broader population more susceptible now that our socializing has increased, he said.“You can think of the community as a gas tank full of immune responses, and every year when flu season hits, it infects a whole bunch of people and if they live, they have lots of immune gas in the tank for our community,” Smith said. “So it fills it up every flu season and it wanes over the year when flu is not circulating. And then when the flu hits again, it fills the tank back up.”But, he said, for the past two years, the tank has drained down to empty because so few people got the flu. “So therefore, when flu hit this year and there was more social interaction and less masking that left more of our community open for infection and it really let it spread very quickly,” Smith said. Local RELATED: No masks required for start of San Diego Unified 2022-23 school year Lara McCaffrey But Fielding-Miller said what might be true for a community isn’t true for an individual. Just because you didn’t get sick for a couple of years doesn’t mean your immune system is weaker. It’s not like a muscle that got flabby without exercise.“You don't have to exercise it all the time,” she said. “Not getting sick for three years just means you didn't get sick for three years, which is really nice. It doesn't mean you're setting yourself up to get more sick later.”Still, the county’s flu numbers aren’t through the roof this year, and the peak in November was pretty typical compared to other pre-COVID years. This casts doubt on the theory that our collective immunity decreased during COVID-19, said Shane Crotty, an infectious disease expert at the La Jolla Institute of Immunology.“There definitely was the concern that when people came back, would there just be a ton of extra infections? And my reading of the data is that, no, that hasn't happened,” Crotty said. “My bet was that it'd be a fairly average winter for a number of these diseases, but that the perception would be it's a really bad winter season because such a high percentage of the population is now on high alert right for respiratory symptoms.”Hospitalizations and deathsThis season’s hospitalization rate for influenza-like illnesses has also been much higher than in the two seasons during COVID-19, but has stayed consistent with most seasons before COVID-19, according to the county data.In the same week of November that the county’s cases peaked, the hospitalization rate was also the highest, with 11.4% of emergency department visits being for influenza-like symptoms. In 2017, that number reached 17.3%, but not until after Christmas. In the season before COVID-19, it hovered at around 10% in the first weeks of 2020.Deaths so far are much lower — just 30 this season compared to 108 in 2019 and 343 in 2017. But the season is only have over and there can be a lag in reporting so the number may rise significantly. Health RELATED: UC San Diego Health rushes to create beds with increases in COVID, flu admissions Matt Hoffman Listen • 1:14 Another note of caution when looking at case data is case counts could be higher this year because more people get tested when they’re feeling sick than they did before COVID-19, said Dr. Seema Shah, the San Diego County-Medical Director of Epidemiology and Immunizations Services.“We're testing as much as we have in the last two years, and certainly that might affect your case data,” Shah said. "But that's not going to affect your hospitalization data, that's not going to affect your death data.”Shah added that the season is not over yet. There may be another peak in the coming weeks that could add significantly to the county’s case count and hospitalizations.Another question is whether a normal or large flu season will make next year’s flu season easier. That’s a difficult question to answer, said Smith of UC San Diego. For one thing, flu viruses are different every year and are hard to predict.Going back to the analogy of exposure to flu viruses as filling the gas tank, Smith said the current season could possibly top us off collectively.“There may be an increase in the amount of immune gas that we have in our community that will last us a little bit better for the next year and we might get into a more predictable cycle for our flu,” he said. “However, what I've noticed, if anything over the past two and a half years with COVID, is not to make predictions.’There is one thing Smith said individuals can do to ensure their gas tank immunity is as full as possible: Get a flu shot. Listen • 4:15 Why did the flu hit San Diego County so hard at the end of 2022? Related podcasts Surge in flu cases KPBS PUBLIC MEDIA Flu cases in San Diego County hit a decade high, but experts are still debating why. In other news, why the cost of eggs is increasing. Plus, non-alcoholic options for those participating in Dry January. Listen • 16:08 Q&A with Rep. Sara Jacobs about the new Congress After a long series of votes and political wrangling to select the new House Speaker, the new Congress got underway this week. San Diego Congresswoman Sara Jacobs, who represents California’s 51st Congressional district, also became the youngest member in the democratic leadership in this new Republican-led House. Listen • 44:06 Tags Health Investigations DeskCOVID-19San Diego Claire Trageser twitter email As deputy investigations team and digital fellowship editor, Claire helps lead the investigations team and digital-first content like podcasts, YouTube videos and data visualizations. She works collaboratively with the news team to produce and enhance investigative and enterprising stories. See stories by Claire Trageser What is a story that is going on in San Diego that people should know about? Contact Claire Prakshal Doshi email linkedin Prakshal Doshi is an investigative student assistant within the KPBS Newsroom. He has three years of industry experience as a software engineer from JP Morgan Chase. See stories by Prakshal Doshi KPBS News: Public Safety Policy KPBS has created a public safety coverage policy to guide decisions on what stories we prioritize, as well as whose narratives we need to include to tell complete stories that best serve our audiences. This policy was shaped through months of training with the Poynter Institute and feedback from the community. You can read the full policy here. Read → More News Quality of Life In pursuit of family-sized apartments, San Diego considers 'single-stair reform' Politics New California law will limit credit union overdraft fees Quality of Life One issue Trump and Newsom agree on? Homeless encampments Border & Immigration California empowered immigrants to speak up at work. Trump could end their protections instagram tiktok youtube facebook About About Us & Mission Careers FCC & Financial Mobile Apps Press Releases Privacy Policy Staff Terms of Service Help Audience and Member Services Closed Captioning Contact Us FAQs How do I listen? Passport Help Help Center Give Corporate Support Donate Membership Information Other Ways to Give Tax ID Vehicle DonationCanada's flu season is winding down, data shows, but it may be the calm before a COVID storm | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Canada's flu season is winding down, data shows, but it may be the calm before a COVID storm | CBC News LoadedHealthCanada's flu season is winding down, data shows, but it may be the calm before a COVID stormWhile the early months of the year often mark the peak of flu season, Canada is starting 2023 already through the worst — though physicians are now bracing for more hospitalizations ahead, largely due to a potential spike in COVID-19.Influenza activity has 'declined sharply' from a November peak, federal figures suggestLauren Pelley · CBC News · Posted: Jan 06, 2023 3:24 PM EST | Last Updated: January 12, 2023Plenty of Canadians caught the flu before the holidays, but the latest federal data suggests the country is now well past the peak of infections. The worry now is holiday gatherings and a return to school and work could help fuel another surge: COVID-19. (Kate Bueckert/CBC)Social SharingWhile the early months of the year often mark the peak of flu season, Canada is starting 2023 already through the worst — though physicians are now bracing for more hospitalizations ahead, largely due to a potential spike in COVID-19.The latest figures from multiple provinces show a steady drop in influenza cases in the weeks leading into the new year, while federal data released Friday confirmed flu activity has "declined sharply" from its peak at the end of November.The weekly percentage of flu tests coming back positive dropped from roughly 13 per cent during the second-last week of December to less than nine per cent in the last week of 2022."Flu season's not quite over, but it's declining quickly now," said clinician-scientist Dr. Allison McGeer, a professor at the University of Toronto's Dalla Lana School of Public Health, in a Friday morning interview with CBC News. Does the thought of getting a needle give you anxiety or prevent you from rolling up your sleeve? We want to hear from you. Email us: ask@cbc.ca. Though it hit hard and fast, putting high numbers of children in hospital last fall, Canada's overall influenza season wound up echoing the experience of countries in the southern hemisphere, such as Australia. "Which is: Early season, sharp peak, but then coming down pretty quickly," McGeer said. "And a lot of disease in kids — so very hard on pediatric hospitals and people who care for children — but actually pretty quiet for adults."AnalysisKids are getting hit hard by respiratory viruses. Here's what scientists know — and what they don'tInside an Ontario hospital bracing for a surge in adult patients — while overflowing with sick kidsOver the course of Canada's flu season, more than 1,500 pediatric influenza-associated hospitalizations have been reported, including 183 children ending up in intensive care. There have also been six influenza-associated pediatric deaths, the latest federal data shows, though prior CBC News reporting suggested the full count among the provinces could be higher, with at least 11 children dying of flu last year across B.C., Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario. Several physicians told CBC News they're now planning for a potential wave of COVID to start up, while flu is still winding down.Concerns remain over COVID, RSVFederal data showed an uptick in SARS-CoV-2 tests coming back positive across multiple regions by the end of 2022.Part of the concern also stems from the spread of highly transmissible Omicron subvariant XBB.1.5, which has been reported in multiple Canadian provinces and close to 30 countries abroad.The subvariant began spreading amid a busy holiday season of socializing and then continued as children returned to school and many adults headed back to work.VideoTriple whammy of respiratory illnesses still filling P.E.I. emergenciesHundreds of Canadians are still dying of COVID-19 every week. Who are they?Bivalent booster shots are expected to help ward off infection, but protection may be fading for Canadians whose last COVID vaccine dose was several months ago or more, McGeer warned — and anyone who skipped out on the latest updated vaccines could be particularly at risk."That combination might mean a significant increase of hospitalizations through January and February," McGeer said, "and I think that's what's worrying people the most at the moment."WATCH | A tough flu season, now an uptick in COVID cases:Hospital bursting with sick kids braces for influx of adults2 years agoDuration 3:23As the severe flu season puts extraordinary pressure on the health-care system, CBC News goes inside a busy Ontario hospital to see how staff are struggling to cope with the surge of seriously ill children while bracing a new wave of adult influenza patients.COVID will continue making the situation in hospitals difficult, all while circulation of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) also remains high, which could continue bringing more sick children into pediatric hospitals, noted Dr. Srinivas Murthy, a clinical associate professor with University of British Columbia's faculty of medicine."As the strain has been visible over the health system for the last couple of months, I think our capacity to respond remains a challenge," he said.Some N.S. pharmacies reporting shortage of cold and flu medicationsVaccine cuts risk of influenza illness by about half, BCCDC finds"We're still seeing much higher levels of RSV-related admissions than we have before," echoed Dr. Nisha Thampi, medical director of infection prevention and control at the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO)."I don't think we're out of the woods yet."ABOUT THE AUTHORLauren PelleySenior Health & Medical ReporterLauren Pelley covers the global spread of infectious diseases, pandemic preparedness and the crucial intersection between health and climate change. She's a two-time RNAO Media Award winner for in-depth health reporting in 2020 and 2022, a silver medallist for best editorial newsletter at the 2024 Digital Publishing Awards, and a 2024 Covering Climate Now award winner in the health category. Contact her at: lauren.pelley@cbc.ca.@LaurenPelleyCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowCanine Influenza Is Being Found in Montgomery County and Around the Washington Region, Per the Office of Animal Services - The MoCo Show Home About Advertise Advertising Info Submit Announcement Calendar Homes Promote Listing Available Homes Upcoming Open Houses MoCo Pass Newsletter Support MoCo Apparel Patreon Home About Advertise Advertising Info Submit Announcement Calendar Homes Promote Listing Available Homes Upcoming Open Houses MoCo Pass Newsletter Support MoCo Apparel Patreon Home About Advertise Advertising Info Submit Announcement Calendar Homes Promote Listing Available Homes Upcoming Open Houses MoCo Pass Newsletter Support MoCo Apparel Patreon MoCo Canine Influenza Is Being Found in Montgomery County and Around the Washington Region, Per the Office of Animal Services By MCS Staff Published January 13, 2023 at 9:09PM Cases of canine influenza virus have been reported by a number of veterinary practices in Montgomery County and in other localities within the Washington Region. The Montgomery County Office of Animal Services (OAS) wants dog owners to be aware, and take precautions, regarding the respiratory disease that is caused by a specific strain of the Type A influenza virus and is highly contagious. The symptoms of canine influenza are cough, runny nose, eye discharge, fever, lethargy and poor appetite. The signs range in severity between no signs at all and severe illness sometimes resulting in death. Canine influenza is thought to spread in aerosol respiratory droplets and contaminated surfaces. It is not transmissible to people. However, people can spread the virus to dogs via their clothing, equipment or hands. OAS advises dog owners if their pet shows any of the prominent symptoms, it could be infected with canine influenza. Pet owners who suspect their dog may have canine influenza should contact their veterinarian immediately for assessment and early supportive treatment. If a dog is diagnosed with canine influenza, that dog should be separated from other animals for at least 28 days. Infected dogs should not go to dog parks, doggy daycare, grooming and boarding facilities. Most dogs recover within two-to-three weeks, but some may develop secondary bacterial infections leading to more severe illness. There is a canine influenza vaccine available, but it is not considered a core vaccine for all dogs. OAS advises, with the current cases occurring in the region, that dog owners speak with their veterinarian about having their dog vaccinated. Dogs that do visit dog parks, doggy daycare or who are boarded when their owners are traveling are more at risk for canine influenza. While the vaccine may not stop a dog from contracting the virus completely, it will lessen the severity and help reduce the spread. Additional precautions that dog owners can take to keep their pet safe include: Limit direct contact with other dogs when on walks. Do not allow them to sniff one another. Avoid using shared toys or dishes. Consider skipping daycare, boarding, grooming facilities and dog parks. Contact the dog’s daycare or boarding facility and ask about recent cases and cleaning protocols. Sources to learn more about canine influenza: Canine influenza | American Veterinary Medical Association (avma.org) Key Facts about Canine Influenza (Dog Flu) | Seasonal Influenza (Flu) | CDC Vaccine Recommendation Schedule Based on Age at Initial Vaccination and Lifestyle of Dog (aaha.org) The Montgomery County Animal Services and Adoption Center, which is operated by the Office of Animal Services, provides high standard sheltering and care to homeless, abused and neglected animals. It is the County’s only open-admission, municipal shelter. Through adoptions, education and outreach, MCASAC serves as a critical community resource to promote and advocate for responsible pet care. Animal services officers are available seven days a week to investigate complaints and respond to animal emergencies 24 hours a day. For more information, visit www.montgomerycountymd.gov/animalservices Featured Event Go to BACK BY POPULAR DEMAND: Dork Diaries Meet & Greet and Book Signing! BACK BY POPULAR DEMAND: Dork Diaries Meet & Greet and Book Signing! November 16, 2024 1:00 pm -3:00 pm Meet Rachel and Nikki Russell as they celebrate the release of their newest New York Times Bestselling book Dork Diaries Book 16: Tales from a Not-So-Bratty Little Sister! Read More Featured Event Go to BACK BY POPULAR DEMAND: Dork Diaries Meet & Greet and Book Signing! BACK BY POPULAR DEMAND: Dork Diaries Meet & Greet and Book Signing! November 16, 2024 1:00 pm -3:00 pm Meet Rachel and Nikki Russell as they celebrate the release of their newest New York Times Bestselling book Dork Diaries Book 16: Tales from a Not-So-Bratty Little Sister! Read More Recent Stories Go to Topps Surprises High School Class With Packs of Cards After Teacher Integrated Jayden Daniels Rookie Cards Into Economics Curriculum Topps Surprises High School Class With Packs of Cards After Teacher Integrated Jayden Daniels Rookie Cards Into Economics Curriculum Read More Go to Olney Winery “Closed Until Further Notice” Olney Winery “Closed Until Further Notice” Read More Go to Suspect on Moped Threatens Victim and Steals His Car Early Sunday Morning Suspect on Moped Threatens Victim and Steals His Car Early Sunday Morning Read More Go to Suspects Jump Over Counter, Assault Employee, and Steal Several Carryout Orders of Peruvian Chicken From Restaurant Suspects Jump Over Counter, Assault Employee, and Steal Several Carryout Orders of Peruvian Chicken From Restaurant Read More Announcements Go to More than a living wage: Well-Paid Maids offers benefits, too More than a living wage: Well-Paid Maids offers benefits, too Read More Montgomery County, MD Home News MoCo Snow MoCo Homes Announcements Apparel Support Privacy Policy Taste MoCo Events ©2024 Copyright The MoCo Show. All Rights Reserved.What are the present challenges and future considerations in developing vaccines against mucosal respiratory viruses? Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member What are the present challenges and future considerations in developing vaccines against mucosal respiratory viruses? Download PDF Copy By Dr. Chinta SidharthanReviewed by Aimee MolineuxJan 13 2023 In a recent review published in Cell Host & Microbe, the former director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and former chief medical advisor to the president of the United States (U.S.), Dr. Fauci, and his team reviewed the roadblocks to developing effective vaccines against viruses that infect the human respiratory mucosa. The team also discussed strategies for next-generation vaccine development against mucosal respiratory viruses. Study: Rethinking next-generation vaccines for coronaviruses, influenzaviruses, and other respiratory viruses. Image Credit: Treecha/Shutterstock Background The recent coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has emphasized the severity and mortality rates associated with respiratory viruses. The influenza virus is thought to cause 12,000 to 52,000 deaths in the U.S. annually, while parainfluenzaviruses and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) add to the mortality rates. The COVID-19 etiological agent, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is thought to have caused over a million deaths in the U.S. The success of vaccines against some major respiratory viruses, such as mumps, measles, and rubella, fueled the hope of developing vaccines against all respiratory viruses. However, the quest to develop a universal influenza vaccine has been unsuccessful. This lack of success in vaccine development is linked to how vaccine-controlled viruses differ in infection progression from other respiratory viruses. Viruses such as mumps, measles, and rubella cause widespread viremia throughout the body after the initial mucosal replication, which brings the virus in contact with various immune compartments and cell types. Coupled with their long incubation period, this results in the induction of strong, long-term, adaptive immunity. In contrast, other respiratory viruses such as SARS-CoV-2, RSV, and influenza do not cause widespread systemic infections and have short incubation periods, which do not elicit strong or long-lived adaptive immune responses. Additionally, these viruses also exhibit high tolerance to mutations, resulting in the rapid emergence of variants with changed antigenicity. Major findings The review reported that the complex tolerance regulation expressed by the respiratory immune system in humans, combined with the short incubation period of non-systemic respiratory viruses, could explain the lack of durable immune responses against these viruses. Additionally, the respiratory immune system comprises separate, tissue-specific regions, including mucosal-associated lymphoid tissues (MALTs), nasopharyngeal-associated lymphoid tissue (NALT), tear/conjunctival-associated lymphoid tissue (TALT), and bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT), each of which independently senses the virus, presents antigens, elicits local effector responses, and maintains tolerized immune states. Non-systemic respiratory viruses have evolved to the tolerized immune environments in humans, and developed methods to replicate and spread before adaptive immune responses are generated to control the infection. These methods include, among others, the inhibition of host interferon responses and the presentation of decoy antigens. Studies in human and animal models have shown that non-systemic mucosal respiratory viruses can be controlled more effectively with secretory mucosal immunity than systemic immunity. Memory T cells residing in tissues respond faster to mucosal infection through secretory immunoglobulin A (sIgA) expressed by plasma cells and effector and memory T cells present in the MALT. Next-generation vaccines To develop effective next-generation vaccines, it is essential to understand the immunological correlates of protection. In the case of influenza, the T cell and mucosal immunological correlates observed during influenza infections were not observed in influenza challenge studies among individuals vaccinated with inactivated or live-attenuated influenza vaccines. Recent studies have also reported that compared to correlates such as stem antibody titers and hemagglutinin head, serum neuraminidase antibody levels were a more accurate measure of protection. Despite this finding, neuraminidase has not been well-explored as a vaccine target. Related StoriesNovel nasal spray shows promise in preventing respiratory infectionsEarly smoking tied to increased respiratory problems in young adultsNew insights into the link between respiratory infections and chronic lung diseasesThe authors also believe that a consensus on the level of protection desired against non-systemic mucosal viruses is important for developing vaccines. The aims could include the complete prevention of the infection, as in the case of systemic respiratory viruses, limiting the replication and transmission of the viruses, preventing disease, or preventing only the severe outcomes of infection, such as hospitalization or death, as was the case for most COVID-19 vaccines. The widespread presence of mucosal surfaces in the human body and the predominance of sIgA in these surfaces indicates that mucosal immunization is a promising avenue for developing vaccines against non-systemic mucosal viruses. However, aspects such as formulations, dosage, frequency of administration, and surmounting the immune tolerance challenges also need to be considered. Given the fact that the vaccines that were successful in eliciting long-lasting protective immunity against systemic respiratory viruses were systemically replicating live viruses, live virus vaccines need to be considered as potential options despite the safety and development constraints. Additionally, the ability of the vaccine antigens to induce broadly protective immune responses against distantly related viruses also needs to be addressed during vaccine development. Public health policies regarding next-generation vaccines against non-systemic mucosal viruses such as influenza and SARS-CoV-2 need to focus on decisions about dosages and frequencies of vaccines, as well as mixed-sequential vaccines where the primary and booster vaccines differ. Studies with RSV indicate repeated antigenic exposures might be more important in granting protection than immune memory. Conclusions Overall, the review comprehensively addressed the challenges in developing durable protective immunity against mucosal respiratory viruses that do not cause systemic infection. The authors also discussed potential directions and goals for next-generation vaccine development and the public health policies that must be considered while designing vaccination strategies. Journal reference: Morens, D. M., Taubenberger, J. K., & Fauci, A. S. (2023). Rethinking next-generation vaccines for coronaviruses, influenzaviruses, and other respiratory viruses. Cell Host & Microbe. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2022.11.016 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1931312822005728 Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Allergy, Antibody, B Cell, Cell, Coronavirus, covid-19, Frequency, Immune System, immunity, Immunization, Immunoglobulin, Infectious Diseases, Influenza, Interferon, Measles, Mortality, Mumps, Nasopharyngeal, Pandemic, Public Health, Respiratory, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Rubella, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Vaccine, Virus Comments (0) Written byDr. Chinta SidharthanChinta Sidharthan is a writer based in Bangalore, India. Her academic background is in evolutionary biology and genetics, and she has extensive experience in scientific research, teaching, science writing, and herpetology. Chinta holds a Ph.D. in evolutionary biology from the Indian Institute of Science and is passionate about science education, writing, animals, wildlife, and conservation. For her doctoral research, she explored the origins and diversification of blindsnakes in India, as a part of which she did extensive fieldwork in the jungles of southern India. She has received the Canadian Governor General’s bronze medal and Bangalore University gold medal for academic excellence and published her research in high-impact journals. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APASidharthan, Chinta. (2023, March 11). What are the present challenges and future considerations in developing vaccines against mucosal respiratory viruses?. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20230113/What-are-the-present-challenges-and-future-considerations-in-developing-vaccines-against-mucosal-respiratory-viruses.aspx.MLASidharthan, Chinta. "What are the present challenges and future considerations in developing vaccines against mucosal respiratory viruses?". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20230113/What-are-the-present-challenges-and-future-considerations-in-developing-vaccines-against-mucosal-respiratory-viruses.aspx>.ChicagoSidharthan, Chinta. "What are the present challenges and future considerations in developing vaccines against mucosal respiratory viruses?". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20230113/What-are-the-present-challenges-and-future-considerations-in-developing-vaccines-against-mucosal-respiratory-viruses.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardSidharthan, Chinta. 2023. What are the present challenges and future considerations in developing vaccines against mucosal respiratory viruses?. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20230113/What-are-the-present-challenges-and-future-considerations-in-developing-vaccines-against-mucosal-respiratory-viruses.aspx. Suggested Reading ​​​​​​​Rice and Baylor receive $2.8 million to suppress inflammation and lung damage in ARDS patientsStudy uncovers OLAH as key driver of fatal respiratory diseaseHigh blood pressure found to increase airway resistance and affect lung functionStudy links air pollution and limited green spaces to higher respiratory hospitalization riskChatGPT outperforms trainee doctors in respiratory disease assessmentsBreath analysis promises rapid diagnosis of lower respiratory infectionsPreclinical blood test could predict severe respiratory conditionsRecruitment underway for a clinical trial testing new vaccine against respiratory viruses Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive health Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsNew discovery reveals how mutant RAS genes drive tumor growthTargeted degradation of Pin1 shows promise for pancreatic cancer treatmentFrailty increases a person's risk of dementia, study findsDiscrimination may drive postpartum weight retention in Black womenResearchers develop new antibody with potential to treat several types of cancer Newsletters you may be interested in Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Allergies (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Drug-free nasal spray demonstrates effectiveness in blocking viral and bacterial infectionsCovid, RSV and the flu: A case of viral interference? | Knowable Magazine Skip to content 1932 Submit CANCEL Health & DiseaseLiving WorldPhysical WorldSocietyFood & EnvironmentTechnologyThe MindClimate Change Search Menu CloseDONATE Topics Health & DiseaseLiving WorldPhysical WorldSocietyFood & EnvironmentTechnologyThe Mind CollectionsClimate ChangeComicsCoronavirusDisease UpdateEventsExplainedIn ReviewOpinionPodcastQ&AStory Behind a PictureVideos Special ReportsBuilding BodiesPersuasionSpecial Report: ResetThe Working Life DONATE About Staff Contact Newsletter Signup Republish Privacy Policy español Submit CANCEL SearchDONATE españolMenu Health & DiseaseLiving WorldPhysical WorldSocietyFood & EnvironmentTechnologyThe MindCLIMATE CHANGE LAYOUT MENU Insert PARAGRAPH Insert IMAGE CAPTION caption full caption right caption left caption center Insert SIDEBAR WITH IMAGE Position LEFT Position RIGHT Position CENTER Position FULL Standard Q&A expert Insert SIDEBAR NO IMAGE Position LEFT Position RIGHT Position CENTER Position FULL Standard Q&A expert Insert YMAL WITH IMAGES Position LEFT Position RIGHT Insert YMAL NO IMAGES Position LEFT Position RIGHT Insert NEWSLETTER PROMO Insert IMAGE CAROUSEL 1 Slide 2 Slides 3 Slides 4 Slides 5 Slides 6 Slides 7 Slides Insert PULLQUOTE Position LEFT Position RIGHT Insert VIDEO CAPTION full width center LAYOUT MENU CREDIT: KNOWABLE MAGAZINE In this stylized graph, data from a hospital in Norway show how first rhinovirus (red), then swine flu (green) and finally RSV (blue) peaked in the population from May 2009 to April 2010. This pattern, with the presence of one virus suppressing another, happened during the 2009 swine flu pandemic and may have happened again during the Covid-19 pandemic. Health & Disease Covid, RSV and the flu: A case of viral interference? The ‘tripledemic’ unfolding this winter is one of several odd trends among respiratory virus infections these last years. Viruses, it turns out, can block one another and take turns to dominate. By Amber Dance 01.12.2023 Facebook Twitter Linkedin WhatsApp Pocket Reddit Flipboard Email Print Republish Support sound science and smart storiesHelp us make scientific knowledge accessible to allDonate today Three years into the pandemic, Covid-19 is still going strong, causing wave after wave as case numbers soar, subside, then ascend again. But this past autumn saw something new — or rather, something old: the return of the flu. Plus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) — a virus that makes few headlines in normal years — ignited in its own surge, creating a “tripledemic.” YOU MAY ALSO LIKE Health & Disease What next-gen Covid-19 vaccines might look like Health & Disease The challenges of antiviral treatments Health & Disease Could getting rid of old cells turn back the clock on aging? The surges in these old foes were particularly striking because flu and RSV all but disappeared during the first two winters of the pandemic. Even more surprising, one particular version of the flu may have gone extinct during the early Covid pandemic. The World Health Organization’s surveillance program has not definitively detected the B/Yamagata flu strain since March 2020. “I don’t think anyone is going to stick their neck out and say it’s gone just yet,” says Richard Webby, a virologist at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis. But, he adds, “we hope it got squeezed out.” Such an extinction would be a super rare event, Webby says.But then, the past few years have been highly unusual times for human-virus relations, and lockdowns and masks went a long way toward preventing flu and RSV from infiltrating human nostrils. Still, Webby thinks another factor may have kept them at bay while Covid raged. It’s called viral interference, and it simply means that the presence of one virus can block another.Viral interference can happen in individual cells in the lab, and in individual animals and people that are exposed to multiple viruses — but it can also play out across entire populations, if enough people get one virus for it to hinder the flourishing of others at scale. This results in waves of infections by individual viruses that take turns to dominate. “Looking back over the past couple of years, I’m pretty confident in saying that Covid can certainly block flu and RSV,” Webby says.It wouldn’t be the first time that scientists have observed such patterns. Back in 2009, for example, the virus to fear was swine flu, which had jumped from pigs to people in spring of that year. It looked poised to ramp up as autumn arrived — but suddenly, in some parts of Europe, it stagnated. The rhinovirus, responsible for the common cold and likely spread by children returning to school, took center stage for a series of weeks before swine flu recaptured dominance. That flu strain then delayed the typical autumn rise of RSV by as much as two and a half months.Running interferenceThere are a number of ways that interference can happen in the body. One occurs when two viruses use the same molecule to gain entry into host cells. If virus A gets there first, and grabs on to all those molecular doorknobs, then virus B will be out of luck.Another kind of interference might happen if two viruses compete for the same resources inside the cell, such as the machinery to make new viral proteins or the means to escape that cell to infect others. “Think of it as a race between two viruses,” Webby says. Over five years in Hong Kong, different kinds of respiratory viruses peaked at different times, with rhinovirus (red) and influenza (blue) alternating dominance, for example. (The method used to detect rhinovirus also picked up enterovirus, a related group.) But the best-understood method of interference concerns a defensive molecule called interferon that’s made by cells of all animals with backbones (and possibly some invertebrates too). Indeed, viral interference is the reason interferon got its name to begin with. When a cell senses a virus, any virus, it starts making interferon. And that, in turn, activates a slew of defensive genes. Some of the products of those genes work inside the cell or at its boundaries, where they prevent additional viruses from entering and block viruses already present from replicating or exiting the cell.Cells secrete interferon into their surroundings, warning other cells to put up their guard. The result of all this: If a second virus then comes along, cells have their defenses already activated, and they may be able to shut it out.This “beware” message can spread throughout the body. So, in theory, getting a respiratory virus such as the rhinovirus could activate defenses in, say, the gut, protecting the same person from an entirely different virus, such as norovirus. But the situation will vary depending on the viruses involved, the amount of interferon produced, and other factors. “Most of the viruses themselves have ways to neutralize the interferon system,” says Ganes Sen, a virologist at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio, who wrote about the interactions between interferon and viruses for the Annual Review of Virology in 2015. “It’s a tug of war.”Scientists study that back-and-forth in animals and other systems in the lab. For example, Ellen Foxman, an immunologist at Yale School of Medicine, investigates viral interactions in lab-grown tissues made from real human airway cells. In one experiment, she studied swine flu and a typical representative of the rhinovirus family. When the researchers infected the human tissue first with the rhinovirus, and then with swine flu, interferon prevented the flu from getting a foothold. In similar studies, she found that rhinovirus infection also interfered with subsequent SARS-CoV-2 infection. Viral interference depends on the molecule interferon, part of the “innate” branch of our immune system. Top: An individual infected with Virus 1 mounts an interferon response, leading to temporary immunity (red) to a subsequent infection. That immunity wanes with time. Bottom: Within a population, some people (shown in black) will be susceptible to infection, while others who were recently infected will have varying levels of immunity (shown in shades of red). It’s iffy to extrapolate from tissues in the lab to people or populations, but Foxman thinks the studies reflect biological truth. “It’s probable that if you get a rhinovirus infection, that’s going to make you relatively resistant to another virus for some period of time,” she says. Foxman speculates that the protective effect probably lasts days or weeks.But don’t go counting on a cold granting you temporary immunity from other viruses. Interference isn’t guaranteed: It’s certainly possible to catch more than one virus at the same time. And interferon isn’t always beneficial, either; sometimes, it can make people more susceptible to infection, not less. A well-known example is that the flu makes people more susceptible to a secondary bacterial infection.In the ongoing pandemic, it’s still hard to say how much of a role, if any, interference played in shutting down RSV and flu in populations around the globe. During the first Covid wave in 2020, Foxman thinks that not enough people had Covid for it to be interfering with other viruses on a grand scale. (RSV underwent an unusual summer peak in 2021 as people eased up on masking and other precautions.)But by the second Covid winter, in 2021-22, Webby thinks he sees population-level evidence for interference. Influenza was starting to pick up in the fall, he says, but then the omicron variant of Covid burst onto the scene. Flu rates fell — even though people were back at work and school and traveling for the holidays. The coronavirus had a big advantage that season, he says, because many people still lacked immunity to it. It doesn’t mean Covid will always edge out influenza in the future.$[$PB_DROPZONE,id:knowable-newsletter-article-promo$]$In the third Covid winter now underway in the Northern Hemisphere, conditions are different yet again. Many people now have immunity to Covid, from a recent bout or from vaccination, but fewer have experienced RSV or flu in recent memory. That set the scene for flu and RSV to stage a massive dual comeback, hitting early and hard.Any potential interference during the 2022-23 tripledemic winter will become more obvious once epidemiologists can look back on the season and see if each virus took its turn. Already, there are indicators that the fall surges of RSV and flu might have peaked, while Covid is on the upswing after the winter holidays. But there are still several cold months to come, providing ample opportunity for any of the trio to rise again. 10.1146/knowable-011223-1 Amber Dance is a Knowable Magazine contributor in Los Angeles. Every time she’s ill, she marvels at the ability of tiny viruses to lay her out. Republish This Article 10.1146/knowable-011223-1 Amber Dance is a Knowable Magazine contributor in Los Angeles. Every time she’s ill, she marvels at the ability of tiny viruses to lay her out. Republish This Article Coronavirus Health & Disease Public Health Stay in the KnowSign up for the Knowable Magazine newsletter today Share this article Facebook X Linkedin WhatsApp Pocket Reddit Flipboard Email Print Republish Support Knowable Magazine Help us make scientific knowledge accessible to all Donate TAKE A DEEPER DIVE | Explore Related Scholarly Articles ANNUAL REVIEW OF VIROLOGY No Love Lost Between Viruses and Interferons Cellular interferons battle viruses, and viruses have ways to resist them; using interferon as a therapeutic can shift the balance. ANNUAL REVIEW OF PUBLIC HEALTH Influenza Virus: Tracking, Predicting, and Forecasting The field of influenza surveillance has undergone a number of advances in recent years, thanks in part to better computational resources. ANNUAL REVIEW OF VIROLOGY Seasonality of Respiratory Viral Infections Many viruses strike in the colder months, due in part to behaviors that bring people together. But recent research indicates that a colder, drier environment also makes the nasal passages more susceptible to infection. ANNUAL REVIEW OF VIROLOGY Interferon-Stimulated Genes: What Do They All Do? About 10 percent of human genes may be regulated by interferons; they have a variety of complex actions, including fighting viruses and turning on the antibody-based part of the immune system. ANNUAL REVIEW OF VIROLOGY IFITM-Family Proteins: The Cell’s First Line of Antiviral Defense Interferon-induced transmembrane (IFITM) proteins, activated when the cell senses a virus, are able to prevent that virus from even entering the cell. More From /content/article/health-disease/2023/covid-rsv-flu-viral-interference dcterms_title,dcterms_subject +dcterms_language:language/en -dcterms_type:topicsewsletter -contentType:Journal -contentType:Contributor -contentType:Concept -contentType:Institution 3 3 Knowable Magazine is from Annual Reviews, a nonprofit publisher dedicated to synthesizing and integrating knowledge for the progress of science and the benefit of society. © 2024 Annual Reviews Facebook X Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Reddit Flipboard RSS Feed DonateAboutStaffContactNewsletterRepublishPrivacy PolicyCookie Policy Close X Science literacy is more important than ever. Help us combat misinformation.Knowable Magazine’s award-winning science journalism is freely available for anyone, anywhere in the world. Our work provides a vital service in increasing the public’s understanding of science. But to keep everything free to read, we need your help. Donate today and help us inspire and inform readers everywhere. DONATE NOW Republish Thank you for your interest in republishing! This HTML is pre-formatted to adhere to our guidelines, which include: Crediting both the author and Knowable Magazine; preserving all hyperlinks; including the canonical link to the original article in the article metadata. Article text (including the headline) may not be edited without prior permission from Knowable Magazine staff. Photographs and illustrations are not included in this license. Please see our full guidelines for more information. Covid, RSV and the flu: A case of viral interference? The ‘tripledemic’ unfolding this winter is one of several odd trends among respiratory virus infections these last years. Viruses, it turns out, can block one another and take turns to dominate. By Amber Dance 01.12.2023 Three years into the pandemic, Covid-19 is still going strong, causing wave after wave as case numbers soar, subside, then ascend again. But this past autumn saw something new — or rather, something old: the return of the flu. Plus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) — a virus that makes few headlines in normal years — ignited in its own surge, creating a “tripledemic.”The surges in these old foes were particularly striking because flu and RSV all but disappeared during the first two winters of the pandemic. Even more surprising, one particular version of the flu may have gone extinct during the early Covid pandemic. The World Health Organization’s surveillance program has not definitively detected the B/Yamagata flu strain since March 2020. “I don’t think anyone is going to stick their neck out and say it’s gone just yet,” says Richard Webby, a virologist at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis. But, he adds, “we hope it got squeezed out.” Such an extinction would be a super rare event, Webby says.But then, the past few years have been highly unusual times for human-virus relations, and lockdowns and masks went a long way toward preventing flu and RSV from infiltrating human nostrils. Still, Webby thinks another factor may have kept them at bay while Covid raged. It’s called viral interference, and it simply means that the presence of one virus can block another.Viral interference can happen in individual cells in the lab, and in individual animals and people that are exposed to multiple viruses — but it can also play out across entire populations, if enough people get one virus for it to hinder the flourishing of others at scale. This results in waves of infections by individual viruses that take turns to dominate. “Looking back over the past couple of years, I’m pretty confident in saying that Covid can certainly block flu and RSV,” Webby says.It wouldn’t be the first time that scientists have observed such patterns. Back in 2009, for example, the virus to fear was swine flu, which had jumped from pigs to people in spring of that year. It looked poised to ramp up as autumn arrived — but suddenly, in some parts of Europe, it stagnated. The rhinovirus, responsible for the common cold and likely spread by children returning to school, took center stage for a series of weeks before swine flu recaptured dominance. That flu strain then delayed the typical autumn rise of RSV by as much as two and a half months.Running interferenceThere are a number of ways that interference can happen in the body. One occurs when two viruses use the same molecule to gain entry into host cells. If virus A gets there first, and grabs on to all those molecular doorknobs, then virus B will be out of luck.Another kind of interference might happen if two viruses compete for the same resources inside the cell, such as the machinery to make new viral proteins or the means to escape that cell to infect others. “Think of it as a race between two viruses,” Webby says.But the best-understood method of interference concerns a defensive molecule called interferon that’s made by cells of all animals with backbones (and possibly some invertebrates too). Indeed, viral interference is the reason interferon got its name to begin with. When a cell senses a virus, any virus, it starts making interferon. And that, in turn, activates a slew of defensive genes. Some of the products of those genes work inside the cell or at its boundaries, where they prevent additional viruses from entering and block viruses already present from replicating or exiting the cell.Cells secrete interferon into their surroundings, warning other cells to put up their guard. The result of all this: If a second virus then comes along, cells have their defenses already activated, and they may be able to shut it out.This “beware” message can spread throughout the body. So, in theory, getting a respiratory virus such as the rhinovirus could activate defenses in, say, the gut, protecting the same person from an entirely different virus, such as norovirus. But the situation will vary depending on the viruses involved, the amount of interferon produced, and other factors. “Most of the viruses themselves have ways to neutralize the interferon system,” says Ganes Sen, a virologist at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio, who wrote about the interactions between interferon and viruses for the Annual Review of Virology in 2015. “It’s a tug of war.”Scientists study that back-and-forth in animals and other systems in the lab. For example, Ellen Foxman, an immunologist at Yale School of Medicine, investigates viral interactions in lab-grown tissues made from real human airway cells. In one experiment, she studied swine flu and a typical representative of the rhinovirus family. When the researchers infected the human tissue first with the rhinovirus, and then with swine flu, interferon prevented the flu from getting a foothold. In similar studies, she found that rhinovirus infection also interfered with subsequent SARS-CoV-2 infection.It’s iffy to extrapolate from tissues in the lab to people or populations, but Foxman thinks the studies reflect biological truth. “It’s probable that if you get a rhinovirus infection, that’s going to make you relatively resistant to another virus for some period of time,” she says. Foxman speculates that the protective effect probably lasts days or weeks.But don’t go counting on a cold granting you temporary immunity from other viruses. Interference isn’t guaranteed: It’s certainly possible to catch more than one virus at the same time. And interferon isn’t always beneficial, either; sometimes, it can make people more susceptible to infection, not less. A well-known example is that the flu makes people more susceptible to a secondary bacterial infection.In the ongoing pandemic, it’s still hard to say how much of a role, if any, interference played in shutting down RSV and flu in populations around the globe. During the first Covid wave in 2020, Foxman thinks that not enough people had Covid for it to be interfering with other viruses on a grand scale. (RSV underwent an unusual summer peak in 2021 as people eased up on masking and other precautions.)But by the second Covid winter, in 2021-22, Webby thinks he sees population-level evidence for interference. Influenza was starting to pick up in the fall, he says, but then the omicron variant of Covid burst onto the scene. Flu rates fell — even though people were back at work and school and traveling for the holidays. The coronavirus had a big advantage that season, he says, because many people still lacked immunity to it. It doesn’t mean Covid will always edge out influenza in the future.$[$PB_DROPZONE,id:knowable-newsletter-article-promo$]$In the third Covid winter now underway in the Northern Hemisphere, conditions are different yet again. Many people now have immunity to Covid, from a recent bout or from vaccination, but fewer have experienced RSV or flu in recent memory. That set the scene for flu and RSV to stage a massive dual comeback, hitting early and hard.Any potential interference during the 2022-23 tripledemic winter will become more obvious once epidemiologists can look back on the season and see if each virus took its turn. Already, there are indicators that the fall surges of RSV and flu might have peaked, while Covid is on the upswing after the winter holidays. But there are still several cold months to come, providing ample opportunity for any of the trio to rise again.10.1146/knowable-011223-1Amber Dance is a Knowable Magazine contributor in Los Angeles. Every time she’s ill, she marvels at the ability of tiny viruses to lay her out. COPY HTMLclose This is a required field Please enter a valid email address Approval was a Success Invalid data An Error Occurred Approval was partially successful, following selected items could not be processed due to error Knowable Magazine: http://instance.metastore.ingenta.com/content/article/health-disease/2023/covid-rsv-flu-viral-interference 10.1146/knowable-011223-1 SEARCH_EXPAND_ITEM Close X Sound science. Smart stories. Every SundayA free newsletter from Knowable Magazine Email address SUBSCRIBE Show me firstPenguins to return to zoo enclosure after avian influenza all-clear | The Independent Stay up to date with notifications from The IndependentNotifications can be managed in browser preferences.Not nowYes pleaseJump to contentAsia EditionChangeUK EditionUS EditionEdición en EspañolSign up to our newslettersSubscribe nowLog in / Register IndependentUS electionBlack FridaySubscribeMenuNewsNewsUKUSWorldUK PoliticsBrexitHealthBusinessScienceSpaceNews VideosSportSportFootballParis 2024 OlympicsFormula 1Rugby UnionCricketTennisBoxingUFCCyclingGolfSport VideosVoicesVoicesEditorialsLettersJohn RentoulMary DejevskyAndrew GriceSean O’GradyCultureCultureFilmTV & RadioMusicGamesBooksArtPhotographyTheatre & DanceCulture VideosLifestyleLifestyleShoppingBeauty Fitness & WellbeingTechMoneyFood & DrinkFashionLove & SexWomenHealth & FamiliesRoyal FamilyMotoringElectric Vehicles Car Insurance Deals Lifestyle VideosIndyBestIndyBestAdvisorHome & GardenTechBroadband dealsFashion & BeautyDealsFood & DrinkKidsBooksTravel & OutdoorsSports & FitnessTravelTravelHotel ReviewsNews & AdviceSimon CalderCruisesUKEuropeUSAAsiaAustralia & New ZealandSouth AmericaC. America & CaribbeanMiddle EastMorePremiumPolitics ExplainedEditorialsVoicesLong ReadsNews AnalysisToday’s EditionClimateNewsClimate 100Electric Vehicles VoicesSustainable LivingExplainedClimate VideosSolar Panels SGITVBehind The HeadlinesOn The GroundDecomplicatedYou Ask The QuestionsBinge WatchMusic BoxLove LivesTravel SmartWatch on your TVToday’s EditionCrosswords & PuzzlesMost CommentedNewslettersAsk Me AnythingVirtual EventsWine Offers VouchersIndy100Betting SitesCasino Sites Thank you for registeringPlease refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged inPlease refresh your browser to be logged inNewsUKPenguins to return to zoo enclosure after avian influenza all-clearSeven penguins were put into isolation when the outbreak was identified bit have since all tested negative.Ben MitchellSunday 08 January 2023 10:39 GMTArticle bookmarkedFind your bookmarks in your Independent Premium section, under my profileDon't show me this message again✕A keeper watches a pair of Humbolt Penguins as they are counted during the annual stocktake at Marwell zoo in Winchester. Picture date: Tuesday January 25, 2022. (PA Archive)For free real time breaking news alerts sent straight to your inbox sign up to our breaking news emailsSign up to our free breaking news emailsPlease enter a valid email addressPlease enter a valid email addressSIGN UPI would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy policyPenguins placed in isolation at a Hampshire zoo are to be returned to their enclosure soon after being given the all-clear for avian influenza.Marwell Zoo, near Winchester, took the precautionary action with the seven penguins after an outbreak was identified in December.Now having tested negative for the disease, the zoo is preparing to return them to their enclosure, along with the centre’s flamingo population.A zoo spokeswoman said: “Following the avian influenza outbreak at Marwell last month, we’ve been working closely with the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) and the Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra).“As a result of the quick action taken by our team, as well as months of careful planning and measures put in place with APHA, we are delighted that the outbreak was contained swiftly.“The seven penguins put into isolation when the outbreak was identified, have since all tested negative.“Our flamingos were also tested as a precaution and are all negative.“Accordingly, the penguins can be reintroduced to their pool and enclosure once we are given the all-clear to do so.“Our flamingos have now been given access to the whole of their enclosure again and we are working with the relevant authorities to get the penguins back in their enclosure as soon as possible.In cases like this, we have to weigh up the risks of having them outside, which allows for much higher welfare standards but with a risk of avian influenza, against the risks of associated health issues and poor welfare if we keep them indoorsJustine Shotton, Marwell Zoo“In order for this to happen a stringent programme of further cleaning and disinfection needs to take place and meet APHA’s requirements and it is anticipated this will take until mid-late January at the earliest.“Access to our walk-through aviaries and Energy For Life: Tropical House will continue to be restricted whilst we work to keep all of our animals as safe as possible.”Justine Shotton, veterinary services manager, said: “The sooner the penguins return to their enclosure the better from a welfare perspective.“As well as the risk of pododermatitis, a condition that affects the birds’ feet, aspergillosis, a potentially fatal fungal infection, is a real risk while the penguins are kept indoors.“To help reduce these risks, all of our penguins are currently on antifungal medication and their condition is being regularly monitored.“In cases like this, we have to weigh up the risks of having them outside, which allows for much higher welfare standards but with a risk of avian influenza, against the risks of associated health issues and poor welfare if we keep them indoors.”She added that risk assessments would continue as avian influenza remained an issue all-year round.More aboutPA ReadyPenguinsHampshireWinchester1/1Penguins to return to zoo enclosure after avian influenza all-clearPenguins to return to zoo enclosure after avian influenza all-clearA keeper watches a pair of Humbolt Penguins as they are counted during the annual stocktake at Marwell zoo in Winchester. Picture date: Tuesday January 25, 2022.PA Archive✕Subscribe to Independent Premium to bookmark this articleWant to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Premium subscription today.SubscribeAlready subscribed? Log inMost PopularPopular videosSponsored FeaturesGet in touchContact usOur ProductsSubscribeRegisterNewslettersToday’s EditionInstall our appArchiveOther publicationsInternational editionsIndependent en EspañolIndependent ArabiaIndependent TurkishIndependent PersianIndependent UrduThe StandardExtrasAdvisorPuzzlesAll topicsBetting OffersVoucher codesCompetitions and offersIndependent AdvertisingIndependent IgniteSyndicationWorking at The IndependentLegalCode of conduct and complaintsContributorsCookie policyPrivacy policyUser policiesModern Slavery StatementThank you for registeringPlease refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged inPlease refresh your browser to be logged inCloseAsia EditionChangeUK EditionUS EditionEdición en EspañolSubscribeLog in / RegisterUS electionBlack Friday Today’s EditionCrosswords & PuzzlesMost CommentedNewslettersAsk Me AnythingVirtual EventsWine Offers VouchersIndy100Betting SitesCasino Sites ✕Log inEmail addressPasswordEmail and password don't matchSubmitForgotten your password?New to The Independent?RegisterOr if you would prefer:SIGN IN WITH GOOGLEThis site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy notice and Terms of service apply.My Independent PremiumAccount detailsHelp centreLogoutHow new covid variant, RSV and flu made for a Southern tripledemicSkip to main content HomeNewsSportsCountiesBusinessMusicOpinionThings To DoLifeObituarieseNewspaperCrosswordsNewslettersConnect With UsInstagramFor SubscribersContributor ContentIsrael War What to know about Southern tripledemic 2023: RSV, flu and COVID risks, rates and moreFrank Gluck Nashville TennesseanSouthern states continue to see high numbers of dangerous respiratory infections but have likely passed the worst of the so-called "tripledemic" of influenza, RSV and COVID-19 that led to widespread school closures this fall and has strained some of the region's hospitals.Meanwhile, COVID-related hospitalizations in Tennessee and throughout the southeast have been at some of the highest levels since the summer — possibly owing to holiday gatherings and colder weather keeping people indoors and in close proximity."It was very challenging for hospitals to take care of this influx of respiratory illnesses," said James Antoon, a pediatrician at Monroe Carell Jr. Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt. "We are seeing an uptick in COVID. It seems less likely that we're going to see that true 'tripledemic' of all three viruses at very high circulating levels (at the same time)."Flu activity levels remain at "high" in Tennessee, Kentucky, North Carolina, Arkansas, Georgia and Alabama, according to the most recent reports from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. But that's an improvement over that state's "very high" status in recent weeks. Mississippi remains at that level of flu activity, however.RSV (short for respiratory syncytial virus), which is responsible for up to 300 child deaths every year in the United States and up to 80,000 hospitalizations, spiked early in Tennessee and the surrounding region but is now retreating after peaking in November, data shows. There is no vaccine for RSV.Virus severity doesn't seem to be the issue. Rather, it's the confluence of normal seasonal viruses — including this now-third COVID winter — hitting early at some health centers earlier than expected and all at once, said Dr. Amesh Adalja, an infectious diseases specialist and a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security."This isn't like the bad old days of COVID where people were really at the point of crisis with standards of care," Adalja said. He noted that RSV presented a particular challenge for children's health centers, which were also coping with flu season and continuing cases of coronavirus. "Pediatric hospitals have lower levels of capacity, and there are fewer of them in the country. There were weeks where it was very trying at pediatric hospitals."Children's hospitals in Memphis and Knoxville reported higher-than-normal patient volumes resulting from RSV. Much of the same was also reported in Kentucky, Mississippi, Alabama and Georgia. Monroe Carell Jr. Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt was also affected but was not overwhelmed, Antoon said.Alabama's primary children's hospital in Birmingham, Children’s of Alabama, faced long ER waits resulting from a flood of flu and RSV, according to local reports."That one definitely felt like a similar strain to what you felt in Tennessee ... making sure we have enough critical care beds to take care of kids that need closer monitoring, and then also ventilators," said Dr. Rachel Lee, an infectious diseases specialist at the University of Alabama-Birmingham. "I think we are doing much better now."COVID rates in Tennessee rising sharplyAccording to the Tennessee Department of Health, COVID-related hospitalizations for adults and children are at their highest levels in months.Last week saw the highest recent peak for adults, with 948 hospitalized throughout the state, including 118 in intensive care units and 46 who required ventilators to breathe. That's more than double the number of such cases seen just in November.Children's cases also rose last week to 27 COVID-related hospitalizations, state data shows. That's roughly triple the number seen in November.The seven-day average of new COVID-19 cases in Tennessee is now 1,656, the highest number since early September. This, of course, doesn't take into account those people who don't get tested and/or report their COVID status to the state.Those showing up to the state's hospital emergency departments with COVID-like symptoms have also been trending upward, with a recent peak of 6.15% of cases on Dec. 25 — the highest rate since August.RSV and flu: Who's at risk?For those who are unfamiliar, RSV is a seasonal virus that primarily causes mild, cold-like symptoms in healthy people.Premature infants and those younger than 6 months are particularly at risk for serious illness, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. So, too, are those with compromised immune systems, neuromuscular disorders, chronic lung disease or congenital heart disease.Adults 65 and older are also at risk, particularly those with weakened immune systems and those with chronic heart or lung disease.While there is no vaccine yet for RSV, they are currently in development.Health officials predicted this season: Health officials warn of nasty flu season, 'twindemic' this yearRelated coverage: Your questions answered: All things COVID-19, flu vaccine safety and efficacyThis year's flu season was considered one of the nastier ones following the experience seen in Australia over the summer.Flu shot rates for adults throughout the South are lower than the national average of 39.8%, according to the latest CDC figures. Tennessee's rate is 34.8%, according to the CDC. Doctors interviewed for this story say this year's flu vaccines work especially well in preventing illness and hospitalization. Both rates are lower than the previous year.Those at particular risk from flu complications include people 65 years and older, those with certain chronic medical conditions (including asthma, diabetes or heart disease), pregnant people and children younger than 5 years (especially those younger than 2)."We're seeing a lot of vaccine hesitancy with influenza shots this year. I think people are tired of shots and the boosters, and there's always this angst about influenza vaccinations," said Dr. Nick Hysmith, medical director of infection prevention at Le Bonheur Children's Hospital in Memphis and an associate professor at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center."This year, we saw quite a few adult admissions for influenza and there was a lot of it in the community."Why a 'tripledemic' this year?Medical experts interviewed for this story were divided on whether the south indeed suffered a true "tripledemic." Adalja, the infectious diseases specialist at Johns Hopkins, noted that a variety of viral infections are always circulating at any given time.Others noted that, yes, there was a triple viral threat this season. But, they said, they were thankfully staggered enough to not completely overwhelm hospitals.All agree that flu season and RSV were unseasonably early. Why?Adalja said it's possible that many U.S. children who might have otherwise gotten RSV between 2020 and 2022, but were shielded from it due to social distancing and masking, may have been more exposed this year. Similarly, those who had gotten some immunity from earlier infections may have seen their immunity wane during this period.Though Lee, of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, doubts that's the case in the South, where masking was not such a priority. It remains something of a mystery, she said, noting that there was a similar uptick in RSV cases in July 2021."I think it's something we're still learning, how these (viruses) are spread among people and what mitigates that spread," she said. "Why are we seeing it? Why did we see it in the summertime rather than in the wintertime (in 2021)? These are all questions that doctors and epidemiologists are continuing to think about. But I don't think it's related to the fact that we've opened the floodgates by taking off our masks."Frank Gluck is the health care reporter for The Tennessean. He can be reached at fgluck@tennessean.com. Follow him on Twitter at @FrankGluck.Want to read more stories like this? A subscription to one of our Tennessee publications gets you unlimited access to all the latest political news, plus newsletters, a personalized mobile experience, and the ability to tap into stories, photos and videos from throughout the USA TODAY Network's daily sites. Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 20245 Tips for Combatting the Flu | News Article | North Texas Menu Hi, Account Summary Donation History Personal Information Sign Out Sign In Español Shop the Red Cross Store National Site American Red Cross North Texas Region Locations National Site Other Regions Find a Region Search Invalid Zip Code About Us About Our Region Contact Us Locations Leadership and Board of Directors Careers Community Partners Tiffany Circle Our Work Home Fire Campaign MapSwipe Videos for Kids: Tornado Facts and Home Fire Facts Year in Review News and Events Service to Armed Forces Events News from Our Youth Bloggers Donate Ways To Donate Give Blood Donate a Vehicle Fundraise for the Red Cross Training & Certification Take A Class Volunteer Explore Volunteering General Volunteer FAQs Youth Volunteer Opportunities Youth Volunteer FAQs Youth Services Executive Leadership Get Help Get Help Give Now Home Local Texas American Red Cross North Texas Region About Us News and Events News 5 Tips for Combatting the Flu Share via Email Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Toggle other share options Share on LinkedIn Print 5 Tips for Combatting the Flu January 10, 2023 By: Ishani Gandi The time of year has arrived where everywhere you go, there’s a cough or a sneeze—the student sitting behind you in class, your coworker at your job. You might start to wonder, “How do I not get sick?” One of the main viruses out there is influenza, more commonly known as the flu. If caught, it can leave you sitting at home with a high fever. Thankfully, it’s beatable. Here are some measures you can take to prevent getting the flu: 1. Get a flu shot. By getting the flu shot ahead of time, before symptoms start, you’ll be able to lower your chance of getting sick. The flu shot creates antibodies against the flu virus, and they will protect your body if you end up getting exposed later. According to Healthline, the flu vaccine prevented more than 5.3 million illnesses in 2016-2017. You can go to your nearby pharmacy and easily schedule an appointment to get your flu shot there. 2. Use tissues instead of your hands If you cough or sneeze into your hand, guess where the residue goes? That’s why it’s safer to use a tissue because it goes straight into the trash after touching your nose or mouth. If you don’t have tissues near you, using your elbow is a good alternative. If you use your hands, wash them or use hand sanitizer to avoid touching doorknobs, papers, technology and more, spreading the flu virus everywhere. 3. Avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth This is one of the riskiest things you can do, not just for the flu but any kind of sickness. Touching your face with germs on your fingers means that anything could be getting into it. To prevent this, it’s important to stop the habit of touching those sensitive areas. 4. Stay at home at least 24 hours after your fever is gone When your temperature goes down from 100°F to 97°F in a couple hours, that doesn’t mean that you’re immediately good to go. The temperature drop could be a result of medication, food or drinks, and the virus could still be in your body. It’s better not to take the risk. Wait at least a day without running a fever before going back to regular life. This will prevent the virus from getting even worse and spreading to other people. 5. Practice healthy habits Getting enough sleep regularly, eating enough nutritious food and drinking lots of fluids, especially water, is super important to avoid getting ill. Even though it sounds simple and self-explanatory, it’s a lot harder than it sounds. The Centers for Disease Control research shows that people with health conditions are a lot more susceptible to the flu than people without any. Although chronic, health-related conditions can’t be helped, you can do your part by trying to be as healthy as you can be. Even though practicing all of these steps can help you prevent sickness, they still might not prevent the flu. It’s important to be mindful and cautious with your actions and your health. Texas Red Crossers Respond to Crisis of Extreme Weather Michelle Tanner November 01, 2024 Red Cross Decorates Habitat for Humanity Playhouse for Santa’s Village at The Shops at Willow Bend Adriane Whitman October 31, 2024 How Having O Negative Blood Became Yan Bolduc’s Superpower Alexis Gonzalez October 28, 2024 Red Cross Celebrates 10th Anniversary of Home Fire Campaign with Sound the Alarm Event in Jacksboro Alexis Gonzalez October 24, 2024 .type=article.p=1.t=redcross%3Amy-region%7Cnorth-texas%7Cyouth-bloggers.t=redcross%3Amy-region%7Cnorth-texas%7Cdfw-metro-west-news.t=redcross%3Amy-region%7Cnorth-texas%7Cdfw-metro-east.t=redcross%3Amy-region%7Cnorth-texas%7Cpanhandle-plains.t=redcross%3Amy-region%7Cnorth-texas%7Cbig-country.t=redcross%3Amy-region%7Cnorth-texas%7Cnortheast-texas.t=redcross%3Amy-region%7Cnorth-texas%7Ceast-texas View All /contentedcross/en/localexasorth-texas/about-usews-and-eventsews/5-tips-for-combatting-the-flu © 2024 The American National Red Cross Accessibility Terms of Use Privacy Policy Contact Us FAQ Mobile Apps Give Blood Careers‘Pandemic potential’: bird flu outbreaks fuelling chance of human spillover | Environment | The Guardian Skip to main contentSkip to navigationClose dialogue1/3Next imagePrevious imageToggle captionSkip to navigationPrint subscriptionsSearch jobs Sign inIntInternational editionUK editionUS editionAustralia editionEurope editionThe Guardian - Back to homeThe GuardianNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleShow moreHide expanded menuNewsView all NewsWorld newsUS elections 2024UK newsClimate crisisUkraineEnvironmentScienceGlobal developmentFootballTechBusinessObituariesOpinionView all OpinionThe Guardian viewColumnistsCartoonsOpinion videosLettersSportView all SportFootballCricketRugby unionTennisCyclingF1GolfUS sportsCultureView all CultureBooksMusicTV & radioArt & designFilmGamesClassicalStageLifestyleView all LifestyleFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneySearch input google-search SearchSupport usPrint subscriptionsSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsThe Guardian appVideoPodcastsPicturesNewslettersToday's paperInside the GuardianThe ObserverGuardian WeeklyCrosswordsWordiplyCorrectionsSearch input google-search SearchSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsEnvironmentClimate crisisWildlifeEnergyPollution Northern gannets next to a dead seabird on Rouzic Island in Brittany, France, September 2022. Bird flu has devastated wild seabird populations. Photograph: Fred Tanneau/AFP/Getty ImagesView image in fullscreenNorthern gannets next to a dead seabird on Rouzic Island in Brittany, France, September 2022. Bird flu has devastated wild seabird populations. Photograph: Fred Tanneau/AFP/Getty ImagesAnimals farmedEnvironment This article is more than 1 year old‘Pandemic potential’: bird flu outbreaks fuelling chance of human spilloverThis article is more than 1 year oldExperts say record waves of avian influenza have been setting off alarms, with fears virus could adapt to spread among peopleSupported byAbout this contentAshifa KassamThu 12 Jan 2023 07.00 GMTLast modified on Mon 16 Jan 2023 17.01 GMTShareMultiple waves of avian influenza have left a trail of devastation across the globe, leading to the deaths and culling of more than 300 million chickens, ducks and geese and an unknown number of wild birds between 2005 and 2021.Today, with parts of Europe and North America in the midst of the worst outbreak on record, a global cohort of researchers is keeping cautious watch amid concerns about the impact the disease could have on humans.“There is concern about it having pandemic potential,” says Wendy Blay Puryear, a molecular virologist at Tufts University. “Before Covid was on anybody’s radar, this was the one that we were all watching very closely.”The virus is currently considered a low risk to humans, she says. “But anything that has the ability to replicate and evolve rapidly, and anything that has that ability to infect a lot of different hosts is kind of on borrowed time.”Much of the focus of experts is on H5N1, a highly pathogenic avian influenza that has fuelled, in part, the surge in cases around the world. First identified at a goose farm in Guangdong, China in 1996, the virus has turned up in at least 63 species of wild birds and has shown itself capable of infecting mammals such as bobcats, harbour seals and bears.If it has become established in wild birds, it is far more complex to control it and predict where it will go nextNichola J Hill, University of MassachusettsThe more the virus spreads, the greater the chances are that it may spill over into humans, says Thijs Kuiken, a professor in the department of viroscience at Erasmus University Medical Centre in Rotterdam. Once the virus infects humans, the concern is that it could further adapt to allow human-to-human transmission.“The chance of this happening is very small, but the impact – if it does happen – is very big, because it means that we then have a new influenza pandemic,” he says, pointing to the 1918 flu, believed to have killed as many as 50 million people, as an example of a pandemic that has been linked to an avian influenza and originating in birds.View image in fullscreenWorkers dispose of thousands of turkeys at a farm near Sorø in Denmark, on 6 January, after an outbreak of bird flu. Photograph: Mads Claus Rasmussen/Ritzau Scanpix/AFP/Getty ImagesAs H5N1 crisscrosses the globe, its impact on humans has set off alarms; between 2003 and October 2022, the virus turned up in 865 humans in 21 countries, resulting in 456 deaths. While the cases – most of them in Africa and Asia – were linked to the handling of infected live poultry rather than human-to-human transmission, the figures suggest the virus “has a high case fatality rate in people who become infected”, says Kuiken.Public health officials are taking few chances. In the UK, where a duck breeder tested positive for the virus in late 2021 after handling infected poultry, the Health Security Agency has been working to develop an “off the shelf exercise” to prepare for an outbreak of avian flu among humans, the UKHSA told the Guardian in an email.In the Canadian province of British Columbia, public health officials recently warned doctors to watch out for avian flu infections among patients, after a spike in cases among poultry at local farms.The virus would probably require more than one or two changes to enable human-to-human transmission, says Ian Barr, the deputy director of the WHO’s Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza in Melbourne.“We never really know with these viruses … but they’ve been with us for 18 years in various forms and they haven’t yet gained that function of being easily transmissible to man,” says Barr. “So, hopefully the virus finds that a difficult thing to do, but it’s something which we’re not entirely knowledgable about.”He described it as a game of numbers. “The more viruses that are out there, the more species that they infect, the longer they hang around for, then the more chance there is for something to mutate or go awry or reassort with an unwanted consequence.”skip past newsletter promotionSign up to Down to EarthFree weekly newsletterThe planet's most important stories. Get all the week's environment news - the good, the bad and the essentialEnter your email address Sign upPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.after newsletter promotionView image in fullscreenPigeons along the Thames path, London this month. The UK has experienced its largest outbreak of avian flu. Photograph: Geoffrey Swaine/Rex/ShutterstockEfforts to halt the spread of this strain of virus have been complicated by its prevalence in wild birds, says Rebecca Poulson of the College of Veterinary Medicine at the University of Georgia.“We know birds move incredibly long distances,” she says. “And if these birds are infected and are shedding these viruses as they move across the landscape, they can disseminate it quite far and wide in a really short amount of time.”Bird flu ‘an urgent warning to move away from factory farming’Read moreThe presence of the virus in wild birds and farmed poultry has allowed it to ping-pong between populations and amplify its spread, says Nichola J Hill, an assistant professor of biology at the University of Massachusetts in Boston.“I think we used to cling to this idea that we can control the virus in poultry, we’re set, no problem,” she says. “And now we’re facing a new era because if it has become established in wild birds, that’s a far more complex situation in terms of figuring out how to control it and predict where it will go next.”What is clear, however, is the role our food system has played in getting us to this point, she says, citing the high densities of poultry seen in commercial farming and the genetic similarity of most of the animals. “All of these amount to a situation which is ripe for the virus to get a foothold and then evolve towards virulence.”Explore more on these topicsEnvironmentAnimals farmedBird fluHealthBirdsfeaturesShareReuse this contentMost viewedMost viewedEnvironmentClimate crisisWildlifeEnergyPollutionNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleOriginal reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morningSign up for our emailHelpComplaints & correctionsSecureDropWork for us Privacy policyCookie policyTerms & conditionsContact usAll topicsAll writersDigital newspaper archiveTax strategyFacebookYouTubeInstagramLinkedInXNewslettersAdvertise with usSearch UK jobsBack to top© 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)‘Tripledemic’ of viruses continues to spread across the Brazos Valley Skip to contentNewsWeatherSportsThe ThreeWatch LiveAdvertiseHomeElection ResultsPresidential Election MapTexas Interactive ResultsNewsLocalStateNationalPoliticsTDCJ InvestigationWatch LiveWeatherInteractive RadarMap RoomFirst Alert PodcastSevere WeatherHurricaneLive EyeDog Walking ForecastAllergy ReportClosingsSportsHigh SchoolTexas A&MAggie Gameday ExtraSam HoustonThe ThreeContestsApplauseTriviaCommunity CalendarAbout UsMeet the TeamContact UsLegalCareersAdvertise With UsCOVID-19 MapProgramming ScheduleSubmit Photos and VideosCircle CountryGray DC BureauInvestigateTVWatching Your WalletPowerNationZeam - News StreamsFeaturesBe RemarkableApplauseBrazos Valley Groundwater ConservationDaily PledgeFeel Good FridayFirst Responders SaluteFood for FamiliesFree Music FridayFrom The Ground UpHalf Price ThursdaysIn DepthJefferson AwardsLegally SpeakingMaking Change PossiblePet of the WeekPump PatrolReason To SmileRestaurant Report CardSenior SaluteTreat Of The DayDream Home GiveawayTwin City TalkWednesday's ChildWeekend GardenerWho's Hiring?Video Request‘Tripledemic’ of viruses continues to spread across the Brazos ValleyKBTX News 3 at Six Weekday EXTENDED(Recurring)By Hope MerrittPublished: Jan. 12, 2023 at 6:46 PM CSTEmail This LinkShare on FacebookShare on X (formerly Twitter)Share on PinterestShare on LinkedInCOLLEGE STATION, Texas (KBTX) -After a busy holiday season, the ‘Tripledemic’ of RSV, Influenza and COVID-19 continues to spread across the Brazos Valley.The Brazos County Health District reported 157 new COVID-19 cases as of Jan. 11, 2023. That means over 150 new cases have come about in the last seven days. They told KBTX they will continue to monitor flu and COVID-19 cases as the new year progresses to see if spikes come about.Texas A&M Health Science Center Family Nurse Practitioner, Matt Hoffman, said there are a few factors to blame in this ‘Tripledemic’ we’re living in.”It really goes back to looking at the history we’ve seen this past year. We had a lot of COVID-19 precautions last year,” said Hoffman. “So, kids who weren’t exposed to RSV, now, they’re exposed and having symptoms. It’s also natural to see a bit of a surge right after the holidays after the traveling and a lot of close gatherings. The changing weather to warm soon is something that could be a main factor to which the illnesses stop spreading, but, it’s hard to say for certain.”Hoffman said the ‘Tripledemic’ has caused hospital beds across Texas to fill up.“Based on hospital data from central Texas, we’ve seen that hospital cases from flu have gone up, but, we’re also seeing COVID-19 increasing as well. However, a majority of those tests being done in the hospitals are RSV. "Hoffman recommends people to stay aware when they feel sick. He says not every case of RSV, COVID-19 and/or the Flu warrants a hospital bed.“If symptoms get severe, shortness of breath, and symptoms that are rapidly worsening, that’s a patient who needs the emergency room,” Hoffman said.Hoffman said the most important thing is knowing how each virus of the ‘Tripledemic’ can be spread.“With flu, we’re talking about a mixture of droplets along with contact so if someone touches something and they’ve been infected, there’s a potential you’ll be able to catch it as well,” said Hoffman. “With RSV, we see it more contact related. So if there’s a surface a kid has touched and they’ve got it we’ll probably get it as well. With COVID-19, its droplet based. Hand hyenine can’t be emphasized enough.”Due to this surge in the three respiratory illnesses, one local pharmacy told KBTX the demand for over-the-counter medications is greater than ever.Bessem Oben, Director at GoldStar Pharmacy, has been in the medical industry for nearly two decades. This winter season has been like no other though, according to Oben.“I’d say in the beginning of the fall, as in September, we started noticing the [medicine] shortages,” said Oben. “We started noticing the rise in the surge of COVID-19, RSV started a bit early and we were already on our way into flu season.”Oben said the trifecta of viruses means medication to treat those symptoms is in high demand which makes it difficult to keep her shelves stocked.“Our stock is of course smaller than usual,” said Oben. “We just try to keep ordering it. Availability is not like it usually is [for] Tylenol, Motrin, your normal pain relievers and fever reducers, cough and cold medications too, as well as some allergy medications.”Oben told KBTX her best advice to people in need of medicine that isn’t available is to look into generic options instead of big names like ‘Tylenol’.“This time may be unprecedented but you have resources out there,” said Oben. “Contact your pharmacist and we can help you navigate through this tough time.”To contact GoldStar Pharmacy, click here.For more information from the Texas A&M Health Science Center, click here.Copyright 2023 KBTX. All rights reserved.Most Read Crash near Texas Renaissance Festival kills one, injures another Houston-area 8-year-old killed in Grimes County ATV crash, sheriff’s office confirms Arrests made following fight at Post Oak Mall carnival Elementary school employees accused of feeding hot sauce, spicy Takis to special needs student with digestive disability, other abuse A record 13 women will be governors next year Museum of the American G.I. helps people step into the shoes of a Veteran with History in Motion eventReality TV star farmer pleads guilty to multi-million dollar crop insurance fraudWaller County sheriff’s deputy dies on dutyLatest News College Station Theatre hosts improve show TRAFFIC ALERT: Oversize load struggles to cross College Station underpass Focus at Four: A&M Economist talks interest rates, Trump presidency impact Bryan Rotary displays 1,000+ flags for 12th annual Field of Valor Bryan American Legion post honors local Veterans, families Crash near Texas Renaissance Festival kills one, injures another Service members honored in joint Bryan-College Station Veterans Day event Missing College Station teen safely locatedHomeNewsWeatherSportsCommunity CalendarUser ContentAbout UsKBTX4141 E. 29th StreetBryan, TX 77802(979) 846-7777EEO StatementPublic Inspection FileFCC ApplicationsTerms of ServicePrivacy PolicyAdvertisingDigital Marketingpublicfile@kbtx.com - (979) 846-7777Closed Captioning/Audio DescriptionCookie SettingsAt Gray, our journalists report, write, edit and produce the news content that informs the communities we serve. Click here to learn more about our approach to artificial intelligence.A Gray Local Media Station © 2002-2024Know Your Winter Respiratory Illness NewsFDA UpdatesLaw and AdvocacyTechnology TrendsViewpointsAll NewsMediaAround the PracticeIn-Depth InsightsK-CastsScript-EdExpert InterviewsPodcastsConferencesConference CoverageConference ListingResourcesDisease Awareness White Board VideoAmerican Pharmacists MonthSponsored ResourcesCME/CEPartnersPublicationsDrug Topics JournalTotal Pharmacy JournalEventsVirtual EventsTotal Pharmacy Solutions SummitBusinessBusiness StrategiesPatient ServicesPharmacy InventoryLaw and RegulationsTechnology and DataAll Business NewsPractice TypeIndependent PharmacyChain PharmacySpecialty PharmacyHealth System PharmacyPharmacy TechniciansSubscribeChoose SpecialtyAllergyAutoimmune DiseasesBiosimilarsCOVID-19Cannabidiol (CBD)CardiologyCompoundingContinuous Glucose MonitoringDermatologyDiabetesDigestive HealthEndocrinologyEye HealthGenericsHIVHeadache and MigraineImmunizationInfectious DiseaseInfluenzaMedical DevicesMental and Behavioral HealthNeurologyOTCObesity ManagementOncologyPain ManagementPain ManagementPediatricsPublic HealthRare DiseasesRespiratoryRheumatologyShinglesSubstance Use DisorderTechnology and DataVeterinary Pharmacy Women's HealthSpotlight - American Pharmacists MonthNCPA Annual ConventionChoose SpecialtyAllergyAutoimmune DiseasesBiosimilarsCOVID-19Cannabidiol (CBD)CardiologyCompoundingContinuous Glucose MonitoringDermatologyDiabetesDigestive HealthEndocrinologyEye HealthGenericsHIVHeadache and MigraineImmunizationInfectious DiseaseInfluenzaMedical DevicesMental and Behavioral HealthNeurologyOTCObesity ManagementOncologyPain ManagementPain ManagementPediatricsPublic HealthRare DiseasesRespiratoryRheumatologyShinglesSubstance Use DisorderTechnology and DataVeterinary Pharmacy Women's Health SpotlightNewsMediaConferencesResourcesPublicationsEventsBusinessPractice TypeSubscribeAdvertisementKnow Your Winter Respiratory IllnessJanuary 11, 2023By Drug Topics staffPublicationArticleDrug Topics JournalDrug Topics January 2023 Volume 167Issue 01 With the respiratory season in full swing and COVID-19 continuing to infect, knowing the basics of the common cold, influenza, COVID-19, and respiratory syncytial virus can help ensure patients get the right care.As the calendar flips to January, the United States is in the middle of a full-force “tripledemic,” with COVID-19, influenza, and respiratory syncytial virus spreading like wildfire. Add in the common cold, which is also making its rounds this season, and pharmacists are likely to experience a store full of coughing, congested patients seeking counsel and symptomatic relief. To help, we’ve compiled a quick reference guide for each of these respiratory conditions.InfluenzaInfluenza symptoms usually include headache, cough, muscle aches, tiredness, sore throat, runny or stuffy nose, fever, and shortness of breath or difficulty breathing.1Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea can sometimes occur but are more common in children. Loss of taste or smell rarely occurs.1Like COVID-19, influenza is a contagious respiratory virus. Both viruses spread similarly, but influenza is caused by the influenza A or B viruses.1Several tests can determine whether a patient has influenza rather than another illness.2 Rapid influenza diagnostic tests are the most common of these tests.Patients with influenza can be treated with influenza antiviral drugs.3 These treatments are available in the form of pills, liquids, inhaled powders, or intravenous solutions, but they are not available OTC. Patients must be prescribed these medications by their health care provider.Individuals infected with influenza should take precautions to not spread the virus. While sick, they should stay away from others, wash their hands often, clean and disinfect surfaces and objects, and cover their nose and mouth when coughing and sneezing.1Fortunately, influenza can often be prevented by receiving the annual influenza vaccine. Even if a patient has already been infected with influenza, they should still receive the vaccine.3Common ColdEach year, adults experience an average of 2 to 3 colds, and children may experience even more.4Cold symptoms usually include cough, sneezing, sore throat, and runny or stuffy nose. They can also include muscle aches, tiredness, loss of taste or smell, and fever. Symptoms do not include diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting.4Common cold symptoms usually appear 1 to 3 days after exposure to a cold-causing virus. A cold is usually harmless; most individuals recover in 3 to 10 days. However, a cold can sometimes last 2 to 3 weeks.Common cold is often caused by rhinoviruses. Rhinoviruses spread in ways that are similar to the spread of COVID-19.It is not necessary for patients to see a health care provider if they suspect they have a cold unless symptoms persist or worsen.4 Unfortunately, there is no cure for the common cold, but colds do improve over time without treatment.Symptoms can be relieved by using OTC medications. OTC medications can manage fevers, body aches, congestion, and cough. Throat lozenges and saline nasal drops/sprays are also a good option.4It’s important to remind patients that antibiotics will not help manage a cold.4In addition to OTC medications, other remedies include drinking plenty of fluids, sipping warm liquids, resting, and gargling salt water.Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV)RSV is considered a seasonal illness and is typically active from late fall to early spring.5Who’s at risk? Premature infants; infants younger than 6 months; individuals who are immunocompromised, have a chronic lung condition, or have a congenital heart condition; and adults 65 years or older are at increased risk for severe cases.5Common symptoms for all ages include cough, runny nose, sneezing, wheezing, and fever. Severe symptoms in children younger than 5 years include noisy breathing, blue or gray color in lips and fingernails, and pausing during breathing.5Older children and adults may experience mild headache, fatigue, or sore throat.5RSV is commonly diagnosed following a medical history and an accounting of the patient’s symptoms. A pulse oximeter or swab test may also be used to diagnose RSV.5Imaging may be used to evaluate a patient’s lungs if severe illness is suspected.5Injections of palivizumab may protect younger children at risk for serious complications. The first injection should be administered at the start of the RSV season and monthly for the rest of the season.6There are no effective antiviral medications to manage the condition. Parents should manage symptoms with OTC medications such as fever medications. However, children should not be given OTC cold medicines because of safety concerns.7An infection does not provide lifelong immunity, and patients can be reinfected in a single RSV season. Reinfection is typically milder, although older patients and those with comorbidities are at risk for more serious illness.5COVID-19At press time, the Omicron variant is the dominant circulating COVID-19 variant. Subvariants of interest include BA.2.3.20, XBB, BA.4.6, BA.2.75, BA.5, BQ.1, BQ.1.1, and BF.7.Symptoms appear 2 to 14 days following exposure, with time to onset varying among the variants. Common symptoms include fever, cough, shortness of breath, headaches, and sore throat. Loss of taste or smell may also occur as a result of infection.8Conditions such as diabetes, asthma, and pregnancy can put a patient at risk for increased disease severity.9COVID-19 is diagnosed with a test, either at home or in a health care setting. Patients who suspect they have COVID-19 but attain a negative test result should be mindful of the possibility of a false negative result. This may result from testing too early or collecting an inadequate specimen.8 The FDA recommends serial testing to help reduce the risk of a false negative test result.10Nirmatrelviritonavir (Paxlovid) and molnupiravir (Lagevrio) are the 2 authorized antiviral medications available for treatment outside the hospital setting. Monoclonal antibody treatments may be available, although their efficacy can diminish with changes in the SARS-CoV-2 virus.11There are 4 approved or authorized COVID-19 vaccines: Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, Novavax, and Janssen. The Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines are authorized for individuals 6 months or older. The Novavax vaccine is authorized for individuals 12 years or older. The Janssen vaccine is authorized for individuals 18 years or older.12The Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, and Novavax vaccines are recommended over the Janssen vaccine. The Janssen vaccine should only be considered when the patient has had a severe reaction to an mRNA vaccine, would remain unvaccinated because of lack of access to the 3 other vaccines, or wishes to receive it despite safety concerns.12Boosters for the Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, and Novavax vaccines are available. The Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna boosters are bivalent, offering protection against the original strain and the BA.4 and BA.5 Omicron variants. They are authorized for all individuals 5 years or older. The Novavax booster is monovalent and authorized for individuals 18 years or older.13ReferencesAbout flu. CDC. Accessed December 12, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/index.htmlRapid influenza diagnostic tests. CDC. Accessed December 12, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/diagnosis/clinician_guidance_ridt.htmWhat you should know about flu antiviral drugs. CDC. Accessed December 12, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/flureatment/whatyoushould.htmCommon cold. CDC. Accessed December 12, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/antibiotic-use/colds.htmlRSV in children and adults. Cleveland Clinic. November 3, 2022. Accessed November 30, 2022. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/8282-respiratory-syncytial-virus-in-children-and-adultsRespiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Mayo Clinic. January 9, 2021. Accessed November 30, 2022. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditionsespiratory-syncytial-virus/symptoms-causes/syc-20353098Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Nemours KidsHealth. November 1, 2022. Accessed November 30, 2022. https://kidshealth.org/en/parentssv.htmlTracking SARS-CoV-2 variants. World Health Organization. Accessed November 30, 2022. https://www.who.int/activitiesracking-SARS-CoV-2-variantsVariant proportions. CDC. Accessed December 12, 2022. https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#variant-proportionsCoronavirus, COVID-19. Cleveland Clinic. March 1, 2022. Accessed November 30, 2022. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21214-coronavirus-covid-19Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Mayo Clinic. October 29, 2022. Accessed November 30, 2022. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/coronavirus/symptoms-causes/syc-20479963At-home COVID-19 antigen tests-take steps to reduce your risk of false negative results: FDA safety communication. FDA. Accessed December 14, 2022. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/safety-communications/home-covid-19-antigen-tests-take-steps-reduce-your-risk-false-negative-results-fda-safetyCOVID-19 treatments and therapeutics. US Department of Health & Human Services. May 2, 2022. Accessed November 30, 2022. https://www.hhs.gov/coronavirus/covid-19-treatments-therapeutics/index.htmlOverview of COVID-19 vaccines. CDC. November 1, 2022. Accessed November 30, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/different-vaccines/overview-COVID-19-vaccines.htmlStay up to date with COVID-19 vaccines including boosters. CDC. November 1, 2022. Accessed November 30, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/stay-up-to-date.htmlDownload Issue PDFArticles in this issueRecommended Immunization Schedules for 2023Holistic Treatment Techniques for Managing Atopic DermatitisKnow Your Winter Respiratory IllnessGetting Well and Staying Well: Supporting Patient New Year’s Resolutions for 2023For Pharmacists, Building Resilience and Well-Being Is CriticalMedication Dosing in Pediatric Obesity Presents Complexities and ChallengesIs It Easy Being Green?FDA Approves Terlipressin for the Management of HRS-1To Improve Retail Pharmacy, Look Beyond Figures and Dig Into FactsCost Savings Associated With Therapeutic Exchange of Stimulant Medications Biosimilars Create Significant Saving for Providers, Payors, and Patients Recent VideosAdvertisementRelated Content COVID-19 Vaccines May Reduce Incidence of Long COVID SymptomsKillian MearaNovember 8th 2024ArticleA new study found that individuals who received a COVID-19 vaccine more recently were less likely to develop long COVID.Good Neighbor Pharmacy Customers Across the US Reflect and Look ForwardSeptember 20th 2021PodcastGood Neighbor Pharmacy customers from rural, suburban, and city areas reflect on the past year and discuss the future of independent pharmacy. Why Vaccination Uptake is Crucial During the Winter SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 6th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, sat down with Drug Topics to discuss the importance of COVID-19 and influenza vaccination.McKesson Series: Using Technology to Simplify Vaccination ProgramsDecember 22nd 2020PodcastOur latest podcast episode discusses how pharmacies can tap technology to boost vaccination programs for COVID-19 vaccines and others. Q&A: The Importance of Vaccine Literacy, Uptake During Flu SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 4th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, discussed the importance of annual vaccination and overall health awareness and literacy during the winter flu season.Women with Delayed Menopause May Face Increased Risk of AsthmaLauren MassaroOctober 30th 2024ArticleWomen experiencing later menopause may face a heightened risk of asthma, underscoring the possible role of estrogen in the development of the condition.Related Content COVID-19 Vaccines May Reduce Incidence of Long COVID SymptomsKillian MearaNovember 8th 2024ArticleA new study found that individuals who received a COVID-19 vaccine more recently were less likely to develop long COVID.Good Neighbor Pharmacy Customers Across the US Reflect and Look ForwardSeptember 20th 2021PodcastGood Neighbor Pharmacy customers from rural, suburban, and city areas reflect on the past year and discuss the future of independent pharmacy. Why Vaccination Uptake is Crucial During the Winter SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 6th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, sat down with Drug Topics to discuss the importance of COVID-19 and influenza vaccination.McKesson Series: Using Technology to Simplify Vaccination ProgramsDecember 22nd 2020PodcastOur latest podcast episode discusses how pharmacies can tap technology to boost vaccination programs for COVID-19 vaccines and others. Q&A: The Importance of Vaccine Literacy, Uptake During Flu SeasonBrian NowosielskiNovember 4th 2024ArticleRuth Carrico, PhD, DNP, APRN, discussed the importance of annual vaccination and overall health awareness and literacy during the winter flu season.Women with Delayed Menopause May Face Increased Risk of AsthmaLauren MassaroOctober 30th 2024ArticleWomen experiencing later menopause may face a heightened risk of asthma, underscoring the possible role of estrogen in the development of the condition.AboutAdvertiseEditorialContact UsTerms and ConditionsPrivacyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationContact Info2 Commerce Drive Cranbury, NJ 08512609-716-7777© 2024 MJH Life Sciences All rights reserved.Why it’s easier to catch a cold, the flu or COVID in the winter Skip to content Subscribe today Every print subscription comes with full digital access Subscribe now Menu All Topics Health Humans Life Earth Physics Space Magazine Menu All Stories Multimedia Reviews Collections Century of Science For Educators Coronavirus Outbreak Newsletters About For Students Our Store SIGN IN Donate Science News INDEPENDENT JOURNALISM SINCE 1921 SIGN IN Search Open search Close search Science News INDEPENDENT JOURNALISM SINCE 1921 All Topics Earth Agriculture Climate Oceans Environment Humans Anthropology Health & Medicine Archaeology Psychology Life Animals Plants Ecosystems Paleontology Neuroscience Genetics Microbes Physics Materials Science Quantum Physics Particle Physics Space Astronomy Planetary Science Cosmology Tech Computing Artificial Intelligence Chemistry Math Science & Society All Topics Health Humans Humans Anthropology Health & Medicine Archaeology Psychology Genetics A common drug may help treat a rare genetic disease By Tina Hesman SaeyNovember 8, 2024 Health & Medicine ‘The Power of Prions’ explores misfolded proteins’ role in brain diseases By Meghan RosenNovember 6, 2024 Archaeology A digital exam reels in engraved scenes of Stone Age net fishing By Bruce BowerNovember 6, 2024 Life Life Animals Plants Ecosystems Paleontology Neuroscience Genetics Microbes Genetics A common drug may help treat a rare genetic disease By Tina Hesman SaeyNovember 8, 2024 Animals Bees flying near cars are dying by the millions, a roadkill study suggests By Amanda HeidtNovember 7, 2024 Animals Putting vampire bats on treadmills reveals an unusual metabolism By Susan MiliusNovember 5, 2024 Earth Earth Agriculture Climate Oceans Environment Environment Fire-prone neighborhoods on the fringes of nature are rapidly expanding By Nikk OgasaNovember 8, 2024 Climate Meet Chonkus, the mutant cyanobacteria that could help sink climate change By Carolyn GramlingNovember 7, 2024 Agriculture Exploiting a genetic quirk in potatoes may cut fertilizer needs By Javier BarbuzanoNovember 6, 2024 Physics Physics Materials Science Quantum Physics Particle Physics Particle Physics Antimatter could travel by truck, a test with protons shows By Emily ConoverNovember 8, 2024 Astronomy A star winked out of sight. Could it be a ‘failed supernova’? By Emily ConoverNovember 7, 2024 Tech Feather-inspired airplane flaps could boost flight performance By Nikk OgasaNovember 5, 2024 Space Space Astronomy Planetary Science Cosmology Planetary Science Uranus may have looked weird when NASA’s Voyager 2 flew by By Lisa Grossman9 hours ago Astronomy A cosmic census triples the known number of black holes in dwarf galaxies By Lisa GrossmanNovember 8, 2024 Astronomy A star winked out of sight. Could it be a ‘failed supernova’? By Emily ConoverNovember 7, 2024 Column Health & Medicine Why it’s easier to catch a cold, the flu or COVID in the winter Low humidity and temperatures may make infections more likely By Tina Hesman Saey Senior Writer, Molecular Biology January 11, 2023 at 9:00 am In winter, cases of colds, flu and COVID-19 often peak. Low temperatures and humidity are partly to blame. invincible_bulldog/iStock/Getty Images Plus Share this:EmailFacebookTwitterPinterestPocketRedditPrint When bitter winds blew and temperatures dropped, my grandmother would urge me to come inside. “You’ll catch your death of cold out there,” she’d say. Sure, freezing to death is possible in frigid temperatures. But doctors and other health experts have long stressed that being cold won’t give you a cold. Still, winter is undisputedly cold-and-flu season. It’s also a period when COVID-19 spreads more. But if the chill doesn’t matter, why does the spread of so many respiratory viruses peak during the season? Tell us about your Science News experience Help us improve by taking our 15-question reader survey. Take the survey now “I’ve spent the past 13 years looking into this question,” says Linsey Marr, a civil and environmental engineer at Virginia Tech in Blacksburg who studies viruses in the air. “The deeper we go, the more I realize we don’t know [and] the more there is to figure out.” She and I are not alone. “That wintertime seasonality has puzzled people for a very long time; thousands of years, to be honest,” says Jeffrey Shaman, an infectious diseases researcher who directs the Climate and Health Program at the Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health. There is some evidence that winter’s shorter days may make people more susceptible to infection, he says. Less sunlight means people make less vitamin D, which is required for some immune responses. But that’s just one piece of the puzzle. Scientists are also looking at what other factors may play a role in making winter a sickening season. Illness may spread more inside. My grandma’s well-intentioned urging to come in from the cold may have instead increased the risk that I’d get sick. Colds, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, are all illnesses that are more prevalent at certain times of year when people spend more time inside. That includes winter in temperate climates, where there are distinct seasons, and rainy seasons in tropical zones. COVID-19 also spreads more indoors than outside (SN: 6/18/20). Those diseases are caused by viruses that are transmitted primarily through breathing in small droplets known as aerosols. That’s a change in thinking. Many scientists thought until very recently that such viruses were spread mainly by touching contaminated surfaces (SN: 12/16/21). “When you’re outdoors, you’re in the ultimate well-ventilated space,” says David Fisman, an epidemiologist at the University of Toronto Dalla Lana School of Public Health. Viruses exhaled outside are diluted quickly with clean air. But inside, aerosols and the viruses they contain can build up. “When you’re in a poorly ventilated space, the air you breathe in is often air that other people have breathed out,” he says. Since viruses come along with that exhaled breath, “it makes a lot of sense that proximity to individuals who might be contagious would facilitate transmission,” Shaman says. But there is more to the story, says Benjamin Bleier, a specialist for sinus and nasal disorders at Harvard Medical School. “In modern society, we’re indoors all year round,” he says. To drive the seasonal pattern we see year after year, something else must be going on too to make people more susceptible to infection and increase the amount of virus circulating, he says. Drier air can give some viruses a boost. Some viruses thrive in winter. But the reason why may not be so much about temperature, but humidity. “There are some viruses that like it warm and wet, and some viruses like it dry and cold,” says Donald Milton, an aerobiologist at the University of Maryland School of Public Health in College Park. For instance, rhinoviruses — one of the many types of viruses that cause colds — survive better when it is humid. Cases of rhinovirus infection typically peak in early fall, he says. Marr and other researchers have found that viruses that surge in the winter, including influenza viruses and SARS-CoV-2 — the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 — survive best when the relative humidity in the air falls below about 40 percent. Viruses aren’t usually floating around naked, Marr says. They are encased in droplets of fluid, such as saliva. Those droplets also have bits of mucus, proteins, salt and other substances in them. Those other components may determine if the virus survives drying. When the humidity is higher, droplets dry slowly. Such slow drying kills viruses such as influenza A and SARS-CoV-2, Marr and colleagues reported July 27 in a preprint at bioRxiv.org. During slow drying, salt and other things that may harm the virus become more concentrated, although researchers still don’t fully understand what’s happening at the molecular scale to inactivate the virus. But flash drying in parched air preserves those viruses. “If the air is very dry, the water quickly evaporates. Everything is dried down, and it’s almost like things are frozen in place,” Marr says. How humidity affects airborne droplets At low humidity levels, airborne droplets, or aerosols, dry quickly (left), preserving viruses under a feathery crystalline lattice, as this microscope image shows. At intermediate humidity levels, crystals form inside liquid droplets (middle), but those crystals may inactivate viruses, not preserve them. At high humidity levels (right), aerosols remain liquid, allowing viruses to survive better than at midlevel humidity. Janie French/Lakdawala Lab/Univ. of Pittsburgh School of MedicineJanie French/Lakdawala Lab/Univ. of Pittsburgh School of Medicine Dryer, smaller aerosols are also more buoyant and may hang in the air longer, increasing the chance that someone will breathe them in, Fisman says. What’s more, dry air can tear down some of people’s defenses against viruses. Studies in animals suggest that dry air can trigger death of some cells lining the airways. That could leave cracks where viruses can invade. Mucus in the airways can trap viruses and help protect against infection. But breathing cold, dry air can also slow the system that usually moves mucus out of the body. That may give viruses time to break out of the mucus trap and invade cells, Fisman says. Cold may harm our ability to fight off viruses. Being cold may not give you a cold, but it could make you more susceptible to catching one. Normally, the immune system has a trick for warding off viruses, Bleier and colleagues recently discovered. Cells in the nose and elsewhere in the body are studded with surface proteins that can detect viruses. When one of these sensor proteins sees a virus coming, it signals the cell to release tiny bubbles called extracellular vesicles. The bubbles work as a diversionary tactic, a bit like chaff being released from a military jet trying to avoid a heat-seeking missile, Bleier says. Viruses may go after the vesicles instead of infecting cells. If a virus docks with one of the bubbles, it’s in for a surprise: Inside the vesicles are virus-killing bits of RNA called microRNAs. One of those microRNAs known as miR-17 could kill two types of rhinoviruses and a cold-causing coronavirus, the team reported December 6 in the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. How cold weather affects the immune system The immune system has a diversionary tactic to keep viruses from infecting cells in the nose: When viruses (black and gray spheres) are detected, nasal cells release bubbles called extracellular vesicles (blue circles). These bubbles are studded with proteins (red, blue and black shapes on blue circles) that are normally found on the surface of nasal cells. Viruses may go after the bubbles instead of infecting cells. When temperatures in the nose drop below body temperature (right), cells release fewer bubbles, making it easier for viruses to find and infect nasal cells. E. OtwellD. Huang et al/Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 2022; adapted by E. Otwell Researchers measured bubbles released from human nasal cells grown in lab dishes at 37° Celsius, our typical body temperature. Then the scientists lowered the thermostat to 32° C. Cells released about 42 percent fewer vesicles at the cooler temperature, the team found. What’s more, those vesicles carried fewer weapons. Vesicles can pack in about 24 percent more microRNA at body temperature than when it is cooler. Three tips to bolster our immune system. I asked the experts what people can do to protect themselves from viruses in the winter. Some said using a humidifier might help raise moisture levels enough to slow the drying of virus-laden droplets, killing the viruses. “Any increase in humidity should be beneficial,” says Shaman. “You get a lot of bang for your buck if you go from very dry to dry.” But Milton doesn’t think it’s a good idea to pump a lot of moisture into a house when it is cold outside. “That humidity is going to find all of the cold spaces in your house and condense there,” creating a breeding ground for mold and rot, he says. Instead, he advocates turning on kitchen and bathroom exhaust fans to increase ventilation and to use HEPA filters or Corsi-Rosenthal boxes to filter unwanted viruses out of the air (SN: 7/25/22). Bleier suggests wearing a mask. Not only can masks filter out viruses, but “our work suggests these masks have a second mechanism of action,” he says. “They keep a cushion of warm [moist] air in front of our noses, which could help bolster the immune system.” Questions or comments on this article? E-mail us at feedback@sciencenews.org | Reprints FAQ A version of this article appears in the January 28, 2023 issue of Science News. Citations C.C. Wang et al. Airborne transmission of respiratory viruses. Science. Vol. 373, August 27, 2021, p. 981. doi: 10.1126/science.abd9149M. Moriyama, W.J. Hugentobler and A. Iwasaki. Seasonality of respiratory viral infections. Annual Review of Virology. Vol. 7, September 2020, p. 83. doi: 10.1146/annurev-virology-012420-022445A.J. French et al. Environmental stability of enveloped viruses is impacted by the initial volume and evaporation kinetics of droplets. bioRxiv.org. Posted July 27, 2022. doi: 10.1101/2022.07.26.501658D. Huang et al. Cold exposure impairs extracellular vesicle swarm–mediated nasal antiviral immunity. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. Published online December 6, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2022.09.037 About Tina Hesman Saey E-mail X Tina Hesman Saey is the senior staff writer and reports on molecular biology. She has a Ph.D. in molecular genetics from Washington University in St. Louis and a master’s degree in science journalism from Boston University. We are at a critical time and supporting climate journalism is more important than ever. Science News and our parent organization, the Society for Science, need your help to strengthen environmental literacy and ensure that our response to climate change is informed by science. Please subscribe to Science News and add $16 to expand science literacy and understanding. Related Stories Health & Medicine Colds and other common respiratory diseases might surge as kids return to school By Jennifer WelshAugust 12, 2021 Health & Medicine Why it matters that health agencies finally said the coronavirus is airborne By Tina Hesman SaeyDecember 16, 2021 Humans Here’s why COVID-19 isn’t seasonal so far By Tina Hesman SaeyJanuary 29, 2024 More Stories from Science News on Health & Medicine Genetics A common drug may help treat a rare genetic disease By Tina Hesman SaeyNovember 8, 2024 Health & Medicine ‘The Power of Prions’ explores misfolded proteins’ role in brain diseases By Meghan RosenNovember 6, 2024 Health & Medicine Why finding bird flu in a U.S. pig for the first time is raising new worries By Erin Garcia de JesúsNovember 1, 2024 Health & Medicine Limiting sugar in infancy reduces the risk of diabetes and hypertension By Skyler WareOctober 31, 2024 Health & Medicine Are synthetic food dyes bad for you? Here’s what the science says. By Sophie HartleyOctober 28, 2024 Health & Medicine Drop in vaping drives tobacco product use by U.S. youth to a record low By Aimee CunninghamOctober 25, 2024 Health & Medicine Male mosquitoes sometimes suck, too By Tina Hesman SaeyOctober 25, 2024 Health & Medicine A new implant tested in animals reverses drug overdoses By Anna GibbsOctober 23, 2024 Science News Science News was founded in 1921 as an independent, nonprofit source of accurate information on the latest news of science, medicine and technology. Today, our mission remains the same: to empower people to evaluate the news and the world around them. It is published by the Society for Science, a nonprofit 501(c)(3) membership organization dedicated to public engagement in scientific research and education (EIN 53-0196483). Science News Explores Science News Learning Subscriber Services Subscribe Renew Give a Gift Subscription Customer Service Follow Science News on Facebook Follow Science News on X Follow Science News via RSS Follow Science News on Instagram Follow Science News on YouTube Follow Science News on TikTok More Information FAQ Newsletters Rights & Permissions Advertise Contact Society for Science About the Society Society Store Donate Careers © Society for Science & the Public 2000–2024. All rights reserved. 1719 N Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036 202.785.2255 Terms of Service Privacy Policy Privacy Manager Close Log in Subscribers, enter your e-mail address for full access to the Science News archives and digital editions. Not a subscriber? Become one now. Client key* E-mail Address* Log InPa. state veterinarian recommends all poultry be maintained indoors Skip to content NOWCAST WGAL News 8 at 6:00 Watch on Demand Menu Search Homepage Local News Pennsylvania News National News Health Weather Interactive Radar Commitment 2024 Alerts Forecasting Our Future Closings Traffic Community Get the Facts 8 On Your Side In Focus Brain Busters Chronicle Matter of Fact Very Local Editorials Sports Explore Outdoors Entertainment News We Love MeTV Susquehanna Valley ulocal Upload Contests News Team Contact Advertise with WGAL Privacy Notice Terms of Use SUBSCRIBE TO EMAIL Weather Search Press enter to search Type to Search Search location by ZIP code ZIP Advertisement Pennsylvania state veterinarian recommends all poultry be maintained indoors to prevent spread of avian flu Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 5:43 AM EST Jan 12, 2023 Pennsylvania state veterinarian recommends all poultry be maintained indoors to prevent spread of avian flu Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 5:43 AM EST Jan 12, 2023 ALL OF THEIR POULTRY INDOORS. 52 MILLION BIRDS HAVE BEEN AFFECTED BY THE AVIAN FLU IN 47 STATES, INCLUDING OUR VERY OWN PENNSYLVANIA. SINCE THE FIRST OUTBREAK IN APRIL 2020 TO 38 FLOCKS HAVE BEEN AFFECTED. OVER FOUR AND A HALF MILLION BIRDS. AND THE CULPRIT RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS SPREAD TURKEY VULTURES. BLACK VULTURES. OTHER RAPTORS HAVE BEEN THE PRIMARY SPREADERS OF THIS ACROSS PENNSYLVANIA. AND BECAUSE OF PENNSYLVANIA’S LOCATION, OUR FLOCKS ARE MORE VULNERABLE. PENNSYLVANIA IS AT THE INTERSECTION OF A COUPLE OF MAJOR FLYWAYS THAT GO ACROSS THE UNITED STATES AND ALSO IN THE OTHER COUNTRIES. SINCE THE FLU SPREADS MORE EASILY IN COLDER MONTHS, THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE IS ADVISING FARMERS TO KEEP POULTRY INDOORS. PEOPLE WHO HAVE BACKYARD FLOCKS, DUCKS, CHICKENS, EVEN LONG POULTRY FLOCKS KEEP THOSE BIRDS INSIDE. THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE IS ALSO ENCOURAGING PEOPLE NOT TO LE GET LOCAL BREAKING NEWS ALERTS The latest breaking updates, delivered straight to your email inbox. Your Email AddressSubmit Privacy Notice Advertisement Pennsylvania state veterinarian recommends all poultry be maintained indoors to prevent spread of avian flu Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 5:43 AM EST Jan 12, 2023 Pennsylvania's state veterinarian is recommending that all poultry be maintained indoors to help prevent the spread of the avian flu.In a letter to poultry producers, Dr. Kevin Brightbill said the identification of new cases has continued across the U.S., including in the wild bird population."These recent cases should act as a reminder that a virulent strain of avian influenza virus continues to circulate in the wild bird population and still threatens commercial and backyard poultry," Brightbill wrote.The first case of avian flu in a domestic flock in Pennsylvania was identified in April 2022 in Lancaster County. More than 4.5 million birds have been lost in the commonwealth, and a total of 38 Pennsylvania flocks have been affected.Brightbill said poultry producers are encouraged to implement strict biosecurity practices and monitor bird health. Any unexplained mortality and morbidity should be reported to the Department of Agriculture at 717-772-2852. Pennsylvania's state veterinarian is recommending that all poultry be maintained indoors to help prevent the spread of the avian flu.In a letter to poultry producers, Dr. Kevin Brightbill said the identification of new cases has continued across the U.S., including in the wild bird population. Advertisement "These recent cases should act as a reminder that a virulent strain of avian influenza virus continues to circulate in the wild bird population and still threatens commercial and backyard poultry," Brightbill wrote.The first case of avian flu in a domestic flock in Pennsylvania was identified in April 2022 in Lancaster County. More than 4.5 million birds have been lost in the commonwealth, and a total of 38 Pennsylvania flocks have been affected.Brightbill said poultry producers are encouraged to implement strict biosecurity practices and monitor bird health. Any unexplained mortality and morbidity should be reported to the Department of Agriculture at 717-772-2852. Top Picks Walmart is already starting Black Friday deals. Here’s what you need to know Firefighter's quick action saves newborn's life at SeaWorld Happy Veterans Day! Here are some retro stories celebrating those who served 'Life becomes wonderful when you give back': Free-throw champion shoots to give people a second chance Loading more articles... WGAL News 8 Local Pennsylvania Contact Us News Team Apps & Social Email Alerts Careers Internships Advertise Digital Advertising Terms & Conditions Broadcast Terms & Conditions RSS EEO Reports Captioning Contacts Public Inspection File Public File Assistance FCC Applications News Policy Statements Hearst Television participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites. ©2024, Hearst Television Inc. on behalf of WGAL-TV. Privacy Notice Your California Privacy Rights Interest-Based Ads Terms of Use Site MapWhat is the dog flu? Denver veterinarian explains | FOX31 Denver Skip to content FOX31 Denver Denver 47° Sign Up Denver 47° Sponsored By Toggle Menu Open Navigation Close Navigation Search Please enter a search term. Primary Menu Watch On-Demand Video 🔴 FOX31 Stream 🔴 Channel 2 Stream One Minute Wellness | Sponsored Content News Local News Election News: Colorado & National Colorado Election Results National/World Problem Solvers Politics Colorado Point of View The Denver Guide Denver Traffic Denver Gas Prices Colorado Lottery Results & Jackpots Serving Those Who Serve Support the Shield Outdoor Colorado FOX31 Newsletters Politics from The Hill DC Bureau Tech Health Money and Business Fentanyl Crisis Automotive News BestReviews BestReviews Daily Deals Press Releases Weather Denver Weather Radar Denver Hourly Forecast Watches & Warnings Closings & Delays Colorado Weather Maps Temperatures: Current & High/Low Air Quality Index & Forecast UV Index & Forecast Fire Restrictions & Bans Wildfire Map Traffic Map Weather Headlines Weather App Pinpoint Weather Beast Top Stories Forecast: Possible overnight fog, Tuesday showers Video Top Stories Forecast: Warming up and thawing out 11 hours ago Video Denver weather: Sunny and warmer for the week ahead 20 hours ago Video Forecast: Sunny skies, calm conditions return 1 day ago Video Denver just got nearly half a winter’s worth of snow 1 day ago Video Sports Denver Broncos | Orange & Blue Report Colorado Rockies Denver Nuggets Colorado Avalanche CU Buffs Colorado Sports Night NASCAR LIV Golf Top Stories Here are the odds of the Broncos making playoffs Video Top Stories CU to host national college pregame show Top Stories Why tortillas were thrown during Buffs, Texas Tech … 8 hours ago Video Avalanche end Hurricanes’ 8-game win streak 12 hours ago Video Nix shines, nearly helping end Chiefs’ perfect season 12 hours ago Video Chiefs block Broncos’ kicker for 14-16 final score 13 hours ago Video Great Day Colorado Latest from GDC About GDC Contact GDC Download GDC Video Hike of the Week Business Spotlight Deals Contests Community Remarkable Women Contact Us Send news tips & story ideas Advertise with Us Marketplace Epic Discounts Find a Job Post a Job Jobs at KDVR & KWGN About News Team TV Schedule: FOX31 TV Schedule: Channel 2 NFL: How games on TV are decided History of KDVR-TV History of KWGN-TV Paid Programming Regional News Partners About BestReviews KDVR/KFCT/KWGN-TV EEO Report Public File Help Closed Captioning Info Search Please enter a search term. News What is the dog flu? Denver veterinarian explains by: Courtney Fromm Posted: Jan 14, 2023 / 10:03 PM MST Updated: Jan 15, 2023 / 09:07 AM MST by: Courtney Fromm Posted: Jan 14, 2023 / 10:03 PM MST Updated: Jan 15, 2023 / 09:07 AM MST SHARE This is an archived article and the information in the article may be outdated. Please look at the time stamp on the story to see when it was last updated. DENVER (KDVR) – Some cities across the United States have started to see an uptick in canine influenza, which is the flu but for dogs, and the symptoms can be similar to humans. “When dogs are sick with it, they have a cough, they have nasal discharge and they have a fever. They can also be lethargic,” Dr. Kevin Fitzgerald a veterinarian at VCA Alameda East Veterinary Hospital told FOX31 on Saturday. Fitzgerald said cities like Chicago are seeing an uptick in cases. If dogs here locally were to travel to cities where there are more dog flu cases and come back to Colorado, they can bring it with them. “It’s highly contagious, 80% of dogs get it but only 5% of them die from it. The dog flu has a low mortality rate,” Fitzgerald said. The vet gave FOX31 and Channel 2 a little insight into how the dog flu originated over the past few decades. “In 2004, a mutated equine virus jumped to dogs. That’s the first time we saw it,” Fitzgerald said. “Then in 2015, a mutated bird flu jumped to dogs.” He said the best thing dog owners can do is be prepared even though he has only seen a few cases here locally. “In 2006 and 2007 we got a good vaccine for it. We’re lucky in Colorado we have a great vet group,” Fitzgerald said. He said it’s up to owners to decide if their dog needs the vaccine based on the risk of exposure. “Let’s be prepped, let’s be ready. Is your dog going to the groomer? A dog park? Are they going to obedience classes or just came from a rescue or shelter?” Fitzgerald said. As of right now, dog influenza can’t jump to humans. But to err on the side of caution, when it comes to your dogs you should limit exposure to dead birds. “The dogs sense the whole world with their nose and that’s where this thing gets the foothold,” Fitzgerald said. Fitzgerald said with the bird flu outbreak nationally any dead birds should be removed from where your dogs can find them. Close Modal Suggest a Correction Your name(required) Your email(required) Report a typo or grammatical error(required) Submit Δ Suggest a Correction Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ✕ Read next > Read next > Next ✕ ✕ Read next > Next story in Cancel Read next > Next story in Cancel The best early Black Friday gifts under $50 Holiday / 4 hours ago BestReviews has assembled a collection of top-quality gifts priced under $50, currently available at discounts of up to 60% off. The best early Best Buy Black Friday deals Holiday / 4 hours ago Best Buy’s major Black Friday sale is happening now, and there are many more amazing discounts to be had. Wayfair’s Black Friday Sneak Peek has deals up to … Holiday / 5 hours ago BestReviews rounded up the best Wayfair Black Friday deals on furniture, kitchenware, appliances and pet products. View All BestReviews Close Thanks for signing up! Watch for us in your inbox. Subscribe Now Pinpoint Weather: Alerts & Storm Updates SIGN UP NOW Top Stories Trump is likely to name a loyalist as Pentagon chief … Ishiba survived a rare runoff to remain Japan’s prime … Trump asks Rep. Mike Waltz, China hawk, to be his … Middle East latest: Israeli minister reports some … Forecast: Possible overnight fog, Tuesday showers Top Stories More Stories Here are the people Trump has picked for key positions … Trump is likely to name a loyalist as Pentagon chief … Ishiba survived a rare runoff to remain Japan’s prime … Trump asks Rep. Mike Waltz, China hawk, to be his … Middle East latest: Israeli minister reports some … Forecast: Possible overnight fog, Tuesday showers The Latest: Fewer than 20 races to be called as control … Thousands attend Colorado Veterans Day Parade More Stories FOX31 Denver Video Parker school hosts Veterans Day event to honor those … 2 hours ago Denver weather: More seasonal temps with some rain … 2 hours ago Loveland to host annual Veterans Day Parade 10 hours ago Spencer Thomas joins Daybreak team 10 hours ago DIA to close bridge security, A-bridge for construction 10 hours ago Vigil held for victims of Halloween night shooting 10 hours ago Counties CPW is considering for next gray wolf release 10 hours ago F-16 fighter jets to flyover Denver on Veterans Day 10 hours ago Caraveo concedes to Evans in Colorado District 8 10 hours ago Denver weather: Sunshine, dry conditions return 13 hours ago Discounts for veterans, service members on Veterans … 13 hours ago Raising awareness for veteran mental health 13 hours ago More Videos More from FOX31 Denver The Latest: Fewer than 20 races to be called as control … Thousands attend Colorado Veterans Day Parade Megan Fox is expecting a baby with Machine Gun Kelly Wisconsin Supreme Court grapples with whether state’s … Queen Bey and Yale: The Ivy League university is … New Zealand’s leaders formally apologize to survivors … Hanging Lake’s new bridge material flown to trail Southwest is offering buyouts to airport workers … More from FOX31 Denver Close Thanks for signing up! Watch for us in your inbox. Subscribe Now Midday News Headlines SIGN UP NOW Pinpoint Weather Forecast Forecast: Possible overnight fog, Tuesday showers Weather Forecast / 28 mins ago Weather Quick Links Interactive Radar — Track the weather where you live Watches & Warnings — Latest weather alerts Closings & Delays — Check the full list any time Download our app — Radar, breaking news, live video Live Traffic Map — Alerts and construction Get weather email alerts — Sign up now BestReviews.com - Top picks to make everyone happy The best early Black Friday gifts under $50 Holiday / 4 hours ago The best early Best Buy Black Friday deals Holiday / 4 hours ago Wayfair’s Black Friday Sneak Peek has deals up to … Holiday / 5 hours ago Walmart’s early Black Friday sale is starting today Holiday / 2 hours ago All the best Veterans Day freebies and deals Holiday / 7 hours ago The best Black Friday deals at PetSmart Holiday / 3 days ago View All BestReviews Picks Top Stories Which states are Coloradans leaving for? Data Desk / 2 hours ago Golden police officer’s memorial service announced Local News / 2 hours ago Jeffco parents fund American flags for classrooms Local News / 2 hours ago Veterans Voices 2024 – Full special Serving Those Who Serve / 7 hours ago Hanging Lake’s new bridge material flown to trail Local News / 1 hour ago Denver, Colorado news, weather, sports and more Denver News Denver Weather Denver Traffic Denver Sports The Denver Guide Contact Us KDVR TV Schedule KWGN TV Schedule KDVR Online Public File KWGN-TV Online Public File KFCT Online Public File KDVR Children’s TV Programming KWGN-TV Children’s TV Programming KFCT Children’s TV Programming KDVR/KFCT/KWGN-TV EEO Report FCC Applications Get News App Get the iOS app Get the Android app from Google Play Get Weather App Get the iOS Weather app Get the Android Weather app from Google Play Stay Connected Haystack Privacy Policy 06/27/2024 Terms Of Use Public File Assistance Contact The Hill NewsNation BestReviews Content Licensing Nexstar Digital Journalistic Integrity Sitemap Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information © 1998 - 2024 Nexstar Media Inc. | All Rights Reserved. ✕AI – how close are we to finding a suitable vaccine? – NFUonline Contact us NFU CallFirst Our offices NFU Cymru Media centre Join the NFU Log in About us About us NFU governance Who's who at the NFU Our history NFU Mutual insurance services NFU Cymru National Pig Association Careers Updates and information Updates and information Regions Sectors Cross sectors Events Campaigning Back British Farming Campaign resources NFU Education NFU reports Consultations Communities Services NFU Professional Services NFU CallFirst Business guides NFU planning services NFU Business Directory NFU Employment Service NFU energy solutions NFU Legal Services The NFU Tenants' Service Rewards Member rewards Business essentials NFU magazines Safety and security Training and resources Vehicles and machinery Wellbeing and lifestyle Home Updates and information How viable is an AI vaccine? How viable is an AI vaccine? 13 January 2023 Poultry Science and technology Avian influenza Text only view The NFU went to a scientific roundtable with a panel of experts to look at the question many poultry farmers are asking: What is standing in the way of an avian influenza vaccine? NFU Graduate Trainee Georgie Cockburn reports. In October, scientists, farmers, and stakeholders from across the globe came together for the IABS (International Alliance for Biological Standardization) conference on ‘Vaccination strategies to prevent and control HPAI: Removing unnecessary barriers to usage’. Les Simms, from Asia Pacific Veterinary Information Services, opened the talks by exploring the perceived barriers to vaccination. He identified the development of suitable vaccines and the trade impacts of using them as two of the barriers that most needed addressing. Finding a suitable vaccine An effective vaccine has two key components – it should be a close match to the circulating strain of virus and needs to stimulate a large enough immune response to protect against infection. For successful uptake, it also needs to be easily administrable to a large number of birds. Erica Spackman, from the US Department of Agriculture, and Ian Brown, from the DeltaFlu Research Consortium, provided an overview of the available vaccine types, including those in development. It was clear that the suitability of each vaccine type would depend on whether a preventative or emergency approach was taken. Inactive vs vector vaccines For example, inactivated vaccines account for the majority of HPAI vaccines used worldwide. These vaccines contain whole viruses that have been killed to stop them from replicating. While they have the benefit of being tried and tested and are effective for numerous species types, these vaccines are generally delivered by injection. This makes them unsuitable for mass administration in an emergency situation. Instead, vector vaccines may be more suitable for emergency vaccination. Vector vaccines use a harmless virus to deliver the genetic code needed to produce the HPAI antigen. These vaccines generate a broad immune response and lend themselves well to mass administration via feed, drinking water, or aerosol spray. Trade barriers While the speakers showcased a vast array of ongoing research, little of it has been tested under field-like conditions. This is because companies are unwilling to take the next steps until they know there will be a market for their product. Therefore, trade barriers will need to be removed before we see further developments. There were concerns that countries might not import poultry products from countries where HPAI vaccination is in use. This concern was largely founded on the risk of silent infection rather than legislative barriers. Vaccination does not affect the HPAI status of a free country or zone under the WOAH (World Organisation for Animal Health) code; and changes to EU regulation under the Animal Health Law (2016) are providing a framework that enables member states to vaccinate. However, AI vaccination is still not permitted under UK legislation. Silent transmission On the topic of silent transmission, Timm Harder, from the Friedrich Loeffler Institute, spoke about the need for a robust testing and surveillance system to reassure trading partners of the infection-free status of vaccinated flocks, vaccination coverage, and population immunity. Serological testing, routine dead bird testing, and environmental sampling were all discussed as possible surveillance mechanisms. He also highlighted the need for any surveillance system to be cost-effective and have sufficient resources dedicated to it. The NFU continues to gather evidence on the issue in order to lobby for effective solutions to avian influenza, which is blighting the industry. More from NFUonline: Avian influenza – how the NFU is working to support you 13 December 202213 December 2022 AI case finder – current and lifted cases of avian influenza Nationwide Avian Influenza Prevention Zone in Great Britain lifted 04 July 202304 July 2023 AI Avian Influenza Ask us a question about this page Once you have submitted your query someone from NFU CallFirst will contact you. If needed, your query will then be passed to the appropriate NFU policy team. Name * Membership number Telephone number * Email address * Enquiry * You have 0 characters remaining. Submit By completing the form with your details on this page, you are agreeing to have this information sent to the NFU for the purposes of contacting you regarding your enquiry. Please take time to read the NFU’s Privacy Policy if you require further information. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Opinion AI – latest update on vaccine progress and a look back at 2022 23 December 202223 December 2022 Victory for poultry producers and NFU in legal case over AI compensation 19 January 202419 January 2024 Government provides funding for avian influenza research 20 June 202220 June 2022 About the NFU About the NFU Advertise with the NFU NFU Careers NFU Membership The NFU 2023 financial statement Media centre More NFU sites More NFU sites Back British Farming British Agriculture Bureau CFE Online Countryside Online Great British Chicken NFU Cymru NFU Sugar Tried and Tested TB Free England UK Turkeys Member services Member services NFU CallFirst NFU Contract Checking Service CT Planning Farm Safety: Risk Management NFU Legal Assistance Scheme (LAS) NFU Employment Service NFU Energy NFU Rural Surveyor Firms The NFU Tenants' Service Follow Us Follow Us The NFU on social media X (Twitter) Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Back British Farming on social media Facebook Instagram TikTok © 2024 – NFUonline NFUonline terms and conditions NFU mobile app terms and conditions Anti‑slavery and human trafficking statement Privacy policy Cookies policy Complaints procedure NFU terms and conditions NFU gender pay gap reports NFU staff pension scheme 114373 Accept essential cookies Accept all cookies Manage preferencesDoctors See Rise in Ear Infections in Kids & Adults As Respiratory Viruses Surge IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Walmart's Black Friday deals event starts today — what to shop, according to an expertSkip to ContentToday LogoOn The ShowAbout TODAY3rd Hour of TODAY Hoda & JennaSaturday TODAYSunday TODAYShop the ShowShopShop the ShowBlack FridayProduct ReviewsSteals & DealsGift GuidesNewsletterWellnessStart TODAYMental HealthWomen's HealthFitnessSleepDiet & NutritionParentsBaby NamesKids HealthFamilyBabiesParenting TipsLOLFoodOn the Show RecipesMost Popular RecipesAll RecipesFood NewsWhat to Cook This WeekLifeAstrologyEssaysHolidaysInspirationJokesBlack FridayTODAY PlazaJoin us on the PlazaHistory of the PlazaCiti Concert SeriesSearchShare this —Search TodaySearchSectionsHealth & WellnessParentingFoodShopPop CultureNewsLifeStyleShowsTODAY3rd Hour of TODAYTODAY with Hoda & JennaSaturday TODAYSunday TODAY with Willie GeistWatch Full EpisodesMoreNewsLifeBooksTrendingRecipesRead With JennaAstrologyInspirational HolidaysRelationshipsTODAY TableHelpNewslettersStart TODAYJokesShop TODAY AwardsCiti Concert SeriesListen All DayFollow todayMore BrandsNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoFacebookPinterestEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardTwitterLinkedinOn The ShowShopWellnessParentsFoodLifeBlack FridayTODAY PlazaCoronavirusEar infections may be on the rise in kids and adults as respiratory viruses continue to surgeWith a surge in cases of flu, RSV and COVID-19, it's possible many kids could also develop bacterial complications, like ear infections.Jan. 9, 2023, 5:15 PM UTC / Source: TODAYBy Sarah JacobyThe recent surge in children's respiratory viral illnesses may also be causing a rise in related complications, such as ear infections.For Nicole Herrador, a school-based occupational therapist in Lindenhurst, New York, that came as a surprise. When her 11-year-old son developed body aches and a high fever the week before Christmas, she took him to the doctor suspecting he had the flu. At the doctor's office, they swabbed him for flu, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and COVID-19 — and checked his ears."They said that his ears were severely inflamed and red and full of fluid," she tells TODAY.com. "He didn't really complain about any symptoms relating directly to the ear infection." If she hadn't taken him to the doctor, "I would have never known." At that point, he was diagnosed with an ear infection and given antibiotics. But a few days later, when the test results confirmed he also had the flu, the doctor's office told Herrador that the flu was likely causing his ear infection.Amid the surge in pediatric cases of flu, RSV and COVID-19, experts tell TODAY.com that they're also seeing more patients dealing with complications arising from those viral illnesses — including some surprises, like the ear infection Herrador's son experienced.The so-called "tripledemic" is still ongoing“Both RSV and influenza virus levels are coming down a little bit, which is welcomed,” Dr. Aaron Milstone, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at the Johns Hopkins Children’s Center, tells TODAY.com. “Unfortunately, COVID levels seem to be going up.”And, so far, the strain on hospital systems has largely continued, Dr. Ishminder Kaur, assistant professor of pediatrics in the division of infectious diseases at UCLA’s David Geffen School of Medicine, tells TODAY.com. Although the levels of each virus have changed over the past few weeks, “it’s just been one after another,” she says. After a decline, doctors are now seeing more ear infections againResearch published last spring shows that pediatric ear infections generally became less common during the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic, Kaur says. Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also show a significant decrease in hospital admissions in hospital visits related to ear infections in kids.But as the pandemic continued into 2021 with fewer public health precautions in place, ear infections became more frequent again.The authors of last spring's research, which looked at 48 U.S. children's hospitals, noted two increases in ear infection cases — one in April 2021 and another in June 2021 — which were more pronounced in some areas of the country. The April increase was most significant in the South, Midwest and Northeast while the June increase was driven mainly by cases in the South and Midwest.Data from Italy shows a similar pattern in the primary care setting: a drop in both cases of ear infections and the number of prescriptions for antibiotics to treat pediatric ear infection cases at the height of the pandemic, followed by an increase in prescriptions during the "post-lockdown" periods in 2021 and 2022."As we get through this winter and look at data, we might see the number (of ear infections) even went higher proportionately because of the higher number of viral upper respiratory infections," Kaur says.A spike in ear infections would "make sense when you have just so many kids with respiratory viral illnesses right now," Milstone agrees.Chanda Costa, a stay-at-home mom in New Jersey, has been experiencing a surge of her own. She tells TODAY.com that all four of her children are currently recovering from ear infections related to viral respiratory illnesses — for the third time in a year.Two rounds of COVID-19, a case of pneumonia and a case of RSV and now this bout of illness have made this Costa's "worst year in all my years of parenting as far as sickness goes," she says. "It's been terrible."Doctors are even seeing rarer bacterial complications of viral illnesses more frequently than normal, likely due to the sheer number of kids who are sick."Because there are so many more kids getting infected, we're going to just see more of these rare complications," Milstone says. For instance, that includes complications like mastoiditis, which is an infection of the bone behind the ear that can develop due to a middle ear infection, MedlinePlus explains."We've definitely seen a couple more cases of mastoiditis in the last few months than we've seen in prior winters," Milstone says, adding that he thinks it's likely "just because we're seeing more kids with respiratory illness who get complicated ear infections."Hospitals are reporting more cases of rare invasive strep A infections among kids, Kaur notes. Invasive strep A, like bacterial ear infections, can develop on the heels of a viral illness. Can COVID-19, RSV and flu cause ear infections?The short answer is that, yes, upper respiratory illnesses caused by viruses can lead to ear infections down the line. In some cases, as with RSV, the virus can directly cause an infection in the ear, Kaur explains. But in many other instances, the virus causes inflammation in the area that sets the stage for a separate bacterial infection to take hold.It's often down to simple anatomy. The eustachian tube connects the area behind your nose — the nasopharynx — to the middle ear, Kaur explains. "When you have a viral infection, there is mucus buildup, inflammation and swelling, which alters the function of that tube," she says. That leads to the buildup of fluid in the area and, ultimately, the collection of enough bacteria to cause an infection.Many different kinds of viral respiratory infections can create the opportunity for a bacterial ear infection, including RSV, influenza, adenovirus, rhinovirus and more. Earlier in the pandemic, doctors weren't sure if COVID-19 could also lead to ear infections. "But what we've learned from COVID is that can anything can happen," Milstone says. Now, both he and Kaur believe it's very possible that COVID-19 could lead to a subsequent ear infection in this way. And a series of eight case studies, published in 2021 in the Journal of Laryngology and Otology, suggests that it does happen.Do adults also get ear infections like these?Yes, adults can get ear infections after a case of a respiratory viral infection, too. It's just much less common, Kaur says. Again, that's partly due to anatomy. "As we grow, our eustachian tube stretches out, and it drains downwards," she explains. That makes it less likely for fluid to get caught and, therefore, reduces the chances for infections to develop.Adults also have some level of protection against many of these illnesses due to past infections, Milstone says, while kids may be encountering them for the first time. Depending on that level of protection, as well as your lifestyle and behavior, you may be more or less likely to get sick, TODAY.com explained previously.What parents need to knowFirst off, know that it's very common for a child to develop an ear infection following a viral respiratory illness — and pediatricians are great at spotting the signs, the experts say. Ear infections like these typically show up about two weeks after the initial viral illness, Kaur says, and certainly within a month. Parents should be on the lookout for a high fever or a child tugging at their ear after the other symptoms — like a runny nose and cough — have resolved, she adds. If appropriate, the pediatrician can prescribe antibiotic treatment to address the ear infection. However, not all ear inflammation is due to an infection, and not all ear infections are bacterial. So, your child may not need to get antibiotics. Although her kids received antibiotics for their previous ear infections, Costa says the doctor didn't prescribe those treatments this time because the infections weren't as severe."There could be some cases where the virus itself is just causing a fluid buildup and it's not truly infected," Kaur explains. And in those cases, your child's pediatrician may advise watchful waiting for a day or two first.Most ear infections don't cause complications, according to the Mayo Clinic, but repeated ear infections and those that go untreated can lead to: hearing loss (temporary or permanent), social or developmental delays (particularly if an infant or toddler loses hearing for a prolonged period), tearing of the ear drum, spread of the infection to the brain or surrounding membranes.Keep in mind, there are ways to help prevent ear infections. That can include preventing the viral infections that contribute to ear infections through the use of vaccines, masks, hand-washing and other protective tools and behaviors. The pneumococcal vaccines in particular have been shown to reduce the risk for ear infections, Kaur says.For now, though, we can expect to see COVID-19 continue to spread and, potentially, cause complications like ear infections — especially after so much travel and gathering during the winter holiday season."The truth is that people are doing all the behaviors that allow respiratory viruses to spread," Milstone says. That doesn't mean we necessarily need to go back into lockdowns, he explains, "but when we do none of those things, it just allows the viruses to spread at will. So that's where we are right now."For Herrador, her son's ear infection is a reminder to take these illnesses seriously. She encourages other parents to "go check because you might be surprised when you get there that there's something else going on," she says."Listen to your gut," Costa agrees. "And know it will pass." Sarah JacobySarah Jacoby is a health reporter at TODAY. RelatedIvan-balvan / Getty Images5 common skin rashes that can be caused by COVID, according to dermatologistsCoronavirus / Updated Nov. 9, 2024Steve Pfost / Newsday via Getty ImagesIs one COVID vaccine better than the others? An infectious disease doctor breaks it downCoronavirus / Updated Oct. 4, 2024Jean-Luc Ichard / Getty ImagesNew XEC COVID variant is on the rise. What are its symptoms, and will it cause a surge?Coronavirus / Updated Oct. 2, 2024Getty ImagesYou can now order more free at-home COVID tests — here’s howCoronavirus / Updated Sept. 27, 2024Getty ImagesAmericans can get another round of free COVID tests this fall: How to orderCoronavirus / Updated Sept. 24, 2024Getty ImagesHow to order free COVID test kits as a new round becomes availableCoronavirus / Updated Sept. 23, 2024Witthaya Prasongsin / Getty ImagesA new COVID-19 booster was just approved by the FDA. Should you get it right away or wait?Coronavirus / Updated Sept. 5, 2024Getty ImagesCOVID is spreading more now than in any previous back-to-school season. 3 things parents can doCoronavirus / Updated Aug. 26, 2024Getty ImagesNew LB.1 COVID variant is spreading in the US. These are its most common symptomsCoronavirus / Updated Aug. 14, 2024Ismail Ferdous / Bloomberg via Getty ImagesCOVID-19 FLiRT variants are dominant in the US. These are their top symptomsCoronavirus / Updated Aug. 13, 2024AboutContactHelpVisitTODAY AppsAD ChoicesPrivacy PolicyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationCA NoticeNEW TERMS OF SERVICE (UPDATED JULY 7, 2023)NEW TERMS OF SERVICE (UPDATED OCTOBER 3, 2024)CareersClosed CaptioningTODAY SitemapAdvertiseTODAY Store Shop TODAYSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday LogoHow long do flu symptoms last? What to know | MintSubscribeSign inView Market DashboardHomeLatest NewsMarketsMarket NewsMark to MarketCommoditiesLive BlogsCryptocurrencyIPOStock MarketsMarket DataStock PagesIndex pagesBullionGold SilverFuelPetrolDieselNewsIndiaWorldWSJEconomistNewsUS NewsPremium e-paperGlobal Partners WSJEconomistMint SpecialsMint ExplainersMark to MarketLong StoryMint PrimerSnapviewSectionsCompaniesTechnologyMarketsMoneyMutual FundsInsuranceAutoIndustryPersonal FinanceCompaniesStart-upsCompany ResultsPeopleMoneyPersonal FinanceInsurance Ask Mint MoneyMutual FundsMyMintUS Elections 2024Personal LoanTechnologyGadgetsTech ReviewsApp News5G TechFoldable SmartphonesIn ChartsMoreElection Results 2024OpinionAuto NewsSportsIPL 2024IPL 2024 Purple CapIPL 2024 Orange CapIPL 2024 Points TableEducationTools IFSC Code FinderIncome Tax CalculatorMint LoungeMintGenie Multi-MediaVideosWebStories Photo GalleryPodcastsExplore MintAbout usPrint subscriptionMint AuthorsPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseDisclaimerMint codeCookie PolicyCode of ethicsSubscriber terms of useSitemapContact Us Hello UserSign inSign OutMy AccountSubscribeMy WatchlistNewslettersNotificationsMy ReadsFor YouView Less -View More +Data InsightsMarket DashboardBullionGoldSilverFuelPetrolDieselCommoditiesGoldGoldMAluminumMenthaoilSilverSilverMICGoldPetalNatural GasCopperZincSilverMCrudeOilGoldGinueaLeadCryptoCurrenciesView Less -View More +Top SectionsToday's NewsIndia NewsWorld NewsUS News TodayEconomyMoney NewsPersonal FinanceQ&AOpinionCompany Business NewsIPO NewsStart-upsCompany ResultsTop Company LeaderStock Market NewsStock MarketsCommodity NewsMark To MarketIPO NewsLive Blogpersonal loanpersonal loan emi calculatorPersonal Loan Interest RatePersonal Loan EligibilityBusiness LoanInstant LoanElection Results 2024Assembly Elections 2024Indian Industry AnalysisBanking NewsInfotech NewsInfrastructureAgricultureManufacturingEnergy NewsRetail NewsAuto NewsSports NewsOpinionViewsColumnsTechnology NewsGadgetsTech ReviewsApp NewsPolitics NewsLoungeBusiness of LifeSports NewsIPL 2025 IPL Points Table 2024IPL 2024 Orange CapIPL 2024 Purple CapIPL Match Today | IPL 2024 Schedule Education News TodayView Less -View More +Premium Offeringse-paperWSJEconomistMyMintMint PremiumView Less -View More +Tools and CalculatorsIFSC Code FinderIncome Tax CalculatorSIP CalculatorEMI CalculatorHome Loan EMI CalculatorCar Loan EMINPS CalculatorView Less -View More +MultiMedia CollectionsVideosWebStoriesPhoto GalleryPodcastsView Less -View More +More From MintMint GenieMint LoungeView Less -Explore MintAbout UsPrint SubscriptionMint AuthorsTerms of UseDisclaimerMint CodeCode of ethicsCookie PolicyPrivacy PolicySubscriber - Terms of UseSITEMAPContact UsMint AppsView Less -View More +Copyright © HT Digital Streams Limited All Rights Reserved.How long do flu symptoms last? What to knowThe influenza virus can affect you longer than you think Andrea Petersen( with inputs from The Wall Street Journal)Published13 Jan 2023, 12:40 AM ISTAccording to the US CDC, the flu and Covid-19 share very similar symptoms. It can take longer for people infected with SARS-CoV-2 to show symptoms and people stay infectious longer than with the flu(HT_PRINT)Many people are experiencing the particular misery of the flu for the first time in several years. After two years of milder flu seasons, here is a reminder of what the flu is—and what to do if you get it.This flu season hit earlier and harder than those of the past couple of years, doctors say. The reason is likely because of the cyclical nature of the flu and the lifting of Covid precautions such as working from home, wearing masks and having smaller social gatherings, says Robert Frenck, a pediatrician in the division of infectious diseases at Cincinnati Children’s hospital in Ohio.We asked doctors what to expect this year if the influenza virus causes illness in your household.Which symptoms are most common?The hallmark symptoms of the flu are fever, headache, chills and body aches, says Dr. Frenck. Sore throat and cough are typical, too, he says.But not everyone who has the flu will get a fever, says Ryan Mire, an internal medicine physician in Nashville, Tenn., and president of the American College of Physicians.In children, the influenza virus can infect the digestive system and cause diarrhea, says Tochi Iroku-Malize, a family doctor in Islip, N.Y., and president of the American Academy of Family Physicians.Symptoms of the flu tend to come on suddenly, within a day or even hours. “It is such a sudden change, they can usually pinpoint around the exact time they started to feel bad,” says Dr. Mire. That is distinct from other viruses such as the common cold, where symptoms tend to come on more gradually, he says.And unlike a cold, you’re less likely to be able to power through symptoms. “You feel terrible,” says Dr. Frenck. “You just want to get in bed and pull the covers over your head.”How long do flu symptoms last?On average, the crushing fever, chills and body aches tend to last between three and five days, says Dr. Frenck. But fatigue and cough can linger for up to three weeks, he says.Dr. Mire notes that the trajectory of flu is highly individual and unpredictable.“I’ve had people feel better after 72 hours and patients who have felt really bad and could not go to work for almost two weeks,” he says. Whether you’ve had your flu shot, how robust your immune system is and how big of a dose of the virus you got can all influence how intense your symptoms are and how long they persist.Why can flu symptoms last so long?People with the flu can start to feel better and then take a turn for the worse, often between days 10 and 14, says Dr. Frenck.For those who have this worsening of symptoms, it may signal a secondary bacterial infection, such as pneumonia. Pneumonia is often characterized by a return of fever and a worsening cough, sometimes accompanied with difficulty breathing. People can also develop ear or sinus infections or even encephalitis, which occurs when the influenza virus gets into the spinal fluid and can cause confusion and other symptoms, says Dr. Mire.Dr. Iroku-Malize says that if you’re having any trouble breathing, are unable to eat or drink, or if you’ve been improving and then symptoms worsen, see your doctor.It is secondary infections, particularly pneumonia, that are often what land people in the hospital and can lead to flu deaths, doctors say. Secondary bacterial infections from influenza need to be treated with antibiotics.For how long are you contagious when you have the flu?People shed the flu virus for about four to five days, says Seema Lakdawala, associate professor of microbiology and immunology at Emory University School of Medicine who studies influenza transmission.But the tricky thing with flu is that you are contagious starting about 24 hours before you show symptoms, says Dr. Lakdawala.Fever is associated with high viral loads, says Dr. Mire, so people are highly contagious while they have a fever. He advises his patients to stay home until they are fever-free, without using any fever-reducing medications, for at least 24 hours. After that, they are much less likely to be contagious.Dr. Lakdawala notes that since the H3N2 version of flu that is circulating this year is more commonly transmitted via close contact, wearing masks, increasing ventilation and social distancing will cut the possibility of spreading the virus.People generally will become infected about one to two days after being exposed to the influenza virus. “If you don’t have any symptomatic onset within three to four days [of being exposed to someone with the flu], you’re probably in the clear,” she says.How is the flu treated?Other than rest and fluids, doctors recommend treating the individual symptoms. For fever and body aches, for example, Dr. Iroku-Malize says your doctor may recommend acetaminophen and ibuprofen. Some people get relief from congestion from mentholated topical rubs, she says.Antiviral medications such as Tamiflu can cut the duration of flu symptoms by a day or two. The drugs also reduce the risk of complications such as secondary infections and hospitalization. Doctors recommend antivirals for people at high risk for flu complications including people aged 65 and older and those with chronic health conditions such as diabetes and heart disease. Taking antivirals within the first 48 hours of symptoms is most effective, says Dr. Mire. The most common side effect of the drugs is nausea and vomiting.If you have symptoms of flu and are at increased risk of complications, it is important to get tested for flu so you can get a diagnosis and start treatment in time for antivirals to be most effective.Is there anything else I can do to lessen my odds of getting the flu?Doctors emphasize the importance of getting your flu shot, which reduces the risk of infection and of complications if you do catch the virus. The vaccine is particularly important for older adults, young children, pregnant women and people with other health conditions.And it isn’t too late to get your shot this year, says Dr. Frenck. He notes that flu activity is typically highest in January and February. Also, two main types of flu circulate, type A and type B. Even if you’ve already had the flu recently, you can still get the other type, he says.Catch all the Business News, Market News, Breaking News Events and Latest News Updates on Live Mint. Download The Mint News App to get Daily Market Updates.MoreLessFirst Published:13 Jan 2023, 12:40 AM ISTBusiness NewsScienceHealthHow long do flu symptoms last? What to knowGet Instant Loan up to ₹10 Lakh!Enter Mobile NumberEmployment TypeSalariedSelf-Employed BusinessApply NowMost Active StocksNTPC share price392.4503:59 PM | 11 NOV 2024-5.25 (-1.32%)Tata Motors share price804.7503:59 PM | 11 NOV 2024-0.95 (-0.12%)ICICI Bank share price1,269.1503:58 PM | 11 NOV 20249.8 (0.78%)Tata Steel share price144.9503:42 PM | 11 NOV 2024-2.6 (-1.76%)More Active StocksMarket SnapshotTop GainersTop Losers52 Week HighMore from 52 Week HighAsian Paints share price2,542.6503:44 PM | 11 NOV 2024-226.6 (-8.18%)CE Info Systems share price1,890.1503:53 PM | 11 NOV 2024-165.65 (-8.06%)UPL share price515.1003:47 PM | 11 NOV 2024-42.5 (-7.62%)Aarti Industries share price439.5503:58 PM | 11 NOV 2024-35.2 (-7.41%)More from Top LosersBiocon share price348.8503:58 PM | 11 NOV 202427.6 (8.59%)Borosil Renewables share price503.1003:40 PM | 11 NOV 202437.5 (8.05%)ITI share price327.4003:59 PM | 11 NOV 202423.8 (7.84%)Power Finance Corp share price481.6003:58 PM | 11 NOV 202432.15 (7.15%)More from Top GainersTrending In Market Sagility India IPOACME Solar IPO Swiggy IPO Allotment Recommended For YouMore RecommendationsGold Prices24K22KBangalore 78,775.000.00Chennai 78,781.000.00Delhi 78,933.000.00Kolkata 78,785.000.00Fuel PricePetrolDieselBangalore 102.92/L0.00Chennai 100.80/L0.00Kolkata 104.95/L0.00New Delhi 94.77/L0.00Popular in ScienceStory Url has been added to your clipboardHomeMarketsPremiumInstant LoanMint ShortsDownload AppDownload the Mint app and read premium storiesTrending StoriesAfghanistan Vs Bangladesh Swiggy IPO Allotment Livemint Hindi Deadpool And Wolverine OTT Bitcoin Tata Motors share ACME Solar IPO Vistara Airlines Sidhu Moosewala Upcoming IPO 2024 Bank Holidays in Uttar Pradesh Bank Holidays in Gujarat Bank Holidays in Delhi Bank Holidays in September Bank Holidays in Jammu And Kashmir Instant Personal Loan Check Credit Score Online Business Loan Personal Loan Interest Rate Personal Loan Eligibility Personal Loan EMI Calculator Gold Rate in Delhi Gold Rate in Bangalore Gold Rate in Chennai Gold Rate in Hyderabad Gold Rate in Mumbai Credit Card Q2 Results Today Business Radio - FAB Play Assembly Election Results Popular StocksJSW INFRASTRUCTURE share priceR R KABEL share priceCONCORD BIOTECH share priceIDBI Bank share priceYes Bank share priceAdani Power share priceHUL share priceIndian Oil share priceVedanta share priceJio Financial Services share pricePaytm share pricePunjab National Bank share priceCanara Bank share priceAdani Green Energy share priceIndian Railway Finance Corporation share priceSuzlon Energy share priceIREDA share priceVodafone Idea share priceOrient Technologies share pricePremier Energies share priceBajaj Housing Finance Share PriceGaruda Construction And Engineer share priceHyundai Motor India share priceNifty 50 companiesADANI ENTERPRISES share priceADANI PORTS share priceAPOLLO HOSPITALS share priceASIAN PAINTS share priceAXIS BANK share priceBAJAJ AUTO share priceBAJAJ FINANCE share priceBAJAJ FINSERVE share priceBPCL share priceBHARTI AIRTEL share priceBRITANNIA share priceCIPLA share priceCOAL INDIA share priceDIVIS LABORATORIES share priceDR REDDYS LABORATORIES share priceEICHER MOTORS share priceGRASIM INDUSTRIES share priceHCL TECHNOLOGIES share priceHDFC BANK share priceHDFC LIFE share priceHERO MOTOCORP share priceHINDALCO INDUSTRIES share priceHINDUSTAN UNILEVER share priceICICI BANK share priceITC share priceINDUSIND BANK share priceINFOSYS share priceJSW STEEL share priceKOTAK BANK share priceLARSEN & TOURBO share priceMAHINDRA & MAHINDRA share priceMARUTI SUZUKI share priceNTPC share priceNESTLE INDIA share priceONGC share pricePOWER GRID share priceRELIANCE INDUSTRIES share priceSBI LIFE share priceSBI share priceSUN PHARMA share priceTCS share priceTATA MOTORS share priceTATA STEEL share priceTATA CONSUMER share priceTECH MAHINDRA share priceTITAN share priceUPL share priceULTRATECH CEMENT share priceWIPRO share priceLatest StoriesWorld News Today Live Updates on November 12, 2024 : From stealth fighters to advanced drones, China’s Zhuhai airshow unveils cutting-edge military techFrom stealth fighters to advanced drones, China’s Zhuhai airshow unveils cutting-edge military techIvanhoe’s Friedland Says Fears for China on US Tariffs OverblownStock market today: Trade setup for Nifty 50 to Q2 results today; five stocks to buy or sell on Tuesday — Nov 12Chennai weather today: Tamil Nadu districts to receive heavy rainfall this week, IMD alert in Tiruvallur, Thanjavur, etcChina Tech Stocks Need Earnings Boost Amid Trump, Macro ThreatsSagility India IPO listing date today. GMP, experts signal flat debut of shares on BSE, NSERailway stocks could be set for a strong finish to 2024Buy or sell: Vaishali Parekh recommends three stocks to buy today — November 12Shares to buy or sell: Chandan Taparia recommends three stocks to buy today — November 12SectionPremiumOpinionNewsMarketPoliticsCompaniesMoneySportsMutual FundIndustryTechnologyToolsIFSC Code FinderIncome Tax CalculatorSIP CalculatorHome Loan EMI CalculatorCar Loan EMINPS CalculatorData PagesMarket DashboardIndicesTop GainerMutual FundsGold PriceSilver PriceFuel PriceAbout UsMint AuthorsContact usTerms of UseCode of EthicsPrivacy PolicyRSSCopyright © 2023 HT Digital Streams Ltd.All Rights ReservedWait for it…Log in to our website to save your bookmarks. It'll just take a moment.Yes, ContinueWorst bird-flu season hits; more than 10 million chickens culled | The Asahi Shimbun: Breaking News, Japan News and Analysis Skip to content Your browser does not support JavaScript, or it is disabled．Please check the site policy for more information. Twitter Facebook Language 日本語 English HOME What’s New National Report Politics Business Asia & World China Korean Peninsula Around Asia World Sci & Tech Culture Style Food Movies Manga & Anime People Travel Sports Opinion Editorial Vox Populi Views Special The Asahi Shimbun> National Report> article Worst bird-flu season hits; more than 10 million chickens culled THE ASAHI SHIMBUN January 10, 2023 at 17:04 JST Share Tweet list Print Epidemic control staff prepare to kill egg-laying hens at a farm in Kawaminami, Miyazaki Prefecture, on Jan. 10. (Provided by Miyazaki prefectural government) Japan’s worst pathogenic avian influenza epidemic has spread to poultry farms in 23 prefectures, leading to a record 10.08 million chickens culled or scheduled to be killed as of Jan. 10. “I would like to declare a sort of state of emergency,” agriculture minister Tetsuro Nomura said during a Jan. 9 emergency ministry meeting called to control the epidemic. Nomura urged poultry growers nationwide and prefectural governments to “take maximum precautions” against bird flu. The culling number is the first to exceed 10 million in a single season. At a poultry farm in Kawaminami, Miyazaki Prefecture, staff early on Jan. 10 began killing about 100,000 egg-laying hens suspected of carrying highly pathogenic avian influenza. It was the 57th bird-flu outbreak reported since the beginning of the season, which started in autumn 2022 and ends in spring this year. On the previous day, staff at a poultry farm in Shirosato, Ibaraki Prefecture, started culling about 930,000 chickens. Ibaraki is the leading prefecture in terms of egg-laying hens. As of February 2022, about 15.3 million egg-laying hens were being raised commercially in the prefecture, according to a farm ministry survey. Two other bird-flu outbreaks were confirmed in the prefecture, and about 1.12 million birds were killed. With the culling of 930,000 birds in Shirosato, the total count will be about 2.05 million, about 10 percent of all egg-laying hens in Ibaraki Prefecture. In Aomori and Niigata prefectures, large farms with more than 1 million chickens each have been hit hard by the epidemic. The previous record for worst bird flu epidemic was in the season from autumn 2020 to spring 2021, when 52 outbreaks were confirmed in 18 prefectures and about 9.87 million chickens were killed. Ministry officials believe that a high proportion of migratory birds, such as ducks, have been infected with the virus and have brought the disease to areas across Japan. Since the end of 2022, the ministry has taken emergency sanitization measures, both inside and outside of chicken coops, at all outbreak-hit poultry farms in 23 prefectures. The ministry said in some cases, a sparrow or a rat infected with the virus entered the coop through a rip in the chicken wire or a hole in a wall. In other cases, the ministry said farm did not take sufficient preventive measures, such as replacing and sanitizing farm workers’ clothes and boots. (This article was compiled from reports by Hiroyuki Maegawa, Keitaro Nishizaki and Hiroshi Ohno.) Related News Japan confirms H5N8 strain in third bird flu outbreak in the country November 17, 2021 Japan reports first bird flu outbreak of season, culling 143,000 chickens November 10, 2021 2.5 million birds culled in potentially worst avian flu season December 11, 2020 South Korea confirms H5N8 bird flu in wild birds, issues warning November 11, 2020 Zoos hiding birds as avian flu spreads in North America April 6, 2022 Share Tweet list Print Trending Now Last 24 hours Last 7 days Shine Muscat threatening Kyoho’s spot as No. 1 table grape Ishiba elected prime minister in runoff at special Diet session Conservative party leader: hysterectomies can fix birthrate Boy rescued after 2011 tsunami struggles with ‘miracle’ label EDITORIAL: Japan faces test of independence as Trump returns to White House Western-style orphanage from Meiji Era to be revived as hotel 13-day limit on consecutive work proposed, with current cap at 48 Disabled man denied entry to matchmaking party in Tokyo Burrn! magazine marks 40 years of love for rock, heavy metal Photographer finds her muse in former imperial villa by the sea Tokyo named best big city in the world by U.S. travel magazine Japan’s declining births on track to fall below 700,000 Disabled man denied entry to matchmaking party in Tokyo Aerosmith rocks with ‘taiyaki’ chain for special sales of the cakes EDITORIAL: Trump’s ‘America First’ agenda puts the world in danger Reiwa head speaking broken Japanese sparks outrage JMA preparing for ‘mysterious tsunami’ that strike in Izu isles Mt. Fuji finally has its iconic snowcap, latest ever in 130 years Narita Airport’s workers won’t let customer harassment fly BASEBALL/ Road warriors Yokohama win first Japan Series title in 26 years Videos Ethereal Bitchu Matsuyama Castle rises from a sea of clouds November 11, 2024 1 missing after MSDF vessel sinks following fire off Fukuoka November 11, 2024 Snow crab boats again land hauls at quake-stricken Wajima port November 9, 2024 Recommended Memories of Hiroshima and Nagasaki Here is a collection of first-hand accounts by “hibakusha” atomic bomb survivors. YOASOBI A peek through the music industry’s curtain at the producers who harnessed social media to help their idols go global. Taste of Life Cooking experts, chefs and others involved in the field of food introduce their special recipes intertwined with their paths in life. Diplomatic Documents A series based on diplomatic documents declassified by Japan’s Foreign Ministry Memories of Nikkei Americans A series about Japanese-Americans and their memories of World War II Asahi Shimbun on Twitter Learning English Asahi Weekly In-house News and Messages Link The New York Times BACK TO TOP About Us Site Policy Privacy Copyright Contact Us Transmission of user information to external service providers（利用者情報の外部送信） Copyright © The Asahi Shimbun Company. All rights reserved. No reproduction or republication without written permission.Influenza drug 'Xofluza' expands indication to over 1 year old in Europe < Pharma < Article - KBR 주요서비스 바로가기 본문 바로가기 매체정보 바로가기 로그인 바로가기 기사검색 바로가기 전체서비스 바로가기 상단영역 UPDATE : 2024-11-12 10:03 (Tues) Home Log in Join 전체메뉴 기사검색 검색 본문영역 이전 기사보기 다음 기사보기 Influenza drug 'Xofluza' expands indication to over 1 year old in Europe 바로가기 복사하기 본문 글씨 줄이기 본문 글씨 키우기 스크롤 이동 상태바 현재위치 Home Pharma Influenza drug 'Xofluza' expands indication to over 1 year old in Europe 기자명 Jeong Min-jun Published 2023.01.13 15:40 바로가기 복사하기 본문 글씨 줄이기 본문 글씨 키우기 SNS 기사보내기 Facebook(으)로 기사보내기 Twitter(으)로 기사보내기 Kakaostory(으)로 기사보내기 Copy url(으)로 기사보내기 이메일(으)로 기사보내기 다른 공유 찾기 기사스크랩하기 I share this article Facebook(으)로 기사보내기 Twitter(으)로 기사보내기 Kakaostory(으)로 기사보내기 Copy url(으)로 기사보내기 닫기 Roche’s influenza treatment Xofluza (baloxavir marboxil) has expanded its indication to children aged one or older in Europe. On Thursday (local time), the European Commission approved expanding Xofluza’s indication to treat uncomplicated influenza or prevent it after exposure to influenza in children aged one or older. Xofluza won approval in Europe for treating influenza without complications in people aged 12 and older and preventing after exposure to influenza for the first time in 2021 and has since been used as a treatment for influenza A and influenza B in more than 70 countries. With the latest expansion of indication, Xofluza can be sued to treat uncomplicated influenza in patients of all age groups, from children aged one to adults. The approval was based on miniSTONE-2 and BLACKSTONE studies. According to a miniSTONE-2 study that compared Xofluza and Tamiflu (oseltamivir), Xofluza drove out influenza from the human body in 24.2 hours, more than two days earlier than Tamiflu’s 75.8 hours. Also, as a result of comparing Xofluza and placebo in various family members (adults and children) in the BLACKSTONE study, Xofluza reduced the risk of influenza infection after exposure to infected family members by 86 percent more than the placebo, demonstrating statistically significant prevention effect. Roche continues to conduct clinical trials related to Xofluza through a phase 3 trial for children aged less than one, the NCT3653364 study, and the NCT03969212 study, which seeks to reduce influenza spread from infected people to their family members. “EC has approved Xofluza’s use on children aged one and older because influenza can be particularly dangerous for children,” said Dr. Levi Garraway, Roche’s chief medical officer (CMO). “Roche hopes Xofluza's convenient one-time oral therapy will help children recover quickly and reduce the social burden of influenza.” Xofluza is an antiviral drug with a new mechanism of action developed for the first time in about 20 years. It blocks the progress of viral replication from the early stage by inhibiting the acid endonuclease protein, which is essential for replicating influenza viruses. The drug not only relieve influenza symptoms quickly with just one oral pill but also is effective in preventing transmission by reducing the time it takes to detect the influenza virus. tweet Related articles ‘Xofluza has good availability in treating children with high risk of complications’ Jeong Min-jun themj@docdocdoc.co.kr See Other Articles Copyright © KBR Unauthorized reproduction, redistribution prohibited News That You Haven't Seen Mediwhale wins 1st place in MICCAI’s medical AI competition Falls and trips, primary reasons for older adults’ injuries, while youngsters must be careful about electric scooters [Interview] ‘Pediatric care will revive, so don't give up and stay with us’ Potential new cure found for treating glioblastoma resistant to immunotherapy Macular degeneration cases mark a 2.5-fold increase in 5 years Huons to acquire PanGen Biotech to boost biopharma R&D, CDMO biz Philips Korea to launch digital pathology reference site at Seoul Clinical Laboratories Mediwhale wins 1st place in MICCAI’s medical AI competition Comments Log In 작성자 비밀번호 댓글 내용입력 0 / 400 Submit 댓글 정렬 Newest Recommended Top Comments BEST Comments BEST Comments It is automatically exposed by adding up the number of replies and recommendations. 닫기 More Delete comments Deleted comments cannot be recovered. Do you still want to delete it? Password Delete 닫기 Modify the comments You can modify comments only within 1 minute after writing. Text / 400 Password Modify 닫기 My comment collection 닫기 Important News [Column] Intentions and misunderstandings: who is at fault? [SITC 2024] Abion presents data on antibody-interferon platform for cancer treatment Severance Hospital tops NCSI rankings for healthcare service for 14 consecutive years Women’s hesitation to seek menopause treatment risks long-term health Should Korea's obesity threshold be raised to BMI of 27 or higher? Medytox Q3 operating profit up 68%, driven by hyaluronic acid filler sales Recent News [Column] Intentions and misunderstandings: who is at fault? [SITC 2024] Abion presents data on antibody-interferon platform for cancer treatment Severance Hospital tops NCSI rankings for healthcare service for 14 consecutive years Women’s hesitation to seek menopause treatment risks long-term health Should Korea's obesity threshold be raised to BMI of 27 or higher? Photo News [Column] Intentions and misunderstandings: who is at fault? [SITC 2024] Abion presents data on antibody-interferon platform for cancer treatment Severance Hospital tops NCSI rankings for healthcare service for 14 consecutive years Women’s hesitation to seek menopause treatment risks long-term health Most Viewed 1 Mediwhale wins 1st place in MICCAI’s medical AI competition 2 Falls and trips, primary reasons for older adults’ injuries, while youngsters must be careful about electric scooters 3 [Interview] ‘Pediatric care will revive, so don't give up and stay with us’ 4 Potential new cure found for treating glioblastoma resistant to immunotherapy 5 Macular degeneration cases mark a 2.5-fold increase in 5 years 6 Huons to acquire PanGen Biotech to boost biopharma R&D, CDMO biz 7 Philips Korea to launch digital pathology reference site at Seoul Clinical Laboratories 8 Hanmi Pharm boosts R&D spending amid Q3 profit decline and global headwinds 하단영역 Latest [Column] Intentions and misunderstandings: who is at fault? [SITC 2024] Abion presents data on antibody-interferon platform for cancer treatment Severance Hospital tops NCSI rankings for healthcare service for 14 consecutive years Women’s hesitation to seek menopause treatment risks long-term health Should Korea's obesity threshold be raised to BMI of 27 or higher? Medytox Q3 operating profit up 68%, driven by hyaluronic acid filler sales GSK Korea unveils long-acting HIV injection at infectious disease meeting 'Qarziba, global standard for neuroblastoma, is urgently needed to expand access to treatment’ [Column] What you need to know about vitamin D Trainee doctors to exert larger influence on reshuffled KMA leadership Important Neurophet teams up with AriBio to develop next-generation Alzheimer's diagnostic platform facebook twitter rss 하단메뉴 About KBR Tip off Advertising Site Feedback Privacy Policy Adolescent Protection Policy E-mail address privacy 매체정보 The Korean Doctors’ Weekly Co., Ltd 76-1, Dongmak-ro, Mapo-gu, Seoul, Korea Tel : 82-2-2646-0852 Fax : 82-2-703-3916 Title : KBR Online newspaper registration number : Seoul 아 04285 Date of registration : December 19, 2016 Publishing date : February 22, 2017 CEO & Publisher : Yang Kyung-cheol Managing Editor : Kim Yoon-mi Juvenile Protection Manager: Lim Woong Copyright © KBR. All rights reserved. 위로 전체메뉴 All Hospital Pharma Bio All Korea‘s Bio Industry Device/ICT Policy People Life science Special All Innovation for Survival Korea’s medical culture series Korea’s New Candidate Drug Watch List Special Series in Celebration of KBR's 1st Anniversary Interview with foreign envoys Special Series in Celebration of KBR’s 2nd Anniversary Interview with global pharma Special Series in Celebration of KBR’s 3rd Anniversary ASCO 2020 Highlights Special Series in Celebration of KBR’s 4th Anniversary KBR Covering RSNA 2021 Special Series in Celebration of KBR’s 5th Anniversary Special Report on EULAR 2022 [Top K-Pharma Analysis] BIO 2023 Opinion All Reporter’s Notebook Journalist’s Column Congratulatory Remarks Sponsored 전체메뉴닫기Flu falls but Covid makes comeback, latest CDC data shows | Daily Mail Online Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Best Buys Discounts Black Friday My Profile Logout Login Strep A Covid-19 Cancer NHS Cold Flu Dementia Fertility UTI Diabetes Weight Loss Diet My Profile Logout Login Privacy Policy Feedback Tuesday, Nov 12th 2024 9AM 14°C 12PM 17°C 5-Day Forecast Advertisement Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC looks to reboot the flagship show: Former England ace Alex Scott among the front-runners… and there are some VERY leftfield options Founder of world's oldest breastfeeding charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of transgender women - saying it has become 'a travesty' that 'indulges the fantasies of adults' Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' The Church of England's most prolific abuser John Smyth beat scores of boys till they bled. GUY ADAMS asks... why did no one in authority tell the police about the abuse by top barrister who exchanged Christmas cards with Justin Welby for years? Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more serious condition which affects up to two in three women The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make a difference, these are the ones that do Here are the number of sit-ups experts say you should be able to do for your age Plane passenger sparks fierce debate after sitting in between couple on three-hour flight I didn't think there was ANY problem carrying suitcases from Mexico for two guys I barely knew... they said it was just $250,000 in cash. I'm STUNNED it was actually £15m of cocaine - it's so unfair I face 60 years in US jail, says Brit beautician How having cancer could REDUCE your risk of dementia later in life: The surprising truth about why surviving one of the world's biggest killers can actually have a protective effect RICHARD LITTLEJOHN: U.S. millionaires fleeing the 'Trump terror' for Starmer's basketcase Britain must be mad Premier League footballer probed over rape claims after previously being arrested in February last year Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having intimate meal with family Yorkshire's Strongest Man contestant was filmed lifting a Ford Transit van with his bare hands while claiming a car crash had left him unable to carry shopping bags in 'blatantly dishonest' insurance claim Pressuring someone to end their lives is set to be a crime punishable by up to 14 years in prison under new Assisted dying bill Apple quietly discontinuing flagship device due to lackluster sales Cher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty. 'Do you want to come to my place?' he asked. I was 15... Keir Starmer throws down the gauntlet to Donald Trump and urges him to 'show leadership' on climate change - as he arrives in Azerbaijan for COP29 climate summit BBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Christine after their break-up Why Cadbury's Chocolate Fingers are changing hands in France for more than TWENTY times their retail price? How the Christmas pudding - a tradition that dates back to the 14th Century - is going out of fashion Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly after suffering miscarriage Scientist claims to have cured her stage 3 cancer with viruses she grew in a lab - after refusing to go through hell of chemo again Madonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris Previous Next Flu falls and Covid makes comeback: Influenza cases drop by two thirds in a fortnight and RSV trends down for eighth week in a row — but Covid deaths are risingAmerica's tripledemic continued to ebb in the first week of this year, data showsFlu cases have tumbled by two thirds compared to a fortnight agoAnd RSV infections are down for the eighth week in a row, to September levelsCovid cases are also pointing downwards, although fewer tests are being done By LUKE ANDREWS HEALTH REPORTER FOR DAILYMAIL.COM Published: 22:17 GMT, 13 January 2023 | Updated: 22:41 GMT, 13 January 2023 e-mail 31 shares 124 View comments Flu cases have fallen by more than two thirds in a fortnight and RSV is continuing to trend downwards — but Covid deaths are starting to rise.Today's report showed 8,200 flu cases were detected in the first week of the new year, down from the 28,000 registered two weeks ago. Hospitalizations with flu-like illness also tumbled below levels recorded at this time last year.RSV followed its downward trend for the eighth week in a row, dropping to 2,100 cases registered in the same week — or the lowest number since early September.But Covid fatalities have risen 44 percent in a week, with 3,900 recorded in the week to January 11. However, this was barely a third of the 13,000 registered for the same week last year and experts said the uptick may be an 'artifact' from the vacation period which likely delayed the reporting of many deaths. The above graph shows flu cases reported by US clinical laboratories in the week to January 7, or the first of the year. It showed flu continued its decline nationwide ‹ Slide me › The above maps show the flu levels in each state over the week to December 31 (left), and the week to January 7 (right) In its weekly update, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said: 'Seasonal flu activity continues but is declining in most areas.'The percentage of patient visits [to hospitals] for respiratory illness decreased for all regions during [the first week of the year].'They added: 'CDC continues to recommend that everyone ages six months and older gets an annual flu vaccine as long as flu activity continues.' RELATED ARTICLES Previous 1 Next EXCLUSIVE: 'There will be medical errors': Campaigners call... Why there's NO reason to worry about Covid death uptick in... Share this article Share Fears about a so-called 'tripledemic' first emerged over summer when Australia and New Zealand — whose winter is during America's summer — suffered devastating flu seasons.Experts have pointed to lockdowns, mask mandates and other pandemic orders over the past two years as the likely reason why this year's flu season has been more brutal than those past.This is the worst flu season America has suffered since the Swine Flu Pandemic of 2009 — and experts have warned for months that it would be a long and harsh winter. The above graph shows hospitalizations with flu-like illness in the US. There were four percent reported in the latest week, compared to 5.4 percent in the previous week. This was below the level at this time of year for last year's flu season This graph shows weekly confirmed flu hospitalizations in the US, which are also declining Today the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) revealed that the Omicron subvariant XBB.1.5 was now the most common variant in the US It is dominant in the northeastern states, and growing fast in other areas Masks make a comeback: Students asked to wear covers Despite Covid infection rates plateauing for months, elementary and high schools in New Jersey, Massachusetts and Pennsylvania have made face coverings a condition of entry for students returning from the holidays. Advertisement At one point earlier in December, hospitals in some areas were more full than they had ever been during the pandemic.But the latest CDC update shows that cases are going down, and continue to as both the flu and RSV burn out.The 10,000 flu cases detected in the week to January 7 is the lowest figure since late October.It is also about a fifth of the 47,000-odd infections confirmed in one week in late November, at the peak of the current wave.In terms of hospitals, about four percent of patients visiting units had respiratory diseases including fever, a cough and a sore throat. This was down a quarter from the 5.4 percent the previous week, and about half the peak of 7.5 percent in late November.Regionally, only one state — New Mexico — and New York City had very high flu activity for the week to January 7.For comparison, in the previous week 11 states and New York City — California, New Mexico, Maine, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New York. South Carolina, Texas, Oklahoma, Colorado and Nebraska — had very high levels.The CDC estimated that so far this year there have been 24million flu illnesses, 260,000 hospitalizations and 16,000 deaths from the virus. RSV infections also trended downwards for the eighth week in a row, with 2,100 cases confirmed in the latest week from 4,800 in the previous week.Covid infections are also falling with 414,721 cases recorded in the week to January 11, the latest available. This was down from 477,230 in the previous week.But today the CDC said the more infectious Covid variant XBB.1.5 was now the most common strain in the US, behind two in five infections.It is the dominant strain in northeastern states — such as New York, Massachusetts and New Jersey —, and growing across the country. The above shows RSV detections in the US. Cases have declined for the eighth week in a row This graph shows Covid deaths in the United States by week, which have risen. Experts say this could be down to reporting, however The above graph shows Covid cases in the US, as reported by the CDCCovid cases have fallen in the latest week, but this may be down to a lack of testing with the week to January 4 seeing the lowest amount of tests done nationwide — 1.9million — since the early days of the pandemic.Covid deaths have risen in the latest week, with 3,900 recorded in the week to January 11 compared to 2,700 in the seven-day period beforehand.The number of Covid deaths recorded is the highest since August, but still streets away from the 17,300 recorded in February during the last Covid wave. Experts say, however, that as this is by date reported, the uptick may be due to a delay in reporting fatalities over the holiday period — when fewer people were available to process data.Dr Paul Hunter, a virus expert at the University of East Anglia in the UK, told DailyMail.com: 'This may be due to a backlog of late reported deaths over the holiday period finally being reported.'Whenever I see a sudden and unexpected change in any surveillance data, my first question is always could this be an artifact?'You would be surprised how often such things are artifacts, and these are more common around holiday periods.'Dr William Hanage, an epidemiologist at Harvard, added: 'You can get effects from delayed reporting and the holidays.'There is a lot of interest in XBB.1.5 right now but all we can say conclusively right now is that it is not very different.'But that could change as data comes in and the infections it has caused start to resolve one way or the other.' There is no evidence at this stage that XBB.1.5 is more likely to cause severe disease or death than other currently circulating variants. FluRSV Share or comment on this article: Flu falls but Covid makes comeback, latest CDC data shows e-mail 31 shares Most watched News videos Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach 91-year-old woman pushed down subway stairs by 'immigrant' robber Princess Kate observes Remembrance Sunday parade at Whitehall Jill Biden sits next to Kamala Harris at Arlington National Cemetery 2019: Tom Homan takes on AOC in heated exchange Narinder Kaur apologises for 'stupid' tweet about Kate Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach Moment Donald Trump snubs Ivanka for Elon in family portrait CCTV captures final moments before woman is mauled to death Joe Biden appears to wipe away tears at Arlington National Cemetery Moment King Charles lay a wreath and salutes on Remembrance Sunday Shocking moment girl wearing headphones is hit and run over by train Comments 110 Share what you think Newest Oldest Best rated Worst rated View all The comments below have not been moderated. View all The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline. We are no longer accepting comments on this article. Bing Site Web Enter search term: Search DON'T MISS Gary Lineker 'will QUIT Match of the Day at the end of the season' after 26 years presenting the show Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly as she debuts bump She's expecting I'm A Celeb's Coleen Rooney reveals vast list of instructions to look after her four children on two HUGE boards during her jungle stint EXCLUSIVECher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty. 'Do you want to come to my place?' he asked. I was 15... EXCLUSIVEAerial photos show Leonardo DiCaprio's stunning eco-friendly compound is completed just in time for his 50th birthday Laundry legend or sock-shrinking disaster? Share this quiz with your loved ones so they can identify their bad household habits - and change them for good! Ad Feature Maura Higgins enjoys final date night with new flame Pete Wicks before she heads to Australia for I'm A Celeb as a latecomer I'm A Celebrity 2024 lineup is CONFIRMED! Coleen Rooney and ab-flashing Tulisa get a jungle makeover in first look snaps Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having a meal with family EXCLUSIVESuper soft hair in three easy steps: Simple routine provides up to 7x* more moisture for up to 72 hours** Ad Feature Liam Payne's $9,500-a-month mansion he moved into with girlfriend Kate Cassidy weeks before his death is back on the rental market EXCLUSIVETHE DUCHESS OF YORK: I'm on a mission to rid nappies of plastic - with my fifth grandchild on the way Iron Maiden star Paul Di'Anno's cause of death revealed after married father-of-six heavy metal singer passed away aged 66 Britney Spears reunites with son Jayden, 18, after years of estrangement and move to Hawaii Reestablishing their bond Find your inner glow: We asked one beauty writer to trial a new range of gentle skincare - here's how she got on Ad Feature Only Fools And Horses star Sir David Jason, 84, reveals he struggles to get parts because of his age Difficulties Her Majesty The Queen: Behind Closed Doors review: Camilla's personality shone, writes CHRISTOPHER STEVENS EXCLUSIVEMelvin Odoom is the SEVENTH star to land in Brisbane ahead of I'm A Celeb - as jungle-bound DJ shares first impression of Australian weather Coleen Nolan's son Jake Roche, 32, reveals he's going to be a dad in days as singer is forced to reschedule upcoming shows How understanding your glucose levels can help you feel less tired after meals Ad Feature Chris Pratt and wife Katherine Schwarzenegger welcome their third child together and name has nod to JFK Aussie actress slams Rebel Wilson's 'absurd' claims she was sexually harassed by a producer on set of new film The Deb Popular British comedian and TV star shocks fans as he announces he's quitting Twitter for good Stepping back Khloe Kardashian shows off her 27inch waistline in see-through nude lingerie as she announces new brand Trim physique Looking to refresh your space before winter? Transform your home and interiors with these 10 top must-know brands Ad Feature Megan Fox fans notice very specific astrological detail about her pregnancy announcement post with MGK EDEN CONFIDENTIAL: What made Harry Styles flee chef Jamie Oliver's £15m home? Bizarre EPHRAIM HARDCASTLE: Why did the late Queen miss out on a Nobel Peace Prize for transforming the Commonwealth? EXCLUSIVEMariah Carey's 5.5 inch custom sandals were designed to dazzle with over 10,000 hand-applied crystals Damaged hair? Don't despair! With 1 billion bonds packed in every bottle, the NEW bond-building wonder product is here to help Ad Feature Nicole Scherzinger pictured wearing Kamala Harris shirt before 'coming out as a Trump supporter' Awkward Married At First Sight UK couple 'SPLIT' following explosive argument as groom branded a 'f*****g narcissist' Machine Gun Kelly's turbulent dating history laid bare as he prepares to welcome first child with Megan Fox Checkered past Bradley Cooper looks loved-up with Gigi Hadid in NYC after sparking shock with 'unrecognizable' face Smitten Riviera glamour, Ibiza nightlife and the most stylish ships at sea: Why THIS is the ultimate cruise for your adults-only Mediterranean escape Ad Feature Who left the Big Brother house? Baked Potato is brutally sent home through the back door just days ahead of final Queen Camilla appears emotional as she speaks to domestic violence survivor in new documentary Powerful topic Coleen Rooney insists small food portions won't bother her on I'm A Celeb as she often 'misses a meal' and 'never gets hangry' Sting says Diddy allegations don't 'taint' Every Breath You Take - after disgraced rapper sampled song Nonplussed Struggling to maintain your weight during menopause? You're not alone - here's why this happens and what you can do about it Ad Feature The inventive way Megan Fox hid her baby bump at Halloween bash before pregnancy reveal with MGK Secret Yellowstone stars 'still processing' popular show's devastating ending - after bombshell season return Jane Moore shares the poignant reason she finally decided to say yes to I'm A Celebrity - and reveals her TWO big phobias The REAL reason Chris Martin kisses the tarmac before he flies after Coldplay frontman was seen planting his lips to the ground BUSTED! The career-myths that are holding you back from success Advertising Leonardo DiCaprio rings in 50th birthday with Vittoria Ceretti, 26, at second star-studded dinner party Night out Loose Women icon 'set to reprise legendary role in Waterloo Road' as she returns to her soap roots Returning to the show Cast of iconic kids' TV show send fans wild with 'nostalgia overload' as they reunite 25 years after first episode Legendary David Duchovny reveals 'failure of friendship' with The X-Files co-star Gillian Anderson amid tension on hit show EXCLUSIVEGive the gift of curiosity! Discover why the What on Earth! Magazine is the ultimate Christmas present for kids who love learning (and we have an offer) SHOPPING Queen Camilla praised for 'moving' and 'powerful' ITV documentary on domestic abuse Positive response Legendary rocker hits back at John Farnham claim their former manager 'drugged me for years' Not happy EXCLUSIVEBrian Austin Green's surprising reaction to ex-wife Megan Fox's pregnancy with Machine Gun Kelly Unexpected Leggy Millie Mackintosh stuns in a black chic minidress as she joins husband Hugo Taylor at book launch As stylish as always Line Of Duty star Adrian Dunbar 'CONFIRMS' show's return: 'When they announce it, it's going to burn up the internet!' EXCLUSIVEWhat's really going with Euphoria? Cancelation rumors spark after Zendaya is cast in Christopher Nolan film Megan Fox and Machine Gun Kelly's ROLLERCOASTER romance timeline: From pregnancy to drinking each other's blood LL Cool J 'chased Monty Don to ask for a selfie as rapper reveals himself to be a VERY unlikely fan of the BBC horticulturist' GK Barry spills the beans on Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly's awkward Instagram gaffe - as she prepares for I'm A Celeb Cat Deeley is criticised by viewers after unfortunate gaffe during Remembrance Day segment on This Morning I'm A Celebrity's Tulisa admits she 'doesn't want to draw attention' in jungle by recreating Myleene Klass' bikini moment EXCLUSIVEThe real reason Ben Affleck always looks 'miserable' The actor always manages to look downcast Emily Watson catches the eye in a graphic gown as she joins chic co-star Olivia Williams at VIP screening of DUNE: Prophecy Megan Fox and MGK fans react to pregnancy reveal eight months after pair ENDED engagement Delighted How England Lioness Chloe Kelly went from goofy teen to glamorous red carpet regular - and the £350 beauty treatment she swears by Travis Kelce and Taylor Swift joined by surprise sports superstar in Chiefs VIP suite as new images emerge EXCLUSIVEColeen Rooney to be greeted by her four sons on the I'm A Celebrity bridge after husband Wayne is forced to stay behind Jessica Simpson hints Eric Johnson marriage is OVER as she admits she 'put up' with things she 'did not deserve' Lizzie Cundy, 56, puts on a leggy display as she follows in Jennifer Lopez's footsteps and undergoes a HydraFacial EXCLUSIVEBBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Stephen Fry and Sophie Winkleman join host of celebs sending letter to Sadiq Khan demanding he change Tube's 5G advertising Luann de Lesseps, 59, reveals which A-List actor she made out with and how she is a member of the Mile High Club I'm A Celeb star Oti Mabuse reveals she is taking part on the gruelling ITV show to 'catch up on sleep' after giving birth to her first child last year Timothee Chalamet reveals the feature he was told would prevent him from succeeding in Hollywood Huge star The View panel fiercely defend Nicole Scherzinger over Russell Brand's election hat Speaking out Queen Silvia of Sweden stuns in deep purple ensemble as she joins King Carl XVI Gustaf for award ceremony in Stockholm Coleen Rooney gives a subtle nod to her Wagatha Christie trial against Rebekah Vardy as she prepares for I'm A Celebrity Strictly sends viewers wild as it reveals comedian ie FIRST confirmed for festive special as he jokes he's about to 'ruin Christmas' EXCLUSIVEColeen's one last night with Wayne! Rooney insisted on taking the last possible flight to Australia ahead of her I'm A Celeb stint Travis Kelce's ex Kayla Nicole makes wild accusation against Taylor Swift Nicole dated Kelce on and off for five years before his romance with Swift James McAvoy is seen for the first time on the Glasgow set of his new film California Schemin' about hoax rappers Silibil N' Brains EXCLUSIVEMadonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris It looks like Madonna is no longer crazy for her recent toyboy Demi Moore, 62, shows off her bikini body as she wishes 2lb dog Pilaf a happy birthday Kevin Costner breaks silence on Yellowstone's John Dutton being killed off in Season 5 part two premiere Cash-strapped Diddy is renting out his private jet for $432k-a-flight as sex trial looms Troubled rapper is trying to generate cash Benny Blanco dishes on VERY romantic mornings with Selena Gomez as he makes People's Sexiest Man Alive issue Katy Perry brutally trolled after sharing her pick for the year's best film Got more than she bargained for Prince Harry pens heartfelt message of 'admiration and appreciation' for his 'fellow veterans' on Remembrance Day Charles grins as he welcomes King of Bahrain to Windsor Castle with a warm hug Charles is hosting Hamad Bin Isa Al Khalifa As Philip Schofield lays his 'extraordinary loyal' mother Pat to rest, friends tell how she became his rock after his TV downfall, reveals KATIE HIND BBC drops first trailer for Return to Paradise and finally confirms release date for Death in Paradise spin-off series Coming soon The Wheel fans blast mortified Helen Flanagan for getting 'very simple' question wrong - but do you know the answer? Dexys Midnight Runners original member dead: Andy Leek passes away aged 66 following long battle with Parkinson's disease just days after tying the knot Shirtless Romeo Beckham shows off his ripped physique as he enjoys getaway with pals - after confirming romance with Gray Sorrenti Cher: The night I took a drunken John Lennon to the Playboy mansion - and he stripped stark naked in front of me in the infamous secret Grotto Barry McGuigan is the SIXTH star to touch down in Australia ahead of his I'm A Celeb stint and jokes he's 'there to sign his next big fighter' Ex Big Brother star Narinder Kaur faces furious backlash for saying Kate Middleton has 'aged so much' as princess returns to royal duties Gary Barlow is dwarfed by best friend musician Eliot Kennedy as the pair share a boozy bath on the Take That star's wine tour series Eamonn Holmes takes shocking swipe at GB News co-star's appearance as sexism debate takes personal turn - and she warns 'back off!' Laverne Cox breaks silence on whether she'll leave US after Trump's election win Opened up about the possibility of leaving Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker transform into Morticia and Gomez Addams for new Halloween posts Getting into character Damian Lewis is criticised for his conduct during Wolf Hall interview after he confessed the role has 'worn him down' Mission Impossible 8 FIRST LOOK: Tom Cruise's Ethan Hunt dangles from a glider in trailer as title for long-delayed conclusion is finally revealed Cruz Beckham, 19, and girlfriend Jackie Apostel, 29, enjoy another public display of affection as they share a passionate kiss Netflix fans rave over 'gripping' crime thriller based on true story 'full of twists and turns' - praising 'excellent acting and an unpredictable ending' Gladiator II review: This sequel falls short of its masterpiece predecessor but is still heaps of farfetched and ferocious fun Deal Or No Deal fans blast ITV bosses for 'killing' the show with big change to Stephen Mulhern's reboot Not happy Chappell Roan has shock four word response to report about her split from management Speaking out EXCLUSIVEPregnant Charlotte Dawson details how she's learning to forgive fiancé Matthew Sarsfield's sexting scandal as she insists that it would have been 'easier to walk away' Kristin Cavallari's ex Mark Estes 'proposes' to Love Island star after hanging out with former girlfriend Marriage plans Chris Evans continues to wow with bookish new look as he promotes Red One in NYC Looking good Yellowstone fans confused after Kevin Costner appears in credits for season five part two despite departure Melissa Suffield jiggles around in a pink bikini as she hits back at cruel trolls and urges to acknowledge the 'reality of everyday bodies' Kyle Richards gives BFF Teddi Mellencamp divorce advice amid Edwin Arroyave split At different stages in their divorces Paul Mescal reveals his 'heartbeat is going through the f***ing roof' as he arrives at the Gladiator II premiere in his hometown Dublin with his family Jennifer Meyer, 47, flashes her $500K diamond engagement ring from billionaire Geoffrey Ogunlesi, 33 Pricey Moment Laurence Fox rescued his fiancee's dog Rocky after pet Jack Russell got trapped in hole underground EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celebrity contestants are set to be battered by freak storms and torrential rain as bad weather threatens to 'ruin' the series Katie Price appears to reignite bitter feud with Emily Atack as she makes snide 'fishy' dig AGAIN in front of huge audience at The Clapham Grand The Day Of The Jackal star Ursula Corbero star sends fans wild with her racy social media snaps after revealing she was 'confused' by her 'weak' role Livid Loose Women fans urge James Martin to 'move with the times' after 'daft, money-wasting' cooking confession on ITV show Moment country star SCREAMS as she falls and takes out her guitarist mid-show Performing in Helotes, Texas on Friday Diana Vickers sets pulses racing in a skimpy gold bikini as she soaks up the sun on lavish Ibiza getaway Sofia Richie is 17 years YOUNGER than sister Nicole Richie but they look the same age in rare photo Raye and LL Cool J look all partied out as they leave Manchester after MTV EMAs - where the British singer was named Best UK & Ireland artist Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright enjoy Majorca getaway with Olly Murs after admitting they're in the 'boring phase of their relationship' Taylor Swift fans furious over savage Jeopardy! clue about Travis Kelce On the program's official Instagram account Iskra Lawrence is praised for sharing footage of her homebirth after welcoming baby daughter 'P. P' Wolf Hall leaves viewers 'traumatised' with 'brutal' execution scene just minutes into BBC premiere as they beg 'please don't show that again!' Rebekah Vardy sets tongues wagging as she packs for mystery trip abroad and posts a teasing emoji - as nemesis WAG Coleen Rooney jets off to Australia for I'm A Celeb Antiques Roadshow guest gasps 'I could cry!' as he learns staggering value of sculpture he bought for just £50 and was using as a DOORSTOP How Alison Hammond's turbulent love life influenced her debut novel, from cheating scandals to surprise encounters at a massage parlour Coleen Rooney jets to Australia ahead of I'm A Celeb stint and reveals nod to her family - as she prepares to join the five celebs who have already landed Brooklyn Beckham reveals his tattoo tribute to Quincy Jones and says he 'misses him more than he can imagine' after the legendary producer's death aged 91 Has Leonardo DiCaprio finally found love with Vittoria Ceretti and ditched his golden rule? A look at the star's relationships as he turns 50 The truth about how accurate that shocking Wolf Hall scene showing Anne Boleyn's execution really was Idina Menzel and Taye Diggs' son, 15, is nearly as tall as his mother as mother-son duo attend Wicked premiere Legendary Chicago singer-songwriter Ella Jenkins dead at 100 Mariah Carey will be 'quizzed under oath' over claims estranged brother sold drugs despite star still reeling from losing mom and sister on the same day Quincy Jones is laid to rest at private family funeral in Los Angeles a week after his death at age 91 Netflix fans furious as three whole episodes of blockbuster series are uploaded with no sound in 'crippling' blunder - raging 'I thought I was going mad!' Linda Lusardi gets £3.8k non-surgical face lift and says she feels '10 years younger' - after becoming 'depressed about her jowls' James Norton reveals he has put off having children 'because it wouldn't be fair to have them right now' as he details split from fiancée Imogen Poots Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson finally addresses on set behavior controversy including 'peeing in bottles' Charli XCX leads the nominees at the Rolling Stone UK Awards with three nods as Raye and Dua Lipa are also honoured Movie director Cameron Crowe, 67, welcomes his 3rd child with publicist Anais Smith, 40 Liam Payne's 'drug dealer' speaks for first time: Argentinian waiter probed over One Direction star's death tells how singer took cocaine with him Robbie Williams announces three huge UK stadium shows as part of mammoth Live 25 tour Damian Lewis slams Donald Trump by comparing him to his Wolf Hall alter-ego Henry VIII as he claims he's become 'disillusioned to the people around him' Tulisa unveils club-themed home makeover complete with huge dressing room, home gym, a bridge that leads to nowhere Gayle King fans warn her to be 'careful' after CBS host admits 'stepping out' of her comfort zone with Shaboozey Yellowstone star Cole Hauser says it would be a 'shame to stop' telling the Dutton family story Ellie Goulding shares a rare snap of son Arthur, 4, and kisses him on the cheek as they adorably dress in matching Spider-Man costumes Sunday Brunch viewers bombard show with complaints just minutes into episode - sinking claws into 'boring and unfunny' Channel 4 scenes Ben Affleck is only 'one errant remark' away from being cancelled and believes the 'phone could stop ringing' despite his success Eddie Redmayne and Úrsula Corberó put on a steamy display as husband and wife in scenes from Sky TV's The Day Of The Jackal Jamie Oliver enjoys Coldplay concert with a female friend in Sydney - after he pulled his children's book from the shelves Mike Tyson has ditched veganism, is on a sex and cannabis ban and training six hours a day to prepare to fight 27-year-old Jake Paul Your turn next? Fans go wild for adorable photo of 'auntie' Taylor Swift posing with fellow Chiefs WAG's baby 'I thought to myself, what if it had been my daughter?' Queen Camilla praises mother of woman killed by her ex - and admits she wouldn't be as 'dignified' in the same position Friends fans complain of 'plot hole' in well-known episode which still 'drives them wild' 26 years later Strictly's Nancy Xu says she is 'gutted' that she and Shayne Ward will miss out on Blackpool and that she finds it 'unfair' that he was 'criticised' Geri Horner pulls series of animated facial expressions as she wraps up warm in stylish white outfit for autumn walk Ant McPartlin looks exhausted as he works up a sweat during gruelling workout ahead of I'm A Celebrity Ali Larter, 48, came to fame for her whipped cream bikini in Varsity Blues - see her now The truth behind Ben Shephard's This Morning absence revealed as ITV star fronts new project worlds away from daytime hit James Norton's surprising health battle - fans shocked to learn newly single Happy Valley hunk lives with deadly illness Lauren Pope kicks off festive season a little too early putting up her Christmas tree as she reveals she had anxiety about last year due to being a single mother Radio 1 DJ Dean McCullough is the FOURTH star to arrive in Australia ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! How Sophie has become Kate's closest ally: 'Maternal' Duchess is a huge support to Princess of Wales - and it's come about because of void left by Meghan Furious Autumnwatch fans rage 'it's appalling and an insult to viewers!' as they skewer BBC for 'dumbing down' beloved nature show with complete overhaul Coleen Rooney reveals the secret to making her marriage with Wayne work as she confesses there were times she thought they wouldn't make it Emily Atack claims her party trick is 'worse than a one night stand' as she recalls the 'embarrassing' and 'horrendous' drunken night out Liam Payne larks about with close pal Rita Ora in unearthed video of them as the heartbroken singer pays tribute at the MTV EMAs Lorde shares a photo of a table littered with drugs and alcohol after celebrating her birthday Partied hard after celebrating with friends Keely Hodgkinson sparks concern as she displays her very sunburnt chest while posing in a tiny crop top during lavish holiday in Hawaii Tulisa reveals she'll QUIT showbusiness in the next two years despite wanting to relaunch solo career after I'm A Celebrity stint Major EastEnders 'Christmas spoiler REVEALED as actress accidentally leaves top secret script on train' Nightmare MTV VMAs worst dressed: Flamboyant outfits that fell flat as A-listers swarmed the red carpet in Manchester Olivia Rodrigo announced as fourth headliner for BST Hyde Park - as her support act is confirmed Kate's meaningful messages: How Princess of Wales used her outfits to pay tribute to Diana, the late Queen and her great-grandmother during Remembrance events BBC Breakfast in ANOTHER hosting shake-up as Jon Kay disappears from show without explanation The Penguin fans hail season one ending as 'the best thing DC has made' as Colin Farrell gives six-word response to calls for a second series Dancing On Ice's Vanessa Bauer says the show's new 24-hour bullying hotline is 'very necessary' ahead of its return in 2025 Viewers defend Boots' 'fabulous' Christmas advert starring Bridgerton's Adjoa Andoh after 'snowflake' critics blasted 'woke' plot Leomie Anderson ditches her gown for a VERY skimpy nude co-ord as she joins Love Island's Indiyah Polack and Maya Jama at MTV EMAs after party Shirtless Mark Wahlberg, 53, orders a trolley full of ice on room service as he continues his wacky health regime Sophie's been supportive from the start! Duchess helped an 11-year-old Princess Beatrice as she fainted on the balcony on Remembrance Sunday Listen as Katie Price performs her 2017 song I Got U at The Clapham Grand - so do you think her vocals make the cut? Strictly fans are left FUMING as they accuse Shirley Ballas of being 'biased' for sending home Shayne Ward in nail biting dance off Advertisement Today's headlines Most Read Nutritionist gives damning verdict on 'healthy' cooking oils and reveals the fats you SHOULD be cooking with Row erupts as doctors call to BAN Lemsip because 'it doesn't work' - but some insist it's the ONLY thing... Ban Lemsip because 'it doesn't work', say experts after US health chiefs propose pulling cold and flu... The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make... Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more... DON'T kiss the baby - doctors reveal terrifying reason why you should never kiss a newborn (unless they're... Revealed: What you need to say to a pharmacist to get antibiotics for your sore throat Diet expert Tim Spector issues warning over store-cupboard favourite SOUP that contains 'chemicals' James Norton's surprising health battle - fans shocked to learn newly single Happy Valley hunk lives with... Should I wear a mask to filter out pollution while I'm cycling? DR MARTIN SCURR has the answer Top doctor reveals vital colon cancer self-check as cases rise in under 50s - his advice has ALREADY saved a... Brain cell transplants might be key to beating Alzheimer's, doctors claim A 5-minute cholesterol check could spot if dementia will strike in 6 years time, experts find Why you should never ignore hip pain: The feeling hit me like a lightning bolt but I brushed it off because... Scientists probe whether RED WINE could be key for fighting off cancer that's hitting ever-more under 50s MORE HEADLINES Nutritionist gives damning verdict on 'healthy' cooking oils and reveals the fats you SHOULD be cooking with Top doctor reveals vital colon cancer self-check as cases rise in under 50s - his advice has ALREADY saved a life Diet expert Tim Spector issues warning over store-cupboard favourite SOUP that contains 'chemicals' Scientist reverses her stage 3 cancer with viruses she grew in a lab - after refusing to go through hell of chemo again Here are the number of sit-ups experts say you should be able to do for your age I brushed aside persistent headaches as eye strain from a new job. Then a devastating diagnosis turned my life upside down Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more serious condition which affects up to two in three women James Norton's surprising health battle - fans shocked to learn newly single Happy Valley hunk lives with deadly illness The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make a difference, these are the ones that do Hospice nurse reveals grim reality of what happens to human body minutes, hours and days after death Row erupts as doctors call to BAN Lemsip because 'it doesn't work' - but some insist it's the ONLY thing that eases a blocked nose Revealed: What you need to say to a pharmacist to get antibiotics for your sore throat Go to bed and wake up looking younger: Beauty guru HANNAH BETTS reveals the treatments that really work DON'T kiss the baby - doctors reveal terrifying reason why you should never kiss a newborn (unless they're your own) A 5-minute cholesterol check could spot if dementia will strike in 6 years time, experts find MOST READ IN DETAIL Follow DailyMail Subscribe Daily Mail Follow @dailymail Follow DailyMail Follow MailOnline Follow Daily Mail MORE DON'T MISS Rita Ora breaks down in tears as she pays moving tribute to close friend Liam Payne at the MTV EMAs Emotional moment Kristina Rihanoff poses for incontinence pad campaign after she and husband Ben Cohen put their £1.75m home up for sale amid financial woes James Argent shares passionate kiss with new girlfriend Nicoline Artursson as besotted couple pack on the PDA for romantic Bonfire Night date Victoria Beckham displays incredibly toned figure as she poses for a mirror selfie - after husband David gave her new beauty product rave reviews Ice Spice flashes her abs in a cropped varsity top and low-rise pleated skirt as she steps out for dinner in Paris after performing her Y2K! World Tour Rita Ora leads the red carpet glamour in a pink feathered gown as she joins glamorous Maya Jama, Vick Hope and Raye at the MTV EMAs Bonnie Blue issues defiant message after her Australian visa was torn up - but there's a glaring problem with her new X-rated plan EXCLUSIVEKate Middleton's Remembrance Day pain: Emotional Princess of Wales appeared 'sad but regal' at Cenotaph, says body language expert Paddy McGuinness reveals he got 'choked up' over the huge support he's had for his 300 mile charity cycle challenge after feeling 'down and dejected' Rita Ora flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in ELEVEN incredible looks as she makes history as host of the MTV EMAs Raye leaves fans speechless with her vocals as she takes to the stage alongside Tyla and Shawn Mendes at the MTV EMAs Charli XCX is snubbed at MTV EMAs despite five nominations while Chappell Roan also leaves empty handed Ben Affleck looks miserable as 'spectacular' Jennifer Lopez shows him what he's missing on red carpet Sabrina Carpenter fan urinates all over the concert floor in San Francisco Ben Affleck treats his son Samuel, 12, to courtside seats at star-studded Lakers vs. Raptors game in LA Ariana Grande and Cynthia Erivo offer apologies for crying so much during Wicked promotion Kate wears Diana's ring in public for the first time since Christmas: Sapphire engagement ring is back after Princess opted to wear eternity bands during treatment Art Garfunkel recalls recent tearful reunion with Paul Simon after 'not seeing each other' for many years Margot Robbie shows off her midriff in a crop top less than a month after giving birth as she steps out in LA SPOILER ALERT: The real reason Yellowstone bosses sealed Kevin Costner's fate in first 30 seconds of bombshell season return Wolf Hall: The Mirror And The Light review: Cromwell's so menacing his glare could split a skull, writes CHRISTOPHER STEVENS MTV EMAs WINNERS FULL LIST: Taylor Swift dominates with FOUR gongs including Best Artist... while Raye and Tyla also win The White Lotus season 3 teaser shows first look at Blackpink's Lisa as hospitality host Keith Urban scrapes $600K Rolls Royce after dropping nepo baby Sunday Rose off at Billie Eilish concert Gavin Rossdale looks loved up with his Gwen Stefani lookalike girlfriend Xhoana X at MTV EMAs Happy Monday's star Bez causes CHAOS as he REFUSES to let go of the mic from Rita Ora in hilarious moment at MTV EMAs Nicola Peltz Beckham says her 'heart is shattered' in emotional tribute to Quincy Jones as she promises to look after his daughter Camila Mendes debuts bold new look as she gears up to film live-action remake of Masters Of The Universe Emmerdale's James Moore reveals future family plans after marrying partner Sophie Edwards as bride recalls their first date N-Dubz singer Tulisa Contostavlos is the third star to arrive in Brisbane ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! Coleen Rooney will NOT be reunited with Wayne after her I'm A Celeb ordeal' as football fixtures leave him grounded EXCLUSIVEColdplay frontman Chris Martin's bizarre act before boarding a plane out of Australia bound for New Zealand Who left Strictly Come Dancing? Shayne Ward's dancing journey is over after receiving the lowest results and landing in the dance-off against Wynne Evans Strictly Come Dancing RECAP as Shayne Ward is eliminated in week eight after losing dance off to Wynne Evans Nicole Kidman looks elegant in a black coat and dress as she heads out in New York City s EXCLUSIVEViewers insist star of Lidl's Christmas advert is the 'double' of Princess Charlotte - so, who is the royal lookalike? Felicity Jones cuts a chic figure in a black blazer and jeans as she addresses the audience at a screening for her new film The Brutalist Shawn Mendes dons smart suit at MTV EMAs in first red carpet appearance since addressing sexuality Zoe Saldana and Kerry Washington glow in silky tops as they lead the stars at ACLU Bill of Rights Awards Christina Ricci oozes business chic in blazer dress at book signing in LA for her new tarot deck and guidebook Fans inundate Bruce Willis's wife with messages of support after she shares 'heartbreaking' video Right behind her Pregnant Gisele Bundchen puts on a leggy display in tiny shorts as she leaves her old house in Miami Beach with a large box Bradley Cooper's unrecognizable face in snap with Gigi Hadid sparks social media confusion: 'Is that AI Bradley?' SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone femme fatale Sarah Atwood's involvement in John Dutton's brutal death is revealed in Season 5 Part 2 premiere Joker 2 star says it is the 'worst film ever made' and that he and his co-stars knew it was 'going to bomb' while filming Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright show off VERY lavish Christmas lights and decorations at £3.5m Essex mansion Georgia Toffolo stuns in a sheer gown as she celebrates 30th birthday and proposal from James Watt with personalised beer Kim Kardashian embraces on-screen mother Glenn Close as they film Ryan Murpjy's new Hulu series All's Fair Ariana Grande fans point out NSFW error on Mattel's Wicked doll packaging - as collection risks mass recall Surfing royals: How Princess Diana sparked her sons' love for the ocean after Prince Harry recently rode waves in California and Prince William surfed chilly Scottish waters Rihanna looks totally at ease as she sits in front of her own Fenty Beauty ad at a bus stop in humorous post Halsey and fiancé Avan Jogia look loved-up at Lakers vs. Raptors NBA game in LA Prince Edward remembers 'all who have made the ultimate sacrifice' as he lays Remembrance Sunday wreath Big Brother viewers SLAM show's 'totally unfair' final twist just days ahead of grand finale: 'Sack whoever came up with this idea!' ROBERT HARDMAN: Courage of the Princess of Wales on parade - in a sign of what matters MOST to the royals Big target Khloe Kardashian throws niece Dream a soccer-themed 8th birthday bash No expense spared Jedward put on a VERY animated display in matching sequinned suits as they lark about on the red carpet at the MTV EMAs Rita Ora's proud mum Vera, 60, wears a chic black suit as she supports her daughter on the MTV EMAs red carpet Halsey and new fiancé Avan Jogia look loved up while enjoying a romantic lunch in NYC Yellowstone's surprising connection to Australia... and it's not actress Jacki Weaver Amelia Gray Hamlin puts on an edgy Y2K display in low-waisted jeans and busty tank top in Milan Elon Musk slams Dana Carvey's impression of him on post-election SNL and says show's been 'dying for years' Air Bud's Kevin DiCicco says he's homeless and dealing with major health problems James Bond fans have revealed the very unlikely Aussie who should play the next 007 Interesting choice Tulisa Contostavlos 'set to use I'm A Celebrity as launchpad for new solo career' as N-Dubz singer becomes third star to arrive EXCLUSIVEShe's the seductive 60s TV actress who was called the 'feline devil' by an iconic vigilante superhero - can you guess who? Bella Hadid flashes her incredible abs in tiny bikinis in racy photo dump from her recent trip to Dubai Looking good Adam Brody and Kristen Bell show off undeniable chemistry as they support Netflix's Nobody Wants This in LA Sam Thompson says he 'might get another bridge reunion' with Pete Wicks if he gets the axe from Strictly Come Dancing Kim Kardashian sports edgy black trench coat as she visits skin care clinic in Beverly Hills Jodie Turner-Smith sets pulses racing as she swaps her regal red carpet gown for skintight black PVC dress at the MTV EMAs Jada Pinkett Smith sparks health concern following rare date night with husband Will Smith The future's orange! Lorraine Kelly takes her adorable granddaughter to her first Dundee United game Proud granny Make breakfast TV great again! Eammon Holmes looks unrecognisable as he transforms into perma-tanned Donald Trump What Kate said to Sophie: Lip reader reveals conversation between Princess of Wales and Duchess of Edinburgh at Cenotaph Katherine Ryan, 41, puts on a busty display as she makes rare red carpet appearance with daughter Violet, 15, at the MTV EMAs Maya Jama channels Elizabeth Hurley as she slips into THAT career-making Versace safety pin gown to attend the MTV European Music Awards Lioness Chloe Kelly looks incredible in a cropped bandeau top and thigh-high boots on the red carpet at MTV EMAS What Taylor Swift told security guard: Pop star's cutting remark to her entourage during wild arrival to watch Travis Kelce Rita Ora shares a red carpet kiss with husband Taika Waititi ahead of her history-making THIRD hosting gig at the MTV EMAs Mariah Carey and son Moroccan dress up as Alvin and the Chipmunks for Halloween in rare family snap Venom 3 stays strong at the box office for third week in a row but new holiday film emerges to challenge it Gemma Atkinson turns heads in a busty leather dress as she poses on the MTV European Music Awards red carpet Travis Kelce sends girlfriend Taylor Swift wild as breaks Kansas City Chiefs history with another touchdown Jodie Turner-Smith puts on a show-stopping display in royal blue gown with a train and fascinator at the 2024 MTV EMAs SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone fans furious over fate of Kevin Costner's John Dutton in Season 5 part two premiere Jeremy Clarkson WILL join protesting farmers at rally in Westminster this week after fears of 'police ban' Pregnant Charlotte Crosby shows off her baby bump alongside fiancé Jake Ankers at MTV EMAs in Manchester Mabel, 28, rocks a quirky checked dress as she joins her chic mum Neneh Cherry, 60, at the MTV European Music Awards Brooklyn Beckham goes for a spin in his classic Mustang in Los Angeles after adding another car to his impressive collection Emily Ratajkowski flashes leg in glam red coat as she walks her dog in New York City She looked super chic as she stepped out Vick Hope puts on a VERY leggy display in a racy thigh-high split skirt and sculpted bodice at the star-studded MTV EMAs James Norton admits split from ex-fiancée Imogen Poots was not his decision as he reveals heartbreaking reason they broke up Katie McGlynn puts on a VERY leggy display in a skimpy silver mini dress as she joins busty Liberty Poole at the MTV EMAs Aaron Taylor-Johnson cuts a debonair figure in a burgundy suit as he graces the red carpet at 2024 MTV EMAs Holly Hagan puts on a VERY busty display in a plunging gown as she cosies up to pregnant co-star Charlotte Crosby at MTV EMAs Tony Hinchcliffe breaks his silence on Trump election win after calling Puerto Rico a 'floating island of garbage' How to watch Yellowstone Season 5 Part 2 premiere in Australia as show begins new frontier without Kevin Costner . Brianna Chickenfry reveals why she won't get Zach Bryan lyric tattoo removed amid ugly split Interview Britney Spears claims was censored in 2016 is finally published Discussing her conservatorship EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb welcomes its first arrival! McFly star Danny Jones touches down at Brisbane Airport Taylor Swift's entourage get into heated altercation as she arrives to watch Travis Kelce and Chiefs Drama Leomie Anderson flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in a VERY skimpy tasselled gown as she poses up a storm on the MTV EMAs red carpet Netflix fans gripped by 'best show they've ever watched' - raving that crime thriller 'had them hooked just a few minutes in' EXCLUSIVEKelly Brook and her husband Jeremy Parisi land major ITV show deal after winning over viewers on BBC's Race Across the World Mel B shares a glimpse of her VERY organised shoe collection - after branding fellow Spice Girls 'd***heads' Raye puts on a very animated display as she stuns in a quirky bejewelled gown ahead of her performance at the MTV EMA's Pamela Anderson's secrets to embracing her natural beauty at 57: From sunrise walks to her no makeup rule and the one thing she avoids 'at all costs' Georgia Kousoulou shows off her bump in skintight dress as she celebrates her daughter's birth with 'dream baby shower' Gigi Hadid and Bradley Cooper enjoy date night as they watch Alyssa Milano performing on Broadway Molly Marsh dazzles as she shows off her enviable figure in sparkly burgundy dress at the MTV European Music Awards Katie Price jumps on stage during London drag competition and belts out her 2017 track I Got U - as she reignites celebrity feud Coleen Rooney suffers major blow ahead of I'm A Celebrity appearance as the first stars touch down in Australia EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb's Sam Thompson reveals he made emotional phone call to best pal Pete Wicks during thunderstorm-hit flight to Australia Chappell Roan 'parts ways' with her management team amid skyrocketing career Split Susan Sarandon admits she'll never work in Hollywood again and reflects on being dropped by her agent after Palestine remarks Pregnant Lottie Tomlinson cradles her bump in a stunning white dress as she celebrates her baby shower with twin sisters Phoebe and Daisy Noel Gallagher is 'working on a new album' with 'six tracks already in the bag' - but brother Liam is yet to contribute I was on The Undateables - the amount we actually got paid and how long it took to film a single date left me completely stunned . The Duchess of Edinburgh, 59, stepped into 'maternal' role at Cenotaph to help 'stoic' Kate Middleton - offering a supportive touch, says body language expert Leonardo DiCaprio ditches the models to party with his peers as he celebrates 50th birthday with Brad Pitt, 60, Paris Hilton, 43, Katy Perry, 40 and his long-time buddies Emmerdale's James Moore ties the knot with partner Sophie Edwards in emotional lakeside ceremony as bride reveals the soap star's heartfelt speech Kaia Gerber oozes glamour in Marc Jacobs gowns and opens up about her intellect being underestimated as she graces Vogue's December cover VERY dramatic exits! From Olivia Rodrigo disappearing through a hole to Gemma Collins' viral mishap - on-stage tumbles that will make you wince English acting legend is approached to be face of Marks & Spencer as bosses keen to sign 'chic, high calibre and sophisticated' star to evolve brand GMA host looks just like his famous father as he shares romantic proposal photos Will Reeve has made a made a big step in his life EXCLUSIVEZara McDermott will NOT be joining boyfriend Sam Thompson in Australia as he films I'm A Celebrity spin-off show Paddy McGuinness breaks down live on Radio 2 as he prepares for 300 mile cycle challenge for Children In Need SNL fans slam 'not funny' cold open reacting to Donald Trump's election win before sketch takes a drastic turn Forget nepo babies, it's all about nepo dating! How the children of the rich and famous have turned to each other for love Brave Kate Middleton watches on as dutiful Prince William and King Charles lay wreathes at emotional Remembrance Sunday memorial service EXCLUSIVEI quit Hollyoaks for Hollywood but ended up repairing phone screens for a living Corrie legend Alan Halsall is the second I'm A Celeb campmate to arrive in Australia as he fights through pain of recurring knee injury to make it to the jungle Coldplay frontman Chris Martin stops show in Sydney to save young boy in heartwarming gesture Liam Payne's £30k Rolex watch still missing nearly a month after his death as police launch hunt for designer timepiece EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb stars face dramatic introduction to Australia as a raging thunderstorm causes flight chaos and leaves them unable to land Furious Strictly Come Dancing fans insist there is a 'fix' as dance-off results are LEAKED again Tamara Ecclestone says she thinks £25m burglary at her home was an 'inside job' and reveals her fury that some of those responsible will 'never face justice in Britain' Think Chappell Roan is bad! The biggest celebrity diva moments of all time - from Will Smith's Oscars slap to Mariah Carey's 2017 New Year's Eve debacle Michael Fassbender and Alicia Vikander put on a rare loved-up display as they enjoy cosy date night in London The new A-list chic way to split? Amicably of course! How celebrity couples like Chris Martin and Gwyneth Paltrow are staying best friends after splitting up Fans go wild as Ariana Grande and boyfriend Ethan Slater share sweet moment before Wicked premiere EXCLUSIVEHow Wicked bosses covered up Ariana Grande and Ethan Slater's romance over fears it could harm film - but fans of the musical are still unhappy Queen Camilla's heartbreak after being forced to forgo Remembrance Sunday memorial service due to chest infection Jennifer Lopez bares washboard abs in racy flesh-flashing gown as she poses solo at Wicked premiere Katy Perry catches up with Miranda Kerr at Baby2Baby Gala after gushing about her friendship with Orlando Bloom's ex wife Kate Middleton's touching tribute to the Queen and Princess Diana: Emotional Princess of Wales wears pearl diamond earrings Prince William's 'hardest year' ever: How future king's annus horribilis has seen him faced with his wife and father's cancer battles - and his ongoing feud with Harry Award winning BBC star reveals she got caught having sex in the Blue Peter garden during a boozy night out Strictly fans RAGING over scores once again as they claim judges are 'over marking' one of the couples EXCLUSIVEDonny Osmond's nephew Jared slams RHOSLC for giving him a bad edit: 'Got thrown under the bus' ty' messages from fans. Kate Middleton cuts an elegant figure in military style coat and fascinator as she joins Duchess of Edinburgh on balcony for Remembrance Sunday EXCLUSIVEPictured: The £2m Absolutely Fabulous Dartmoor mansion at the centre of Jennifer Saunders' and Adrian Edmondson's planning row Vinnie Jones reveals new girlfriend Emma Ford 'promised his late wife Tanya she would look after him' as star insists she wouldn't want him to be alone Heartwarming moment Prince William and Kate Middleton get emotional as hymn from their wedding is played at Festival of Remembrance Coleen Rooney's 'battle to be Queen of the Jungle shower: WAG hits the gym to match Maura Higgins on I'm A Celebrity' BRIAN HOEY reveals the reason why Princess Kate wears three poppies on Remembrance Sunday EXCLUSIVEGeorge Clooney taking step back from politics after being made a 'scapegoat' for Kamala Harris defeat Princess of Wales picks jewels with deep family connection for Festival of Remembrance - including Princess Diana's sapphire ring EXCLUSIVEKate and William 'can't keep their hands off each other' with 'almost endless PDAs' as they offer 'mutual affection', body language expert reveals EXCLUSIVEAnt McPartlin touches down in Australia one week before I'm A Celebrity premiere Strictly's Nadiya Bychkova 'is being comforted by celeb partner Tom Dean following her split from Kai Widdrington' Actress Cush Jumbo faces bankruptcy battle over unpaid bills... after being forced to cancel Macbeth performances last week Strictly's Chris McCausland reveals why his daughter, 11, was wary about him taking part in the dancing show Strictly's Carlos Gu breaks his silence on shock fall out with co-star Nancy Xu amid claims they're 'refusing to speak backstage' Ariana Grande dazzles in pink gingham while Cynthia Erivo stuns in green latex gown at Wicked premiere in LA Crown actor Josh O'Connor 'is dating Saltburn star Alison Oliver' as the couple are seen together in Italy EXCLUSIVEBaroness Brady parades stunning weight loss - as she insists her trim figure has nothing to do with Ozempic Princess Andre, 17, cuts a stylish figure in a green velvet gown as she joins her dad Peter and his wife Emily for a family night out at Arora's Charity Ball Ariana Grande's boyfriend Ethan Slater poses solo at Wicked premiere after breaking silence on romance The boy who inspired Steve McQueen's Blitz: Picture of black evacuee leaving London in 1940 ahead of Hitler's deadly bombing captivated director - so where is he now? Charlize Theron, Jessica Alba, Katy Perry and Heidi Klum lead the star parade at Baby2Baby gala Kate Winslet has surprise reunion with Titanic co-star - 27 years after film's release Miranda Kerr shows off slender postpartum figure at Baby2Baby gala with husband Evan Spiegel Is Meghan Markle's obsession with Gwyneth Paltrow's Goop the inspiration for her upcoming lifestyle brand? Strictly's Pete Wicks leaves viewers in tears as he pays tribute to his nan with emotional dance after saying her death was the 'hardest time' of his life HBO confirms whether or not Euphoria will return for third season amid cancelation rumors Celebrity chef Jamie Oliver pulls children's book from shelves after criticism for 'stereotyping' Indigenous Australians Eamonn Holmes, 64, shares gratitude after a 'tough year' of health woes as he attends first event with girlfriend Katie Alexander NEW ARTICLESHomeTop Share Back to top Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Sitemap Archive Video Archive Authors Topics Index Mobile Apps Screensaver RSS Text-based site Reader Prints Our Papers Top of page Daily Mail Mail on Sunday This is Money Metro Jobsite Mail Travel Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group dmg media Contact us How to complain Leadership Team Advertise with us Contributors Terms Subscription Terms & Conditions Do not sell or share my personal information About MailOnline Privacy Settings Privacy policy & cookies Advertisement AdvertisementRSV, COVID, influenza cases increasing on St Kitts and Nevis | Loop Cayman Islands LoginCayman Islands Trinidad & Tobago Jamaica Barbados Haiti St. Lucia Caribbean NewsLoop CaymanNewsVideosCayman NewsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsSportEntertainmentEnvironmentLifestyleTravelFoodBusinessCoronavirusMonday Nov 11 0°CNews (current)VideosTopicsLoop CaymanNewsVideosCayman NewsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsSportEntertainmentEnvironmentLifestyleTravelFoodBusinessCoronavirusLocationTrinidad & TobagoJamaicaBarbadosCayman IslandsHaitiSt. LuciaCaribbean NewsMy LoopSign InForgot Password?Create AccountBreaking News Scotiabank locations to remain closed on Wednesday Cabinet Meeting Summary Published For June 19, 2024FATF Removes Jamaica From FATF Grey ListWheels For Meals' Raises $36k For SeniorsJudiciary's Distinguished Guest Lecture By Sir Geoffrey VosProgressive Raise Questions About Anti-Gang Strategy, Minimum Wage RCIPS Launches National Gun Amnesty For The Month Of JulyThe National Conservation Act And The Bogeyman FallacyPolice Investigate Single-Vehicle Collision On Shamrock RoadAcademy Sports Club Welcomes New Women's Coach Fabian SanginesMonday Nov 11 0°C Caribbean News1 min readRSV, COVID, influenza cases increasing on St Kitts and NevisLoop News January 12, 2023 04:46 PM ETThe Government of St Kitts and Nevis has urged islanders to take precautions as the country is reporting rising levels of influenza, Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) and coronavirus (COVID-19).A statement from the Health Ministry noted that the country is presently in the midst of the flu season, which runs from November to March each year.“It is recommended that you visit your regular doctor or the district medical officer at the nearest health centre if you develop any symptoms of the flu. Persons are also encouraged to remain at home until fully recovered and to wear masks to prevent the transmission of the virus if contracted,” the ministry said.The ministry added it is monitoring the emergence of the Omicron sub-variant of COVID-19, XBB.1.5, which is surging in the northeastern USA. XBB.1.5 is the most transmissible COVID-19 variant that has been detected so far. Loop is better in the app. Customize your news feed, save articles for later, view your reading history and more. Click the links below to download the app for Android and IOS. Related Articles World NewsSaudi Arabia: Hajj pilgrimage returning to pre-COVID levelsJanuary 10, 2023 10:26 PM Caribbean NewsBermuda reports rising COVID-19 & RSV cases in nursing homesDecember 17, 2022 01:36 PM Caribbean NewsHealth officials monitoring spread of RSV on the USVINovember 21, 2022 08:53 PMRecent Articles World News24 more monkeys that escaped from South Carolina lab recaptured Caribbean NewsHaiti replaces its prime minister World NewsActor Tony Todd, known for his role in the movie Candyman, dies at 69More FromEditor's ChoiceiRock.bet announces Brand Ambassador - Busy Signal "It's a new adventure for me, and I can't wait to see where it takes us..." Brought To You ByiRock.betTalking Health in 5: How to keep your heart healthy Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is known to be the leading cause of death worldwide. This remains true in Jamaica and other Caribbean countries. Additionally, there is a high prevalence of CVD Brought To You ByLASCO LaSoyXodus Carnival: Moving soca people 'Twas the first official band launch for the 2023 Carnival season, and patrons and stakeholders alike were rearing to get on bad. Since Xodus Carnival and Bacchanal Jamaica dropped the plot twi Brought To You ByCarib BeerInternational Friendship Day- 10 of the best friendship traits When it comes to friendships, you are always going to be closer to some people than others. While many friends may fall into the “casual acquaintance” category, a special few sit comfortably within yo Brought To You ByCoca-Cola The Caribbean’s Most Downloaded News AppSign Up For Our NewsletterStay Connected Facebook Twitter Instagram Loop News Advertise with us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Comments Policy About Us Contact Us Submit an Article Cookie PolicyCOPYRIGHT 2020 BY DIGICEL | ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDJapan's 1st flu-specific insurance available through PayPay cashless payment service - The Mainichi Please view the main text area of the page by skipping the main menu. The page may not be displayed properly if the JavaScript is deactivated on your browser. Japan's National Daily Since 1922 Japanese Contact Us Top Latest Japan World Business Sports Science Entertainment Opinion Lifestyle Obituaries Features Photos Videos Japan's 1st flu-specific insurance available through PayPay cashless payment service January 13, 2023 (Mainichi Japan) Japanese version This 2021 file photo shows syringes containing flu vaccines in Tokyo's Chiyoda Ward. (Mainichi/Kenji Yoneda) TOKYO -- Japan's first flu-specific insurance made its debut on Jan. 11, available through smartphone payment service PayPay. The "Influenza Omimai-kin" (flu consolation payment) insurance policy is being offered by firms including Sumitomo Life Insurance Co. and Z Holdings Corp. For people aged 20 and older, there are three types of plans available, respectively priced at 250 yen (about $1.90), 310 yen (roughly $2.30), and 360 yen (about $2.70) per month. For ages 10 to 19, the price is higher, ranging from 380 to 1,090 yen (roughly $2.90 to $8.20) per month. If a policyholder is infected with flu and is prescribed anti-flu drugs, they will receive 3,000 yen (about $22), 5,000 yen (roughly $38), or 7,000 yen (about $53), depending on which plan they join. In case of hospitalization for two days and one night or longer, 30,000 yen (about $227) will be paid. The sales period is until March 22, and the insurance coverage is valid until the end of April. The next sales period is scheduled to start in September. On Dec. 28, 2022, the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare announced that the seasonal influenza epidemic had started in Japan. The nationwide epidemic of flu was the first since November 2019, before the spread of the coronavirus. (Japanese original by Yusuke Matsukura, Business News Department) Font Size SML Print Go to The Mainichi Home Page Related Articles News Navigator: Do I need to be careful about using dual flu-COVID test kits? Also in The Mainichi The Mainichi on social media RSS Latest Articles MLB: Ohtani named finalist for National League MVP China to conduct sampling of treated water at Fukushima nuclear plant Japan PM plans to attend APEC, G-20 summits in Peru, Brazil More Articles Trending Go to Page Top Japan Crime & Accidents Politics Social Issues Weather & Disasters History & Festivals Education Imperial Family Polls World Asia & Oceania USA & Canada Europe Middle East Latin America Africa Business Corporate Economy Financial Agriculture & Fisheries Sports Baseball Soccer Sumo Tennis Golf Rugby Athletics Winter Sports Olympics & Paralympics Science Technology Medical Environment Space Entertainment Anime & Manga Showbiz Culture Amusement Film Music Books Opinion Editorial News Navigator Perspectives Lifestyle Animals Travel Health Food Fashion Features A-bomb Survivors Obituaries Photos Photo Journal Photo Specials Videos The Mainichi on social media Copyright Privacy Policy External Transmission of User Information Advertise with Us Contact Us Copyright THE MAINICHI NEWSPAPERS. All rights reserved.High demand, bird flu are scrambling the egg supply chainSupermarket News is part of the Informa Connect Division of Informa PLCINFORMA PLC|ABOUT US|INVESTOR RELATIONS|TALENTThis site is operated by a business or businesses owned by Informa PLC and all copyright resides with them. Informa PLC's registered office is 5 Howick Place, London SW1P 1WG. Registered in England and Wales. Number 8860726.About UsSubscribe AdvertiseWebinarsSign UpSign UpGrocery OperationsRelated TopicsGrocery TechnologyLegislation & Regulatory NewsMergers & AcquisitionsIndependents / Regional GrocersGrocery MarketingGrocery Wholesale & DistributorsRetail LaborFoodservice at RetailFood SafetySustainabilityGrocery Pharmacy & Health CareFinanceNew StoresExecutive MovesSupplier NewsCompany NewsStore ClosingsRecallsRetail MediaFood AccessibilityRecent in Grocery OperationsSee AllA ripped section of blue paper showing a hidden white background with the 5 things logo in the upper right.Grocery Operations5 things: They are hiding something5 things: They are hiding somethingbySupermarket News StaffNov 8, 20244 Min ReadThe front of a Grocery Outlet store with the 5 things top news logo in the upper right. Grocery Operations5 things top news: Grocery Outlet chief up and leaves5 things top news: Grocery Outlet chief up and leavesbyBill WilsonNov 4, 2024Grocery Trends & DataRelated Topics Consumer Trends Health & WellnessOrganic & NaturalCPGNew CPG ProductsRecent in Grocery Trends & DataSee AllthumbnailGrocery Trends & DataThe Retail Daily podcastThe Retail Daily podcastNov 8, 2024Couple at a storeGrocery Trends & DataSpecialty, fresh format, and value grocers are outpacing traditional chainsSpecialty, fresh format, and value grocers are outpacing traditional chainsbyTimothy InklebargerNov 8, 20244 Min Read Grocery CategoriesRelated Topics BakeryBeverages Nonfood & Pharmacy Fresh Produce Deli Prepared Foods Meat Seafood Dairy Center Store Frozen Private LabelHBC Health & BeautyRecent in Grocery CategoriesSee AllA blurred picture of a frozen food section in a grocery store.Grocery CategoriesCategory update: Nature and manmade disasters help with September food salesCategory update: Nature and manmade disasters help with September food salesbyBill WilsonOct 16, 20247 Min ReadBlenderBites.pngNew CPG ProductsSoutheastern Grocers now carries Blender Bites smoothiesSoutheastern Grocers now carries Blender Bites smoothiesbyTimothy InklebargerFeb 20, 20241 Min ReadSponsored ByFresh ProduceDairyGrocery OperationsHigh demand, bird flu are scrambling the egg supply chainHigh demand, bird flu are scrambling the egg supply chainSome grocers are limiting egg purchases as consumers contend with bare shelves and soaring prices. But there might be relief on the horizon.Heather Lalley, Managing editorJanuary 11, 20233 Min ReadEggs are in short supply at some retailers, including at this Target in Chicago. / Photo by: Heather LalleyDavid Maloni has worked in food supply-chain data analysis for more than a quarter century. But he has never seen a situation with eggs quite like the one playing out across the country right now.A nationwide egg shortage sparked by a deadly avian influenza outbreak is causing empty shelves and soaring prices, prompting some grocers to limit the number of eggs shoppers can purchase.“I don’t know if we’ve ever seen prices like this before,” said Maloni, who is a commodity and food supply-chain consultant and president of Sarasota, Florida-based Datum FS. “It’s pretty crazy.”Egg prices were up more than 225% in December over the year before, surging from $1.47 for a dozen large eggs in 2021 to $4.79 a dozen 12 months later. Overall food-at-home prices were up 12% in November, according to federal data. December’s Consumer Price Index numbers are slated to be released Thursday. The high prices were fueled by soaring demand for eggs for holiday baking, a normal seasonal fluctuation that was magnified by the impact of the bird flu outbreak.As of Tuesday, 57.8 million animals are known to have been infected with highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses since January 2022, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That includes 728 reported outbreaks among wild aquatic birds, commercial poultry and backyard or hobbyist flocks in 47 states, the agency said.Egg-laying chickens have made up the majority of the birds slaughtered in an attempt to slow the spread of the virus.Those outbreaks have stalled fall egg production by about 5% compared with the same period last year, Maloni said.“It’s at a time when we have our biggest seasonal increase in demand,” he said.Egg supply headaches have been especially severe in Colorado, where a state law that went into effect Jan. 1 requires all locally raised chickens to be cage-free if the eggs will be sold in stores. The law is being phased in and will be fully implemented by 2025.According to local reports around the country, a number of grocers are limiting egg purchases to two cartons per customer, including Fred Meyer in Anchorage, Alaska, and a Whole Foods Market in Denver.The egg shelves were nearly bare at a Target store on the Northwest Side of Chicago earlier this week, with the few cartons of organic eggs available selling for $7.99 a dozen.A Walmart spokesperson told WGB that the retail giant had not imposed any egg purchase limits, despite ongoing supply chain challenges.“Higher demand leading up to the holidays and the impact of avian flu caused tighter supply,” the spokesperson said. “However, now demand has returned to normal levels.”There are some reasons for sunny side-up optimism in the egg pipeline, Maloni said.The United States Department of Agriculture is forecasting egg production in 2023 to be about 5% higher than the year before and about 2% higher than it was in 2021 and 2020, he noted.“That’s good if we can get there,” Maloni said. “That’s good but it’s probably not good enough.”With the holiday season over, demand for eggs will slow. And so too should prices.“Typically, some of the highest prices will be in December, and then the market will come off about 10% to 20% in January compared to December,” he said. “I think the highest prices hopefully are behind us.”Egg supply, however, is another story.“It’s going to take a little while for it to recover,” he said. “We should see some of that seasonal decline, but it’s going to take a while for supplies to normalize.”About the AuthorHeather LalleyManaging editorHeather Lalley is the managing editor of Restaurant Business, Foodservice Director and CSP Daily news. She previously served as editor in chief of Winsight Grocery Business.Before joining Winsight and Informa, Heather spent nearly a decade as a reporter for the daily newspaper in Spokane, Washington. She is the author of "The Chicago Homegrown Cookbook." She holds a journalism degree from Northwestern University and is a graduate of the two-year baking and pastry program at Washburne Culinary Institute in Chicago.She is the mother of two and rarely passes up a chance to eat tater tots.See more from Heather LalleyStay up-to-date on the latest food retail news and trendsSubscribe to free eNewsletters from Supermarket NewsSign Up NowYou May Also LikeRead moreA Costco sign on a Costco store. FinanceCostco’s October was better than a year agoCostco’s October was better than a year agoA seafood counter at Whole Foods MarketSeafoodHow to keep your supermarket’s seafood counter relevantHow to keep your supermarket’s seafood counter relevantA frozen seafood caseSeafoodWhy supermarket shoppers are giving a cold shoulder to frozen seafoodWhy supermarket shoppers are giving a cold shoulder to frozen seafoodRendering of Central MarketNew StoresH-E-B set to open new Central Market in DallasH-E-B set to open new Central Market in DallasA package of Bettergoods Sleigh Ride MixPrivate LabelWalmart drops its holiday Bettergoods productsWalmart drops its holiday Bettergoods productsExploreAbout Supermarket NewsSubscribe to SNCompany NewsContact UsPartner With UsOur CapabilitiesMedia KitConferences & EventsAd SpecificationsMore From Informa Connect FoodserviceCSPFoodService DirectorNation’s Restaurant NewsRestaurant BusinessRestaurant HospitalityTechnomicJoin UsSign UpFollow UsCopyright © 2024 Informa Connect Limited. Registered in England & Wales with number 01835199, registered office 5 Howick Place, London, SW1P 1WG.Website TOU|Code of conduct events|Group privacy policy|CCPA|Cookie PolicyRespiratory tract infections: Weekly review: 2 - 8 January 2023 - The Luxembourg Government Aller au menu principal Aller au menu principal Aller au contenu The Luxembourg Government gouvernement.lu Select language - Please use the arrow keys (up and down) to navigate menu en fr de lb Menu main News Conseils de gouvernement All of the news Schedule Conseils de gouvernement The Government FRIEDEN Luc BETTEL Xavier HANSEN Martine MEISCH Claude DELLES Lex BACKES Yuriko HAHN Max ROTH Gilles DEPREZ Martine GLODEN Léon OBERTIN Stéphanie MISCHO Georges WILMES Serge MARGUE Elisabeth THILL Eric Former Members of Government Ministries Departments Topics Political system Head of State Government Electoral system Chamber of Deputies Council of State Court of Auditors The Economic and Social Council Professional chambers Courts and tribunals Political parties European Union and international organisations High Council for Sustainable Development Show hide search Search Search The Luxembourg Government gouvernement.lu Select language - Please use the arrow keys (up and down) to navigate menu en fr de lb Show hide search Search Search News Conseils de gouvernement All of the news Schedule Conseils de gouvernement The Government FRIEDEN Luc BETTEL Xavier HANSEN Martine MEISCH Claude DELLES Lex BACKES Yuriko HAHN Max ROTH Gilles DEPREZ Martine GLODEN Léon OBERTIN Stéphanie MISCHO Georges WILMES Serge MARGUE Elisabeth THILL Eric Former Members of Government Ministries Departments Topics Political system Head of State Government Electoral system Chamber of Deputies Council of State Court of Auditors The Economic and Social Council Professional chambers Courts and tribunals Political parties European Union and international organisations High Council for Sustainable Development Your shopping cart contains 0 Item(s) ( €) Partage Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Linkedin Share By Email Copy the link Home News All of the news Respiratory tract infections: Weekly review: 2 - 8 January 2023 Respiratory tract infections: Weekly review: 2 - 8 January 2023 Press release Created on 11.01.2023 Last update 12.01.2023 The weekly retrospective gives you a broader overview of respiratory viruses in general: including COVID-19 and influenza. COVID-19 During the week of 2 to 8 January 2023, the number of people testing positive for COVID-19 decreased to 568 cases, compared to 777 cases the previous week. In addition, 431 people were re-infected, representing 43.1% of all those who tested positive, compared to 499 (39.1%) the previous week. 7 further deaths in connection with COVID-19 are to be deplored. ​ The average age of the deceased is 81 years. In the hospitals, there were 23 new admissions of confirmed COVID-19 patients in normal care, compared to 30 the previous week. In intensive care, the number of occupied beds is 5. The average age of hospitalised patients is 70 years. Vaccinations: update on the situation For the week of 2 to 8 January 2023, a total of 699 doses were administered. 6 people received a 1st dose, 12 a 2nd dose, 76 people received one complementary dose to a full vaccination, 581 received a second complementary dose to a full vaccination and 23 received a third complementary dose to a full vaccination and 1 a fourth complementary dose to a full vaccination, raising the total number of vaccines administered as of 10 January 2023 to 1,292,815. 474,913 people have a complete vaccination pattern, which corresponds to a vaccination rate of 79% of the eligible population (i.e. the 5+ population). Vaccination pop-up in Esch-Belval In order to facilitate the possibility of getting vaccinated, a vaccination pop-up is open on Fridays until 17 Februaury 2023 from 10 am to 4 pm in Esch-Belval in the Belval Plaza shopping centre on the 1st floor. The list of all vaccination possibilities can be consulted on the following website: www.covidvaccination.lu ​ The evolution of the variants Variant sequencing data are published in the REVILUX report on the website of the National Health Laboratory (Laboratoire national de Santé, LNS) https://lns.lu/publications/ Currently the Omicron BQ.1 variants dominate, representing 75.1% in week 52. The XBB variant represents 4.7% in week 52 (7.6% in week 51) Wastewater monitoring in Luxembourg as part of SARS-CoV-2 The CORONASTEP report is published every 15 days. According to the latest CORONASTEP report drawn up by the LIST (Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology), the contamination level of the 13 wastewater treatment plants analysed during the 51th week of 2022 and 1st week of 2023 still shows a high prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater at national level. The current trend is downwards with a decrease in SARS-CoV-2 genome flows observed over the last three weeks. All CORONASTEP reports are available on the LIST website: ​ https://www.list.lu/en/covid-19/coronastep/ Influenza For the week of 2 to 8 January 2023, the number of influenza cases reported by laboratories decreased to 491 cases from 911 cases in the previous week, a decrease of 54% compared to the previous week. A first peak of the flu epidemic seems to have been reached. © MSAN The microbiology department of the LNS, in collaboration with the Health Directorate and a network of sentinel general practitioners and paediatricians throughout the country, carries out annual influenza sentinel surveillance: Data on the influenza sentinel are published in the REVILUX report on the National Health Laboratory website LNS https://lns.lu/publications/ Press release by the Ministry of Health, the Laboratoire national de santé (LNS) and the Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST) For more information Weekly review: 02 - 08 Januar 2023 (Français, Pdf, 2,57 Mo) Organisation Ministry of Health Health directorate Topic Coronavirus Health - Well-being Research - Science - Innovation Statistics Event date 11.01.2023 Related articles Respiratory tract infections: Weekly review: 26 December 2022- 1 January 2023 Publication date 05.01.2023 The weekly retrospective gives you a broader overview of respiratory viruses in general: including COVID-19 and influenza. Footer Sections News The Government Ministries Departments Topics Political system Publications Support Contact Sitemap About this site General Legal Notice (GTCU) Declaration of Accessibility Cookies management Stay informed Twitter Facebook Instagram Youtube RSS Newsletter Fields marked with an asterisk (*) are mandatory. E-mail* 🡒 Back to topMarwell Zoo penguins isolating due to bird flu given all-clear - BBC NewsBBC HomepageSkip to contentAccessibility HelpYour accountHomeNewsSportEarthReelWorklifeTravelMore menuMore menuSearch BBCHomeNewsSportEarthReelWorklifeTravelCultureFutureMusicTVWeatherSoundsClose menuBBC NewsMenuHomeIsrael-Gaza warWar in UkraineClimateVideoWorldAsiaUKBusinessTechMoreScienceEntertainment & ArtsHealthWorld News TVIn PicturesBBC VerifyNewsbeatEnglandRegionsHampshire & Isle of WightMarwell Zoo penguins isolating due to bird flu given all-clearPublished8 January 2023Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingImage source, Getty ImagesImage caption, Penguins that were isolating due to avian flu have been given the all-clear to return to their enclosurePenguins that had been put into isolation due to bird flu have been give the all-clear, a zoo has said.Marwell Zoo, in Hampshire, put seven of the birds into isolation after an outbreak of avian flu in December.Four other penguins died while a further four tested positive and, by law, had to be euthanised.Now the seven in isolation have tested negative for the disease and will be returned to their enclosure, along with the centre's flamingo population.On 6 December, the (HPAI) H5N1 strain of avian flu was confirmed near Highclere and Colden Common and a 3km (1.86 mile) monitoring zone was set up around both premises.The seven penguins were put into isolation for their own safety, as were the flamingos as a precaution.Bird flu outbreak kills penguins at zooEight penguins dead amid bird flu outbreak at zooSwans and geese die at park after bird flu found"We are delighted that the outbreak was contained swiftly," said a spokeswoman Marwell Zoo, near Colden Common.She added it had been working with the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) and the Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra)."Our flamingos have now been given access to the whole of their enclosure again and we are working with the relevant authorities to get the penguins back in their enclosure as soon as possible," she continued.'Fungal infection risks'She said access to the walk-through aviaries and Energy For Life: Tropical House would continue to be restricted."The sooner the penguins return to their enclosure the better, from a welfare perspective," Justine Shotton, veterinary services manager, said.Penguins kept indoors are at risk of pododermatitis - a condition affecting the birds' feet, and aspergillosis - a potentially fatal fungal infection, according to Ms Shotton.She said all of the zoo's penguins were on antifungal medication and their condition was being regularly monitored.Risk assessments will continue as avian influenza remains an issue all year round, Ms Shotton added.Follow BBC South on Facebook, external, Twitter, external, or Instagram, external. Send your story ideas to south.newsonline@bbc.co.uk, external.Related topicsPenguinsHampshire & Isle of WightMore on this storyBird flu outbreak kills penguins at zooPublished6 December 2022Eight penguins dead amid bird flu outbreak at zooPublished7 December 2022Swans and geese die at park after bird flu foundPublished7 December 2022Related internet linksMarwell ZooThe BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.From other local news sitesAldi asking Hampshire shoppers to nominate charities for Â£10k fundExternalAndover AdvertiserOne of UK's largest indoor Christmas attractions opens soon as new features announcedExternalBasingstoke GazetteWinchester charity warns: 'Without volunteers we can't provide our services'ExternalHampshire ChronicleChristmas tree put up on Winchester High Street ahead of festive lights ceremonyExternalHampshire ChronicleHMS Prince of Wales departure delayedExternalPortsmouth TodayDriver of car "driven dangerously" during police pursuit reported for summonsExternalIsle of Wight County PressInformation about BBC links to other news sitesTop storiesAssisted dying bill has strict safeguards, says MP proposing law changePublished2 hours agoGary Lineker to leave BBC's Match of the DayPublished2 hours agoWatch: 'Any good?' Lineker kicks off 25 years as MOTD hostPublished5 hours agoMore to exploreMatch of the Day: Who could replace Gary Lineker as host?New study on moons of Uranus raises chance of lifeColeen Rooney, GK Barry and Danny Jones in I'm a Celeb 2024 line-upCritics say Gladiator II is 'gobsmacking' and 'loopy'Woman, 102, recalls mother's betrayal in keeping WW2 sweetheart's letters from herHow to watch the Taurid Meteor Shower tonightEnergy smart meter issues creating north-south divideSquid Game director was so stressed on set he lost nine teethâCatfish killer used my photo to trap other girlsâElsewhere on the BBCPaul Weller performs for Radio 2's Piano RoomA performance from a true mod legend, you may know him from bands such as The Jam or The Style CouncilAn award-winning topical satire showSatirical impressions from the team headed up by Jon Culshaw and Jan RavensLily and Miquita discuss the U.S. electionLifelong friends Lily Allen and Miquita Oliver discuss the world around them twice a weekCountryfile Rambles for BBC Children in NeedThe people, places and stories making news in the British countrysideMost read1Gary Lineker to leave BBC's Match of the Day2Mother-of-two dies during Turkey weight-loss op3National park says dropping Snowdon name a success4Coleen Rooney, GK Barry and Danny Jones in I'm a Celeb 2024 line-up5Saudi crown prince says Israel committing 'genocide' in Gaza6NHS offers 'improved' stop smoking pill7Critics say Gladiator II is 'gobsmacking' and 'loopy'8Bishop calls on Welby to resign over Church abuse scandal9'He'd be enraged': Al Fayed abuse survivors on their friendship10Assisted dying bill has strict safeguards, MP saysBBC News ServicesOn your mobileOn smart speakersGet news alertsContact BBC NewsHomeNewsSportEarthReelWorklifeTravelCultureFutureMusicTVWeatherSoundsTerms of UseAbout the BBCPrivacy PolicyCookiesAccessibility HelpParental GuidanceContact the BBCGet Personalised NewslettersWhy you can trust the BBCAdvertise with usÂ© 2024 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Vaccines: Trial for single shot targeting three different infectionsWatch TVNewsSportLifestyleTravelEntertainmentProduct ReviewsCouponsStanDomainDriveConnect with us Search NationalNSWVICQLDSAWAACTTASNTLatestUS Election 2024Israel-HamasCrimeTechnologyHealthFinanceExplainersCost of LivingPoliticsWorldAsiaEuropeNZUKUSAChinaAfricaVideosLiveToday ShowACA60 MinutesSportOlympicsAFLCricketFootballLive scoresNRLWeatherFinanceBusiness newsFind and comparePersonal financeSmall businessCelebrityEntertainment newsCelebrityRoyal newsTV guideAppApp StoreGoogle PlayMeet The TeamAbout 9NewsContact usMeet the teamPrivacyTerms of useYour location:SYDNEYSYDNEY, NSWPERTH, WAMELBOURNE, VICHOBART, TASBRISBANE, QLDDARWIN, NTADELAIDE, SACANBERRA, ACTYour web browser is no longer supported. To improve your experience update it hereBREAKINGVictorian man jailed for exit-trafficking his wife 'as a chattel'NewsNationalTrial for vaccine targeting three different infectionsBy Savannah Meacham • AAP8:11pm Jan 11, 2023 Tweet Facebook Mail A vaccine trial is underway to combat a triple threat of infections with just one single jab.The University of the Sunshine Coast has started clinical trials of a new Moderna vaccine which works as a triple-barrel shot to target COVID-19, RSV and influenza."If you could go to the doctor and get one vaccine that essentially covers you for influenza, COVID-19 and RSV - that would be helpful," Dr Nischal Sahai said.READ MORE: Sun Cable enters administration, billionaire investor 'fully backs' solar company﻿The vaccine would target COVID-19, influenza and RSV. (9News)"The aim is to see whether a combination vaccine will be as tolerable as giving all three vaccines separately."The vaccine poses a major shake-up to Australia's annual vaccine rollout to help ease the burden on an overloaded system."One visit, one vaccination and possibly a booster compared to three visits and boosters," participant Carolyn Rose said."I think that will take a big load off our current health system."READ MORE: Gladys Berejiklian ICAC report delayed﻿Researchers are looking for more participants in the trial. (9News)It can take several years to collate enough data before the vaccine can be rolled out safely but researchers are now looking to expand their pool of participants and are calling for more volunteers. "We are looking for people who are generally in good health between 50 and 75 - they can be male or female," senior clinical trial coordinator Joan Stark said.The process includes seven clinic visits and eight phone calls over a period of up to 13 months with all participants compensated.Continue readingvaccineAustralianationalqueenslandSunshine CoastCOVID 19fluDiseaseCONTACT USSend your stories to contact@9news.com.auProperty News: World's biggest building kicks off $75 billion construction.Top StoriesWoman thought she was 'going to die' when car wash malfunctionedGirl's miracle survival exposes sailing boat murder spreeThousands line up for once-in-a-decade chance to smell a corpseGood Food Guide crowns best restaurants for every tastean hour agoAboutContactWatch TVLive TVTV ShowsCategoriesConnect your TVHow to watchTV GuideNewsLatestNationalWorldPoliticsTechWeatherFinanceToday ShowA Current Affair60 MinutesSportLive ScoresOlympicsNRLCricketTennisAFLRugbyFootballAthleticsGolfCombatLifestyleLatestRoyalsStyleCelebrityKitchenTravelCoachYouParentingMoneyHoroscopesEntertainmentLatestTV ShowsMAFSThe BlockLove IslandLego MastersTipping PointThe SummitGetawayTravel GuidesProduct ReviewsTechnologyBeautyStyle + FashionLivingKitchenHealth + FitnessParentingGift IdeasRadio2GB3AW4BC6PRStanTV ShowsMoviesSportStan OriginalsDomainAdvice & GuidesProperty SearchHome LoansHome Price GuideDriveCar ReviewsCar NewsNew Car ShowroomCars for SalePedestrian TVEntertainmentNewsOnlineTelevisionCouponsUber EatseBayAmazonNikeHomeNewslettersWork with usAdvertise with usSupportTerms of usePrivacy© 2024 Nine Entertainment Co.123,210 flu-like cases logged in 2022 | Philstar.com Philstar.comHOMEHeadlinesOpinionNationWorldBusinessSportsEntertainmentLifestyleOther SectionsThe Philippine StarPilipino Star NgayonHOMEBansaMetroProbinsiyaOpinyonPalaroShowbizTrue ConfessionsDr. LoveLitra-talkKutobKomiksThe FreemanHOMECebu NewsOpinionMetro CebuRegionCebu BusinessCebu SportsCebu LifestyleCebu EntertainmentPang-MasaHOMEPolice MetroPunto MoPang MoviesPM SportsPara ManaloPara MalibangBanatHOMEBalitaOpinyonKalingawanShowbizPalaroImong KapalaranPunsoyInteraksyonHOMETrends + SpotlightsPolitics + IssuesCelebritiesHobbies + InterestsRumor CopCouponsHOMETop StoresOffers By CategoryLatest Posts 2025 MIDTERM ELECTIONS SONA 2024 EXPLAINERS SUPPORT PHILSTAR About Us | Contact Us | Advertise | Privacy Policy | Member Agreement | Copyright Notice Copyright © 2024. Philstar Global Corp. All Rights Reserved My Profile Sign Out Subscribe Subscribe navnation== HOME HEADLINES OPINION NATION WORLD BUSINESS SPORTS ENTERTAINMENT LIFESTYLE OTHER SECTIONS X 2025 MIDTERM ELECTIONS SONA 2024 EXPLAINERS Nation 123,210 flu-like cases logged in 2022 Rhodina Villanueva - The Philippine StarJanuary 9, 2023 | 12:00am Shoppers flocked to Ylaya street in Divisoria, Manila to buy gifts on December 23, 2022.STAR / Ernie Penarendondo MANILA, Philippines — More than 120,000 influenza- or flu-like illnesses were recorded nationwide last year, the Department of Health (DOH) reported over the weekend. Data from the DOH’s Disease Surveillance Report showed 123,210 flu-like cases were recorded from Jan. 1 to Dec. 17, 2022. The figure is 53 percent higher compared to the 80,554 cases reported during the same period in 2021. A majority of the cases were reported in Davao region with 25,212 followed by Northern Mindanao with 18,174 and Central Visayas, 12,524. The National Capital Region recorded the highest increase in flu-like cases with 750 percent, or from 606 in 2021 to 5,151 in 2022. It was followed by the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao with 355 percent, or from 548 to 2,492, and Ilocos Region with 153 percent, or from 2,889 to 7,319 cases. Data from the DOH’s Epidemiology Bureau showed 475 fatalities due to flu-like illnesses or a case fatality rate of 0.4 percent. In 2021, health officials recorded 981 deaths or a case fatality rate of 1.2 percent. Zamboanga peninsula logged the highest number of fatalities with 183 followed by Central Visayas, 127, and Caraga, 39. Health experts earlier warned the public to be wary of illnesses that commonly affect people during the holiday season such as influenza, whose symptoms include fever, chills, dry cough, loss of appetite, body aches, nausea and sneezing. INFLUENZA BrandSpace Articles With BDO, life is easy like Sunday morning 5 reasons why Purefoods Corned Beef meets the Pinoy’s ‘pure standard’ #PhilstarPicks: 11.11 Lazada items to check out for every 'era' you're in Ambassador Philippe Jones Lhuillier’s remarkable life chronicled in 'A Purposeful Journey of a Lifetime' The Grand Midori Ortigas: A Zen-inspired residential development in the city Work mode off: Guide to perfecting your after-work wind-down GH Mall's first Christmas tree lighting kicks off ‘Larger than Life’ celebration Amorita Resort, The Funny Lion El Nido win Condé Nast Johansens Awards for Excellence Unlock the American dream: Filipinos can now play Mega Millions online with official tickets < > Philstar x LatestTrending Trending Latest Trending abtestabtest 109 file COCs for BARMM parliamentary polls By Mayen Jaymalin | 1 day ago Up to 109 aspirants have filed certificates of candidacy (COCs) for the first parliamentary elections in the Bangsamoro Autonomous... Nation MMDA suspends coding, Pasig ferry trips due to Nika By Mark Ernest Villeza | 9 hours ago The Metropolitan Manila Development Authority has suspended the number coding scheme and the operation of the Pasig River... Nation Suspect in shooting of LTO officer surrenders By Ed Amoroso | 2 days ago A businessman, tagged as a suspect in the shooting of three people in Calapan City, including the assistant Land Transportation... Nation Manila archbishop won’t endorse 2025 poll bets By Evelyn Macairan | 9 hours ago The Archdiocese of Manila will welcome candidates in the May 2025 midterm elections, but no endorsement will be made. Nation MILF opposes BARMM parliamentary polls postponement By John Unson | 9 hours ago The Moro Islamic Liberation Front is not seeking to postpone the first parliamentary elections in the Bangsamoro Autonomous... Nation Latest More in Nation US honors Filipino, American veterans Man, 60, dies in motorcycle crash ASF cases declining – BAI Comelec proclaims new Legazpi mayor abtest P2.2 million smuggled sugar seized in Zamboanga By Roel Pareño | 9 hours ago Up to 900 sacks of suspected smuggled refined sugar worth about P2.2 million were seized at a private shipyard in this city at dawn yesterday. Nation P5.7 million shabu seized in Zamboanga By Roel Pareño | 9 hours ago Shabu with an estimated street value of P5.7 million was seized in a sting that also resulted in the arrest of two suspects in this city on Sunday night. Nation Village exec shot dead By John Unson | 9 hours ago A barangay councilman was shot dead by motorcycle-riding assailants in Kabacan, Cotabato on Saturday. Nation BOC confiscates cigarettes found abandoned in CDO By Evelyn Macairan | 9 hours ago The Bureau of Customs has confiscated smuggled cigarettes worth about P2.5 million that were found abandoned in Cagayan de... Nation 'Peacebuilder' barangay exec killed in Cotabato ambush By John Unson | 14 hours ago Gunmen killed a barangay official in an ambush on Saturday, November 9, in Kabacan, Cotabato. The official was known for his... Nation Recommended Suspect in shooting of LTO officer surrenders 2 days ago A businessman, tagged as a suspect in the shooting of three people in Calapan City, including the assistant Land Transportation... NationNATIONAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION Sherwin says he never lent out protocol plate 3 days ago Sen. Sherwin Gatchalian yesterday belied reports that he was involved in the illegal entry of a Cadillac Escalade at the Edsa... NationLTO Deputy LTO chief, business owners shot in Calapan 3 days ago A heated argument over a routine Land Transport Office checkpoint inspection led to the shooting of the LTO assistant district... NationLTO Sherwin evasive on SUV: Leave it to LTO 4 days ago Describing himself as a law-abiding public servant, Sen. Sherwin Gatchalian broke his silence yesterday about the involvement... NationEDSALTOSHERWIN SUV with ‘7’ plate linked to Gatchalians 5 days ago The luxury vehicle bearing the Senate protocol plate “7” that was flagged down along the EDSA bus lane is a vehicle... NationEDSA next Recommended Suspect in shooting of LTO officer surrenders A businessman, tagged as a suspect in the shooting of three people in Calapan City, including the assistant Land Transportation Office district chief, surrendered to the National Bureau of Investigation in Oriental Mindoro yesterday. 2 days ago NATIONAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION Sherwin says he never lent out protocol plate Sen. Sherwin Gatchalian yesterday belied reports that he was involved in the illegal entry of a Cadillac Escalade at the Edsa bus lane on Sunday night. 3 days ago LTO Deputy LTO chief, business owners shot in Calapan A heated argument over a routine Land Transport Office checkpoint inspection led to the shooting of the LTO assistant district chief in Calapan, Oriental Mindoro and two businessmen, one of whom succumbed to a gunshot wound. 3 days ago LTO Sherwin evasive on SUV: Leave it to LTO Describing himself as a law-abiding public servant, Sen. Sherwin Gatchalian broke his silence yesterday about the involvement of his family in the Cadillac vehicle with a Senate protocol plate that illegally entered the EDSA busway. 4 days ago EDSA LTO SHERWIN SUV with ‘7’ plate linked to Gatchalians The luxury vehicle bearing the Senate protocol plate “7” that was flagged down along the EDSA bus lane is a vehicle registered with the Gatchalians, according to the Land Transportation Office. 5 days ago EDSA OK Are you sure you want to log out? Yes No X Login Philstar.com is one of the most vibrant, opinionated, discerning communities of readers on cyberspace. With your meaningful insights, help shape the stories that can shape the country. Sign up now! Get Updated: Signup for the News Round now E-mail Address: Password REMEMBER ME FORGOT PASSWORD? SIGN IN or sign in with New user? CLICK HERE TO REGISTER This site uses cookies. By continuing to browse the site, you are agreeing to our use of cookies.SKNVibes | Persons Asked To be Vigilant Against Several Respiratory Infections Including COVID-19 Javascript Menu by Deluxe-Menu.com All Headlines|NoticesDeathsSchedulesMoviesFerries JobsAutosReal Estate My Account | Contact Us Home > Headlines > NEWS Posted: Wednesday 11 January, 2023 at 8:26 PM Persons Asked To be Vigilant Against Several Respiratory Infections Including COVID-19 By: (OPM), Press Release Basseterre, St. Kitts and Nevis, January 11, 2023 [Press Secretary’s Office]: St. Kitts and Nevis, as with the rest of the region, is in the middle of the 2022-2023 Influenza (flu) season which typically occurs between November to March each year. As the concerns over the influenza, Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV), and the new strain of the COVID-19 rise, the Ministry of Health seeks to advise the public on ways to address the symptoms and prevent transmission. Influenza (flu) is an acute and very contagious respiratory tract infection caused by influenza type A (H3N2) and type B viruses circulating in all parts of the world, and in the Caribbean sub-region. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact us globally, the USA, Europe, the Caribbean region, and the Federation. There has been a gradual increase in RSV, COVID-19, and Influenza (Flu) cases caused by influenza type A virus in the Federation confirmed by laboratory testing. The Ministry of Health is monitoring the emergence of XBB.1.5 latest Omicron subvariant surging in the north-eastern USA. This is the most transmissible variant that has been detected so far. The variant Omicron and its subvariants remain the dominant variants and they cause less severe disease. Prime Minister of St. Kitts and Nevis and Minister of Health, Hon. Dr. Terrance Drew announced in August of 2022 that the mask mandates have been lifted within the Federation except that you are expected to wear a face mask when visiting the hospital or any health facility. However, the public health measures such as mandatory isolation for persons who test positive for COVID-19 remain. RSV is a common respiratory virus that usually causes mild, cold-like symptoms. Most people recover in a week or two, but RSV can be serious, especially for children aged four years and younger and older adults. The influenza virus causes mild to very severe illness which can at times be detrimental. The symptoms often occur within one (1) to four (4) days after becoming infected. Persons may experience some fever, sore throat, coughing, stuffy or runny nose, muscle, and joint pains (body aches), headache and sometimes dizziness, chills, loss of taste sensation and appetite, malaise & fatigue, or sometimes diarrhoea and vomiting. Most persons recover from these flu symptoms within one (1) week. However, some persons are at high risk of progressing and developing complications of the flu like ear infection, sinus infection, lung infection or pneumonia, and even worsening of underlying chronic medical conditions such as asthma, heart disease and diabetes. It is recommended that you visit your regular doctor or the district medical officer at the nearest health centre if you develop any symptoms of the flu. Persons are also encouraged to remain at home until fully recovered and to wear masks to prevent the transmission of the virus if contracted. The Ministry of Health takes this opportunity to wish everyone optimal health, happiness, and success for 2023 and beyond. Disclaimer This article was posted in its entirety as received by SKNVibes.com. This media house does not correct any spelling or grammatical error within press releases and commentaries. The views expressed therein are not necessarily those of SKNVibes.com, its sponsors or advertisers Copyright © 2024 SKNVibes, Inc. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy Terms of Service CloseNovavax vaccine: Australians could be first to experience dual COVID-19 and influenza jab following trials Watch TVNewsSportLifestyleTravelEntertainmentProduct ReviewsCouponsStanDomainDriveConnect with us Weeknights 7.00pm | Saturdays 7.00pmCombined ShapeCreated with Sketch.HomeLatestWatch EpisodesEmail us your storyAustralians could be first to experience dual COVID-19 and flu vaccineBy A Current Affair Staff|2 years agoDoctors have been working hard on an annual vaccine that protects against COVID-19 and influenza - and Australians will be some of the first to experience it."I think the combination of a COVID vaccine and an influenza vaccine is really a no-brainer," executive vice president of pharmaceutical giant Novavax, Silvia Taylor, told A Current Affair.Novavax is beginning phase two of its trial in Australia and New Zealand.Doctors have been working hard on an annual vaccine that protects against COVID-19 and influenza. (A Current Affair)READ MORE: Disgruntled customers call out Ford over lemon cars﻿A Current Affair was granted access to the trial of the new jab, which could help to stop us from getting seriously ill from COVID-19 and the flu."Our hope is that combining both of those vaccinations eventually into one jab will encourage people to get vaccinated against both of these serious infectious diseases," Taylor said.Taylor said Novavax has done multiple trials in Australia over the years and testing is currently underway at 26 different locations across the country.Executive vice president of pharmaceutical giant Novavax, Silvia Taylor. (A Current Affair)READ MORE: Car-share giant targeted by cunning thieves﻿In Sydney's east, at the Australian Clinical Research Network, Dr Mark Arya has been testing eligible patients between the ages of 50 and 80."They have to be healthy participants with stable medical conditions," Arya said.There are over 2000 participants across Australia and New Zealand.Novavax has done multiple trials in Australia over the years and testing is currently underway at 26 different locations across the country. (A Current Affair)READ MORE: Tracy Grimshaw reflects on 2018 interview with Dolly Everett's grieving parents﻿For stage one they'll either get a flu jab, a COVID-19 vaccine, or a combination of the two."There's some 20 combinations that will be used as part of this clinical trial to get the dose levels and the optimum combination assessed, before we progress to a larger phase three trial," lead investigator Dr Paul Griffin said.The vaccine is carefully prepared and stored between two and eight degrees Celsius.There are over 2000 participants across Australia and New Zealand. (A Current Affair)READ MORE: 'It has to be somewhere': Dream holiday turned nightmare over lost luggage﻿The participant is then briefed by a doctor and given one of the combinations."One of the big advantages of the Novavax vaccine is it is what's considered a more traditional vaccine approach," Griffin said."It's a protein-based vaccine. So it's not (like) mRNA. (It) doesn't need those ultra-cold temperatures that mRNA does."Dr Mark Arya from the Australian Clinical Research Network. (A Current Affair)READ MORE: Family left with 'tinfoil' protection after botched window and door installation﻿The patients getting vaccinated will be required to come back for four blood tests over a six-month period so medical staff can keep an eye on how their body reacts to the jab.They're also required to keep a digital diary to track their symptoms and any discomfort they might be feeling after getting vaccinated.Adriana Nohra, who is the primary study coordinator at the Australian Clinical Research Network, said when they get the blood test results they'll be looking at things like safety and the immune response to the vaccine.Lead investigator Dr Paul Griffin. (A Current Affair)She said they also write down any reactions patients mention and report it to the sponsor."Anything severe we note it down, escalate it if needs (to) be and the doctor is always here as well and they always see the patients at their scheduled visits," Nohra said.Taylor said some of the common side effects are "headache, nausea, some pain at the injection site" and "some swelling".Adriana Nohra is the primary study coordinator at the Australian Clinical Research Network. (A Current Affair)"What's important for people to know is that those side effects are what's called transient. They last for a day or two and quickly go away," Taylor said.Results for the phase two trial are expected in six months' time and if all goes to plan, phase three will kick off in a matter of months."We think we could be on the market with our combination vaccine, as early as 2025," Taylor said.In PicturesThe 'heartbreaking' health conditions affecting Aussies Four months ago, Melbourne-based Jennifer McDermott contracted COVID-19.View GalleryStream the latest episodesMonday 11 NovemberSaturday 9 NovemberFriday 8 NovemberVaccineCoronavirusHealth Share Mail Tweet Pinterest Auto news: Surprising reason councils use these black road cables.AboutContactWatch TVLive TVTV ShowsCategoriesConnect your TVHow to watchTV GuideNewsLatestNationalWorldPoliticsTechWeatherFinanceToday ShowA Current Affair60 MinutesSportLive ScoresOlympicsNRLCricketTennisAFLRugbyFootballAthleticsGolfCombatLifestyleLatestRoyalsStyleCelebrityKitchenTravelCoachYouParentingMoneyHoroscopesEntertainmentLatestTV ShowsMAFSThe BlockLove IslandLego MastersTipping PointThe SummitGetawayTravel GuidesProduct ReviewsTechnologyBeautyStyle + FashionLivingKitchenHealth + FitnessParentingGift IdeasRadio2GB3AW4BC6PRStanTV ShowsMoviesSportStan OriginalsDomainAdvice & GuidesProperty SearchHome LoansHome Price GuideDriveCar ReviewsCar NewsNew Car ShowroomCars for SalePedestrian TVEntertainmentNewsOnlineTelevisionCouponsUber EatseBayAmazonNikeHomeNewslettersWork with usAdvertise with usSupportTerms of usePrivacy© 2024 Nine Entertainment Co.The Best Breathable Face Masks to Protect Your Kids Against COVID-19, RSV, and Influenza This Winter | Entertainment TonightShopStyleBeauty & WellnessHomeTechLifestyleStreamingGiftsSales & DealsEntertainmentLatest VideosArticlesTVET Vault UnlockedMusicAwardsMoviesNewsletterClose MenuLIVEVideosPhotosShopWatch ETSearchClose FormOpen Search FormShopThe Best Breathable Face Masks to Protect Your Kids Against COVID-19, RSV, and Influenza This WinterEach product has been independently selected by our editorial team. We may receive commissions from some links to products on this page. Promotions are subject to availability and retailer terms. AmazonBy ETonline StaffPublished: 1:26 PM PST, January 13, 2023Stay safe this winter season with face masks with fun prints specifically for little ones.Many retailers offer cloth face masks that are an alternative to true personal protective equipment (PPE), but with Omicron and other variants spreading fast, a lot of people are trading in their cloth reusable face mask for disposable KN95, KF94 and N95 mask options for better protection.Certain school districts are updating their mask mandates as the school year is approaching. Los Angeles Unified School District has required students to wear "well-fitted, non-cloth masks with a nose wire" indoors and outdoors. Surgical mask or higher-grade mask options are acceptable. These masks would be available to students upon request.Whether you're dealing with an adult mask or a kids mask, make sure it fits snugly but comfortably against both sides of the face. This can be achieved by securing the ear loop, adjustable ear loops or ties, and ensuring it includes multiple layers of fabric (most have two or three), while allowing unrestricted breathing.Browse ET's picks for the best kids face mask options below, including fabric mask and non-cloth mask styles for winter 2023.Non-Cloth N95, KN95 and KF94 Masks for Kids: Powecom KN95-SM Respirator Mask - 10 PackBona Fide Masks Powecom KN95-SM Respirator Mask - 10 PackUpgrade your child's face masks with these FDA approved children's KN95 face masks with better breathability from Bona Fide Masks. $13 Buy Now5 Kids Black KN95 MasksEvolvetogether5 Kids Black KN95 Masks$15Buy Now TopLAD 50 Kids Disposable Face MasksAmazonTopLAD 50 Kids Disposable Face MasksA 4-layer woven disposable face mask perfect for kids during in-person learning. $16Buy NowFDA Listed Kids Mask with KN95 ProtectionVidaFDA Listed Kids Mask with KN95 ProtectionBoost up your child's protection with these Vida Kn95 face masks. $35Buy NowKF94 Disposable Fish Mouth Four-Layer Protective MaskAmazon KF94 Disposable Fish Mouth Four-Layer Protective MaskThese kids' KF94 masks have cute patterns on top of four-layer protection. $14Pack of 10Buy NowAirpop Kids Face Masks 4 PackAmazonAirpop Kids Face Masks 4 PackAirpop face masks are made of 4 layers of ultra-durable nonwoven materials. This garment has a fluid-resistant outer layer, an electrostatically charged interior "melt-blown" layer, and a soft inner layer to absorb moisture and keep your children comfortable. $36 $20Buy NowKids KF94 Mask 50-PackAmazon Kids KF94 Mask 50-PackSome find the KF94 masks with 94% filtration efficiency to have a more comfortable design than KN95 masks. $21 $14Pack of 50Buy NowCloth Masks for Kids:Crayola Kids Face Mask 5-PackAmazon Crayola Kids Face Mask 5-PackThese adorable washable face masks are crafted with a 3-D face design, adjustable ear straps, and a nose clip for a secure fit. $30 $8Buy NowUncommon Goods Children's Rainbow Face Coverings - Set of 2Uncommon GoodsUncommon Goods Children's Rainbow Face Coverings - Set of 2100% of profits from sales of these kid-designed cotton masks go to New York City's public hospitals via NYC Health + Hospitals. $25 $.50 for 2 at Uncommon GoodsBuy NowCubcoats Kids Face MasksAmazonCubcoats Kids Face MasksThis two-pack of Cubcoats kids' face masks, featuring Kali the Kitty and Bori the Bear, are reusable and can be hand washed and dried. They are made with two layers of cotton and elastic ear loops and have a metal nose clip for a protective fit. These masks are recommended for kids age four and up. $8Buy NowSanctuary 5 Pack Kids Fashion PPE MasksSanctuarySanctuary 5 Pack Kids Fashion PPE MasksEach pack of these Sanctuary masks comes with two Dino prints, one camo print, one pink camo print and one baby leopard print. With every mask purchase, the company will provide masks to hospitals and organizations in need (learn more via the brand's Instagram Live). $25For for 5 MasksBuy NowGoodDayMasks Kids Face MasksEtsyGoodDayMasks Kids Face MasksThese double-layer cotton face masks are designed to fit a child's face and are made in Los Angeles and being restocked daily. You can order individual masks, family four-packs or a "Mommy and me" set. $12 and Up at EtsyBuy NowEtsy Kids Face Mask with Filter Pocket and Nose WireEtsyEtsy Kids Face Mask with Filter Pocket and Nose WireThese cute masks are specially designed for kids ages 5-12. Each cloth mask comes with two filters with a five-layer filtration system made of activated carbon, non-woven, and melt-blown filter cloth. $2 and UpBuy NowLA Made Tie Dye 5-Pack LA MadeLA Made Tie Dye 5-Pack These reversible two-layer cotton masks come in assorted packs of five -- they're also available in two-packs and combo packs with kids' sizes. $55 $35For 5 MasksBuy NowThreadless Tie DyeThreadlessThreadless Tie DyeFace masks from Manhattan-based clothing site Rocks Off via Threadless are made in the U.S. and can be washed and reused. They are also reversible, unisex and made with a two-ply cotton poly blend. Kids' masks cost $13, with proceeds going to MedShare to help provide medical supplies and equipment to people in need all over the world. $13Buy NowFor the most up-to-date news and information about the coronavirus pandemic, visit the World Health Organization website.RELATED CONTENT:Best ListsThe Best N95 and KN95 Face Masks to Protect You Against COVID-19, RSV, and Influenza This WinterShopThe KN95 Face Masks Seen on Bella Hadid, Jennifer Garner and More Stars Are In Stock This Winter 2023ShopSave Hundreds on Powerful Dyson Vacuums and Air Purifiers for a Clean Home This WinterStyleThe Best Cozy Sweaters to Keep You Warm and Fabulous All Winter LongShopThe 21 Best Winter Coats and Jackets on AmazonStyleThe 12 Warmest Winter Coats for Women to Shop in 2023StyleThe Best Fleece-Lined Leggings and Joggers to Keep Warm This Winter 2023ShopWHO Recommends Masks on Long Flights as COVID Variant Spreads — Get The Best Face Masks for PlanesTags:ShoppingCoronavirusUpdates on Celebrity News, TV, Fashion and More!By clicking "Sign Up", you confirm that you have read and agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge our Privacy Policy.Sign upBrowseNewsVideoPhotosMoviesTVAwardsMusicShopNewslettersConnectFacebookInstagramTwitterYouTubeET on TVAboutETonline StaffRSSLegalTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyClosed CaptioningSubmit a TipCalifornia NoticeYour Privacy ChoicesOpens a new windowOpens a new windowOpens a new windowOpens a new windowOpens a new window™ & © 2024 CBS Studios Inc. and CBS Interactive Inc., Paramount companies. All Rights Reserved.