Commercial influenza vaccines vary in HA-complex structure and in induction of cross-reactive HA antibodies | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Commercial influenza vaccines vary in HA-complex structure and in induction of cross-reactive HA antibodies Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 30 March 2023 Commercial influenza vaccines vary in HA-complex structure and in induction of cross-reactive HA antibodies Mallory L. Myers1 na1, John R. Gallagher ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1954-88721 na1, Alexander J. Kim1, Walker H. Payne1, Samantha Maldonado-Puga1, Haralabos Assimakopoulos1, Kevin W. Bock ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9454-09372, Udana Torian1 nAff3, Ian N. Moore2 nAff4 & …Audray K. Harris ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8875-18741 Show authors Nature Communications volume 14, Article number: 1763 (2023) Cite this article 7196 Accesses 8 Citations 15 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Cryoelectron tomographyInfluenza virusVaccines AbstractInfluenza virus infects millions of people annually and can cause global pandemics. Hemagglutinin (HA) is the primary component of commercial influenza vaccines (CIV), and antibody titer to HA is a primary correlate of protection. Continual antigenic variation of HA requires that CIVs are reformulated yearly. Structural organization of HA complexes have not previously been correlated with induction of broadly reactive antibodies, yet CIV formulations vary in how HA is organized. Using electron microscopy to study four current CIVs, we find structures including: individual HAs, starfish structures with up to 12 HA molecules, and novel spiked-nanodisc structures that display over 50 HA molecules along the complex’s perimeter. CIV containing these spiked nanodiscs elicit the highest levels of heterosubtypic cross-reactive antibodies in female mice. Here, we report that HA structural organization can be an important CIV parameter and can be associated with the induction of cross-reactive antibodies to conserved HA epitopes. Similar content being viewed by others Heterologous viral protein interactions within licensed seasonal influenza virus vaccines Article Open access 10 January 2020 Unique features of a recombinant haemagglutinin influenza vaccine that influence vaccine performance Article Open access 02 December 2021 Multivalent next generation influenza virus vaccines protect against seasonal and pre-pandemic viruses Article Open access 16 January 2024 IntroductionInfluenza is a widely prevalent respiratory virus with pandemic potential. Healthy individuals, even those who are vaccinated, are often still susceptible to influenza infection and may become sick, disrupting work and well-being1. At-risk individuals that may be immunologically suppressed due to age or specific health issues can develop life threatening infections2. Yet even prime aged individuals may fall victim to seasonal influenza, especially with the lack of supportive care for these infections3. When new zoonotic strains are created by reassortment between animal and human lineages, antigenically novel influenza viruses have caused pandemics which have put even the healthy populations at great risk4. The commercial vaccine market for seasonal influenza vaccines has become a billion dollar industry5, in part due to the rapid variation of influenza antigens.Influenza is an enveloped virus, presenting three antigens on the viral surface. Hemagglutinin (HA), the most prevalent viral glycoprotein, is responsible for binding to target cell glycans, as well as execution of membrane fusion. Neuraminidase (NA) cleaves cellular glycans to assist in viral release from host cells, counteracting the binding activity of HA. Matrix (M2) is an ion channel embedded in the viral envelope which is integral for pH homeostasis of the virus6,7,8. Following either natural infection with influenza virus or immunization with HA-based vaccines, the majority of protective antibodies are targeted to HA9,10,11. HA is expressed as a homotrimer consisting of three copies of the protein HA0. Each HA0 protomer is later proteolytically cleaved into two fragments: HA1 and HA2. HA1 is the N-terminal fragment and comprises the head domain, which is the membrane-distal region of the 13 nm tall viral glycoprotein. HA1’s protein sequence also contributes to the stem domain at the opposite end of the HA protein from the head and nearer to the viral envelope. HA2 is the C-terminal fragment of HA0 cleavage, and all residues of HA2 contribute to the stem domain. HA2 contributes the most conserved amino acids in HA12, which perform the act of fusing host and viral membranes during viral entry. Because the HA head is both immunodominant and highly variable, yearly reformulation of influenza vaccines is required to ensure that HA antigenic variation does not escape vaccine-elicited antibodies13,14.Historically, influenza vaccine development was evaluated by antigenicity and protection in animal models focusing on the concentration of HA, but recently other viral components such as NA and M2 are being explored15,16,17. Commercially available influenza vaccines have been widely accessible in the United States since the 1950s18 with the CDC regulating the concentration of HA in those offered9. Early vaccine formulation strategies and procedures, many of which are still in use, required generation of antigen via seed viruses that are then used to infect embryonated chicken eggs, harvest virus, and extract HA by methods of varying specificity19. To avoid the problem of egg-adapted HA mutations, new strategies have been developed to manufacture vaccines directly from mammalian cells infected with influenza20. Further developments in vaccine manufacturing were seen with the approval of an MF59 adjuvanted commercial vaccine21, while another vaccine formulation utilized recombinant HA derived from a baculovirus expression system in insect cells22,23,24. To date, structural characterization of commercial HA subunit vaccines for influenza has not extended beyond negative-stain electron microscopy (EM)25. Those studies showed HA presented in rosette formations when isolated from inactivated virus or produced by recombinant baculovirus expression23,25,26. Rosettes were naturally formed by removing lipid components, resulting in the transmembrane domain of multiple HA proteins being constricted into small lipid micelles. Within rosettes, the accessibility of the HA head domain was unperturbed, causing no concern for decreased immunogenicity as vaccine development had focused on the antigenically dominant head domain of HA. However, recent universal influenza vaccine initiatives have shifted attention from a singular focus on HA head-targeted antibodies toward consideration of HA stem epitopes.Pursuit of novel HA stem vaccines aiming to protect against both current and future influenza viral strains ignited interest in targeting the conserved stem of HA, which is composed of evolutionarily conserved sequence of HA2 and contains residues essential for viral fusion27,28. Presently, differences in the extent that existing influenza vaccine formulations display influenza virus stem epitopes has not been fully characterized. While some formulations offer better cross-protection against influenza viral strains that are not present in the vaccine, the mechanism for this effect in terms of HA organization and conserved epitope display is unknown21,29. The addition of an adjuvant to a vaccine is known to directly stimulate the immune response in additional ways to subunit vaccines30; however, adjuvant can also profoundly affect the higher-order organization of antigen in solution.In this work, we explore the organization of HA within four licensed influenza vaccines: Fluzone High Dose (HD), Flucelvax, Flublok, and Fluad, by EM to identify structural correlates to the induction of antibodies against different influenza virus HA subtypes. We show that the four commercial influenza vaccines have HA components organized in heterogenous polymorphic complexes when examined by 2D imaging and classification by negative stain EM. While different in organization, all vaccines display the conserved stem HA epitopes and bind to broadly reactive human anti-stem antibodies FI6v3 and CR6261. However, the four vaccines have important differences in their ability to elicit cross-reactive antibodies to HA subtypes not part of their formulation. All of the vaccines protect against a homologous H1N1 challenge, while only one vaccine, Fluad, elicits significant levels of antibodies to the stem and for HA subtypes not present in the vaccine formulation. This vaccine also presents a novel spiked-nanodisc HA structure. Analysis of the spiked nanodiscs indicates that HA stem epitopes are more readily accessible, suggesting a structural basis for the ability to induce heterospecific antibodies to subtypes not present in the vaccine. Induction of heterospecific antibodies will be important for the development of both more efficacious seasonal and universal influenza vaccines that elicit broad immune responses to antigenically divergent HAs.ResultsHA organization in different commercial vaccinesNegative-stain EM was used to determine if antigen structure and organization within the four commercial influenza vaccines were different. Of the four commercial vaccines studied, Fluad and Fluzone High Dose (HD) are trivalent, containing HA antigens for H1 and H3 subtypes for influenza A virus, and B/Victoria lineage for influenza B virus. Flublok and Flucelvax are quadrivalent vaccines due to their composition including an additional influenza B virus B/Yamagata strain. Specific influenza strain composition for each vaccine is given in Supplementary Fig. 1a. All vaccine HA antigens were generated from inactivated influenza virus except for the Flublok vaccine, which was composed of recombinant HA protein (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Western blot analyses of the vaccines’ components confirmed the presence of the major antigens of the commercial vaccines (Supplementary Fig. 2a–c), including HA proteins of H1 and H3 subtypes in addition to influenza B virus HA glycoproteins. Other viral components were present at lower levels and exclusively in virus-derived formulations. These other viral components included neuraminidase (NA), matrix, and nucleoprotein (Supplementary Fig. 2d–f).Four configurations summarized the organization of HA in these vaccine formulations: (1) isolated HA molecules, (2) starfish-like complexes with HA radiating from a central core, (3) HA in micelles, and (4) HA in a larger disc-like structure (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. 3). In EM micrographs, glycoproteins appear as a lighter shade of gray against a darker background, since the negative stain is excluded by presence of the protein. On rare occurrences, genomic ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes were also visible (Fig. 1a, asterisk). Class-averages were generated from thousands of picked particles in order to visualize the most common structures observed across the entire sample. In general, average structures indicated that the conformation of HA was presented in the characteristic peanut-shapes of prefusion trimeric molecules, which were in multimeric starfish-like complexes (e.g. Fig. 1b, left, middle panels) and as isolated HA trimers associated with small volumes of membrane (e.g. Fig. 1b, right panel).Fig. 1: Structural organization of HA antigens in influenza vaccines.a Images from negative-stain EM of Fluzone HD vaccine and b select 2D classes averages. Similarly, images and class averages for c, d Flucelvax, e, f Flublok, and g, h Fluad. Complexes observed include HA starfish-like complexes (black arrows), isolated molecules (white arrows), large round complexes (white asterisk), RNP (black asterisk) and small round mostly bald particles (bracket, putative micelles). Scale bars are 100 nm for panels a, c, e, and g, and 10 nm for panels b, d, f, h. Grids representing each vaccine were prepared at least three times, to account for staining variation.Full size imageStarfish-like structures were characterized by glycoprotein spikes protruding from a central location containing HA transmembrane domains. Starfish-like complexes of HA (Fig. 1a, black arrows) and isolated HA trimers (Fig. 1b, right panel) were present in Fluzone HD. Flucelvax also contained both isolated HAs and starfish complexes, but differed from Fluzone HD in that isolated HA molecules were more prevalent (Fig. 1c, white arrows) than starfish-like complexes (Fig. 1c, black arrows). Class averages of Flucelvax indicated the presence of HA-starfish-like complexes, isolated HA molecules, and NA heads which were identifiable by their tetrameric symmetry (Fig. 1d, right panel). Unique to Flucelvax were relatively large 100-200 nm lipid structures (i.e. micelles) with sparsely distributed HA proteins protruding from their surface (Fig. 1c, black bracket). Flublok was the most structurally homogeneous, with HA organized exclusively in starfish-like complexes, commonly containing 5-12 HA trimers (Fig. 1e, f). To address if individual HA molecules were in prefusion or post-fusion conformation, individual HA trimers were manually picked to select proteins that were sufficiently isolated from other entities in the EM images. These individual HA trimers were averaged to improve resolution, and then measured for comparison to previously reported structures. We found that all influenza vaccines yielded HA profiles that were consistent with prefusion HA conformation, based upon the height of the HA trimer, and based upon the shape profile (Supplementary Fig. 4).While Fluad contained isolated HA molecules and HA-starfish complexes similar to other vaccines (Fig. 1g, h), Fluad also contained an additional component not seen in other formulations. Large round complexes were observed with glycoprotein spikes dotting their outer perimeter (Fig. 1g, white asterisk). Many HA proteins on these complexes were visible as top-views that visualized the HA three-fold symmetry axis as a triangular arrangement of HA protomers. Different years of each of these influenza subunit vaccines were compared and the structures for each vaccine matched the EM data of Fig. 1. Thus, confirmatory EM results indicated that the organization of HA molecules was consistent from year to year (data not shown).Modeling the effects of HA stem epitope crowdingThe observed differences in HA molecule spacing and arrangement across different vaccine complexes led us to investigate the likelihood that HA stem epitopes were blocked or occluded by steric hindrance from neighboring HA molecules. We enumerated possible pairwise HA orientations by Monte Carlo simulation and evaluated if these configurations would occlude stem antibody binding (Fig. 2a, b). We modeled the interaction with fragment antigen binding (Fab) domain instead of full IgG, thus our findings represent an upper bound to the number of sterically permitted binding conformations. IgG molecules have flexibility between domains31, which allows them to deviate from a rigid Y-shaped conformation. This flexibility enables the approximation of using a Fab to represent the IgG in many bound conformations, but not all. Test configurations started with the atomic coordinates of a trimeric HA ectodomain with all three stem epitope binding sites occupied by Fab. Then a second HA-trimer complex including bound Fabs was placed randomly, proximal to the first, and the configuration was assessed for steric clash (Fig. 2a). The repetitive cycle of random placement of pairs of HA-Fab complexes and their ensuing evaluation for steric clash constituted a Monte Carlo method to empirically sample the irregular parameter space relating HA distances, relative angles, and steric clash (Fig. 2b). We segmented the resulting plot of configurations of HA-Fab complexes into three regions: (i) HA-Fab complexes always clashed with each other, (ii) stem Fabs interdigitated and may or may not clash depending on the HA rotation and (iii) HA-Fabs do not clash due to sufficient space between the two HA-Fab complexes (Fig. 2b). The Monte Carlo simulation sampled 500,000 random conformations, which empirically enumerated the steric clash landscape used to define these three regions. At certain angles between HA-trimers, clashes may occur between stem-Fabs even when the inter-HA distance is comparatively large (16 nm) relative to the Fab domain size (7 nm), effectively reducing the Fab binding in those circumstances. The simulations illustrated how increased angles between the long axis of HA molecules allow full occupancy of stem epitopes at shorter distances between HA trimers (Fig. 2c vs 2d). Thus, smaller diameter complexes with greater curvature more readily exposed their full set of stem epitopes to antibody binding, partially counteracting the presence of fewer antigens on these smaller starfish complexes.Fig. 2: Monte Carlo model relating HA orientation with occlusion of stem antibody binding.a Structures of pairs of HA-trimers (green and blue), each with three stem Fabs bound in complex (gray), were randomly oriented by rigid rotation relative to each other, and then the resulting complexes were scored for steric clash. The steric clashes were described according to the distance between the base of HA trimers, and the angle between the central axis of HA trimers (orange line). The plot of steric clashes was empirically segmented into three regions: no steric clash (blue), all steric clash (yellow), and conditional steric clash depending upon the interdigitation of Fabs (mixture of blue and yellow). Within the central region of the conditional steric clash, 57% of these configurations are free of steric clash. The two black points in panel a represent the example complexes depicted in panels c and d. b A visualization of the steric clash model system denotes the distance between HA bases, and the angle between central axes of HA trimers. c An example configuration shows parallel HA trimers (angle = 0°) and Fab domains rotated to face each other, but the 190 Å distance between bases avoids steric clash. d An example of HA trimers in the conditional clash region where Fabs interdigitate, avoiding clash in some rotations, but Fabs could easily clash in other rotations of the HA trimer.Full size image3D structure of HA starfish in FlublokTo determine the structural organization of starfish-like complexes, we used cryo-electron tomography of HA complexes in Flublok (Fig. 3). Virtual slices through Flublok complexes in the 3D tomogram revealed that HA trimers radiated out from a central location in 3D space (Fig. 3a–f, Supplementary Movie 1). While the technique of negative staining had flattened the HA-starfish complexes during visualization, cryo-electron microscopy revealed that the solution structure of HA complexes indeed emanated radially outward from a central clustering of HA transmembrane domains (Fig. 3g, h). A schematic model in which trimeric HA molecules cluster into a starfish complex via their transmembrane domains is seen forming a central hydrophobic core region (Fig. 3i, grey core). Some starfish complexes were elongated rather than spherical, with HAs emanating from a cylindrical lipid core rather than a single point. The average diameter of HA complexes was approximately 25 nm. The density profiles of the constituent HA molecules were consistent with the prefusion state of HA, one which is competent for stem-epitope binding by HA-stem targeted antibodies.Fig. 3: Flublok structural analysis by cryo-electron tomography and molecular modeling.a–f Example of six serial slices from top to bottom of a cryo-electron tomogram with a field of HA complexes. a, b White arrows indicate the location of three individual starfish complexes made of constituent HA molecules. c View in which the slice of the central complex (white brackets) presents a starfish arrangement of its HA molecules. g–h Two different molecular models of specific complexes with trimeric HA ectodomain coordinates, with red denoting the head and blue denoting the stem, docked into the 3D tomogram shown as a transparent isosurface. i A schematic of a HA-starfish structure illustrates how a central hydrophobic core (gray) contains HA transmembrane domains and lipid, and HA proteins point outward exposing the HA head colored in red, and the HA stem colored in blue. j Distance and angular measurements between HA-trimer bases, according to HA ectodomains docked into tomograms of the HA starfish complexes. The plot is segmented into colored regions according to Monte Carlo simulations of HA-stem clashes: no steric clash (blue), all steric clash (yellow), and conditional steric clash depending upon the interdigitation of Fabs (green). k HA-trimer distances between the central axis of head domains in docked complexes were tabulated and plotted as a histogram. The arrow on the x-axis denotes the threshold distance of 16 nm under which bivalent binding is possible. Scale bars are 10 nm for panels a–f, and 5 nm for panels g and h. Flublok cryo samples were collected at least two times and starfish morphology was consistent.Full size imageHA-trimers were modeled into each density with dimensions appropriate for HA (Fig. 3g, h), which allowed a series of HA starfish complexes from cryo-electron tomography to be characterized for steric hinderance of stem epitope binding, based upon the metrics established by Monte Carlo simulation. By plotting these experimental HA-trimer configurations on the same landscape as the Monte Carlo results (Fig. 2a), the probability of stem epitope availability was estimated. For Flublok, there was a broad distribution of angles and distances between HA molecules (Fig. 3j). The likelihood that the HA complexes in Flublok permitted binding to a full complement of stem antibodies was estimated as the sum of HAs in the permissive region of the Monte Carlo simulation, plus the HAs in the conditional clash region, scaled by the fraction estimated competent for full stem antibody binding in the conditional clash region by Monte Carlo simulation (57%). For Flublok, 49% of HAs were in the permissive region and 40% were in the conditionally permissive region. After scaling the fraction in the conditionally permissive region by 57%, the sum of these two regions estimates the fraction of HA stem epitopes sterically capable of binding stem antibodies in Flublok as 72%. Configuration of HAs can also impact the propensity for bivalent binding by a single antibody to two different HA heads. Bivalent binding increases the avidity of the antibody for the epitope by decreasing the off rate, enabling weak but conserved epitopes to progress through affinity maturation. The threshold for bivalent binding has been experimentally determined as approximately 16 nm32. Influenza vaccines that orient HA heads within 16 nm have the potential for bivalent binding, and this potential is visualized as the frequency of HA heads below this distance threshold (Fig. 3k). 63% of HA pairs in Flublok within 22 nm are within this threshold for bivalent binding.3D structure of HA spiked nanodiscs in FluadCryo-electron tomography of Fluad was performed to probe the 3D molecular organization and spatial display of HA stem epitopes. Fluad is a vaccine adjuvanted with MF59 (squalene oil-in-water emulsion), and we aimed to visualize the effect of the adjuvant. Virtual slices through Fluad tomograms revealed round vesicle-like structures interpreted to be the MF59 adjuvant (Fig. 4a, b, asterisks). Interspersed among the vesicles were flat disc-like structures approximately 100 nm in width, containing glycoprotein spikes (Fig. 4a, b, arrows, Supplementary Movie 2). We refer to these structures as spiked nanodiscs. HA ectodomains could be modeled into the spike densities at the periphery of the spiked nanodiscs (Figs. 4c, d). In contrast to Flublok, the Fluad 100 nm spiked nanodiscs are larger and can contain over 50 HA trimers. To observe the nature of the lipid disc constituent in the spiked nanodiscs, we performed subtomogram averaging from 58 discs. Averaging just the center of the discs where no HA was present, we measured a distance of 48 Å between two peaks of density in a cross-section of the subtomogram averaged volume (Fig. 4e). We concluded that the spiked nanodiscs were comprised of a lipid bilayer (Fig. 4e). Because the resolution of the subtomogram average was anisotropic, we separately estimated the error of the bilayer width by manually measuring the cross-sectional distance between bilayer peaks in particles where the bilayer was viewed from the side, and we found the average and standard deviation of this distance to be 50.6 ± 4.5 Å. HA glycoprotein spikes studded the outer perimeter of the spiked nanodisc, oriented normal to the flat surface of the spike nanodisc. Thus, pairs of HA trimers were approximately parallel when located on the same side of the spiked nanodisc, and antiparallel when on opposite sides of the spiked nanodisc (Fig. 4f, Supplementary Movie 3). This exposed the full height of HA at the edge of the spiked nanodiscs, and prominently displayed conserved stem epitopes. The fraction of HAs in the spiked nanodiscs that were permissive to full stem-antibody binding was estimated as the sum of HAs in the permissive region (67%) and the HAs in the conditionally permissive region (30%) scaled by 57% (fraction available indicated by Monte Caro simulations). Therefore, the final estimate for the fraction of HAs in Fluad permissive to full stem antibody binding was 84% (Fig. 4g). Bivalent binding, approximated by the frequency of HA heads being within 16 nm, was estimated at 62% (Fig. 4h) within the locale of 22 nm, which is notably similar to bivalent binding permissibility of Flublok starfish.Fig. 4: Fluad structural analysis by cryo-electron tomography and molecular modeling.a, b Examples of slices through cryo-electron tomograms with a field of Fluad spike complexes and putative adjuvant vesicles. Black arrows indicate some spike complexes protruding from an apparent lipid bilayer. Black asterisks denote adjuvant vesicles. c Oblique view of a cryoelectron-tomographic 3D reconstruction (gray) of a Fluad large particle. A disc-like structure was observed with spiked densities around its perimeter, which were used to dock HA molecules (ectodomain trimers, PDB ID 3LZG) that were parallel and anti-parallel on either the same or different sides of the disk, respectively. HA heads were colored red, and HA stems were colored blue. d Side-view of the Fluad particle in panel c illustrates parallel and anti-parallel HA orientation. e Side view of a subtomogram average of Fluad disc structures, focusing on the disc center. Two layers of density are visible in a density slice bisecting the disc, which indicated the discs are composed of a bilayer. The distance between the centers of each band of density were 48 Å. f A schematic of the HA trimers on the perimeter of the lipid-based disc (gray) illustrates their consensus orientations with HA heads, colored in red, aligned normal to the disc surface. HA stem regions are colored blue. g Distance and angular measurements between HA-trimers that were docked into Fluad discs. The plot is segmented into colored regions according to Monte Carlo simulations of HA-stem clashes: no steric clash (blue), all steric clash (yellow), and conditional steric clash depending upon the interdigitation of Fabs (green). h HA-trimer distances between the central axis of head domains were tabulated and plotted as a histogram. The arrow denotes the threshold distance of 16 nm under which bivalent binding is possible. Scale bars are 100 nm in panels a and b, and 10 nm in panels c, d, and e. Fluad cryo samples were observed at least three times across multiple microscopes, with morphology of discs being consistent.Full size imageNA quantitationNA presence in influenza vaccines has increasingly been the focus of influenza vaccine design strategies. Because we observed individual NA tetramers in negative stain EM images, we sought to quantify bulk N1 NA content among these four influenza vaccine formulations. Focus was on N1 NA because H1N1 viruses are both seasonal and have caused pandemics in 1918 and 2009. Using western blot, we compared NA content in the vaccines to known dilutions of recombinant NA. While NA was observed by EM in all influenza vaccine formulations except Flublok, Fluad contained the highest concentration of NA (Supplementary Fig. 5). From the absolute concentration of NA, we found that the relative concentration of NA in Fluad was approximately 0.16 ug of NA for 1 ug HA, or equivalent to 2.4 ug NA per influenza strain, per vaccine dose. Meanwhile, all other vaccines contain less than our detection threshold of 0.025 ug NA per 1 ug HA (Supplementary Fig. 5).Induction of heterologous HA subtype antibodiesDifferences in HA stem epitope displayed from structural studies of commercial influenza vaccines led us to closely investigate the in vivo immunogenicity of these same formulations. To probe these differences, we assessed binding (in vitro display) by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using stem antibodies. Recombinant H1 protein was used as a positive binding control since both stem antibodies and vaccinated animal sera bind to it more readily than HA on virus (Supplementary Fig. 6). Anti-stem monoclonal antibodies FI6v3, CR6261, and C179 were used as capture antibodies to detect differences in the availability of stem epitopes in the commercial influenza vaccines Fluad, Flublok, Fluzone HD, and Flucelvax (Fig. 5a). All vaccines contained HA protein capable of binding epitopes to anti-HA stem antibodies FI6v3 and CR6261. However, while all vaccines showed similar levels of binding to FI6v3, after normalizing the formulations for HA concentration, there were differences in binding to CR6261 indicating that both Flublok and Fluad had more stem epitope binding availability than Fluzone HD and Flucelvax. These differences were more pronounced when capture antibody C179 was utilized, C179 bound significantly more Flublok than any other vaccine (Fluad, Fluzone HD, and Flucelvax). C179 was particularly poor at binding the H1 HA in Fluclevax, showing no difference from saline (Fig. 5a). These results indicated that the binding availability of conserved HA stem epitopes could vary between different commercial influenza vaccines that were purified and formulated by different methods, despite their similar composition of full-length HA trimers (Supplementary Fig. 1).Fig. 5: Commercial vaccine stem-epitope availability and cross-reactive immunogenicity.a ELISA binding analysis of commercial vaccines (Fluad (blue), Flublok (purple), Fluzone HD (red), Flucelvax (green)) by HA stem monoclonal antibodies (FI6v3, CR6261, C179). Vaccine samples were normalized for H1 HA amount prior to plating. Recombinant H1 HA protein (H1 HA A/Michigan/45/21015, black dots) was a positive control with saline (white dots) as the negative control (F (10, 36) = 7.219, p < 0.0001). b Schedule for immunization of mice with vaccines with day 35 sera used in subsequent ELISA studies. c–f The endpoint titer levels of different vaccine sera were compared for cross-reactivity to different recombinant proteins: c H1 head (N = 15 mice, F (3, 56) = 32.86, p < 0.0001), d H1 stem (N = 15 mice, F (3, 56) = 10.77, p < 0.0001), e H2 HA (N = 5 mice, F (3, 16) = 20.16 p < 0.0001), and f H7 HA (N = 5 mice, F (3, 16) = 38.08, p < 0.0001). PBS control sera were also tested to determine threshold, but not shown. Graphs display the mean with standard error of the mean bars and asterisks to denote statistical differences (p < 0.05, Tukey’s multiple comparisons test with two-tailed significance).Full size imageAn in vivo immunogenicity study was conducted using the commercial vaccines formulations to determine if the stem epitope displays observed in vitro would be able to elicit stem antibodies in vivo. Mice were immunized with the vaccines using a prime and boost immunization schedule (Fig. 5b). Vaccine HA antigens were immunogenic and elicited homosubtypic binding antibodies to their H1, H3, and influenza B virus HA antigens, as judged by ELISAs using immunized mouse sera and full-length recombinant HA proteins (Supplementary Fig. 7). When comparing endpoint titers calculated from dilution curves (Supplementary Fig. 8 and Supplementary Fig. 9) there were statistically significant differences between the different vaccine sera binding to H1 head, H1 stem, H2 HA and H7 HA recombinant proteins (Fig. 5c–f). Fluad sera had higher levels of antibodies binding to a H1 head domain protein than the sera from the other three vaccines (Flublok, Fluzone HD, Flucelvax) (Fig. 5c). Likewise, Fluad elicited higher levels of cross-reactive antibodies to an H1 stem protein (Fig. 5d) when compared to the other vaccines. Although H2 and H7 HA antigens were not components of the vaccines, Fluad elicited statistically significant higher levels of cross-reactive antibodies to both H2 HA and H7 HA when compared to the other vaccines, indicating the elicitation of higher levels of heterosubtypic antibodies by Fluad (Fig. 5e, f).Weight-loss and lung pathology differences between vaccinesHaving observed differences in both the vaccines’ organizations and the elicitation of cross-reactive antibodies, we challenged mice with a A/Michigan/45/2015 (H1N1) virus that was a match to the H1 vaccine component and looked for differences in survival, weight loss (Fig. 6), and lung pathology (Fig. 7). As expected, all vaccines protected mice from H1N1 challenge (Fig. 6b). This was expected because all the vaccines contained H1 HA protein and elicited antibodies to H1 HA (Supplementary Figs. 1, 2, 7). However, further examination of the weight-loss curves showed that Fluad and Flublok had trends for reduced weight loss compared to both Flucelvax and Fluzone HD (Fig. 6c). The most observable difference was at day 3 (Fig. 6c, arrow). When the experimental timeline was repeated with additional mice for the collection of lung tissue, the weight-loss differences observed on day 3 post challenge were statistically significant (Fig. 6d). Vaccination with any vaccine followed by viral challenge resulted in lesser weight loss when compared to the saline control group. Between the vaccine groups, mice given Flublok and Fluad had no significant weight-loss difference between each other after viral challenge but did have a statistically significant reduced weight-loss when compared to Fluzone HD and Flucelvax (Fig. 6d). Interestingly, when lung tissue was homogenized, infectious virus could not be recovered from the lungs of mice vaccinated with Fluad, while the other vaccines permitted viral recovery (50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) assays) (Fig. 6e). Although Fluad and Flublok did not show a statistical difference in weight-loss reduction between them, they differed in their ability to permit recovery of virus from the lungs (Fig. 6e).Fig. 6: Protection efficacy and weight lost differences after H1N1 challenge.a Mice were immunized with commercial influenza vaccines (day 0 and 21) and challenge with A/Michigan/45/2015 H1N1 influenza virus at 10x the lethal dose for control mice (day 42). b Survival curves for mice (N = 5) immunized with saline control (black), Fluad (blue), Flublok (purple), Fluzone HD (red) and Flucelvax (green). c Weight-loss curves for challenged mice (N = 5) that were immunized with saline (black), Fluad (blue), Flublok (purple), Fluzone HD (red) and Flucelvax (green). The black arrow indicates weight-loss on day three post H1N1 challenge. d Statistical analysis of weight-loss differences (N = 15 mice) between immunization groups for day 3 post H1N1 challenge (F (4, 70) = 49.44, p < 0.0001). Tukey’s multiple comparisons test with two-tailed significance found no statistical difference in weight-loss between Flublok and Fluad as denoted (i.e., ns.). Asterisks denote statistical differences (p < 0.05) in weight-loss between saline control as compared to vaccines (Flublok, Fluad, Fluzone HD, Flucelvax) and statistical differences between Flublok and Fluad versus the other vaccines, Fluzone HD and Flucelvax. e Mouse lung titers were determined by 50% Tissue Culture infectious Dose (TCID50) for tissues taken day three post-H1N1 challenge and compared between commercial influenza vaccines. Graphs display mean with standard error of the mean bars.Full size imageFig. 7: Histopathology in mice lungs following vaccination with commercial influenza vaccines and subsequent challenge with H1N1 influenza virus.a–f Images show immunohistochemistry (IHC) against the influenza nucleoprotein protein for different vaccination groups. Red arrows denote viral antigen areas. Images shown are from day 3 post H1N1 challenge for all groups. a Healthy lung control via immunization with saline and challenged with saline-BSA. b Pathogenic positive control via immunization with saline with challenge with H1N1 virus. c–f Immunization with the commercial influenza vaccines c Fluzone HD, d Flucelvax, e Flublok, and f Fluad and subsequent challenge with H1N1 virus. Lung samples were collected from two mice per condition group and the experiment was replicated (N = 4). All images at 10x magnification and display 100 μm scale bars.Full size imageLung samples were also examined by immunohistochemistry at day 3 post-viral challenge. An unbiased, blinded method was employed for analysis of histopathology of mouse lungs following H1N1 challenge (Supplementary Fig. 10). Processed samples indicated that when compared to the healthy-lung control (Fig. 7a), mice receiving saline instead of vaccine had large amounts of influenza virus NP antigen staining in lung sections (Fig. 7b, red arrows). Mice vaccinated with Fluzone HD and Flucelvax had similar distributions of viral antigen in the lungs. Animals given Flublok had lesser antigen distribution than Fluzone HD and Flucelvax. Fluad had the least amount of antigen detected in the lungs of all the vaccines tested. Fluad was visually the most similar to the healthy-lung control (Fig. 7).DiscussionInfluenza HA is a major target of the neutralizing antibody response to influenza virus, and antibodies elicited by the immunodominant HA head domain are evaded by antigenic drift in just a few influenza seasons33. Antibodies targeting the HA stem are often broadly reactive across influenza virus subtypes but are elicited in low amounts by seasonal influenza virus34. To understand if different vaccine formulations impact the nature of the antibody response and prevalence of cross-reactive stem-binding antibodies, we evaluated 4 subunit influenza vaccines that capture the varying methods of formulating HA for vaccination (i.e., Fluzone HD, Flucelvax, Flublok, Fluad) (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. 1). Recent studies using structure-guided nanoparticle designs for viral vaccines have indicated numerous important factors for glycoprotein display and immunogenicity. These factors may include glycoprotein pre/post-fusion conformation, glycoprotein spacing, and number of glycoproteins or multivalency of the nanoparticle28,35,36. However, these factors such as HA conformation, spacing and numbers have not been studied in terms of current influenza commercial vaccines in a side-by-side comparison. Other types of antigen display are currently being developed to enhance immunogenicity of vaccines, such as octahedral ferritin particles, to display the prefusion trimeric ectodomains of a multitude of different viral proteins such as influenza HA, human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) Env, and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spike28,36,37,38. Although commercial vaccines are given to millions of people world-wide, differences in stem epitope display and vaccine structure between a group of influenza vaccines generally have not been studied. Previous reports have been limited to biochemical or human/animal studies for individual commercial influenza vaccines21,39.In this work, we directly observe a variety of parameters that describe how epitopes are made available in commercial influenza vaccines. We started by quantitating epitope bioavailability via monoclonal antibody binding. By normalizing the concentration of H1 HA protein, we found that the Flublok vaccine had the highest fraction of H1 HA stem bound across the monoclonal stem antibodies examined, while Fluzone HD, Flucelvax and Fluad formulations varied in binding based upon the selected capture antibody (Fig. 5a). We also found differences in the induction of stem-targeted antibodies in mice, which did not follow the same trend as available stem epitopes in vaccine formulations (Fig. 5d–f). While Flublok exposed the most stem epitopes in vitro, it induced less HA stem-specific antibodies in mice. Meanwhile, Fluad which exposed similar or lower levels of stem epitopes in vitro as Flublok, elicited significantly more HA stem-specific antibodies in mice. Fluad also elicited the most HA head-specific antibodies, conferring it the strongest HA-specific antibody response overall. Fluzone HD contained the most non-HA viral components and offered the most heterogenous configurations of HA clusters, while inducing the least amount of head-specific HA antibodies.We found that HA complexes in commercial influenza vaccines did not exhibit any regular symmetry (Figs. 1, 3, 4). Different from HA starfish-like complexes found in the engineered HA ferritin nanoparticles28,36, commercial vaccines present a medley of arrangements for a given number of HAs, which are made possible by full-length HAs being embedded in a lipid component. Our structural studies suggests that in the vaccines, the HA molecules are in a prefusion state and that the mechanism of HA complex formation appears to be via aggregation of the hydrophobic transmembrane (TM) regions (Fig. 3g, h).Molecular models from 3D cryo-electron tomography indicate that in Flublok, starfish-like structures are bound together by hydrophobic TM regions which partition out of aqueous solution (Fig. 3a–i). In contrast, HA trimers in Fluad were arranged as a double ring with a disc shape that we refer to as a spiked nanodiscs (Fig. 4). This nanodisc structure is a different geometrical display of HA molecules than both the HA starfish arrangement and rigid nanoparticles, such as those scaffolded by ferritin28,36. The Fluad spiked-nanodisc structure could be a novel method of displaying viral glycoproteins that is optimized to present conserved stem epitopes. These larger spiked nanodiscs also contain more HA trimers than most nanoparticle scaffolds, perhaps equivalent to icosahedrally symmetric vehicles. Compared to other subunit vaccines, Fluad has higher multivalency of HA complexes (Fig. 4c vs 3 g). While Fluad complexes would have less multivalency than whole virus or virosomes, the particle concentration of these virus-sized complexes would also be lower and would require direct comparison to evaluate.Ideal spacing and presentation of antigen for immune stimulation has long been an interest when rationally designing vaccines35. Densely spaced antigens on a particle surface offer more binding sites to interact with immune system components, yet very densely packed antigens can occlude access to epitopes recessed on the antigen surface. IgG is comprised of three rigid domains: two Fab domains which each separately bind antigen, and an Fc domain that binds receptors and immune effectors. Bivalent binding by IgG can occur when epitopes are spaced between 4–16 nm apart32, resulting in high avidity binding. When antigens are densely spaced but not compatible with bivalent finding, Fc and Fab domains may sterically hinder IgG from binding neighboring antigens. The linkers between the three domains in IgG have preferred orientations, but are flexible to a degree that varies by antibody subtype31. Since the bound Fab domain is the only fragment of the IgG rigidly positioned by antigen binding, we employed a Monte Carlo method to directly evaluate the irregular molecular surfaces of HA trimers bound to stem-targeting Fab. We found that HA stem epitopes are readily occluded when HA molecules pack closely next to each other, yet stem epitopes become more available as the angle between HA trimers increases (Fig. 2). Thus, there is an interesting relationship between multivalency and epitope accessibility, as increased density of HA antigen can both occlude epitopes and offer more opportunity for bivalent binding. Meanwhile, smaller complexes with lower multivalency gain epitope accessibility through less HA being present, as well as greater particle curvature.Our simulations address only the rigid Fab domain, but the impact of full IgG or even IgM should also be considered. In supplementary work (Supplementary Fig. 11) we first used the 5 crystal structures of full-length IgG (PDB IDs 1HZH, 1IGT, 1IGY, 5DK3, 6GFE), which we aligned to representative poses of HA trimers illustrated in Fig. 2. When HA trimers were positioned at a 90 degree angle (Fig. 2b), we were surprised to find that the off-center attachment site of the Fc-Fab linker as it connects to the Fab domain often avoided steric clashes that were anticipated due to close proximity of bound Fab domains. As HA trimer orientations became parallel and the orientation of bound Fab domains approached 180 degrees, clashes were observed with either the Fc domain or the unbound Fab domain (Supplementary Fig. 11). These instances, where Fab domains were just beyond the range of bivalent binding yet still oriented in opposite directions, were the conformations most affected by the presence of the full-length IgG. Still, quantitation of this effect would be specific to antibody type and subtype, and would require rigorous knowledge of the linker length and flexibility, such as described for IgG131 and IgD40. In an intriguing case where IgG structure was resolved in bivalently-bound complexes of 4-, 5-, and 6-membered rings with its CD20 antigen, Fc domains were poorly resolved due to substantial flexibility even when both Fab domains were immobilized by antigen41. We conclude that while the physical presence of Fc and unbound Fab domains must play a role in the sterics of binding dense antigen, the significance is minimal for most binding orientations of this HA model system due to the Fc-Fab linker positioning and flexibility.Previous studies with viral glycoproteins, such as Epstein-Barr virus gp350 and influenza HA trimer, indicated that increasing multivalency via a ferritin nanoparticle yielded increased immunogenicity and vaccine efficacy in animal models36,42. For influenza commercial vaccines, our work suggests that low multivalency could have HA stem in vitro binding activity by anti-HA stem monoclonals like for Fluzone HD (Fig. 5a red dots), but not elicit higher levels of antibodies to the stem or cross-reactive ones to different HA subtypes in vivo (Fig. 5d–f). Fluzone HD contained HA starfish-like complexes of relatively low numbers of HA (i.e. low multivalency) (Fig. 1a, b). In contrast, Fluad had similar levels of in vitro binding by the human anti-stem broadly reactive antibody FI6v3 (Fig. 5a blue dots) yet elicited the highest levels of cross-reactive antibodies to the stem and to HA subtypes not a constituent in the vaccines (Fig. 5d–f). This ability of Fluad to elicit cross-reactive antibodies coincided with the observation by cryo-electron microscopy of the unique spiked nanodiscs, containing a variable number of HAs commonly over 50. The spiked-nanodisc structure is unique in how it displays parallel HA trimers, exposing stem epitopes around the disc’s perimeter in such a way as to promote multivalent binding specifically for stem epitopes. In creating these spiked nanodisc structures, the adjuvant may act to directly arrange the HA trimers and improve the elicitation of cross-reactive antibodies.Dominance of the immune response to highly variable epitopes on the HA head is a known challenge in influenza vaccine design, and is an important factor in limiting the effectiveness of immunity due to natural infection14. Whether or not HA stem epitopes are selected against in B cell maturation due to the nature of the HA protein itself is an ongoing question. While not outright solving this problem, we demonstrate in this work that even among full-length HA antigens that include the variable head epitopes, improvements can be made in targeting a greater fraction of the immune response to conserved stem epitopes (Fig. 5). Even though designed antigens may illicit only a stem epitope response, antibodies targeting the head typically neutralize virus much more effectively when the viral strain is matched to the vaccine14. Thus, it is desirable to understand how a single vaccine may elicit both head and stem antibodies in a way that neither response dominates over the other. Here, we have both described how four influenza vaccines differ in their organization structure of antigen, as well as the nature of their response, hopefully pointing the way for future vaccines to build upon the best of these characteristics.In conclusion, although all of the commercial influenza vaccines in this study contained full-length HA proteins there were differences in the number of HA molecules per particle (multivalency), spacing, and epitope display within HA complexes. Our results suggest that vaccine formulations, like Fluad, that specifically structure HA antigen into spiked-nanodisc displays can offer examples of how to improve multivalency and immunogenicity of HA subunit vaccines to formulate more efficacious influenza vaccines for pandemic preparedness and universal influenza vaccine development. More broadly, these structure-guided approaches to influenza subunit vaccines containing HA can be applied to viral glycoproteins from other viruses with pandemic potential such as HIV, Ebola, and SARS coronaviruses.MethodsNegative-stain electron microscopy (EM)Samples (e.g. Flucelvax, Fluzone HD, Flublok, and Fluad) were diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to an HA concentration of 10 µg/mL. EM sample grids were prepared by applying 5 µL of the sample to glow-discharged Formvar/carbon (F/C) 300 mesh grids. Excess sample was blotted with filter paper, then the sample was rinsed twice by dipping in deionized water and blotting with filter paper. The specimens were negatively stained by dipping the grid in 3% phosphotungstic acid at pH 7 for 1 min, blotted, rinsed one time by deionized water, blotted dry with filter paper, and then dried43. Data was acquired using a Tecnai 12 electron microscope (ThermoFisher) with a LaB6 filament operating at 100 kV and nominal magnifications of 67,000x, yielding a magnified pixel size of 1.8 Å/pixel. All images were recorded on a 4kx4k OneView camera (Gatan, Pleasaton, CA) using SerialEM software. Data for class averages was typically acquired in a single session lasting 1 to 2 hours, which yielded 100-200 micrographs44. For 2018–2019 Flucelvax, 134 micrographs (12,652 particles) were collected; for 2018–2019 Fluzone HD, 136 micrographs (15,739 particles) were collected; for 2018-2019 Flublok, 27 micrographs (4575 particles) were collected; and for 2018–2019 Fluad, 97 micrographs (949 particles) were collected.Negative stain EM data were processed using RELION3 v.3.1.245. The contrast transfer function (CTF) for each micrograph was estimated using CTFFIND4 software46. For 2D image averaging of whole vaccine particles, for each vaccine, 500-1,000 particles were manually picked. RELION3 2D classification was then used to generate auto-picking templates, which were used as references to repick particles on all micrographs, yielding a total of 10,000 to 20,000 particles that were extracted at a box size of 256 pixels. These particles were aligned and classified using RELION3 2D Classification to remove poorly resolved classes (e.g. false positive picks or poorly aligned particles) from the particle set. Results from the final round of 2D classification were used to characterize the sample.For 2D image averaging of individual HA proteins within vaccine particles, only manually picked particles were used to ensure HA proteins were isolated and proximal particles didn’t interfere with averages. 2017–2018 Flucelvax 176 particles were manually picked. For 2017–2018 Fluad, 135 particles were manually picked. For 2017–2018 Fluzone HD, 143 particles were manually picked. For 2022 Flublok, 152 particles were manually picked. At a resolution of 1.8 Å/pixel, particles from Fluad and Flucelvax were extracted at a box size of 176 pixels while particles from Fluzone HD and Flublok were extracted at a box size of 128 pixels. The smaller box sizes were used to avoid nearby particles. These particles were aligned and classified using RELION3 2D classification with a single class. Classifications with 2, 3, or 4 classes were also investigated, but results did not offer further insight. Fiji software47 was used to measure HA particle height in 2D class averages, and to produce an intensity profile along the height of the HA particle. Final class averages were manually rotated to vertically align HA to facilitate comparison across vaccines. Images of HA reference structures were generated using Chimera48 and 2D density projections from 3D volumes were made with EMAN2 v.2.9149.Monte Carlo simulationThe crystal structure of HA in complex with stem Fab C179, PDB code 4HLZ, was used to model steric clashes between stem antibodies when bound to HA. Using the PERL scripting language, coordinates for the complex were rotated a random amount, then translated a random amount up to 25 nm and written to a PDB file including the rotated HA complex and a reference HA complex. The same wrapper PERL script then calls Chimera48 to measure distances and angles between these two HA complexes, as specified by a Chimera command file. Steric clashes between these two HA complexes were scored using the software MolProbability Probe50. A cycle consisting of model generation, measurement, and clash scoring constituted one iteration of the Monte Carlo Method, and 500,000 such iterations were run. Plots were generated using the statistical software R51.Cryo-electron tomographyCryo-electron microscopy grids for 2018-2019 Flublok and 2018-2019 Fluad were prepared separately using similar procedures. Samples were mixed with 5 or 10 nm gold particles as fiducials. Using a Leica EM GP plunge freezer (Leica Microsystems), aliquots of 4 µL of sample were applied to glow-discharged, Quantifoil C Flat R2/2 200 mesh grids, blotted for 1.5 seconds in 99% humidity chamber, and plunge-frozen in liquid ethane. Flublok and Fluad tilt series were collected using Falcon II and Falcon 3 cameras on Titan Krios microscopes operating at 300 kV using a Volta phase plate (VPP) (FEI). Zero loss energy filtered data was collected with a 70 μm objective aperture at 3.3 Å pixel size (nominal magnification 26,000x) with a defocus range of −3.5 to −5.5 μm. Additionally, Fluad tilt series data was collected with a Titan Krios microscope (ThermoFisher) operating at 300 kV but with a GIF-2002 energy filter (Gatan Inc.) with a slit width of 20 eV, coupled with a Gatan K2 camera (Gatan Inc.), 2.9 Å pixel size (nominal magnification 29,000x) and a − 2.5 μm defocus. All single-axis tilt series data were collected over − /+ 60° with 2° tilt increments. Tilt series datasets were collected under low-dose conditions with a cumulative electron dose of 100 e-/Å2. Images within the tilt series were mutually aligned by using the gold particles as fiducial markers and the 3D volumes (tomograms) were reconstructed as implemented the IMOD v.4.10.16 and EMAN2 v.2.91 software packages52,53.Docking of HA trimers into subtomograms was performed using Chimera48. A total of 20 subtomograms of Flublok and 7 subtomograms of Fluad were analyzed. Scripted commands in chimera were used to measure distances and angles between HA trimers. PERL scripts were used to parse data in preparation for plotting, and R was used to generate plots.For subtomogram averages of Fluad discs, particles were picked from tomograms that had been reconstructed with EMAN253. Particles were extracted and subtomogram averaged using RELION2 v.2.154. To resolve the central lipid comprising the discs, particle box sizes was chosen to be 64 pixels, which was 346 Å at a working pixel size of 5.4 Å/pixel. To arrive at a single best-fit measurement of the disc thickness, D64 symmetry was imposed. 58 nanodiscs were used in the final subtomogram average structure.Western blot for vaccine composition and NA quantitationDenatured N1 NA protein c26 Cal09 WT was provided by the Vaccine Research Center (NIH, Bethesda, MD) and loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel (4-12% Bis-Tris) at twofold dilutions beginning at 120 ng. Denatured vaccines (Fluad, Flublok, Fluzone HD, Flucelvax) and recombinant H1 HA A/Michigan/45/15 (catalogue number 3006, Protein Sciences) were loaded at an amount of 0.3 μg. Gel electrophoresis was run at 200 V for 50 min to separate vaccine components. Bands were transferred to nitrocellulose membrane via the iblot transfer system (Thermofisher) and probed with primary antibody and florescent tagged secondary antibody via lateral flow (ibind system, Thermofisher). For vaccine antigen composition western blots, primary antibodies were anti-H1 polyclonal PS6000 (Protein Sciences, 1:1000 dilution), anti-H3 polyclonal PS6001, (Protein Sciences, 1:1000 dilution), anti-HB polyclonal PS6003 (Protein Sciences, 1:1000 dilution), anti-NA polyclonal PA5-32238 (GeneTex, 1:1000 dilution), anti-M1 monoclonal HB64 (American Type Culture Collection clone M2-1C6-4R3, 3.5 µg/ml), and anti-NP monoclonal HB65 (American Type Culture Collection clone H16-L10-4R5, 3.5 µg/ml). For NA quantitation, NA antibody PA5-32238 (GeneTex, 1:1000 dilution) was used. Membranes were visualized on the c600 imager (Azure biosystems) for 1 sec and 30 sec47. NA standard curve was generated using Prism (GraphPad Software) and the NA concentration for the vaccines was extrapolated. Blots were done in duplicate to ensure accuracy.Propagation and titration of H1 virusMadin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) Cells, London Line (FR-58) was obtained through the International Reagent Resource (IRR). These cells were grown in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with FBS 10%, Pen Strep (Gibco). Cells were infected with A/Michigan/45/2015(H1N1) pdm09 (IRR, FR-1483), at 37 °C/72 hr, using DMEM without addition of FBS or antibiotic. Then, the cell culture supernatants were obtained by centrifugation at 1800 x g, at 4°C, for 20 min to remove cell debris. Samples were concentrated by ultracentrifugation at 50,000 x g, 8 °C for 2 h, and the pellet was resuspended in 500 μl of Phosphate-Buffered Saline (PBS). The virus inoculum was back-titrated to verify the accuracy of the hemagglutination activity units (HAU) to 64 HAU/50 μl. Fifty microliters volume of virus was added in the first well, then 2-fold serial dilutions in V-well microtiter plates were incubated with 0.75% turkey RBCs for 30 min at RT. After incubation was complete, individual plates were placed in the Cypher One instrument (InDevR) for imaging.ELISA for epitope accessibilityStem monoclonal antibodies (FI6v3, CR6261, and C179 provided by the Vaccine Research Center, NIH, Bethesda, MD) were applied to microtiter plates (immulon 2 B, Thermo Fisher) at 1.25 μg/ml to act as a capture antigen and incubated overnight at 4 oC. Plates were washed between all experimental step with PBS plus 0.1% tween 20 (405 TS ELISA plate washer, Agilent Technologies). Blocking (1% omniblok, AmericanBio, Inc., and 0.1% tween 20 in PBS) occurred for 30 min at 20 oC prior to application of commercial vaccines or rHA at 1.25 μg/ml of H1 HA or saline for 2 h before washing and probing with a rabbit polyclonal antibody to H1 HA (PS6000, Protein Sciences, 1:1000 dilution) for an additional 2 h. Plates were than incubated at 37oC for 1 h with a goat anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase (HRP) conjugated secondary antibody (goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L), Thermo Fisher). Colorimetric detection occurred for 15 min at 20 oC and absorbance was read at 405 nm (1-Step 2,2’azinobis-[3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid] diammonium salt (ABTS), Thermo Fisher) at 405 nm. Samples were run in triplicate. A background control was subtracted and the data is displayed as mean with standard error of the mean (SEM) bars using Prism (GraphPad).For determination of mouse sera immunogenicity, antigen was applied to 96-well plates and incubated overnight at 4 °C (1.25 μg/mL). Recombinant H1 head antigen was obtained from the International Reagent Resource (IRR), catalog number FR695. Recombinant H1 stem antigen comprised mostly of HA2 sequence only was kindly provided by Jeffery Taubenberger from the Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, NIH NIAID. Recombinant H2 antigen was obtained from IRR, catalog number FR700. Additional HA antigen was obtained from Protein Sciences (H7 A/Anhui/01/2013, H1 A/Michigan/45/2015, H3 A/HongKong/1408/2014, and B Victoria B/Brisbane/60/2008). Plates followed a similar procedure as above for washes, blocking, incubations and detection. Primary serum samples from vaccinated mice were plated at an 1:125 dilution with two-fold dilutions following. Endpoint titer levels were statistically defined per plate55 as the lowest sera dilution still differing from the saline group, an endpoint titer of 2.01 Log(reciprocal dilution factor) indicates no difference from the saline group at the highest sera concentration tested. Statistical analysis was conducted for analysis of variance (ANOVA) using Prism (GraphPad), statistically significant differences are denoted with an asterisk to represent a significance level (p) less than 0.05.To compare binding between rHA and HA displayed on virus, ELISA plates were incubated overnight at 4oC with rHA (2 μg/ml) or virus (ranging from 8 to 64 HAU/50 μl56). Plates were washed and blocked prior to application of primary antibody: either monoclonal stem antibodies (10 μg/ml) or sera (1:125 dilution). Finally, plates were detected with the appropriate HRP conjugated secondary and ABTS. Samples were run in duplicate. A background control was subtracted and the data is displayed as mean with standard error of the mean (SEM) bars using Prism (GraphPad).Animal immunization and mouse challengeRabbit studies were conducted by Life Sciences Solutions (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were in accordance with the Animal Care and Use Committee (ACUC) of Cocalico Biologicals, Inc. New Zealand White rabbits (Cocalico Biologicals) began experimentation at approximately two to four months of age. Polyclonal rabbit sera were collected for 1–2 male rabbits per vaccine (Fluad, Flublok, Fluzone HD, or Flucelvax). Rabbits were injected intramuscularly with a total of 1 ml of vaccine on days 0, 14, and 42 with blood collection occurring immediately prior to immunization and final blood collection occurring on day 56 (Supplementary Fig. 6c).All mouse experiments were performed under protocols approved by the ACUC at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). Mouse immunogenicity studies were conducted with 25 female BALB/c mice (Taconic Biosciences) aged 8–10 weeks that were randomly assigned to a vaccine group. Female mice were utilized for in vivo experimentation due to their higher immunogenetic response following vaccination57,58,59. Groups of mice (N = 5) received one of five types of intramuscular injections for immunization on day 0 (prime) and day 21 (boost): saline, Fluad, Flublok, Fluzone HD, and Flucelvax. Mice were injected intramuscularly (50 μL/leg) at the manufacturer’s supplied concentration. Mice were weighed weekly to ensure health with bleeds occurring on day 0, day 14, and day 35 to track immunogenicity.On day 42 mice were anesthetized and intranasal challenged with 25 μl of influenza virus H1N1 A/Michigan/45/2015 at 10xMLD50 (50% Mouse Lethal Dose). The initial survival experiments used five mice per vaccine group and were observed twice daily for survival criteria (humane endpoints observed following a 30% decrease from initial body weight) until day 56, when all surviving mice were humanely euthanized. Differences in survival rates were compared using a Kaplan–Meier survival analysis (Graph Pad Prism). A replicate study was conducted with mice being euthanized 3 days post challenge for the collection of lung tissue for pathology. A control mouse group for pathology studies received vaccinations with saline on day 0 and day 21, and challenge with saline supplemented with 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSS-BSA) on day 42.Determination of influenza virus mouse lung titerTCID50 assays were conducted by infecting the ATL isolate of Madin-Darby canine kidney cells (MDCK-ATL) cells with 1:5 serial dilutions of each mouse lung homogenate in duplicate in serum-free minimum essential media (MEM) with 1 μl/ml N-p-tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-treated trypsin and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 96 h. Cytopathic effect (CPE) was determined following incubation by staining with crystal violet and TCID50 was calculated using the Reed-Muench method60.ImmunohistochemistryFormalin-fixed paraffin-embedded mouse lung sections were labeled for immunohistochemical staining using a rabbit polyclonal anti-Influenza A virus nucleoprotein antibody, CAT# GTX125989 (GeneTex). Staining was carried out on the Bond RX (Leica Biosystems) platform according to manufacturer-supplied protocols. Briefly, 5 µm-thick sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated. Heat-induced epitope retrieval (HIER) was performed using Epitope Retrieval Solution 2, pH 9.0, heated to 100 °C for 20 minutes. The specimen was then incubated with hydrogen peroxide to quench endogenous peroxidase activity prior to applying the primary antibody at a dilution of 1:4000. Detection with 3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DAB) chromogen was completed using the Bond Polymer Refine Detection kit (Leica Biosystems). Slides were finally cleared through gradient alcohol and xylene washes prior to mounting and coverslipping. Sections were examined by light microscopy using an Olympus BX51 microscope and photomicrographs were taken using an Olympus DP73 camera. An unbiased blinded then unblinded approach was used to analyze the immunization conditions of mice using commercial influenza vaccines with histopathology after H1N1 viral challenge. Pathology experiments were repeated to ensure accuracy, N = 4.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The source data underlying Figs. 2a, 3j, 4g, 5a,c,d,e,f and 6b,c,d,e and Supplementary Figs. 4i,j, 5c, and 6a,b,d are provided in SourceData.xlsx inside SourceData.zip. Tomographic reconstructions have been deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/emdb/, under the following accession numbers: Fluad spiked nanodisc, “EMDB-27232”; Flublok starfish, “EMD-27233”. PDB files used in this study were downloaded from the Protein Data Bank: https://www.rcsb.org/, including “1HZH”, “1IGT”, “1IGY”, “5DK3”, “6GFE”, “4HLZ”. Due to limited available volumes, mouse sera generated in this study are unable to be made generally available. Source data are provided with this paper. Code availability PERL and R scripts to reproduce Fig. 2a are included in the supplementary data file SourceData.zip. ReferencesNichol, K. L. et al. The effectiveness of vaccination against influenza in healthy, working adults. N. Engl. J. Med 333, 889–893 (1995).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Dugan, H. L., Henry, C. & Wilson, P. C. Aging and influenza vaccine-induced immunity. Cell Immunol. 348, 103998 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Iuliano, A. D. et al. Estimates of global seasonal influenza-associated respiratory mortality: a modelling study. Lancet 391, 1285–1300 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar Smith, G. J. et al. Origins and evolutionary genomics of the 2009 swine-origin H1N1 influenza A epidemic. Nature 459, 1122–1125 (2009).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Becker, C. Influenza economics. Providers and suppliers who usually reap big profits during flu season might find that a pandemic could backfire on their bottom lines. Mod. Health. 35, 6–7 (2005). 16, 1. Google Scholar Calder, L. J., Wasilewski, S., Berriman, J. A. & Rosenthal, P. B. Structural organization of a filamentous influenza A virus. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 10685–10690 (2010).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Harris, A. et al. Influenza virus pleiomorphy characterized by cryoelectron tomography. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 19123–19127 (2006).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pinto, L. H., Holsinger, L. J. & Lamb, R. A. Influenza virus M2 protein has ion channel activity. Cell 69, 517–528 (1992).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Cox, R. J. Correlates of protection to influenza virus, where do we go from here? Hum. Vaccin Immunother. 9, 405–408 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hobson, D., Curry, R. L., Beare, A. S. & Ward-Gardner, A. The role of serum haemagglutination-inhibiting antibody in protection against challenge infection with influenza A2 and B viruses. J. Hyg. (Lond.) 70, 767–777 (1972).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Christensen, S. R. et al. Assessing the Protective Potential of H1N1 Influenza Virus Hemagglutinin Head and Stalk Antibodies in Humans. J. Virol. 93, e02134–18 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kirkpatrick, E., Qiu, X., Wilson, P. C., Bahl, J. & Krammer, F. The influenza virus hemagglutinin head evolves faster than the stalk domain. Sci. Rep. 8, 10432 (2018).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nafziger, A. N. & Pratt, D. S. Seasonal influenza vaccination and technologies. J. Clin. Pharm. 54, 719–731 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Zost, S. J., Wu, N. C., Hensley, S. E. & Wilson, I. A. Immunodominance and Antigenic Variation of Influenza Virus Hemagglutinin: Implications for Design of Universal Vaccine Immunogens. J. Infect. Dis. 219, S38–s45 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kolpe, A., Schepens, B., Fiers, W. & Saelens, X. M2-based influenza vaccines: recent advances and clinical potential. Expert Rev. Vaccines 16, 123–136 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen, Y. Q. et al. Influenza Infection in Humans Induces Broadly Cross-Reactive and Protective Neuraminidase-Reactive Antibodies. Cell 173, 417–429.e10 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stadlbauer, D. et al. Broadly protective human antibodies that target the active site of influenza virus neuraminidase. Science 366, 499–504 (2019).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hannoun, C. The evolving history of influenza viruses and influenza vaccines. Expert Rev. Vaccines 12, 1085–1094 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Webster, R. G. & Laver, W. G. Influenza virus subunit vaccines: immunogenicity and lack of toxicity for rabbits of ether- and detergent-disrupted virus. J. Immunol. 96, 596–605 (1966).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lamb, Y. N. Cell-Based Quadrivalent Inactivated Influenza Virus Vaccine (Flucelvax(®) Tetra/Flucelvax Quadrivalent(®)): A Review in the Prevention of Influenza. Drugs 79, 1337–1348 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kavian, N. et al. Assessment of enhanced influenza vaccination finds that FluAd conveys an advantage in mice and older adults. Clin. Transl. Immunol. 9, e1107 (2020).Article Google Scholar Richards, K. A. et al. Recombinant HA-based vaccine outperforms split and subunit vaccines in elicitation of influenza-specific CD4 T cells and CD4 T cell-dependent antibody responses in humans. NPJ Vaccines 5, 77 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Buckland, B. et al. Technology transfer and scale-up of the Flublok recombinant hemagglutinin (HA) influenza vaccine manufacturing process. Vaccine 32, 5496–5502 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Treanor, J. J. et al. Protective efficacy of a trivalent recombinant hemagglutinin protein vaccine (FluBlok(R)) against influenza in healthy adults: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Vaccine 29, 7733–7739 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gallagher, J. R. et al. Characterization of hemagglutinin antigens on influenza virus and within vaccines using electron microscopy. Vaccines (Basel) 6, 31 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar Skehel, J. J. The characterization of subviral particles derived from influenza virus. Virology 44, 409–417 (1971).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wei, C. J. et al. Next-generation influenza vaccines: opportunities and challenges. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 19, 239–252 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yassine, H. M. et al. Hemagglutinin-stem nanoparticles generate heterosubtypic influenza protection. Nat. Med 21, 1065–1070 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Calabro, S. et al. The adjuvant effect of MF59 is due to the oil-in-water emulsion formulation, none of the individual components induce a comparable adjuvant effect. Vaccine 31, 3363–3369 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wilkins, A. L. et al. AS03- and MF59-Adjuvanted Influenza Vaccines in Children. Front Immunol. 8, 1760 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, X. et al. 3D Structural Fluctuation of IgG1 Antibody Revealed by Individual Particle Electron Tomography. Sci. Rep. 5, 9803 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shaw, A. et al. Binding to nanopatterned antigens is dominated by the spatial tolerance of antibodies. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 184–190 (2019).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, N. C. & Wilson, I. A. Influenza Hemagglutinin Structures and Antibody Recognition. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 10, a038778 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar He, X. S. et al. Heterovariant cross-reactive B-cell responses induced by the 2009 pandemic influenza virus A subtype H1N1 vaccine. J. Infect. Dis. 207, 288–296 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Graham, B. S., Gilman, M. S. A. & McLellan, J. S. Structure-Based Vaccine Antigen Design. Annu Rev. Med. 70, 91–104 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kanekiyo, M. et al. Self-assembling influenza nanoparticle vaccines elicit broadly neutralizing H1N1 antibodies. Nature 499, 102–106 (2013).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar He, L. et al. Presenting native-like trimeric HIV-1 antigens with self-assembling nanoparticles. Nat. Commun. 7, 12041 (2016).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, B. et al. A platform incorporating trimeric antigens into self-assembling nanoparticles reveals SARS-CoV-2-spike nanoparticles to elicit substantially higher neutralizing responses than spike alone. Sci. Rep. 10, 18149 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Koroleva, M. et al. Heterologous viral protein interactions within licensed seasonal influenza virus vaccines. NPJ Vaccines 5, 3 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sun, Z. et al. Semi-extended solution structure of human myeloma immunoglobulin D determined by constrained X-ray scattering. J. Mol. Biol. 353, 155–173 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rouge, L. et al. Structure of CD20 in complex with the therapeutic monoclonal antibody rituximab. Science 367, 1224–1230 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kanekiyo, M. et al. Rational Design of an Epstein-Barr Virus Vaccine Targeting the Receptor-Binding Site. Cell 162, 1090–1100 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gallagher, J. R., Kim, A. J., Gulati, N. M. & Harris, A. K. Negative-Stain Transmission Electron Microscopy of Molecular Complexes for Image Analysis by 2D Class Averaging. Curr. Protoc. Microbiol 54, e90 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Schorb, M., Haberbosch, I., Hagen, W. J. H., Schwab, Y. & Mastronarde, D. N. Software tools for automated transmission electron microscopy. Nat. Methods 16, 471–477 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zivanov, J. et al. New tools for automated high-resolution cryo-EM structure determination in RELION-3. Elife 7, e42166 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rohou, A. & Grigorieff, N. CTFFIND4: Fast and accurate defocus estimation from electron micrographs. J. Struct. Biol. 192, 216–221 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pettersen, E. F. et al. UCSF Chimera–a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. J. Comput Chem. 25, 1605–1612 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Tang, G. et al. EMAN2: an extensible image processing suite for electron microscopy. J. Struct. Biol. 157, 38–46 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen, V. B. et al. MolProbity: all-atom structure validation for macromolecular crystallography. Acta Crystallogr D. Biol. Crystallogr 66, 12–21 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Team, R.C. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. in R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. (2019).Kremer, J. R., Mastronarde, D. N. & McIntosh, J. R. Computer visualization of three-dimensional image data using IMOD. J. Struct. Biol. 116, 71–76 (1996).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Galaz-Montoya, J. G., Flanagan, J., Schmid, M. F. & Ludtke, S. J. Single particle tomography in EMAN2. J. Struct. Biol. 190, 279–290 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bharat, T. A. & Scheres, S. H. Resolving macromolecular structures from electron cryo-tomography data using subtomogram averaging in RELION. Nat. Protoc. 11, 2054–2065 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Frey, A., Di Canzio, J. & Zurakowski, D. A statistically defined endpoint titer determination method for immunoassays. J. Immunol. Methods 221, 35–41 (1998).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Andrews, S. F. et al. Immune history profoundly affects broadly protective B cell responses to influenza. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 316ra192 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fink, A. L., Engle, K., Ursin, R. L., Tang, W. Y. & Klein, S. L. Biological sex affects vaccine efficacy and protection against influenza in mice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 12477–12482 (2018).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Klein, S. L., Hodgson, A. & Robinson, D. P. Mechanisms of sex disparities in influenza pathogenesis. J. Leukoc. Biol. 92, 67–73 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Denly, L. The effect of sex on responses to influenza vaccines. Hum. Vaccin Immunother. 17, 1396–1402 (2021).Article PubMed Google Scholar REED, L. J. & MUENCH, H. A simple method of estimating fifty percent endpoints. Am. J. Epidemiol. 27, 493–497 (1938).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 1ZIAAI001180, AKH. We thank Jeffery Taubenberger and Jae-keun Park for kindly providing the headless trimeric stem protein and the International Reagent Resource for HA proteins. We thank Masaru Kanekiyo and Barney Graham for providing stem antibodies. We also thank Vinod Nair, Cindi Schwartz, Elizabeth Fischer, and Rick Huang for help in cryo-EM data collection. This work utilized the computational resources of the NIH HPC Biowulf cluster (http://hpc.nih.gov), and the Office of Cyber Infrastructure and Computational Biology (OCICB) High-Performance Computing (HPC) cluster at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), Bethesda, MD.FundingOpen Access funding provided by the National Institutes of Health (NIH).Author informationAuthor notesUdana TorianPresent address: Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, 37 Convent Drive, Room 306C, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USAIan N. MoorePresent address: Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory University, 954 Gatewood Rd NE, Atlanta, GA, 30329 37, USAThese authors contributed equally: Mallory L. Myers, John R. Gallagher.Authors and AffiliationsStructural Informatics Unit, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, Room 6351, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USAMallory L. Myers, John R. Gallagher, Alexander J. Kim, Walker H. Payne, Samantha Maldonado-Puga, Haralabos Assimakopoulos, Udana Torian & Audray K. HarrisInfectious Disease Pathogenesis Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 33 North Drive, Room BN25, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USAKevin W. Bock & Ian N. MooreAuthorsMallory L. MyersView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJohn R. GallagherView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlexander J. KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWalker H. PayneView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSamantha Maldonado-PugaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHaralabos AssimakopoulosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKevin W. BockView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarUdana TorianView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIan N. MooreView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAudray K. HarrisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsM.M. designed the in vivo experimental studies, ELISA experiments and western blots. J.G. designed the EM experiments and Monte Carlo simulations. A.K., W.P., H.A. and J.G. collected and analyzed EM data. S.M.-P. and U.T. grew viral reagents and conducted titer experiments. A.H., K.B., and I.M. conducted and interpreted the pathology experiments. M.M., J.G. and A.H. designed the study and experiments and wrote the paper. All authors contributed to editing the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Audray K. Harris.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests defined as financial and non-financial interests (including but not limited to funding, employment, stocks, shares, patents, personal or professional relationships with individuals or institutions, and unpaid membership advocacy) that could be perceived to directly undermine the objectivity, integrity, and value of a publication, or could be seen as having an influence on the judgments and actions of authors with regard to objective data presentation, analysis, and interpretation. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary informationReporting SummaryDescription of additional supplementary filesSupplementary Movie 1Supplementary Movie 2Supplementary Movie 3Peer Review FileSource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleMyers, M.L., Gallagher, J.R., Kim, A.J. et al. Commercial influenza vaccines vary in HA-complex structure and in induction of cross-reactive HA antibodies. Nat Commun 14, 1763 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37162-zDownload citationReceived: 25 June 2022Accepted: 03 March 2023Published: 30 March 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37162-zShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyEPI-WIN webinar: Influenza – avian influenza H5: its evolution and associated risk Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English العربية 中文 Français Русский Español Donate Donate Home Health Topics All topicsABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Resources Fact sheets Facts in pictures Multimedia Podcasts Publications Questions and answers Tools and toolkits Popular Dengue Endometriosis Excessive heat Herpes Mental disorders Mpox Countries All countriesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Regions Africa Americas Europe Eastern Mediterranean South-East Asia Western Pacific WHO in countries Data by country Country presence Country strengthening Country cooperation strategies Newsroom All news News releases Statements Campaigns Events Feature stories Press conferences Speeches Commentaries Photo library Headlines Emergencies Focus on Cholera Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Greater Horn of Africa Israel and occupied Palestinian territory Mpox Sudan Ukraine Latest Disease Outbreak News Situation reports Weekly Epidemiological Record WHO in emergencies Surveillance Operations Research Funding Partners Health emergency appeal International Health Regulations Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee Data Dashboards Triple Billion Progress Health Inequality Monitor Delivery for impact COVID-19 dashboard Data collection Classifications SCORE Surveys Civil registration and vital statistics Routine health information systems Harmonized health facility assessment GIS centre for health Reports World Health Statistics UHC global monitoring report About WHO About WHO Partnerships Committees and advisory groups Collaborating centres Technical teams Organizational structure Who we are Our work Activities Initiatives General Programme of Work WHO Academy Funding Investment in WHO WHO Foundation Accountability External audit Financial statements Internal audit and investigations Programme Budget Results reports Governance Governing bodies World Health Assembly Executive Board Member States Portal Home/ Newsroom/ Events/ Detail/ EPI-WIN webinar: Influenza – avian influenza H5: its evolution and associated risk EPI-WIN webinar: Influenza – avian influenza H5: its evolution and associated risk 29 March 2023 12:00 – 13:00 CET As part of the WHO EPI-WIN webinar series on influenza, this webinar will focus on the H5 avian influenza, how it evolves, and the risk associated with it for humans, including H5N1.Dr Richard Webby's presentationSpeakers:Dr Sylvie Briand, Director, Epidemic and Pandemic Preparedness and Prevention (EPP), WHODr Ron A.M. Fouchier, Professor Molecular Virology, Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, The NetherlandsDr Richard Webby, Director, WHO Collaborating Centre for Studies on the Ecology of Influenza in Animals and Birds, St Jude Children’s Research Hospital, USAModeration:Dr Wenqing Zhang, Unit Head, Global Influenza Programme, WHOPresentations:Dr Ron A.M. Fouchier (Download PDF)Dr Richard Webby (Download PDF)Q&A:Participants will be able to submit questions during the webinar by using Zoom's "Q&A" feature. You may also submit them in advance by sending them to epi-win@who.int. Related Global Influenza ProgrammeEPI-WIN: WHO Information Network for EpidemicsEPI-WIN webinarsEPI-WIN updates Events EPI-WIN webinar: Influenza vaccines: what makes them work 1 March 2023 13:00 – 14:00 CET EPI-WIN webinar: The current global influenza outbreak: what we are doing and what it means for pandemic influenza 18 January 2023 12:00 – 13:00 CET Regions Africa Americas Eastern Mediterranean Europe South-East Asia Western Pacific Policies Cybersecurity Ethics Information disclosure Permissions and licensing Preventing sexual exploitation Terms of use About us Careers Frequently asked questions Library Newsletters Procurement Publications Contact us Report misconduct Privacy policy © 2024 WHONext-generation influenza vaccines show greater impact and cost-effectiveness, study suggests Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Next-generation influenza vaccines show greater impact and cost-effectiveness, study suggests Download PDF Copy By Dr. Chinta SidharthanReviewed by Lily Ramsey, LLMMar 28 2023 In a recent study published in the BMC Medicine Journal, researchers conducted a modeling study to evaluate the cost-effectiveness and health impacts of the next-generation vaccines against influenza in Kenya. Image Credit: Riccardo Mayer / Shutterstock Background Influenza is highly prevalent among children below the age of five in Kenya. The recurrent peaks of influenza infections in sub-tropical and tropical regions and the occurrence of infections throughout the year make the choice of vaccine formulation (southern or northern hemisphere vaccine) and the decision of whether or not to vaccinate challenging. This difficulty is exacerbated by the short-lived and strain-specific immunity granted by the current vaccines. Based on the willingness-to-pay threshold, the current vaccines are not cost-effective since the presence of multiple influenza strains and the inconsistent seasonality of infections necessitate revaccinations every year. Various next-generation vaccines, such as those using nano-particles and messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), have been focusing on conserved proteins in the influenza virus, which might stimulate T-cell responses, reducing the need for annual vaccinations. Mathematical models involving transmission dynamics, interventions, and control strategies are ideal for evaluating whether these next-generation vaccines could be cost-effective. About the study The present study used Kenya's data on severe acute respiratory illness between 2010 and 2018 and a disease transmission model to evaluate next-generation vaccines with broader cross-protection, longer immunity, and higher efficacy. Four models were evaluated in the study. The first model, the vaccination model, does not consider the prior vaccination or infection status while examining the level of vaccine-induced immunity. The population is considered susceptible to influenza, vaccinated and susceptible, or vaccinated and recovered from influenza. The epidemic model (second model) used existing data to identify epidemic periods specific to 11 subtypes. Influenza epidemics were defined based on the proportion of subtype-specific cases with positive test results greater than the weekly average during the study period. The third model used data on patients hospitalized with severe acute respiratory illness between 2010 and 2018 to determine the epidemiology of influenza, and the model was based on the background force of infection. Finally, the fourth model analyzed the cost-effectiveness of several vaccine scenarios compared to those without vaccines. Additionally, the health outcomes associated with various vaccine scenarios are calculated based on disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) weighted for mild upper respiratory tract infections, moderate and severe lower respiratory tract infections, and mortality. Related StoriesUS study uncovers antiviral resistance in swine-origin influenza, urging enhanced pandemic surveillanceSeasonal influenza adapted and evolved during the COVID-19 pandemicWHO announces recommended viral composition for 2025 influenza vaccinesThe cost-effectiveness was determined based on each DALY's median incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) and the median incremental net monetary benefit (INMB). These were used to compare each vaccine and no-vaccine scenario across the ten years. The highest INMB and lowest ICER scenario would be the most cost-effective. Results The results suggested that based on the assumed willingness-to-pay threshold and the characteristics of the vaccine, next-generation vaccines could provide cost-effective protection against influenza with a more significant impact than those exhibited by the current vaccines. Number of weekly reported cases during epidemic and inter-epidemic time periods. Epidemic periods are highlighted in brown, and periods used to estimate the background force of infection are shown in grey. B Model projections of cumulative number of infections (median and 95% CrI) by vaccine scenario The cost-effectiveness is higher than the current vaccines for even incrementally better vaccines that show a slightly longer duration of immunity and greater breadth of protection. Universal vaccines, which are thought to provide broader and more long-lived immunity, are estimated to avert 66% of influenza infections compared to a no-vaccine scenario. In comparison, the current vaccines are seen to prevent only 29% of influenza infections. In comparison, even minimally improved vaccines prevent 41% of infections. The ICER values for the current and improved influenza vaccines are 10.55 and 1.60–2.38 times higher compared to universal vaccines, respectively. Universal vaccines also have 2.50 higher INMB values than the improved influenza vaccines at willingness-to-pay thresholds of $623 (United States dollars). At the willingness-to-pay threshold of $5,738, the threshold at which current influenza vaccines are cost-effective, the universal vaccines have a 4.39 times higher INMB value. Conclusions The study provides important evidence to facilitate country-level decision-making about introducing next-generation vaccines. It highlights that next-generation vaccines will likely have a much greater impact and better cost-effective outcomes than currently available vaccines. Overall, the results suggested that out of the tested next-generation vaccines, universal influenza vaccines present the most cost-effective option for protection against influenza, with a median cost of $5.16 or less for one vaccine dose. Additionally, the study demonstrated the advantage of using mathematical models and cost-effectiveness thresholds in evaluating whether improved vaccines present viable health intervention options. Journal reference: Waterlow, N. et al. (2023) "Potential health and economic impact of paediatric vaccination using next-generation influenza vaccines in Kenya: a modelling study", BMC Medicine, 21(1). doi: 10.1186/s12916-023-02830-w. https://bmcmedicine.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12916-023-02830-w Posted in: Child Health News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News | Pharmaceutical News Tags: Cell, Children, Disability, Efficacy, Epidemiology, immunity, Influenza, Medicine, Mortality, Respiratory, Respiratory Illness, Respiratory Tract Infections, Ribonucleic Acid, Severe Acute Respiratory, T-Cell, Vaccine, Virus Comments (0) Written byDr. Chinta SidharthanChinta Sidharthan is a writer based in Bangalore, India. Her academic background is in evolutionary biology and genetics, and she has extensive experience in scientific research, teaching, science writing, and herpetology. Chinta holds a Ph.D. in evolutionary biology from the Indian Institute of Science and is passionate about science education, writing, animals, wildlife, and conservation. For her doctoral research, she explored the origins and diversification of blindsnakes in India, as a part of which she did extensive fieldwork in the jungles of southern India. She has received the Canadian Governor General’s bronze medal and Bangalore University gold medal for academic excellence and published her research in high-impact journals. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APASidharthan, Chinta. (2023, March 28). Next-generation influenza vaccines show greater impact and cost-effectiveness, study suggests. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20230328/Next-generation-influenza-vaccines-show-greater-impact-and-cost-effectiveness-study-suggests.aspx.MLASidharthan, Chinta. "Next-generation influenza vaccines show greater impact and cost-effectiveness, study suggests". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20230328/Next-generation-influenza-vaccines-show-greater-impact-and-cost-effectiveness-study-suggests.aspx>.ChicagoSidharthan, Chinta. "Next-generation influenza vaccines show greater impact and cost-effectiveness, study suggests". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20230328/Next-generation-influenza-vaccines-show-greater-impact-and-cost-effectiveness-study-suggests.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardSidharthan, Chinta. 2023. Next-generation influenza vaccines show greater impact and cost-effectiveness, study suggests. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20230328/Next-generation-influenza-vaccines-show-greater-impact-and-cost-effectiveness-study-suggests.aspx. Suggested Reading Research identifies respiratory transmission potential of H5N1 virusStem cell therapy advances: MSCs show potential in managing COVID-19 and influenza infectionsStudy reveals a promising approach to developing universal influenza vaccineWastewater surveillance detects influenza and H5 viruses from human and animal sourcesUnraveling the mechanism of Shufeng Jiedu Capsules in influenza treatmentStudy confirms flu vaccine effectiveness against A H1N1 in young childrenA call for robust H5N1 influenza preparedness and responseNew project launched to accelerate development and accessibility of H5N1 mRNA vaccine candidates Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersCDC updates pain care guidelines for clinicians Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsNew discovery reveals how mutant RAS genes drive tumor growthTargeted degradation of Pin1 shows promise for pancreatic cancer treatmentFrailty increases a person's risk of dementia, study findsDiscrimination may drive postpartum weight retention in Black womenResearchers develop new antibody with potential to treat several types of cancer Newsletters you may be interested in Respiratory Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Arthritis (Subscribe or Preview) Mpox (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Study reveals distinct genetic risk factors for influenza and COVID-19Influenza viral matrix 1 protein aggravates viral pathogenicity by inducing TLR4-mediated reactive oxygen species production and apoptotic cell death | Cell Death & Disease Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature cell death & disease articles article Influenza viral matrix 1 protein aggravates viral pathogenicity by inducing TLR4-mediated reactive oxygen species production and apoptotic cell death Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 30 March 2023 Influenza viral matrix 1 protein aggravates viral pathogenicity by inducing TLR4-mediated reactive oxygen species production and apoptotic cell death Chang-Ung Kim1 na1, Dahwan Lim2,3 na1, Young Sang Kim2, Bonsu Ku ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1784-89753,4 & …Doo-Jin Kim ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4934-49311,2,4 Show authors Cell Death & Disease volume 14, Article number: 228 (2023) Cite this article 2654 Accesses 6 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Acute inflammationCell death and immune responseInfectionInfluenza virus AbstractInfluenza virus is one of the most challenging viruses threating human health. Since infection with influenza virus triggers inflammatory responses and induces cell death, the molecular and cellular mechanisms by which the virus-infected cells undergo apoptotic and necrotic cell death have been widely studied. However, most of the studies have focused on the molecular events occurring in the cytosol and there is limited information on the physiological correlation between virus-induced cell death and the viral pathogenesis in vivo. In this study, we demonstrate that the influenza virus matrix 1 (M1) protein is released from virus-infected cells and triggers apoptotic cell death of lung epithelial and pulmonary immune cells, through the activation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling. Treatment with M1 protein led to robust cellular inflammatory responses, such as the production of proinflammatory cytokines and cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), and induction of cell death. When M1 protein was administered in vivo, it induced the activation of inflammatory responses and cell death in the lungs. Furthermore, the administration of M1 aggravated lung pathology and mortality of the virus-infected mice in a TLR4-dependent manner. These results demonstrate that M1 is an important pathogenic factor contributing to influenza virus pathogenicity by enhancing cell death in the lungs, thereby expanding our understanding of the molecular mechanism of influenza virus-induced cell death through the interaction with an innate immune receptor. Similar content being viewed by others Gasdermin D promotes hyperinflammation and immunopathology during severe influenza A virus infection Article Open access 09 November 2023 Interleukin-38 ameliorates poly(I:C) induced lung inflammation: therapeutic implications in respiratory viral infections Article Open access 07 January 2021 SARS-CoV-2 and its ORF3a, E and M viroporins activate inflammasome in human macrophages and induce of IL-1α in pulmonary epithelial and endothelial cells Article Open access 25 April 2024 IntroductionInfluenza is an acute respiratory viral disease with approximately 3 to 5 million cases of severe illness and up to 650000 deaths annually, worldwide. Therefore, the underlying mechanisms of the pathogenesis of the influenza virus have attracted extensive attention. Previous reports have demonstrated that influenza virus triggers various inflammatory responses, such as the upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, overproduction of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), and enhanced programmed cell death [1,2,3]. Since these cellular responses can lead to severe lung injury, identification of precise inflammation-associated factors and pathways is important for understanding the pathogenesis of influenza and developing novel therapeutic strategies.Acute viral infection is commonly associated with cell death. Since lung epithelial and pulmonary immune cells directly infected with influenza virus undergo apoptotic, necrotic and necroptotic cell death, the underlying molecular mechanisms have been widely studied [4,5,6,7]. Particularly, intracellular interactions between viral and host proteins have attracted the most attention because it has been regarded that viral proteins, especially internal proteins, are expressed and reside in the cytosol. However, it was recently reported that nucleoprotein (NP) can be released from infected cells and increase viral pathogenicity through the activation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), a membrane receptor, on innate immune cells in the lungs [8]. This suggests a potential role for viral internal proteins in the disease pathogenesis through the interaction with host cells in the extracellular compartment.Influenza virus matrix 1 (M1) protein is important for viral replication and shaping of virus particles [9]. M1 also interacts with cytosolic host proteins such as caspase-8 and heat shock protein 70 to accelerate apoptosis of the infected cells [10, 11]. However, despite extensive studies at the molecular and cellular levels, the physiological role of M1 in viral pathogenicity in vivo has not yet been comprehensively addressed. In this study, we investigated the role of influenza virus M1 protein in cell death and viral pathogenicity in vivo. Our results showed that extracellular M1 triggered apoptotic cell death of the lung epithelial cells and pulmonary immune cells through the activation of TLR4 signaling pathway and the production of ROS in vitro and in vivo. Our findings indicate that extracellular M1 is an important pathogenic factor contributing to influenza virus pathogenicity by enhancing cell death in the lungs, thereby expanding our understanding of the molecular mechanism of influenza virus-induced cell death.ResultsExtracellular M1 activates intracellular inflammatory pathwaysrM1 was produced using the CHO cell expression system (Fig. S1A, B) and was confirmed to be endotoxin-free (Fig. S1C). When bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) were treated with rM1, nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) pathway and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family members were activated within 15 min (Fig. 1A, B). Consequently, the production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as IL-6 and C-X-C motif ligand (CXCL10), was remarkably upregulated (Fig. 1C). Furthermore, time-dependent enhanced expressions of peroxide synthases like COX2 and iNOS were also observed (Fig. 1D), which accounts for the increased production of ROS (Fig. 1E). In addition, the increase in the inflammatory response including proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and ROS-regulated genes owing to M1 treatment was confirmed via RNA sequencing analysis (Fig. 1F). Similarly, rM1 treatment led to enhanced expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines and upregulation of ROS in murine lung epithelial (MLE)-12 (Fig. S2A, B) and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells (Fig. S2C, D). Collectively, these data demonstrated that extracellular M1 treatment can induce intracellular inflammatory pathways in host cells.Fig. 1: Extracellular treatment with M1 provokes inflammatory responses.BMDMs were treated with rM1 and analyzed as described in the text. Activation of the (A) NF-κB and (B) MAPK pathways were detected at the indicated points in time by immunoblotting. C After 24 h of treatment with various concentrations of rM1, cell culture supernatants were used for ELISA to detect the levels of the indicated cytokines and chemokines (n = 5). D Levels of proteins involved in the ROS production were traced at each time point by immunoblotting. E ROS levels were detected in cell culture supernatants of cells treated with rM1 (15 μg/ml) (n = 5). F The inflammatory response genes regulated by M1 and LPS treatment was analyzed by RNA-sequencing is presented as a heatmap (n = 2). Data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) from triplicate culture wells. ***p < 0.001.Full size imageTLR4 plays a key role in M1-induced inflammatory responsesNext, we sought to identify the host receptor responsible for recognizing M1 and initializing inflammatory responses. We found that the upregulation of IL-6 expression and ROS production, usually observed in TLR4-mediated signaling processes, was observed in rM1-treated BMDMs (Fig. 1C, E), MLE-12, and BAL-derived cells (Fig. S2). Moreover, inactivated influenza virus triggers the production of oxidized phospholipid via the TLR4 − IL-6−ROS signaling cascade, which causes acute lung injury [12]. Therefore, we hypothesized that TLR4 plays a key role in the rM1-induced inflammatory responses. Dose-dependent TLR4-stimulating activity of rM1 was detected when TLR4-expressing reporter cells were treated with rM1 (Fig. 2A). A subsequent immunoprecipitation (IP) assay revealed a physical interaction between rM1 and TLR4 in rM1-treated BMDM cell lysates (Fig. 2B). Specifically, genetic ablation of TLR4 in BMDM cells led to a significant impairment of rM1-induced production of proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-6, CXCL1, CXCL10, and C-C motif ligand (CCL)5 (Fig. 2C). Furthermore, COX2 peroxide synthase expression (Fig. 2D) and ROS (Fig. 2E) levels were remarkably reduced in TLR4-deficient cells.Fig. 2: Inflammatory functionality of M1 depends on TLR4.A, F TLR4 reporter and (B–E and G) BMDM cells were treated with rM1 (A and F, as indicated; B–G, 15 μg/ml) and analyzed as described in the text (A, C, and E–G; n = 5). (A) TLR4 reporter cells were incubated with the indicated materials for 20 h, and the TLR4 expression level was analyzed by measuring OD630. B After 30 min of treatment with the two types of rM1, IP was performed to detect interactions between TLR4 and M1. C After 24 h of rM1 treatment, wild-type (WT) and TLR4−/− cell culture supernatants were subjected to ELISA to determine the levels of indicated cytokines and chemokines. D The effects of rM1 treatment (8 h) on COX2 levels in WT and TLR4−/− cells were measured by immunoblotting. E ROS levels detected in WT and TLR4−/− cell culture supernatants. F TLR4 reporter cells were incubated with the indicated materials for 20 h; thereafter, OD630 was measured. G After 24 h of incubation with the indicated materials, cytokines and chemokines were detected in cell culture supernatants. Data are presented as the mean ± SD from triplicate culture wells. ***p < 0.001.Full size imageIt has been reported that several viral proteins can activate TLR4 [13]. Recently, it was proposed that the multimeric or oligomeric structure of viral proteins is important for TLR4 activation [8, 13]. Although oligomeric M1 is abundant, monomeric M1 also exists at equilibrium in vitro and in vivo (Fig. S3A, B) [9, 14, 15]. To determine whether the stoichiometry of M1 affects its functionality toward TLR4, we separated M1 into two fractions of less than and greater than 50 kDa (Fig. S4A, B). Only the M1 fraction of >50 kDa induced TLR4 activation, whereas monomeric M1 did not (Fig. 2F). Proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines were also induced only by oligomeric M1 (Fig. 2G). These results indicate that M1, as an oligomeric form, induces the inflammatory response through the activation of TLR4.M1 induces cell death via ROS production and caspase cascadesGiven that excessive ROS increase mitochondria damage, which induces apoptotic cell death [16, 17], we next examined whether rM1 treatment also affects cell fate via upregulation of ROS production (Figs. 1E and 2E). We found a prominent increase in the protein levels of pro-apoptotic factors such as BimEL, BimL, and Bak in BMDM cells upon rM1 treatment (Fig. 3A). Increased cytochrome C levels were detected in the cytosol upon M1 administration, indicating mitochondrial damage (Fig. 3B). Consistently, rM1 treatment induced cleavage of caspase proteins, including caspase-3, −6, and −7, which are characteristic markers of activation of the caspase cascades that mediate apoptosis (Fig. 3C). Consequently, rM1 treatment caused the death of BMDM cells in a time-dependent manner, which was verified by the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release assay (Fig. 3D). Furthermore, cell death was attenuated by treatment with the ROS inhibitor N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC) or pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK (Fig. 3E). Consistent with the result of cytokine production, oligomeric M1, not monomeric M1, induced apoptotic cell death (Fig. 3F). In addition, M1-treated BMDMs had increased mRNA levels of factors involved in apoptotic processes such as Tnf, Fas, Bid, and Bax (Fig. 3G). Similarly, rM1 treatment induced the death of MLE-12–and BAL-derived cells (Fig. S5A, B). These results indicate that oligomeric M1 triggers apoptotic cell death via ROS production and a caspase cascade activation-dependent pathway.Fig. 3: M1 activates apoptotic pathways and induces cell death.BMDMs were treated with rM1 (15 μg/ml) and analyzed as described. A Levels of pro-apoptotic factors, (B) cytochrome c, and (C) cleaved caspases were determined at the indicated time points by immunoblotting. D LDH levels detected in the cell culture supernatants at indicated time point (n = 5). E–F LDH levels detected in the cell culture supernatants after 24 h of incubation with the indicated materials (n = 5). G The apoptotic process regulated at gene level by M1 and LPS treatment was analyzed by RNA-sequencing and is presented as a heatmap (n = 2). Data are presented as the mean ± SD from triplicate culture wells. ***p < 0.001.Full size imageM1 activates pulmonary immune cells and induces inflammatory responses in the lungsAfter demonstrating that cellular inflammatory responses and ROS-associated apoptosis can be induced by extracellular treatment with a recombinant form of influenza virus M1 protein (Figs. 1–3), we attempted to verify the functionality of M1 in vivo using a mouse model. First, to identify which cell types are mainly activated by M1, we isolated various immune-associated cells from mouse lung tissues and incubated them with Alexa Fluor 488–labeled rM1 for 15 min. A flow cytometry analysis showed that Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated rM1 was vividly detected in neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages, which are key players in innate immune responses (Fig. 4A). By contrast, it was weakly detected in cells controlling adaptive immune responses, such as B and T cells (Fig. 4A). Next, we intranasally treated the mice with rM1 and analyzed their response. Activation of NF-κB and MAPKs were identified in BAL-isolated cells 6 h after rM1 treatment (Fig. 4B). The protein levels of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines in BAL fluid also increased noticeably 1–3 days after intranasal treatment with rM1 (Fig. 4C).Fig. 4: M1 recognizes pulmonary immune cells and activates inflammatory responses in mouse lungs.A Cells isolated from mouse lungs were treated with rM1 or Alexa 488-labeled rM1 (15 μg/ml) for 15 min and then analyzed by flow cytometry to determine the M1–cell association (n = 5). B Mice were intranasally treated with PBS or rM1 (15 μg/ml) for 6 h (n = 5). BAL fluid cells were isolated from these mice and subjected to immunoblotting to detect the activation of NF-κB and MAPK signaling. C Mice were intranasally treated with PBS or rM1 (30 μg/ml) for 0–3 days. BAL fluid was extracted from these mice and subjected to ELISA every day to measure the levels of the indicated cytokines and chemokines (n = 5). Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05.Full size imageNext, we analyzed whether ROS production and the consequent cell death were upregulated by intranasal treatment with rM1. Activation of COX2 and iNOS was observed in BAL-derived cells (Fig. 5A), which led to the upregulation of ROS levels in the BAL fluid (Fig. 5B), in rM1-treated mice after 6 h. We also noticed that iNOS levels were remarkably enhanced in macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils, cell types that were majorly targeted by rM1 (Fig. 4A). However, iNOS levels were not enhanced in dendritic cells even 2 days after rM1 treatment (Fig. 5C). The LDH level in BAL fluid was elevated upon rM1 treatment, implying increased cell death in the lung (Fig. 5D). Subsequently, we hypothesized that the pathology occurs in the rM1-treated mouse lung tissues. In accordance with this hypothesis, the albumin level in BAL fluid was considerably higher after intranasal treatment with rM1 (Fig. 5E), which was also supported by the histological analysis of rM1-treated mouse lung tissues (Fig. 5F). These results suggest that influenza virus M1 protein targets pulmonary immune cells in the lungs and induces inflammatory responses, such as cytokine production and ROS generation, in the lungs.Fig. 5: M1 increases lung damage through ROS production and apoptosis.A Mice (n = 5) were intranasally treated with PBS or rM1 (30 μg) for 6 h. BAL cells were isolated and subjected to immunoblotting for detecting COX2 and iNOS. B–F Mice were intranasally treated with PBS or rM1 (30 μg) for 0–3 days (B) BAL fluid was extracted, followed by the in vitro ROS/RNS assay for ROS measurement. C Total lung tissue was isolated and subjected to surface staining and intracellular iNOS staining for flow cytometry analysis. D LDH levels detected in BAL fluid using the LDH cytotoxicity assay (B–D, n = 5). E Albumin levels in BAL fluid detected using the BCG albumin assay kit. F Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was used to visualize lung tissues obtained on day 3 (n = 2). Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05.Full size imageM1 aggravates influenza pathogenicity in a TLR4-dependent mannerNext, we investigated whether M1 protein affects influenza pathogenicity. Mice were intranasally treated with rM1 (30 μg/mouse) 3 days before (Fig. 6A) or during (Fig. 6B) infection with a sublethal dose (32 PFU) of influenza virus. Remarkably, all rM1-injected mice died within 10 days of infection (Fig. 6A, B, left panels). In contrast, more than 80% of the control group members survived (Fig. 6A, B, left panels) and recovered 8 days post infection (Fig. 6A, B, right panels). In addition, when influenza virus-infected mice were treated with rM1 3 days post infection, the fatality rate of the rM1-treated group was considerably higher than that of the PBS-treated group (Fig. 6C). Further, rM1 treatment severely worsened lung damage in influenza virus-infected mice. These results indicated that rM1 substantially aggravates the pathogenicity of influenza infection. (Fig. 6D). We propose that TLR4 plays a pivotal role in rM1-mediated influenza pathogenicity because no significant difference was observed between TLR4-deficient mice and the control group upon rM1 administration (Fig. 6E). Collectively, these results show that M1 contributes to viral pathogenicity and aggravates lung damage caused by influenza infection, in which TLR4 serves as a critical component.Fig. 6: M1 aggravates influenza pathogenesis in a TLR4-dependent manner.Mice were intranasally treated with rM1 (30 μg) 3 days prior to (A and left panel of D) or simultaneously with (B and middle panel of D) or 3 days after (C and right panel of D) PR8 influenza infection. A–C Survival rates and body weight change were monitored for 2 weeks (n = 8). D Lung tissues obtained on day 5 post infection were visualized using H&E staining (n = 2). E TLR4−/− mice were treated intranasally with rM1 (30 μg) and co-infected with PR8 influenza virus (32 PFU), and the body weight change was monitored for 2 weeks (n = 8). ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05 in the log-rank test.Full size imageNeutralization of M1 effectively diminishes influenza severityHaving shown that M1 plays an important role in influenza virus pathogenesis, we next investigated whether anti-M1 antibodies can counteract the effects of this viral protein. Even though the anti-M1 serum was unable to neutralize the influenza virus in vitro (Fig. S6A), it positively affected the survival rate and body weight of influenza-infected mice that were intraperitoneally treated with anti-M1 serum daily for 3 days (Fig. 7A). Moreover, the fatality of virus-infected mice decreased significantly by injecting purified anti-M1 IgG (Fig. S6B). We also found that anti-M1 serum administration led to a reduction in ROS and LDH levels in the BAL fluid derived from infected mice (Fig. 7B, C), indicating that lung inflammation was suppressed by anti-M1 serum injection. Particularly, lung injury was noticeably alleviated upon anti-M1 serum administration, as demonstrated by the downregulated albumin level in BAL fluid (Fig. 7D) and histological analysis of lung tissues (Fig. 7E). Overall, these results suggest that M1 could be a target for mitigating the pathogenesis of influenza virus infection.Fig. 7: Anti-M1 serum alleviates influenza viral pathogenicity.Mice infected with PR8 influenza virus (32 PFU) were treated with naïve or anti-M1 serum (200 μl) once daily for 3 days. A Survival rates and bodyweights of the mice were monitored for 10 days (n = 8). B–D BAL fluid was extracted on days 3, 5, and 7 post infection and used to analyze levels of (B) ROS, (C) LDH, (D) and albumin. E Lung tissues obtained on day 5 were visualized using H&E staining (n = 2). Data in (A) are presented as log-rank tests. Data in (B–D) are presented as mean ± SEM. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05.Full size imageDiscussionInfluenza virus is one of the major pathogens threatening human health worldwide. Since acute viral infection is associated with cell death and tissue damage, the molecular and cellular mechanisms by which the virus-infected cells undergo cell death have been intensively studied. However, most of the studies to date have focused on the interactions between viral components and host proteins in the cytosol of the infected cells [9], where most influenza viral proteins have been regarded to linger. It is also still unclear whether the interactions studied at molecular level affect the disease pathology in vivo. This study aimed to investigate whether and how the influenza viral extracellular M1 protein induces apoptotic cell death in the lungs and affects the viral pathogenesis using a murine influenza model.Infection with influenza virus primarily induces apoptotic, necrotic, and necroptotic death of lung epithelial and pulmonary immune cells [4,5,6,7]. In addition to direct infection, viral infection can also mediate “extrinsic” apoptotic cell death of uninfected cells through the induction of TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and Fas ligand (FasL) in monocyte-derived macrophages and lymphocytes [18,19,20]. Here, we showed that M1 is released from the infected cells and induces inflammatory response and apoptotic cell death (Figs. 3 and 5), suggesting that it can also paracrinally affect uninfected cells similar to the death receptor ligands. Consequently, infiltrating immune cells are exposed to proapoptotic environment, implying that the release of M1 could be one of the immune-evading strategies of the virus. Our findings further expand molecular and physiological aspects of the extrinsic cell death and immune evasion mechanism of influenza virus, utilizing a viral protein.Influenza viral proteins have been generally regarded to be localized inside the infected cells or on the plasma membrane. M1 is localized just beneath the plasma membrane where it forms a mature virion. However, we recently reported that various influenza viral proteins can be detected in a cell-free or virion-free form by viral infection, suggesting the potential of interaction between viral proteins and neighboring cells [8]. In this study, we showed that M1 has a novel biological function in the extracellular compartment through the activation of TLR4 signaling. Although we did not investigate the molecular mechanism by which M1 is released from the infected cells in this study, the possible mechanisms include the following. (i) Infection with influenza virus directly triggers necrotic and necroptotic cell death [7, 21,22,23], resulting in the leakage of cell contents. M1 can also be exposed to the extracellular compartment during apoptosis. (ii) When the apoptized cells are not completely cleared, the debris could undergo secondary necrosis [24], resulting in the release of internal materials. (iii) In addition, M1 physically interacts with phosphatidylserine of the plasma membrane [25]. The flipping of phosphatidylserine from the inner side to outer side during apoptosis is a possible mechanism of M1 release. Considering that lytic cell death is a common outcome of acute viral infection, further study is required to ascertain the biological function of viral internal proteins in viral pathogenesis through interaction with neighboring cells.Thus far, activation of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) by influenza virus has been widely studied at molecular and cellular levels. In many cases, however, it remains unclear whether the PRR activation affects host defense in vivo. Activation of TLR7 and RIG-I by influenza virus infection triggers innate immune responses such as the production of type I IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines result in overall protection in vivo [26,27,28,29]. It is also controversial whether the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and production of IL-1β and IL-18 increases or decreases lung pathology [30,31,32]. In this work, we demonstrated that TLR4 recognizes extracellular M1 and aggravates viral pathogenicity in vivo. Interestingly, inactivated H5N1 virus induced acute lung injury in a TLR4-dependent manner, partially supporting our findings [12]. Furthermore, we recently reported the pathogenic role of TLR4 through the interaction with influenza virus NP [8]. Collectively, TLR4 plays a pathogenic role in the pathogenesis of influenza by recognizing a wide range of ligands from oxidized phospholipid to viral proteins.Excess levels of ROS can lead to mitochondrial damage and consequent apoptotic cell death. In the case of influenza viral infection, oxidative stress by ROS provokes inflammation and acute lung injury [12, 33, 34]. It is well known that oxidized phospholipid can trigger ROS production through the activation of TLR4 [12]. In this study, we additionally showed that M1, the most abundant influenza viral protein, can be another trigger for ROS production in vitro and in vivo. However, it is intriguing that cellular ROS is also required for the optimal induction of the antigen-specific CD8+ T cell response by increasing antigen cross-presentation by dendritic cells [35,36,37]. In our study, we did not investigate the effect of M1 on the fate or behavior of dendritic cells. It is worthwhile to study whether and how M1 differentially modulates the host response to the viral infection depending on physiological conditions such as its micro-concentration and the cell types it encounters.The activation of TLR4 has different sub-signaling mechanisms depending on the type of ligand [38, 39]. Bacteria-derived LPS activates both MyD88-dependent and TRIF-dependent pathways [38], but monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA), a low-toxic derivative of lipid A moiety of LPS, predominantly activates the TRIF-dependent pathway [40, 41]. Consequently, TLR4 activation by LPS and MPLA differs in the induction of transcriptome change, chemokine production, inflammation, and memory CD8+ T cell differentiation [42, 43]. Thus, identifying novel ligands of TLR4 and their biological consequence is of continuing interest. Our gene expression profile results showed that M1 and LPS differentially activated downstream target genes, and, interestingly, it did not match those prompted by NP (Figs. 1F and 3F, and Fig. S7A–C). Therefore, further study is required on ligand dependent TLR4 signaling mechanisms in terms of molecular and structural biology.Previous studies have demonstrated that anti-M1 antibody cannot directly neutralize influenza virus [44]. However, our data showed that anti-M1 antibody alleviates disease severity and improves survival rate against the viral challenge. Anti-M1 plasma or anti-M1 antibody reduced the level of inflammatory cytokines and cell death in infected mice. Antibodies to NP have shown an antiviral effect against influenza virus infection in murine models [45,46,47]. Although it has been previously suggested that NK cells contribute to the antiviral effect via antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, the exact mechanism has not been experimentally proved. In this study, we did not investigate the possibility of involvement of NK cells in the anti-M1 antibody-mediated therapeutic effect. Nonetheless, antibodies targeting M1 could be an auxiliary therapeutic approach for influenza.In conclusion, we showed that M1 is an important pathogenic factor contributing to influenza viral pathogenicity by increasing ROS-mediated cell death in the lungs. Intriguingly, M1 is released from infected cells to the extracellular compartment and interacts with TLR4, a membrane receptor protein, on the lung epithelial and pulmonary immune cells. This finding not only expands our understanding of the molecular mechanism of influenza virus-induced cell death and viral pathogenesis but could also be useful information for the development of a novel antiviral drug.Materials and methodsMiceSeven- to eight-week-old C57BL/6 and BALB/c female mice were purchased from KOATECH (Pyeongtaek, Korea) and maintained in a specific pathogen-free biosafety level-2 facility at the Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB). TLR4 knockout mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, USA). Only 8- to 12-week-old female mice were used in this study. All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Use and Care Committee of KRIBB (KRIBB-AEC-19173) and performed in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the US National Institutes of Health.Cell cultureHEK-Blue™ TLR4 (InvivoGen, San Diego, CA, USA) and L929 (ATCC, Manassas, Virginia, USA) cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Corning, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, HyClone, Logan, Utah, USA) and 1× antibiotics (Gibco™, Massachusetts, USA). MLE-12 cells (ATCC) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS and 1× antibiotics. No mycoplasma contamination was detected. To prepare BMDMs, bone marrow cells were harvested from the femur and tibia of C57BL/6 N and TLR4 knockout mice and differentiated in DMEM containing 25% L929-conditioned medium, 10% FBS, and 1× antibiotics. L929-conditioned medium was obtained by culturing L929 cells in DMEM for 7 days until a confluence of >90% was obtained. Afterwards, the medium underwent centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 10 min and the supernatants were collected and filtered through a 0.45 μm filter system.Recombinant M1 proteinThe DNA fragment encoding M1 protein (GenBank: CY147535.1) was cloned into the pEXPR-IBA 103 vector (IBA Lifesciences, Göttingen, Germany), and the plasmid DNA was transfected into ExpiCHO cells. Five days later, the cells were harvested and lysed by sonication (30% amplitude, 10 s on/10 s off, total 10 min). After filtration with a 0.45 μm filter (Corning), the lysate supernatant was bound to Strep-Tactin XT resin (IBA Lifesciences) using a gravity flow column. After washing, the bound protein was collected by treating the column with an elution buffer (IBA Lifesciences). The endotoxin level in the purified M1 was measured using the endotoxin test kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). The protein was stored at –80 °C until further use.VirusThe influenza A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (PR8) virus was cultivated in the allantoic cavity of embryonated chicken eggs. Viruses were titrated by calculating the 50% egg infectious dose (EID50) and 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) and stored at –80 °C until use.Anti-M1 polyserum and anti-M1 antibodyThe M1-coding DNA fragment was cloned into the pGX-10 plasmid [48], which was used as the DNA vaccine vector in this study. Mice (BALB/c) were intramuscularly immunized twice at 3-week intervals with the plasmid DNA (10 μg) using electroporation. Serum was obtained 2 weeks after the final vaccination. Anti-M1 IgG was purified from the serum of mock- and M1-vaccinated mice using an IgG antibody purification kit (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Serum and purified antibodies were stored at –20 °C.Preparation of lung samples (whole lung cells, BAL fluid, and BAL cells)Total lung cells and BAL fluid samples were obtained as described previously [8]. Briefly, lung tissue was minced and incubated in 1.5 ml RPMI 1640 media containing collagenase D (150 unit/ml, Gibco), DNase I (50 μg/ml, Merck), 10% FBS, and 1× antibiotics. After enzymatic digestion, cells were isolated from the tissue using a strainer (SPL, Pyeongtaek, Korea). For BAL fluid preparation, a catheter was inserted in the trachea of anesthetized mice and 1 ml of cold PBS containing protease inhibitors (Merck) was instilled into the lungs. After gentle aspiration, BAL fluid and cells were separated by centrifugation (4000 rpm, 5 min, 4 °C).Experimental scheduleMice (C57BL/6) were treated intranasally with recombinant M1 protein (rM1), after which, BAL fluid, BAL cells and lung cells were obtained at each indicated time point for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), western blotting, and flow cytometry analysis. Mice (C57BL/6) infected with PR8 influenza virus (32 PFU) were intranasally treated with PBS or M1 immediately, 3 days pre- or post-infection. Influenza virus-infected mice were intraperitoneally administered with 200 μl of naïve or anti-M1 serum or 15–200 μg of anti-M1 purified IgG antibody daily for 3 days. The change in bodyweight and survival rate of the mice were monitored for 14 days post infection.Western blotCells were lysed in CETi lysis buffer (TransLab, Daejeon, Korea) and the lysate was separated by sodium dodecyl-sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). After transferring the proteins onto polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Merck), the membranes were blocked and incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C. After washing, horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies were added. Bound antibodies were visualized using Immobilon Forte Western HRP substrate (Merck) and imaged using EZ-Capture II (ATTO Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). The following antibodies were used: anti-phospho-SAPK/JNK (Cat# 9255), anti-SAPK/JNK (Cat# 9252), anti-phospho-p44/42 MAPK (Cat# 4370), anti-p44/42 (Cat# 4695), anti-phospho-p38 MAPK (Cat# 4511), anti-p38 MAPK (Cat# 54470), anti-phospho-IκB (Cat# 2859), anti-IκB-alpha (Cat# 4812), anti-phospho-NF-κB p65 (Cat# 3033), anti-COX1 (Cat# 9896), anti-COX2 (Cat# 12282), anti-iNOS (Cat# 13120), anti-Bim (Cat# 2933), anti-phospho-Bad (Cat# 5284), anti-Bak (Cat# 12105), anti-caspase-3 (Cat# 9665), anti-caspase-6 (Cat# 9762), anti-caspase-7 (Cat# 8438), anti-caspase-9 (Cat# 9508), HRP-linked anti-mouse IgG (Cat# 7076), HRP-linked anti-rabbit IgG (Cat# 7074),(all from CST, Danvers, Massachusetts, USA), and anti-Strep-tag II (Abcam, Cat# ab76949).IPFor IP, BMDMs were lysed in CETi lysis buffer for 10 min on ice. Lysates were centrifuged and the supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes containing antibody coated Dynabeads as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen), followed by western blot analysis. The following antibodies were used: anti-TLR4 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas, USA; and Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# sc-293072) and anti-influenza M1 (Sino biological, Beijing, China, Cat# 40010-RP01).ELISA, LDH, and ROS assayBMDM, MLE-12, and BAL cell culture supernatants were collected after treatment with M1 or LPS for 20 h for ELISA and after 0–48 h for LDH and ROS assays. BAL fluid samples were obtained from the mice, and cytokines were measured using IL-6, CXCL1, CXCL-10, CCL2, CCL5 ELISA kits (all from R&D Systems, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA). LDH and ROS were detected using the CyQUANT™ LDH cytotoxicity assay (Invitrogen) and in vitro ROS/RNS assay kits (Cell Biolabs Inc. San Diego, CA, US), respectively, according to the manufacturers’ protocols.RNA sequencing and analysis(1) RNA isolationBMDM cells were treated with PBS, M1, NP, or LPS for 6 h, after which total RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA, USA). RNA purity and integrity were evaluated using a ND-2000 Spectrophotometer (NanoDrop, Wilmington, USA) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, USA), respectively.(2) Affymetrix whole-transcript expression arrayThe Affymetrix Whole-transcript Expression array was performed using the GeneChip Whole Transcript PLUS reagent Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) per the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA was synthesized using the GeneChip WT (Whole Transcript) Amplification kit as described by the manufacturer. The sense cDNA was then fragmented and biotin-labeled with terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) using the GeneChip WT Terminal labeling kit. Approximately 5.5 μg of labeled DNA target was hybridized to the Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse ST 2.0 Array at 45 °C for 16 h. Hybridized arrays were washed and stained on a GeneChip Fluidics Station 450 and scanned on a GCS3000 Scanner (Affymetrix). Signal values were computed using the Affymetrix® GeneChip™ Command Console software.(3) Data analysisExpression data were generated by Transcriptome Analysis console 4.0.1. For the normalization, robust multi-average (RMA) algorithm implemented in Transcriptome Analysis Console software was used. Data mining and graphic visualization were performed using ExDEGA (Ebiogen Inc., Korea). To define differentially expressed genes (DEGs), adjusted |log2fold-change (FC)| ≥ 1.5 and P < 0.05 were selected as cut-off values.TLR reporter cell line assayThe TLR reporter cell lines (Invivogen) were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1× antibiotics. When the HEK-Blue™ TLR4 reporter cells reached 80% confluency, they were harvested using a scraper and resuspended in HEK-Blue™ Detection media (InvivoGen). The resuspended cells (5 × 104 cells/well; 180 μl) were then incubated with 20 μl of each stimulant in a 96-well plate. After 20 h of culture, the optical density at 630 nm (OD630) was measured.Flow cytometrySingle lung cell suspensions were blocked using anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (mouse BD Fc Block™; BD Biosciences) at room temperature for 15 min before staining. The surface antigens were stained with the indicated conjugated antibodies at 4 °C for 15 min. The following antibodies were used: APC anti-CD4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 17-0042-82), PerCP-eFluor 710 anti-CD3e (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 46-0033-82), PE/Cyanine7 anti-CD45R (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 25-0452-82), PE anti-Siglec-F (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 552126), PerCD-eFluor 710 anti-Ly6G (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 46-9668-82), Alexa Fluor 700 anti-MHC Class II I-A/I-E (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 56-5321-80), and eFluor 450 anti-F4/80 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 48-4801-82); APC/cyanine7 anti-CD45 (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA, Cat# 103116); APC anti-CD11b (BioLegend, Cat# 101212) and PE anti-CD49b (BioLegend, Cat# 103506); and FITC anti-NK1.1 (BD Biosciences, Cat# 553164). Stained cells were analyzed using a Gallios flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, US) with FlowJo™ software (Becton, Dickinson and Company, New Jersey, USA).Statistical analysisStatistical differences among groups were assessed using a two-tailed Student’s t-test and a log-rank test with Prism software (GraphPad Software, USA). Mice were randomly assigned to experimental groups without blinding method for injections. No animal exclusion criteria were applied, and the variance was comparable among the groups that were statistically compared. Values with p < 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant. Data availability All datasets generated and analysed during this study are included in this published article and its Supplementary Information files. Additional data are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. ReferencesJulkunen I, Melen K, Nyqvist M, Pirhonen J, Sareneva T, Matikainen S. Inflammatory responses in influenza A virus infection. Vaccine. 2000;19:S32–37.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lee SM, Cheung CY, Nicholls JM, Hui KP, Leung CY, Uiprasertkul M, et al. Hyperinduction of cyclooxygenase-2-mediated proinflammatory cascade: a mechanism for the pathogenesis of avian influenza H5N1 infection. J Infect Dis. 2008;198:525–35.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wareing MD, Lyon AB, Lu B, Gerard C, Sarawar SR. Chemokine expression during the development and resolution of a pulmonary leukocyte response to influenza A virus infection in mice. J Leukoc Biol. 2004;76:886–95.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen W, Calvo PA, Malide D, Gibbs J, Schubert U, Bacik I, et al. A novel influenza A virus mitochondrial protein that induces cell death. Nat Med. 2001;7:1306–12.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chang P, Kuchipudi SV, Mellits KH, Sebastian S, James J, Liu J, et al. Early apoptosis of porcine alveolar macrophages limits avian influenza virus replication and pro-inflammatory dysregulation. Sci Rep. 2015;5:17999.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lam WY, Tang JW, Yeung AC, Chiu LC, Sung JJ, Chan PK. Avian influenza virus A/HK/483/97(H5N1) NS1 protein induces apoptosis in human airway epithelial cells. J Virol. 2008;82:2741–51.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hartmann BM, Albrecht RA, Zaslavsky E, Nudelman G, Pincas H, Marjanovic N, et al. Pandemic H1N1 influenza A viruses suppress immunogenic RIPK3-driven dendritic cell death. Nat Commun. 2017;8:1931.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kim C-U, Jeong Y-J, Lee P, Lee M-S, Park J-H, Kim Y-S, et al. Extracellular nucleoprotein exacerbates influenza virus pathogenesis by activating Toll-like receptor 4 and the NLRP3 inflammasome. Cell Mol Immunolog. 2022;19:715–25.Article CAS Google Scholar Peukes J, Xiong X, Erlendsson S, Qu K, Wan W, Calder LJ, et al. The native structure of the assembled matrix protein 1 of influenza A virus. Nature. 2020;587:495–8.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Halder UC, Bagchi P, Chattopadhyay S, Dutta D, Chawla-Sarkar M. Cell death regulation during influenza A virus infection by matrix (M1) protein: a model of viral control over the cellular survival pathway. Cell Death Dis. 2011;2:e197.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhirnov OP, Ksenofontov AL, Kuzmina SG, Klenk HD. Interaction of influenza A virus M1 matrix protein with caspases. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2002;67:534–9.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Imai Y, Kuba K, Neely GG, Yaghubian-Malhami R, Perkmann T, van Loo G, et al. Identification of oxidative stress and Toll-like receptor 4 signaling as a key pathway of acute lung injury. Cell. 2008;133:235–49.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pone EJ, Hernandez-Davies JE, Jan S, Silzel E, Felgner PL, Davies DH. Multimericity amplifies the synergy of BCR and TLR4 for B cell activation and antibody class switching. Front Immunol. 2022;13:882502.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Selzer L, Su Z, Pintilie GD, Chiu W, Kirkegaard K. Full-length three-dimensional structure of the influenza A virus M1 protein and its organization into a matrix layer. PLoS Biol. 2020;18:e3000827.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao H, Ekstrom M, Garoff H. The M1 and NP proteins of influenza A virus form homo- but not heterooligomeric complexes when coexpressed in BHK-21 cells. J Gen Virol. 1998;79:2435–46.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen H, Ning X, Jiang Z. Caspases control antiviral innate immunity. Cell Mol Immunol. 2017;14:736–47.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Redza-Dutordoir M, Averill-Bates DA. Activation of apoptosis signalling pathways by reactive oxygen species. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016;1863:2977–92.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Herold S, Steinmueller M, von Wulffen W, Cakarova L, Pinto R, Pleschka S, et al. Lung epithelial apoptosis in influenza virus pneumonia: the role of macrophage-expressed TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand. J Exp Med. 2008;205:3065–77.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hogner K, Wolff T, Pleschka S, Plog S, Gruber AD, Kalinke U, et al. Macrophage-expressed IFN-beta contributes to apoptotic alveolar epithelial cell injury in severe influenza virus pneumonia. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9:e1003188.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rodrigue-Gervais IG, Labbé K, Dagenais M, Dupaul-Chicoine J, Champagne C, Morizot A, et al. Cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein cIAP2 protects against pulmonary tissue necrosis during influenza virus infection to promote host survival. Cell Host Microbe. 2014;15:23–35.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mosavi SZ, Shahsavandi S, Ebrahimi MM, Hatami AR, Sadeghi K, Shahivandi H. Necrotic response to low pathogenic H9N2 influenza virus in chicken hepatoma cells. Jundishapur J Microbiol. 2015;8:e13770.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Arndt U, Wennemuth G, Barth P, Nain M, Al-Abed Y, Meinhardt A, et al. Release of macrophage migration inhibitory factor and CXCL8/interleukin-8 from lung epithelial cells rendered necrotic by influenza A virus infection. J Virol. 2002;76:9298–306.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Balachandran S, Rall GF. Benefits and perils of necroptosis in influenza virus infection. J Virol. 2020;94:e01101–19.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vanden Berghe T, Vanlangenakker N, Parthoens E, Deckers W, Devos M, Festjens N, et al. Necroptosis, necrosis and secondary necrosis converge on similar cellular disintegration features. Cell Death Differ. 2010;17:922–30.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hofer CT, Di Lella S, Dahmani I, Jungnick N, Bordag N, Bobone S, et al. Structural determinants of the interaction between influenza A virus matrix protein M1 and lipid membranes. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr. 2019;1861:1123–34.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Heer AK, Shamshiev A, Donda A, Uematsu S, Akira S, Kopf M, et al. TLR signaling fine-tunes anti-influenza B cell responses without regulating effector T cell responses. J Immunol. 2007;178:2182–91.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Koyama S, Aoshi T, Tanimoto T, Kumagai Y, Kobiyama K, Tougan T, et al. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells delineate immunogenicity of influenza vaccine subtypes. Sci Transl Med. 2010;2:25ra24.Article PubMed Google Scholar Koyama S, Ishii KJ, Kumar H, Tanimoto T, Coban C, Uematsu S, et al. Differential role of TLR- and RLR-signaling in the immune responses to influenza A virus infection and vaccination. J Immunol. 2007;179:4711–20.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lopez CB, Moltedo B, Alexopoulou L, Bonifaz L, Flavell RA, Moran TM. TLR-independent induction of dendritic cell maturation and adaptive immunity by negative-strand RNA viruses. J Immunol. 2004;173:6882–9.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Allen IC, Scull MA, Moore CB, Holl EK, McElvania-TeKippe E, Taxman DJ, et al. The NLRP3 inflammasome mediates in vivo innate immunity to influenza A virus through recognition of viral RNA. Immunity. 2009;30:556–65.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ichinohe T, Lee HK, Ogura Y, Flavell R, Iwasaki A. Inflammasome recognition of influenza virus is essential for adaptive immune responses. J Exp Med. 2009;206:79–87.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thomas PG, Dash P, Aldridge JR Jr., Ellebedy AH, Reynolds C, Funk AJ, et al. The intracellular sensor NLRP3 mediates key innate and healing responses to influenza A virus via the regulation of caspase-1. Immunity. 2009;30:566–75.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Uiprasertkul M, Kitphati R, Puthavathana P, Kriwong R, Kongchanagul A, Ungchusak K, et al. Apoptosis and pathogenesis of avian influenza A (H5N1) virus in humans. Emerg Infect Dis. 2007;13:708–12.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen KK, Minakuchi M, Wuputra K, Ku CC, Pan JB, Kuo KK, et al. Redox control in the pathophysiology of influenza virus infection. BMC Microbiol. 2020;20:214.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mantegazza AR, Savina A, Vermeulen M, Perez L, Geffner J, Hermine O, et al. NADPH oxidase controls phagosomal pH and antigen cross-presentation in human dendritic cells. Blood. 2008;112:4712–22.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Matsue H, Edelbaum D, Shalhevet D, Mizumoto N, Yang C, Mummert ME, et al. Generation and function of reactive oxygen species in dendritic cells during antigen presentation. J Immunol. 2003;171:3010–8.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Oberkampf M, Guillerey C, Mouries J, Rosenbaum P, Fayolle C, Bobard A, et al. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species regulate the induction of CD8(+) T cells by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Nat Commun. 2018;9:2241.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Akira S, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O. Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. Cell. 2006;124:783–801.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Molteni M, Gemma S, Rossetti C. The Role of Toll-Like Receptor 4 in Infectious and Noninfectious Inflammation. Mediators Inflamm. 2016;2016:6978936.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mata-Haro V, Cekic C, Martin M, Chilton PM, Casella CR, Mitchell TC. The vaccine adjuvant monophosphoryl lipid A as a TRIF-biased agonist of TLR4. Science. 2007;316:1628–32.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ohto U, Fukase K, Miyake K, Satow Y. Crystal structures of human MD-2 and its complex with antiendotoxic lipid IVa. Science. 2007;316:1632–4.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Cui W, Joshi NS, Liu Y, Meng H, Kleinstein SH, Kaech SM. TLR4 ligands lipopolysaccharide and monophosphoryl lipid a differentially regulate effector and memory CD8+ T Cell differentiation. J Immunol. 2014;192:4221–32.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Luan L, Patil NK, Guo Y, Hernandez A, Bohannon JK, Fensterheim BA, et al. Comparative transcriptome profiles of human blood in response to the toll-like receptor 4 ligands lipopolysaccharide and monophosphoryl lipid A. Sci Rep. 2017;7:40050.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Padilla-Quirarte HO, Lopez-Guerrero DV, Gutierrez-Xicotencatl L, Esquivel-Guadarrama F. Protective antibodies against influenza proteins. Front Immunol. 2019;10:1677.Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vanderven HA, Ana-Sosa-Batiz F, Jegaskanda S, Rockman S, Laurie K, Barr I, et al. What lies beneath: antibody dependent natural killer cell activation by antibodies to internal influenza virus proteins. EBioMedicine. 2016;8:277–90.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Carragher DM, Kaminski DA, Moquin A, Hartson L, Randall TD. A novel role for non-neutralizing antibodies against nucleoprotein in facilitating resistance to influenza virus. J Immunol. 2008;181:4168–76.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar LaMere MW, Lam HT, Moquin A, Haynes L, Lund FE, Randall TD, et al. Contributions of antinucleoprotein IgG to heterosubtypic immunity against influenza virus. J Immunol. 2011;186:4331–9.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ha SJ, Jeon BY, Kim SC, Kim DJ, Song MK, Sung YC, et al. Therapeutic effect of DNA vaccines combined with chemotherapy in a latent infection model after aerosol infection of mice with mycobacterium tuberculosis. Gene Ther. 2003;10:1592–9.Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis study was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Government of Korea (MSIT: 2018M3A9H4077992 and 2020R1C1C1008451) and the KRIBB Research Initiative Program (KGM9952112 and KGM9942213).FundingThis work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Government of Korea (MSIT: 2018M3A9H4077992 and 2020R1C1C1008451) and the KRIBB Research Initiative Program (KGM9942213 and KGM9952112).Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Chang-Ung Kim, Dahwan Lim.Authors and AffiliationsInfectious Disease Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, South KoreaChang-Ung Kim & Doo-Jin KimDepartment of Biochemistry, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, South KoreaDahwan Lim, Young Sang Kim & Doo-Jin KimDisease Target Structure Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, South KoreaDahwan Lim & Bonsu KuUniversity of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, South KoreaBonsu Ku & Doo-Jin KimAuthorsChang-Ung KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDahwan LimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYoung Sang KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBonsu KuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDoo-Jin KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsStudy conception and design: CUK, DL, YSK, DJK. Methodology: CUK, DJK. Analysis and interpretation of results: CUK, DL, BK, DJK. Investigation: CUK, DL, BK, YSK, DJK. Validation: CUK, DL, YSK, BK, DJK. Resources: BK, DJK. Original draft preparation: CUK, DL, BK. Draft review & editing: CUK, BK, DJK. Final edition: BK, DJK. Supervision: BK, DJK. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Bonsu Ku or Doo-Jin Kim.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Edited by Professor Hans-Uwe SimonSupplementary informationSupplementary Figure 1-7ChecklistOriginal Data FileRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleKim, CU., Lim, D., Kim, Y.S. et al. Influenza viral matrix 1 protein aggravates viral pathogenicity by inducing TLR4-mediated reactive oxygen species production and apoptotic cell death. Cell Death Dis 14, 228 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-05749-5Download citationReceived: 06 November 2022Revised: 14 March 2023Accepted: 16 March 2023Published: 30 March 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-05749-5Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Generation of “OP7 chimera” defective interfering influenza A particle preparations free of infectious virus that show antiviral efficacy in mice Tanya DograLars PelzUdo Reichl Scientific Reports (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Information About the Editors Open access publishing Contact For Advertisers Press Releases About the Partner Upcoming Conferences Publish with us For Authors & Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Cell Death & Disease (Cell Death Dis) ISSN 2041-4889 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedBird flu FAQ: What is avian influenza? How is it transmitted to humans? What are the symptoms? Are there effective treatments and vaccines? Will H5N1 become the next viral pandemic? Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair Avian influenza (‘bird flu’) is a highly transmissible and usually mild disease that affects wild birds such as geese, swans, seagulls, shorebirds, and also domestic birds such as chickens and turkeys. (CDC and NIAID), CC BY Bird flu FAQ: What is avian influenza? How is it transmitted to humans? What are the symptoms? Are there effective treatments and vaccines? Will H5N1 become the next viral pandemic? Published: March 27, 2023 7.54pm BST Sameer Elsayed, Western University Author Sameer Elsayed Professor of Medicine, Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, and Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Western University Disclosure statement Sameer Elsayed does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment. Partners Western University provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR.Western University provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA. View all partners Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger Avian influenza (“bird flu”) is a highly contagious viral infection that affects wild and domestic birds worldwide. It has recently gained notoriety for its devastating impact on the commercial poultry sector and as an emerging human public health threat. What are avian influenza viruses? Influenza viruses belong to the Orthomyxovirus family and are grouped into four species designated by the letters A (Alpha), B (Beta), C (Gamma) and D (Delta). Almost all influenza infections in humans are caused by influenza A and B viruses. Influenza A viruses have been named avian (bird), swine (pig), equine (horse), canine (dog), chiropteran (bat) and human, based on their natural reservoir (the organism where they are most commonly found). Influenza species and host-specific forms of Influenza A. (Sameer Elsayed), Author provided Avian influenza and other Influenza A viruses are categorized into subtypes according to the composition of their hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) surface proteins. There are 18 known H types (H1 to H18) and 11 known N types (N1 to N11). The combination of an H type and an N type defines a specific influenza virus subtype (for example, H5N1). What do we know about avian influenza? Avian influenza (“bird flu”) was first described in the late 1800s. It’s a highly transmissible and usually mild disease of wild birds such as geese, swans, seagulls, shorebirds, and also domestic birds such as chickens and turkeys. It is usually caused by influenza A viruses with an H5 or H7 hemaglutinin type, for example, H5N1 or H7N9. In Canada and the U.S., outbreaks of H5N1 influenza in domestic and wild birds have been reported in most regions. Wikimedia Commons/Woodly Wonderwords, CC BY While many forms of these viruses are minimally virulent — meaning they cause mild disease — some are highly virulent, meaning that they cause more serious disease. Millions of poultry deaths in Asia, Europe, the Americas and Australia have been attributed to highly virulent forms of H5N1, H5N8, H7N7 and H7N9, with H5N1 accounting for the vast majority of cases. In Canada and the U.S., outbreaks of H5N1 influenza in domestic and wild birds have been reported in most regions. How is avian influenza transmitted to humans? Bird flu cannot be transmitted by eating cooked poultry products. (Unsplash/Tofan Teodor) Avian influenza viruses are not easily transmitted from birds to humans or to other animals. Humans are accidental hosts — meaning that the virus does not typically circulate among people. Humans may acquire the virus after inhaling birds’ respiratory droplets or exposure of their mucus membranes to bird feces, saliva or contaminated surfaces. Bird flu cannot be transmitted by eating cooked poultry products. Always follow food safety guidelines for cooking and for handling raw poultry. Recently discovered mutations in the neuraminidase (N) gene of H5N1 viruses isolated from humans appear to promote bird-to-human transmission. Fortunately, human-to-human transmission is extremely rare. When was avian influenza first reported in humans? The first human cases of avian influenza were reported in 1997 by public health authorities in Hong Kong. These infections were linked to poultry infected with a highly virulent H5N1 subtype. Of the 18 affected individuals, six (33 per cent) succumbed to their illness. Since then, avian influenza has been responsible for at least 2,600 infections and over 1,000 deaths in humans worldwide. In the majority of human cases, infection was acquired following exposure to live poultry rather than wild birds. Human infections due to avian influenza viruses have primarily been caused by subtypes H5N1, H5N6, H7N7 and H7N9. All but two of the documented human fatalities to date have occurred in low-to-middle-income countries, likely as a consequence of the total case burden and lack of access to antiviral drugs. What are the signs and symptoms of avian influenza in humans? How is it diagnosed? Early symptoms of avian influenza in humans are similar to those caused by seasonal influenza viruses such as H3N2 and H1N1. Typical symptoms include fevers, chills, muscle aches, cough, sore throat, shortness of breath, headache and fatigue. Infections caused by highly virulent forms of H5N1 or H7N9 subtypes may follow a more severe course of illness characterized by internal bleeding, multi-organ failure and a high mortality rate. The combination of an influenza-like illness and a recent history of exposure to live poultry should raise suspicion for avian influenza. The diagnosis is confirmed by detection of viral RNA in nasopharyngeal specimens using tests for specific subtypes. What treatments are available for avian influenza? Antiviral drugs belonging to the neuraminidase inhibitor (such as oseltamivir) and endonuclease inhibitor classes (for example, baloxivir) appear to be highly effective against most avian influenza subtypes, including H5N1 and H7N9. However, antiviral resistance has been well documented and represents a threat to the potency of these agents in the face of constant viral evolution. Is there a human vaccine against avian influenza? Human vaccines against avian flu have been developed and approved, but current stockpiles are unlikely to meet demand if there is a surge in human infections. Wikimedia/U.S. Marine Corps/Jackeline Perez Rivera Licensed vaccines exist to protect humans against avian influenza, although they are not commercially available. In 2007, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved an H5N1 vaccine for adults ages 18 and older. These vaccines form part of the U.S. government’s Strategic National Stockpile (SNS) of medicines for deployment in the event of a public health emergency. In 2013, the FDA approved a second H5N1 vaccine that is also part of the SNS. Similar vaccines are licensed in other jurisdictions. All of these vaccines were shown to be safe and effective at the time of approval. In contrast, H5N1 vaccines for use in animals are commercially available. Vaccination of poultry has been widely adopted in China and other low-to-middle income countries. The U.S. and Europe are gearing up for a massive poultry vaccination campaign to curtail the spread of bird flu. How else can I protect myself against avian influenza? Avoiding direct contact with live poultry is perhaps the single most effective measure to prevent development of avian influenza. If exposure to potentially infected birds cannot be avoided, personal protective gear including gloves, gowns, face masks and eye shields should be worn. Hands should be thoroughly washed with soap and water after all potential exposures. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers are less effective at inactivating influenza viruses compared to handwashing. Are bird feeders safe to use? There are divergent opinions on the potential role of bird feeders in spreading the disease. (Unsplash/Grayson Smith) Although there is currently a negligible risk of developing avian influenza following wild bird exposure, there are divergent opinions on the role of bird feeders in potentially spreading the disease. The British Columbia Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals recommends temporarily abandoning the practice of using backyard bird feeders. In contrast, the U.S. Department of Agriculture does not recommend against their use unless poultry are being farmed in the area. Is avian influenza the next viral pandemic? There is no way to predict if avian influenza will evolve into a pandemic affecting humans. Mitigation strategies to prevent cross-species transmission include large-scale pre-emptive vaccination of domestic birds and culling of infected flocks. Of major concern is the potential for novel avian influenza subtypes to emerge through antigenic shift. This phenomenon involves reassortment of hemaglutinin and neuraminidase genes when a single host is infected with more than one viral subtype. As such, avian influenza is a prime contender as a pandemic viral disease of animals and humans alike. Current stockpiles of avian influenza vaccines for human use will likely be inadequate to meet societal needs should there be a surge in human infections over time. Public health Infectious diseases Vaccines Birds Pandemic Avian flu H5N1 Chickens Antiviral drugs Zoonoses Avian flu Viruses Poultry Bird flu Culling One Health Listen to this article Events More events Jobs Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Student Academic Misconduct Officer Commissioning Editor Nigeria Professor in Physiotherapy Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationHow a tight supply from the deadliest bird flu outbreak is hammering the egg industry | Food Dive Skip to main content CONTINUE TO SITE ➞ Don't miss tomorrow's food industry news Let Food Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox. Daily Dive M-F Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Topics Sign up Search Sign up Search Finances & Deals Food Tech Manufacturing Ingredients Corporate Ops Packaging Policy Protein Beverages Sustainability An article from How a tight supply from the deadliest bird flu outbreak is hammering the egg industry Since the virus surfaced last February, tens of millions of farm-raised birds in the U.S. have died, and eggs have seen skyrocketing prices. Published March 30, 2023 • By Chris Casey , Shaun Lucas and Rose Palazzolo Workers at the Schoenecke organic-accredited poultry farm check chicken eggs for defects in Elstorf, Germany, on Jan. 7, 2011. Joern Pollex via Getty Images The current global outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI), a form of bird flu (H5N1), began in early 2022 and has resulted in the deaths of over 58 million chickens and turkeys. This group, of course, includes egg-laying hens, and experts fear that the virus will continue to spread. The current outbreak led to a severely strained egg supply and caused skyrocketing prices and record profits for producers early in 2023. The price of eggs has increased over the last year because of an avian flu outbreak that has impacted chicken farms across the country. Eggs are for sale on an almost empty shelf at a grocery store in Kansas City, Mo, on Jan. 23, 2023. Aaron M. Sprecher/AP Experts worry the current migration season could cause the avian virus to spread further or mutate among poultry. While it is not currently endemic to U.S. poultry flocks, the virus reaching that point could have a significant impact on food safety, Maurice Pitesky, a poultry health professor at the University of California, Davis told Food Dive. Workers spray a vehicle before it leaves a large-scale commercial poultry farm operated by Daybreak Foods, which has been designated a "biosecurity area" after an avian influenza outbreak in Eagle Grove, Iowa, on May 17, 2015. Scott Olson via Getty Images Millions of dead chickens and turkeys decomposing in fly-swarmed piles near dozens of Iowa farms, culled because of a bird flu virus that swept through the state's large poultry operations on May 7, 2015. Iowa Department of Natural Resources/AP Turkeys stand in a barn on the Moline family turkey farm in Manson, Iowa, on Aug. 10, 2015. The Moline farm was the first Iowa farm to restock after the bird flu outbreak that killed 48 million birds in 15 states. Charlie Neibergall/AP The impact of bird flu In 2015, avian influenza subtype H5N2 was identified in a series of chicken and turkey farming operations in the Midwest, according to USDA. That outbreak affected nearly 50 million birds and was the costliest animal health emergency in the history of USDA, the government agency reported. By summer 2015, more than 43 million birds were culled, including nearly 30 million in Iowa alone, the state with the largest egg operations, the Los Angeles Times reported. The average price of eggs increased 120% between April 22 and May 30, 2015. The effects, however, were seen nationwide, with prices in California up 71% in the same timeframe. Cases subsided in 2016, according to the CDC. The current bird flu outbreak, which started in January 2022, has since spread to 47 states, the CDC said. By November 2022, 50 million birds were infected. The government has not reported any new cases of bird flu among commercial or backyard flocks since late December, meaning the spread of the virus may have temporarily subsided. Microbiologist Anne Vandenburg-Carroll tests poultry samples collected from a farm located in a control area for the presence of avian influenza at the Wisconsin Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory in Madison, Wisconsin, on March 24, 2022. Scott Olson via Getty Images Following months of increases, prices of eggs at grocery stores decreased 6.7% in February, according to the Consumer Price Index from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The current strain of the bird flu virus, H5N1, was first identified in 1996 in geese in China, and in people in Hong Kong in 1997. Government workers collect chickens at a Hong Kong farm after the government ordered the slaughter of all 1.2 million chickens in a move to stamp out a mysterious bird virus that killed four people on Dec. 29, 1997. Larry Chan/Pool/AP “At the end of the day, this is a continuum of the same outbreak that started back in 1996,” Dr. Malik Peiris, chief of virology at the University of Hong Kong, who has helped oversee responses to several bird flu outbreaks in Southeast Asia told the New York Times. “Really, it never went away.” HPAI is carried by aquatic birds, such as ducks, that can transmit the virus rapidly to domestic poultry through contact with bodily secretions, according to the CDC. South Korean soldiers and national veterinary and quarantine service personnel pass a roadblock on their way bury hundreds of carcasses at a duck farm affected by a highly pathogenic avian influenza in Cheonan, Seoul, on Dec. 22, 2003. Chung Sung-Jun via Getty Images The spring migration, which is happening currently and is projected to conclude in May, has experts and industry figures worried that it will continue to spread to commercial flocks. Several vaccines against HPAI have been developed. In March 2023, the Biden administration announced plans to test a vaccine for poultry, potentially to use on a large scale in the United States. A barnyard hen's egg (top) and a quail's egg sit in the palm of a hand in 1950. Douglas Grundy/Three Lions via Getty Images A farm worker packs eggs in the 1930s. General Photographic Agency via Getty Images Innovative engineer Mr. Reginald Carter proudly poses with his new invention, the Egg-O-Matic, which simplifies the messy business of egg buying on May 4, 1960. Chris Ware/Keystone Features via Getty Images A bit of egg history Humans have eaten eggs for about 6 million years. The first people to eat eggs most likely took them from nests in the wild and ate the eggs raw, according to the American Egg Board. Wild jungle birds were domesticated for egg production in India by 3200 BC, the American Egg Board reported, and it is thought that ancient Egypt and China were the first to domesticate hens. Joseph Coyle’s design patent for the egg carton. US Patent The egg carton was invented by Joseph Coyle in 1911 in Smithers, British Columbia. Lore has it that the carton was created to resolve a dispute about broken eggs between a farmer and the owner of a hotel. Early egg cartons were made of paper. The U.S. egg industry began as a backyard business. In the early 1900s, farmers raised hens to provide eggs for their families, according to The American Egg Board. Extra eggs were sold at local markets. As the demand for eggs grew, farmers increased the size of their flocks. The farmers had more eggs to sell, but they had more problems, too. Conveyor belts and egg washers were introduced. Farm girls washing eggs, before they go into an incubator for post war poultry re-stocking on May 1, 1945. Fox Photos via Getty Images By the early 1960s, the egg industry was shifting from small farm flocks to larger commercial operations. Today, robots are common in commercial operations. An employee works at the egg sorting and packing line of the Labinsky breeding poultry plant, in Krasnodar region, Russia. The enterprise produces incubation and commercial chicken eggs. Vitaly Timkiv/Sputnik/AP Iowa leads the nation with more than 14.8 billion eggs produced annually. Ohio is next in line, producing 7.9 billion eggs each year. In 2022, around 9.1 billion dozens of eggs were produced, according to Statista data. Bill Powers checks on his flock of white turkeys, which have been kept under shelter all year to prevent exposure to avian influenza, at his family's farm in Townsend, Delaware, on Nov. 14, 2022. Nathan Howard via Getty Images In the U.S., eggs are washed. In the UK and the rest of Europe, eggs usually are not washed and do not require refrigeration since their cuticle is undamaged. Washing the cuticle cleans the shell, but erodes its cuticle. Chicken eggs are colored for Easter at Baumeister Frischei egg and chicken farm in Breckerfeld, Germany on April 10, 2014. Sascha Schuermann via Getty Images The Easter Egg may symbolize religious traditions, but it’s believed that the origin of eggs being part of the beginning of spring is actually a pagan one. According to the Los Angeles Times: The pre-Christian Ukrainians thought the egg personified the coming of spring ⸺ a celebration of the rebirth after the long death of nature in winter. They began to follow the pagan ritual of coloring eggs as a form of thanking the sun for warming the Earth an event that became an essential component of Easter celebrations as they are known today. Credits Chris Casey Staff Reporter Shaun Lucas Visuals Editor Rose Palazzolo Lead Editor Recommended Reading Egg prices to remain high for as long as bird flu continues, experts say By Chris Casey • Feb. 2, 2023 Cal-Maine hits record earnings as egg prices skyrocket, but shares drop By Chris Casey • Jan. 3, 2023 Experts worry migration season could further spread of bird flu By Chris Casey • March 14, 2023 purchase licensing rights Filed Under: Ingredients, Meat / Protein Food Dive news delivered to your inbox Get the free daily newsletter read by industry experts Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Company Announcements View all | Post a press release Edlong Announces Acquisition of Brisan Group From The Edlong Corporation October 30, 2024 Applied Food Sciences Introduces PurGinseng™ – The First-of-Its-Kind GRAS Panax Ginseng Extrac… From Applied Food Sciences October 23, 2024 Prime Shrimp Expands Retail Footprint to Include Select Whole Foods Market Locations Across th… From Prime Shrimp November 05, 2024 Brightseed’s Forager® AI Platform Named One Of TIME’s Best Inventions Of 2024 From Brightseed October 30, 2024 Company Announcements Edlong Announces Acquisition of Brisan Group From The Edlong Corporation Applied Food Sciences Introduces PurGinseng™ – The First-of-Its-Kind GRAS Panax Ginseng Extrac… From Applied Food Sciences Prime Shrimp Expands Retail Footprint to Include Select Whole Foods Market Locations Across th… From Prime Shrimp Brightseed’s Forager® AI Platform Named One Of TIME’s Best Inventions Of 2024 From Brightseed View all | Post a press release Explore About Editorial Team Contact Us Newsletter Purchase Licensing Rights Press Releases What We're Reading Reach our audience Advertising Post a press release Submit an opinion piece Promote an event Related Publications Grocery Dive Restaurant Dive image/svg+xml Industry Dive is an Informa business © 2024 Industry Dive. All rights reserved. | View our other publications | Privacy policy | Terms of use | Take down policy. Cookie Preferences / Do Not Sell Search Home Topics Finances & Deals Food Tech Manufacturing Ingredients Corporate Ops Packaging Policy Protein Beverages Sustainability Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Get Food Dive in your inbox The free newsletter covering the top industry headlines Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter.COVID-19 or something else? - Harvard Health Harvard Health Publishing Harvard Health Publishing Search Search Search Close Shopping Cart Customer Service Content Licensing About Us Login Open mobile menu Menu Free HealthBeat Signup Shop Subscriptions Special Health Reports Online Courses Pay Subscription Bill Common Conditions Staying Healthy Resources Blog COVID-19 Updates Close menu Close Main Content Common Conditions Staying Healthy Resources Blog Helpful Links Customer Service About Us Login Content Licensing Free Healthbeat Signup Subscriptions Special Health Reports Online Courses Pay Subscription Bill Recent Blog Articles Could imaging scans replace biopsies during prostate cancer screening? Celiac disease: Exploring four myths Does drinking water before meals really help you lose weight? Which migraine medications are most helpful? Want a calmer brain? Try this Do tattoos cause lymphoma? PTSD: How is treatment changing? Concussion in children: What to know and do Ever hear of tonsil stones? Midlife ADHD? Coping strategies that can help / Staying Healthy COVID-19 or something else? March 29, 2023 Learn how COVID-19 symptoms compare to other illnesses, and when you should call the doctor. Before 2020, you might not have worried much about a tickle in your throat or a little tightness in your chest. But that’s changed. Now even slight signs of a respiratory bug might make you wonder if it’s the start of COVID-19, the flu, a cold or something else? How do you distinguish one illness from another? It’s complicated. Many of the symptoms overlap. For example, it’s very hard for me clinically, as a physician, to be able to look at someone and say it’s COVID-19, influenza or a common cold. Don’t jump to conclusions if you start to feel sick. Learn the hallmarks of common illnesses and how they differ from COVID-19, so you can take the appropriate action. COVID-19 COVID-19 is an extremely contagious respiratory illness caused by a type of virus (a coronavirus) called SARS-CoV-2. It’s a cousin of the common cold, but its potential consequences are far more serious. Hallmarks: Loss of taste and smell (in the absence of nasal congestion), fever, cough, shortness of breath, and muscle aches. Other potential symptoms: Sore throat, diarrhea, congestion, runny nose, chills, shivering, headache, fatigue, and loss of appetite. Note: Some infected people don’t have any symptoms of COVID-19, but they’re still contagious. Influenza Influenza (flu) is a highly contagious respiratory infection caused by the influenza A, B, or C virus. The U.S. flu season typically lasts from October to March, but flu is present year-round. Hallmarks: Fever, muscle aches, and cough. Other potential symptoms: Sore throat, diarrhea, congestion, runny nose, chills, shivering, headache, fatigue, loss of appetite. Different from COVID-19: Flu usually does not cause shortness of breath. Common cold The common cold (viral rhinitis) is an upper respiratory infection that can be caused by any of hundreds of different viruses (including coronaviruses or rhinoviruses). It’s usually mild and resolves within a week. Hallmarks: Congestion, runny nose, cough, and sore throat. Other potential symptoms: Fever, muscle aches, and fatigue. Different from COVID-19: A cold does not cause shortness of breath, body aches, chills, or loss of appetite, and it usually doesn’t cause fever. Seasonal allergies A seasonal allergy isn’t a virus; it’s caused when the immune system responds to a harmless non-human substance, like tree pollen, as if it were a dangerous threat. Allergies are typically seasonal, lasting for weeks or months, depending on the allergen in the air (mold is the common allergen in the fall and winter). Hallmarks: Runny nose, itchy eyes, sneezing, congestion. Other potential symptoms: Loss of smell from congestion. Different from COVID-19: Allergies do not cause fevers, coughing, shortness of breath, muscle aches, sore throat, diarrhea, chills, headaches, fatigue, or loss of appetite. Asthma Asthma is a chronic lung condition caused by inflammation in the air passages. Airways narrow and make it harder to breathe, which can cause concern that it might be COVID-19. "Asthma-like" symptoms can be triggered by a cold or influenza, but asthma is a separate condition. Hallmarks: Wheezing (a whistling sound as air is forcibly expelled), difficulty breathing, chest tightness, and a persistent cough. Other potential symptoms: A severe asthma attack can cause sudden, extreme shortness of breath; chest tightness; a rapid pulse; sweating; and bluish discoloration of the lips and fingernails. Different from COVID-19: Asthma does not cause a fever, muscle aches, sore throat, diarrhea, congestion, loss of taste or smell, runny nose, chills, shivering, headache, fatigue, or loss of appetite. What you should do Don’t be a hero and try to tough out an illness. Call your doctor to report any concerning symptoms, whether or not your home COVID test is positive or negative. It’s a different era from when you didn’t want to bother your doctor. Don’t deny yourself care. Your doctor would never want that. And the earlier you call, the sooner you can be treated if you need it. Image: © Dave & Les Jacobs/Getty Images Share This Page Share this page to Facebook Share this page to Twitter Share this page via Email Print This Page Click to Print Disclaimer: As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content. Please note the date of last review or update on all articles. No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician. Recent Blog Articles Could imaging scans replace biopsies during prostate cancer screening? Celiac disease: Exploring four myths Does drinking water before meals really help you lose weight? Which migraine medications are most helpful? Want a calmer brain? Try this Do tattoos cause lymphoma? PTSD: How is treatment changing? Concussion in children: What to know and do Ever hear of tonsil stones? Midlife ADHD? Coping strategies that can help / Related Content Diseases & Conditions Can't shake that cough? Diseases & Conditions Why does everything taste salty to me? Diseases & Conditions Do you really have a drug allergy? Allergies COVID-19 Infectious diseases Lung Health Free Healthbeat Signup Get the latest in health news delivered to your inbox! Sign Up Footer Harvard Health Publishing Facebook Twitter Linkedin YouTube My Account Customer Service Log in Order Now Online Learning Courses Digital Subscriptions Special Health Reports Print Subscriptions More About Us Permissions Content Licensing Topics Trademark Notice © 2024 Harvard Health Publishing® of The President and Fellows of Harvard College Do not sell my personal information | Privacy Policy and Terms of Use Scroll To Top Close Thanks for visiting. Don't miss your FREE gift. The Best Diets for Cognitive Fitness, is yours absolutely FREE when you sign up to receive Health Alerts from Harvard Medical School Sign up to get tips for living a healthy lifestyle, with ways to fight inflammation and improve cognitive health, plus the latest advances in preventative medicine, diet and exercise, pain relief, blood pressure and cholesterol management, and more. I want to get healthier This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Close Health Alerts from Harvard Medical School Get helpful tips and guidance for everything from fighting inflammation to finding the best diets for weight loss...from exercises to build a stronger core to advice on treating cataracts. PLUS, the latest news on medical advances and breakthroughs from Harvard Medical School experts. BONUS! Sign up now and get a FREE copy of theBest Diets for Cognitive Fitness I want to get healthier This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Close Stay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School. Plus, get a FREE copy of the Best Diets for Cognitive Fitness. Sign me up Close Stay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School. Plus, get a FREE copy of the Best Diets for Cognitive Fitness. Sign me up This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.Pathology Case of the Month - Bald Eagle | U.S. Geological Survey Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock () or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. U.S. Geological Survey Science Science Explorer Biology Climate Coasts Energy Environmental Health Geology Information Systems Maps and Mapping Minerals Methods and Analysis Natural Hazards Ocean Planetary Science Science Technology Water Mission Areas Core Science Systems Ecosystems Energy and Minerals Natural Hazards Water Resources Programs Regions Northeast Region Southeast Region Midcontinent Region Rocky Mountain Region Southwest Region Alaska Region Northwest-Pacific Islands Region Science Centers Observatories Laboratories Frequently Asked Questions Educational Resources Special Topics USGS Celebrates the Year of Open Science Products Data Data Management Data Releases Real-time Data All Data Maps Geologic Maps Map Releases Topographic (Topo) Maps Volcanic Maps All Maps Multimedia Gallery Audio Images Stereograms Videos Webcams All Multimedia Publications Web Tools Alert and Notification Services APIs Data Access Tools Data Analysis Tools Data Visualizations Interactive Maps All Web Tools Software U.S. Board on Geographic Names The National Map USGS Library USGS Store Park Passes News News Releases National News Releases State News Releases All News Releases Featured Stories Science Snippets Technical Announcements Employees in the News Get Our News Media Contacts Newsletters I'm a Reporter Earthquake Questions Request Footage Multimedia Gallery Connect Headquarters 12201 Sunrise Valley Drive Reston, VA 20192 Locations Staff Profiles Social Media Careers Contact Us 1-888-392-8545 Live Chat Email USGS Store 1-888-275-8747 About About Us Who We Are Our History Past Directors Survey Manual Key Officials Organizational Chart Organization Mission Areas Programs Regions Science Centers Observatories Laboratories Science Support Offices Congressional Statements Contacts Budget Careers and Employees Diversity and Equal Opportunity Doing Business Acquisition and Financial Assistance Partners and Cooperators Building Partnerships Emergency Management Facebook Twitter Linkedin Digg Reddit Pinterest Email Latest Earthquakes | Chat Share Social Media Label Menu Label Close U.S. Geological Survey Science Science Explorer Mission Areas Programs Regions Science Centers Observatories Laboratories Frequently Asked Questions Educational Resources Special Topics USGS Celebrates the Year of Open Science Products Data Maps Multimedia Gallery Publications Web Tools Software U.S. Board on Geographic Names The National Map USGS Library USGS Store Park Passes News News Releases Featured Stories Science Snippets Technical Announcements Employees in the News Get Our News Media Contacts Newsletters I'm a Reporter Connect Headquarters Locations Staff Profiles Social Media Careers Contact Us About About Us Survey Manual Key Officials Organization Congressional Budget Careers and Employees Diversity and Equal Opportunity Doing Business Emergency Management Latest Earthquakes Live WebChat Share Social Media Facebook Twitter Linkedin Digg Reddit Pinterest Email Breadcrumb News Breadcrumb News Pathology Case of the Month - Bald Eagle By National Wildlife Health Center March 31, 2023 Case History: A Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) was found dead in December 2022 in Wisconsin, USA. The bird was found sprawled across a raised log along a dead-end access road with no obvious external signs of injuries. This bird was submitted for necropsy examination and diagnostic testing. Gross Findings: This subadult female Bald Eagle was in excellent body condition, with abundant subcutaneous, visceral, and epicardial fat stores. The bird was in fair postmortem condition. The pancreas was reddened and had 1-2 dozen multifocal pinpoint to 5 x 5 mm diameter tan foci throughout (Fig. 1A). The spleen was dark purple and had 1-2 dozen pinpoint white foci throughout (Fig. 1B). The liver contained 1-2 dozen linear black foci throughout ranging from 1 x <1 mm to 2 x 1 mm. The gall bladder was distended with dark green, slightly viscous bile. The external surface of the cerebellum was dark red. Remaining tissues not described were within normal limits. Sources/Usage: Public Domain. View Media Details Figure 1. Photographs from a Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) found dead in Wisconsin, USA. (A) The pancreas is reddened and has pinpoint to coalescing tan foci of necrosis (arrows). (B) The spleen contains pinpoint tan foci (arrows). Histopathological Findings: In one region of the cerebrum there are small perivascular cuffs of mononuclear cells and rare heterophils with scattered foci of gliosis, and rare acutely necrotic neurons (Fig. 2A). There are foci of acute necrosis in multiple organs, including the pancreas (Fig. 2B), liver, spleen, kidney (Fig. 2C), and adrenal glands. The heart has small foci with loss of myofibers and replacement by degenerate mononuclear cells (Fig 2D). In addition, there is fibrinoid vascular necrosis of a few arteries in the portal triads of the liver, moderate lymphoid depletion in the spleen, marked heterophilic inflammation segmentally in the ureters, and a small amount of acute myofiber degeneration in the pectoral and thigh skeletal muscles. Incidentally, there is mild to moderate parasitism present, with trematode eggs and black pigment within the liver with associated fibrosis and inflammation, moderate numbers of Capillarid nematodes and eggs with bipolar plugs in the mucosa of the esophagus, 3-4 degenerate parasites in the mucosa of the small intestine, and rare protozoal cysts within small numbers of myofibers in the heart. Sources/Usage: Public Domain. View Media Details Figure 2. Photomicrographs from a Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) found dead in Wisconsin, USA. (A) In the brain, there is a region in the cerebrum with small perivascular cuffs of mononuclear cells and rare heterophils (arrow), scattered foci of gliosis (*), and rare acutely necrotic neurons (inset). H&E stain. (B) The pancreas has large areas of acute necrosis (N) effacing the parenchyma. H&E stain. (C) The kidneys have small foci of acute necrosis (N) effacing the parenchyma. H&E stain. (D) The myofibers of the heart are multifocally replaced by degenerate mononuclear cells (*). H&E stain. Ancillary Test(s): In-house testing detected the avian influenza matrix gene, the H5 gene, and the Eurasian lineage clade H5 2.3.4.4 strain in tracheal and cloacal swabs by rRT-PCR; the H7 gene was not detected. Additional testing performed at the USDA National Veterinary Services Laboratories (NVSL) confirmed the Eurasian lineage H5 clade 2.3.4.4 and the N1 gene by rRT-PCR on the tracheal swab. The final report from NVSL with avian influenza hemagglutinin cleavage site analysis was pending at the time of this publication. In the current HPAI outbreak in wild birds in the USA beginning in January 2022, EA/AM 2.3.4.4 H5N1 is the common reassortant virus that is causing disease. Morphologic Diagnoses: Severe multifocal to coalescing acute pancreatic necrosis Mild mononuclear perivascular encephalitis with moderate multifocal gliosis and mild focally extensive acute neuronal necrosis Mild multifocal acute hepatic, spleen, renal, and adrenal cortical necrosis Mild multifocal subacute cardiac myofiber necrosis Marked segmental heterophilic ureteritis Liver, portal arteries: Moderate multifocal segmental to circumferential fibrinoid vascular necrosis Disease: Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) Etiology: Highly pathogenic avian influenza is caused by an influenza A virus. Avian influenza virus is deemed highly pathogenic based on its ability to cause morbidity and mortality in domestic poultry. The cause of the current HPAI outbreak in wild birds in the United States that began in January 2022 is H5 clade 2.3.4.4b. Distribution: Worldwide Host range: In general, all wild birds are susceptible to HPAI, though waterfowl (i.e., geese, swans, and ducks) are most commonly infected. Apparently healthy waterfowl have been shown to carry HPAI, and some groups of wild birds, such as raptors, appear to be more susceptible to disease than others. Songbirds appear to be low risk for HPAI infection compared to other wild birds. Mammals, including humans, may also be infected. Raptor species from which HPAI virus has been detected in the current HPAI outbreak in the USA include American Kestrel (Falco sparverius), Bald Eagle, Barred Owl (Strix varia), Broad-winged hawk (Buteo platypterus), Cooper’s Hawk (Accipiter cooperii), Crested Caracara (Caracara plancus), Eastern Screech Owl (Megascops asio), Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetos), Great Horned Owl (Bubo virginianus), Harris Hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus), Long-eared Owl (Asio otus), Merlin (F. columbarius), captive Northern Harrier (Circus hudsonius), Osprey (Pandion haliaetus), Peregrine Falcon (F. peregrinus), Prairie Falcon (Falco mexicanus), Red-shouldered Hawk (B. lineatus), Red-tailed Hawk (B. jamaicensis), Rough-legged Hawk (B. lagopus), Sharp-shinned Hawk (A. striatus), Short-eared Owl (A. flammeus), Snowy Owl (B. scandiacus), Swainson’s Hawk (Buteo swainsoni), and Western Screech Owl (Megascops kennicottii). Transmission: HPAI virus is found in oral and nasal secretions and in feces. It is maintained and spread by a fecal-oral transmission and inhalation. Migratory waterfowl may spread avian influenza viruses over long distances. HPAI virus is also found within tissues, thus making raptors susceptible to infection because they will feed on infected waterfowl. Clinical signs: There are often no clinical signs associated with HPAI in wild birds. When present, neurologic signs are most common and include swimming in circles, twisted necks, and tremors. Clinical signs in poultry are highly variable, including neurologic, respiratory, circulatory, and enteric abnormalities. Pathology: Gross findings vary depending on the species affected. Common findings include white to red foci within the pancreas indicative of necrosis and hemorrhage, white foci in the spleen and liver, and reddening of the cerebellum. However, some cases may have no obvious gross changes. Microscopic findings are variable and include inflammation in the meninges and brain, gliosis, neuronal necrosis, necrosis in the pancreas, liver, and spleen, necrosis and/or inflammation in the heart, and occasionally necrosis in the kidneys, adrenal glands, gonad, and intestine. In a small number of Bald Eagles examined at NWHC, encephalitis, gliosis, renal necrosis, myocardial necrosis and inflammation, and splenic necrosis were the most common histologic lesions. Diagnosis: Tracheal and cloacal swabs can be used for identifying infected wild birds that are not showing clinical signs. As gross and microscopic lesions are not necessarily specific to HPAI, confirmation using PCR on tracheal or cloacal swabs or tissues with microscopic changes is required. Public health concerns: The HPAI virus has the potential to infect humans, though reports are rare. HPAI should be considered a human health concern and appropriate precautions such as personal protective equipment and hand washing should be used if handling sick or dead birds. Wildlife population impacts: The susceptibility of wild birds in North America to recently discovered strains of HPAI continues to be investigated. As of March 14, 2023, HPAI virus has been detected in 6,444 live, hunter harvested, or dead wild and captive wild birds in all states except Hawaii, of which 1,215 have been raptors. As some populations of wild birds are more susceptible to HPAI, the emergence of this disease may be especially detrimental in certain threatened or endangered species. Management: Removal and disposal of potentially infected carcasses by properly trained individuals may be warranted to reduce scavenger, domestic animal, or human exposure. Visit unaffected sites first (if necessary) and then go to affected sites to avoid cross contamination of sites. Work areas/surfaces, equipment, and vehicles should be washed to remove organic material and then disinfected after use and between sites. Limiting contact with pet birds and poultry for 5 days after potential exposure to an HPAI infected bird may be warranted to prevent spread of potentially infectious agents. References: Cornell Wildlife Health Lab. 2018. Avian Influenza. Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine Animal Health Diagnostic Center. https://cwhl.vet.cornell.edu/system/files/public/cwhl-fact-sheets-ai.pdf. Accessed March 2022. USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. Last modified March 15, 2023. 2022-2023 Detections of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in Wild Birds. USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/animalhealth/animal-disease-information/avian/avian-influenza/hpai-2022/2022-hpai-wild-birds. Accessed March 2023. USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. June 2016. Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza and North American Wild Birds: Frequently Asked Questions. USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/animalhealth/animal-disease-information/avian/avian-influenza/ai-wild-birds. Accessed March 2023. Related Science Label link July 27, 2023 WHISPers WHISPers, the Wildlife Health Information Sharing Partnership - event reporting system, is a web-based repository of basic information on current and historic wildlife mortality (death) and/or morbidity (illness) events reported by partners nationwide. It is also the portal to request diagnostic and epidemiologic services from the USGS National Wildlife Health Center. By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link July 27, 2023 WHISPers WHISPers, the Wildlife Health Information Sharing Partnership - event reporting system, is a web-based repository of basic information on current and historic wildlife mortality (death) and/or morbidity (illness) events reported by partners nationwide. It is also the portal to request diagnostic and epidemiologic services from the USGS National Wildlife Health Center. Learn More link November 27, 2022 Distribution of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in North America, 2021/2022 The first 2021/2022 detection of Eurasian strain (EA) highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 in North America occurred in December 2021 in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. Subsequently, HPAI EA H5 and EA H5N1 viruses have been confirmed in wild birds, backyard flocks, commercial poultry facilities, and wild mammals in both Canada and the United States. This HPAI distribution map will be... By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link November 27, 2022 Distribution of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in North America, 2021/2022 The first 2021/2022 detection of Eurasian strain (EA) highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 in North America occurred in December 2021 in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. Subsequently, HPAI EA H5 and EA H5N1 viruses have been confirmed in wild birds, backyard flocks, commercial poultry facilities, and wild mammals in both Canada and the United States. This HPAI distribution map will be... Learn More link October 16, 2022 Avian Influenza Surveillance The USGS National Wildlife Health Center (NWHC) conducts surveillance in wild birds to facilitate early detection and situational awareness for high consequence pathogens, including highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses. By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link October 16, 2022 Avian Influenza Surveillance The USGS National Wildlife Health Center (NWHC) conducts surveillance in wild birds to facilitate early detection and situational awareness for high consequence pathogens, including highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses. Learn More link September 1, 2022 Pathology Case of the Month Notable cases at the National Wildlife Health Center are highlighted here in the Pathology Case of the Month Series. By Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link September 1, 2022 Pathology Case of the Month Notable cases at the National Wildlife Health Center are highlighted here in the Pathology Case of the Month Series. Learn More link July 24, 2018 Avian Influenza Avian influenza is a viral disease caused by various strains of avian influenza viruses that can be classified as low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) or highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI). It remains a global disease with potential high consequence with the potential to threaten wildlife, agriculture, and human health. By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link July 24, 2018 Avian Influenza Avian influenza is a viral disease caused by various strains of avian influenza viruses that can be classified as low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) or highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI). It remains a global disease with potential high consequence with the potential to threaten wildlife, agriculture, and human health. Learn More link March 29, 2018 Diagnostic Services The USGS National Wildlife Health Center (NWHC) conducts laboratory investigations to determine the causes of wildlife mortality events, especially large-scale die-offs or those that are otherwise unusual. By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link March 29, 2018 Diagnostic Services The USGS National Wildlife Health Center (NWHC) conducts laboratory investigations to determine the causes of wildlife mortality events, especially large-scale die-offs or those that are otherwise unusual. Learn More Related Science Label link July 27, 2023 WHISPers WHISPers, the Wildlife Health Information Sharing Partnership - event reporting system, is a web-based repository of basic information on current and historic wildlife mortality (death) and/or morbidity (illness) events reported by partners nationwide. It is also the portal to request diagnostic and epidemiologic services from the USGS National Wildlife Health Center. By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link July 27, 2023 WHISPers WHISPers, the Wildlife Health Information Sharing Partnership - event reporting system, is a web-based repository of basic information on current and historic wildlife mortality (death) and/or morbidity (illness) events reported by partners nationwide. It is also the portal to request diagnostic and epidemiologic services from the USGS National Wildlife Health Center. Learn More link November 27, 2022 Distribution of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in North America, 2021/2022 The first 2021/2022 detection of Eurasian strain (EA) highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 in North America occurred in December 2021 in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. Subsequently, HPAI EA H5 and EA H5N1 viruses have been confirmed in wild birds, backyard flocks, commercial poultry facilities, and wild mammals in both Canada and the United States. This HPAI distribution map will be... By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link November 27, 2022 Distribution of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in North America, 2021/2022 The first 2021/2022 detection of Eurasian strain (EA) highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 in North America occurred in December 2021 in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. Subsequently, HPAI EA H5 and EA H5N1 viruses have been confirmed in wild birds, backyard flocks, commercial poultry facilities, and wild mammals in both Canada and the United States. This HPAI distribution map will be... Learn More link October 16, 2022 Avian Influenza Surveillance The USGS National Wildlife Health Center (NWHC) conducts surveillance in wild birds to facilitate early detection and situational awareness for high consequence pathogens, including highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses. By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link October 16, 2022 Avian Influenza Surveillance The USGS National Wildlife Health Center (NWHC) conducts surveillance in wild birds to facilitate early detection and situational awareness for high consequence pathogens, including highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses. Learn More link September 1, 2022 Pathology Case of the Month Notable cases at the National Wildlife Health Center are highlighted here in the Pathology Case of the Month Series. By Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link September 1, 2022 Pathology Case of the Month Notable cases at the National Wildlife Health Center are highlighted here in the Pathology Case of the Month Series. Learn More link July 24, 2018 Avian Influenza Avian influenza is a viral disease caused by various strains of avian influenza viruses that can be classified as low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) or highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI). It remains a global disease with potential high consequence with the potential to threaten wildlife, agriculture, and human health. By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link July 24, 2018 Avian Influenza Avian influenza is a viral disease caused by various strains of avian influenza viruses that can be classified as low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) or highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI). It remains a global disease with potential high consequence with the potential to threaten wildlife, agriculture, and human health. Learn More link March 29, 2018 Diagnostic Services The USGS National Wildlife Health Center (NWHC) conducts laboratory investigations to determine the causes of wildlife mortality events, especially large-scale die-offs or those that are otherwise unusual. By Ecosystems Mission Area, Biological Threats and Invasive Species Research Program, National Wildlife Health Center link March 29, 2018 Diagnostic Services The USGS National Wildlife Health Center (NWHC) conducts laboratory investigations to determine the causes of wildlife mortality events, especially large-scale die-offs or those that are otherwise unusual. Learn More Get Our News These items are in the RSS feed format (Really Simple Syndication) based on categories such as topics, locations, and more. You can install and RSS reader browser extension, software, or use a third-party service to receive immediate news updates depending on the feed that you have added. If you click the feed links below, they may look strange because they are simply XML code. An RSS reader can easily read this code and push out a notification to you when something new is posted to our site. RSS Icon Biology News RSS Icon Ecosystems News RSS Icon National Wildlife Health Center News Authors Back to Top Science Science Explorer Mission Areas Programs Regions Science Centers Observatories Laboratories Frequently Asked Questions Educational Resources Special Topics Products Data Maps Publications Multimedia Gallery Web Tools Software U.S. Board on Geographic Names The National Map USGS Library USGS Store Park Passes News Featured Stories News Releases Science Snippets Technical Announcements Employees in the News Get Our News Media Contacts I'm a Reporter Newsletters Connect Headquarters Locations Staff Profiles Social Media Careers Contact Us About About Us Survey Manual Organization Key Officials Congressional Budget Careers and Employees Doing Business Emergency Management Legal Accessibility FOIA Site Policies Privacy Policy Site Map DOI and USGS link policies apply No FEAR Act USA.gov Vulnerability Disclosure Policy U.S. Geological Survey U.S. Department of the Interior Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram RSS Contact USGS 1-888-392-8545 answers.usgs.gov Was this page helpful?Dogs Can Carry Mutant Flu Strains | Scientific American Skip to main contentScientific AmericanApril 1, 20232 min readDogs Can Carry Mutant Flu StrainsA mutant human influenza found in two dogs shows the importance of viral surveillance in companion animalsBy Ida Emilie Steinmark katerinasergeevna/Getty ImagesJoin Our Community of Science Lovers!Sign Up for Our Free Daily NewsletterEmail AddressI agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Scientific American and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.Sign UpMutant strains of a common human flu virus have been found in dogs for the first time, prompting concerns that such viruses could start to spread easily among pets—and potentially evolve into dangerous new strains that jump back to humans.Nanjing Agricultural University virologist Shuo Su and his colleagues identified two dogs in southern China with different mutant strains of the influenza C virus, which infects almost all humans—mostly as children—and usually causes mild illness.The researchers genetically sequenced these strains and found that mutations affected their structure near the part that binds to a host's cells. These changes mean “it might be on the way to replicate better in dogs,” says Freie Universität Berlin biochemist Michael Veit, a co-author on the new work. People sometimes pass flu viruses to a pet dog, where the contagion typically stops. But the newly found strains' particular mutations suggest that they more likely spread from dog to dog, Veit says.On supporting science journalismIf you're enjoying this article, consider supporting our award-winning journalism by subscribing. By purchasing a subscription you are helping to ensure the future of impactful stories about the discoveries and ideas shaping our world today.Although most adults have already been exposed to influenza C, the researchers say we might have little immunity against a new strain that jumps back to humans after mutating in animals. For a letter published in the Journal of Infection, the scientists describe this finding and say it shows that viruses should be tracked more thoroughly in dogs and other pets through regular testing and sequencing. Cornell University animal virologist Colin Parrish, who was not involved in the study, says he would “certainly advocate” for that.“We have sort of ignored dogs and cats as potential reservoirs or intermediate hosts,” he says. The U.S. has no formal monitoring programs for viruses in pets, but Parrish's research group routinely surveys dogs for new respiratory viruses.Two flu viruses are known to spread among dogs around the world: one that jumped from horses and one from birds. In southern China, there are also reports of dogs spreading flu strains from pigs, suggesting the region could be an unusual hotspot for viruses in dogs.It is too early to say whether dog-borne influenza C will become a problem. More studies are needed to confirm the virus is spreading among these animals and, if so, how easily. But the researchers say it and other viruses should be monitored carefully to catch any emerging disease strains. Increasing surveillance “could be done really, really simply,” Parrish says.A good place to start would be kennels and similar places where viruses can easily spread and evolve, says University of Nottingham virologist Janet Daly, who was also not involved in the new study. “If you are keeping or farming animals at high density,” she says, “that's where you need to look.”Rights & PermissionsIda Emilie Steinmark is a freelance science journalist based in City. Follow her on Twitter @IEmSteinmarkMore by Ida Emilie SteinmarkThis article was originally published with the title “Pet Viruses” in Scientific American Magazine Vol. 328 No. 4 (April 2023), p. 15doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0423-15View This IssueExpand Your World with ScienceLearn and share the most exciting discoveries, innovations and ideas shaping our world today.SubscribeSign up for our newslettersSee the latest storiesRead the latest issueGive a Gift SubscriptionFollow Us:Return & Refund PolicyAboutPress RoomFAQsContact UsInternational EditionsAdvertiseAccessibility StatementTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyCalifornia Consumer Privacy StatementUse of cookies/Do not sell my dataScientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.© 2024 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, A DIVISION OF SPRINGER NATURE AMERICA, INC.ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.Flu 2019-2020: Symptoms, Treatment & Prevention Tips From DoctorsSearchJoin the CollectiveFitnessHealthHealthy MumsBeautyFoodTravelGym WearWorld of WooProject Body LoveAll VideosSubscribeNewslettersFollowCompetitionsPrivacy NoticeCookies PolicyOther EditionsPrivacy NoticeTerms Of UseSkip to ContentFitnessHealthBeautyNutritionThe EditHealthy MumsFinancial wellnessTravelSubscribeNewsletterThe cosiest loungewear 9 easy orgasm positions Scorpio seasonMattresses for back painWinter running leggingsWe earn a commission for products purchased through some links in this article.HealthConditionsThis is how to know if your cold is actually the fluThis is how to know if your cold is actually the fluPlus: the 9 symptoms to be aware of By Brittany Risher Englert and Medical Reviewer: Dr. Raj DasguptaUpdated: 27 March 2023Westend61//Getty ImagesAn intensely bunged up nose, a throat as rough as sandpaper and a general feeling of 'cannot adult today.' Being struck with a nasty cold is zero fun. But how do you know when yours has slid beyond the common virus – and into the realms of the flu? For expert intel, scroll on...9 symptoms of the fluSymptoms of influenza are often similar to those of a common cold, but appear suddenly and are more severe. This can include some or all of the following:Fever or feeling feverishAchy muscles, especially in your back, arms, and legsRunny or stuffy noseSore throatCoughChills and sweatsWeakness and fatigueHeadachesVomiting or diarrhoea (more common in children) What are the differences between a cold and the flu? Despite similar symptoms, a cold is milder than the flu and comes on more gradually. 'If you don’t feel horrible, you probably don’t have flu,' Dr. Joseph Ladapo, professor of medicine at UCLA, says. Most cold symptoms primarily show up above your neck (like swollen glands and a runny nose), while flu symptoms can impact your body above and below the neck. Ask yourself these questions:How severe does this feel?Cold: You feel a bit icky and things get worse slowly. The first signs to watch for include slight aches, a scratchy throat, headaches, and/or low-grade fever.Flu: The flu hits you hard. You may first feel feverish at first, and quickly become too fatigued to do daily activities. Every inch of your body aches.lemsip Lemsip Max Flu Lemon - 10 Sachets£6 at BootsCan I get out of bed?Cold: Yes, you can walk around. While you may not feel like going to work or getting your kids ready for school, you can still go about your day.Flu: Absolutely not—you’re flat on your back and staying there. Extreme fatigue is going to incapacitate you for at least a few days. What are the 5 stages of a cold? Sometimes a cold can feel like it lasts an eternity. And while everyone is different when it comes to symptoms, there is a general idea of the life cycle of cold. Days one to two and you don’t even think to Google ‘Common Cold stages’, as you feel absolutely fine. Come days two and three, you’ll start to feel a bit tired and sneezy, your body may ache and you’ll likely have an odd tickle or soreness in your throat that you just can’t shift. Days three to four are the part where you’re bunged up and your nose is running like a tap – it’s not nice as the colour changes from clear to thick greenish yellow.Due to inflammation around the airways, the cough may persist after your other symptoms are long gone.Day seven and it might just be time to call off that doctor's appointment. Common colds usually last around 7-10 days with most cold sufferers getting better with rest and over-the-counter remediesWhat causes the flu? When someone with the flu coughs or sneezes, droplets carrying the virus enter the air. You can catch the flu if you inhale these droplets through your nose or mouth, or if you touch objects such as doorknobs or keyboards that are contaminated with the virus and then touch your nose, eyes, or mouth. If you have the flu, you can spread the virus a day before your symptoms develop and up to seven days after you become sick. People with the flu are most contagious during the first three to four days of their illness. If it is flu season and you are generally healthy and experience symptoms, you don’t need to see a doctor right away, says Dr. Ladapo. Simply treat your symptoms with rest and over-the-counter medications, such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen. However, anyone who is at high risk—that is, a child, older adult, pregnant woman, or someone with a chronic condition such as diabetes, heart disease, or stroke—see your doctor. 'He or she can follow up with you to confirm that things are going in the right direction,' Dr. Ladapo says, or advise on seeking more care if they feel it’s necessary.The Best Cold and Flu MedicinesOtrivine Adult Measured Dose Sinusitis Spray 10ml£6 at lloydspharmacy.comStrepsils Sore Throat and Cough Lozenges - 24 Lozenges£6 at lloydspharmacy.comLemsip Max All In One Cold & Flu Capsules 16 CapsulesNow 27% Off£4 at lloydspharmacy.comVicks Mentholated Rub 50g£3 at lloydspharmacy.comFrom: Prevention USWatch Next Advertisement - Continue Reading BelowConditionsThis is how long it takes to recover from a cold Black poo? Here're 5 possible reasons whyThis is how high your blood pressure should beWhy do I keep getting trapped wind? Advertisement - Continue Reading BelowExperts on how to get rid of a UTI Here’s why you keep getting acid reflux What are the early signs of a thyroid problem?What exactly is insulin resistance? How to reduce cortisol - and why you might need toLyme disease: what actually is it? What you need to know about ulcerative colitis What not to say to someone dealing with cancer Advertisement - Continue Reading BelowCelebrity WorkoutsLeggingsHairFat LossWorkoutsYogaGym WearMental HealthSleepHealthy EatingRecipesSubscribeWoman's Health HolidaysWomen's Health, Part of the Hearst UK Wellbeing NetworkWe earn a commission for products purchased through some links in this article.©2024 Hearst UK is the trading name of the National Magazine Company Ltd, 30 Panton Street, Leicester Square, London, SW1Y 4AJ. Registered in England 112955. All rights reserved.About & how to contact usCookies PolicyTerms and ConditionsComplaintsPrivacy NoticeSitemapAdvertisingCookies ChoicesSwine Flu: Are We At Risk for Mass Human Infections? Skip to content • Health & Wellness Health Stories + solutions for a changing world 11/06/24 Wed November 6th. News Climate Food Health Policy Science Search English Español Diet Lifestyle Mental Health Nutrition Public Health Toxic Planet Climate Environment Pollution Justice Oceans Wildlife Research Industry Policy Food Solutions Food Systems Food Waste Food Aquaculture Workers Investigations Food Waste Food Systems Industry Innovations Sustainable Farming Research Food Labeling Health Nutrition Public Health Lifestyle Diet Mental Health Beauty Toxic Planet Policy Entertainment Sanctuaries Law & Justice Reflections Workers Sport Animal Testing Investigations Justice Research Future of Food Election 2024 Meat Lobby Science Technology Sentience Research Breakthroughs Animal Testing Animal Behavior Mythbusting Search English Español Instagram Facebook X Mastodon LinkedIn YouTube Resources for Journalists Food & Farming Media Network How to Pitch Us Freelance Charter Work With Us Sentient Mission People Donate Funding Contact Environmental Policy Code of Ethics Testimonials Reported What Do We Have to Fear From Swine Flu? Most human cases of swine flu are found at agricultural fairs but there are other disease hotspots to consider, like factory farms. Mon March 27th, 2023 Reported • Health • Public Health Words by Jennifer Mishler - Share on Facebook - Share on LinkedIn - Share on Whatsapp - Share on X - Copy URL Coppied - Republish 5 min read As avian flu continues its spread across the globe — killing nearly 60 million farmed and wild birds in the U.S. alone — researchers are keeping a close eye on the many other animal diseases with the potential to spark an outbreak in human populations. One possible threat is swine flu. For now, most cases occur at agricultural fairs but, like any zoonotic disease, the risk can change at any time. What Is Swine Flu? Crowded with animals and their waste, factory farms are especially conducive to the rapid spread of disease — a fact made all the more clear after recent mass avian flu outbreaks and resulting poultry culls. There are other influenza strains that originate in animals, including swine flu. According to the CDC, swine flu is simply a variant of influenza that mostly infects pigs. While incredibly rare, humans can become infected. In recent years, most human infections of swine flu have occurred at agricultural fairs. Throughout North America, 150 million people visit these events each year. Most infected cases are in animal exhibitors — the people with the closest and most prolonged interactions with pigs. In 2012, Indiana experienced an eightfold rise in human swine flu cases tied to fairs over the course of just one week, with a 30-case outbreak in neighboring Ohio. That same year, an outbreak of 309 human cases ultimately led to the formation of a working group to recommend safety measures. Last updated in 2018, the guidelines are not mandatory, and may differ from regulations imposed by individual states and fairs. Chief among the recommendations is to hire a veterinarian. Other guidelines include banning food or drinks in areas where people hold pigs, and — based on the findings of research led by Dr. Andrew Bowman of Ohio State University’s Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine — limiting the duration of agricultural fairs to no more than 72 hours. Bowman, who has studied this topic for many years, said the restriction “can be the difference between a few animals catching the virus and most of them becoming infected.” ‘Assume Pigs Show Up at the Fair Infected’ On a CDC podcast, Bowman explained that “pigs at fairs are different from commercial swine” because they usually come from various locations and then are placed in close quarters together for a long period of time. It’s the “prolonged mixing of pigs and people” that spreads the disease — both between animals and from animals to humans. Research of Ohio fairs found 22.6 percent of pigs tested positive. What’s more worrisome though, greater than 83 percent of infected animals were asymptomatic — making it near impossible to detect illness based just on observation. In further research, Bowman and others found evidence of “significant intra- and inter-species transmission.” In yet another study, Bowman detected influenza A in 18.6 percent of air samples at agricultural fairs, and in 18.8 percent of surface samples. More recently, researchers detected flu in 13.9 percent of pigs at events known as “jackpot shows” that bring in pigs from longer distances and run for longer durations. All told, agricultural fairs remain the leading hotspot for swine flu outbreaks in humans. “You have to pretty much assume pigs are going to show up at the fair infected with flu,” Bowman told The Frederick News-Post, after an outbreak in Maryland resulted in 40 human cases. Over 300 pigs were culled in Ohio that year. Last August, 2 human infections of H3N2 swine flu were found among West Virginia fair workers. Just one month later, a case of H1N2 was reported in a Michigan fairgoer. We May Be Underestimating All Strains of Influenza The number of human cases of any influenza may be higher than we realize. Asymptomatic infections are common and there are other potential hotspots, like intensive agricultural operations. A 2020 study of large-scale European farms revealed 56 percent of facilities were host to influenza strains that could pass to humans. In that same research, 36 percent of pigs studied tested positive. The BBC called the findings “a pandemic waiting to happen.” Globally, over 284,000 deaths were caused by the 2009 H1N1 pandemic. While some believe the virus originated in pigs, other health officials strongly disagree. Still other researchers argue it began with strains found on U.S. factory farms as far back as 1998. Regardless of the origin, the 2009 pandemic was severe — hitting infants, young children and the elderly the hardest — an estimated 80 percent of those killed were under the age of 65. Shots offered little protection at the time, and the U.S. saw 60.8 million cases between April of 2009 and 2010 — more than twelve thousand of which were fatal. Today’s flu vaccines protect against H1N1 and other variants of influenza. Yet because the strain that became known as “swine flu” may not have originated in pigs, flu shots are “generally not expected” to protect against those particular strains. Public Health Threat From Swine Flu, Explained Health officials maintain there is little current risk of swine flu pandemic in humans. Just as with avian influenza, people who become infected with swine flu typically have direct contact with pigs. Yet, according to the CDC, “limited human-to-human transmission” of swine flu is possible. And there are other challenges. The U.S. public continues to underestimate influenza viruses writ large — think of the “COVID-19 is just the flu” narrative for instance. Perhaps Americans pay little attention because the disease tends to disproportionately affect low-income nations and communities. Currently, India is facing an outbreak of H3N2, with more than 3,000 cases and at least 2 fatalities reported since January. The World Health Organization estimates 3-5 million severe cases of seasonal flu annually, and 290,000-650,000 deaths. Ten years ago, the World Health Organization issued this warning: “the world is ill-prepared to respond to a severe influenza pandemic or to any similarly global, sustained and threatening public health emergency.” This statement came 7 years before the current coronavirus pandemic. Since then, we’ve seen a dramatic uptick in pandemic risk — thanks in large part to how much meat we eat and its link to deforestation — yet little has changed to curb that risk. We haven’t done enough to prepare for future pandemics, public health experts warn, and on top of that, we’ve done nothing to change our global food system. Support Us Independent Journalism Needs You Custom amount $ Donate » -opens in new tab. Donate via PayPal More options » - Share on Facebook - Share on LinkedIn - Share on Whatsapp - Share on X - Copy URL Coppied - Republish Republish this article » The Author Jennifer Mishler Jennifer is a writer and editor based near Washington, DC. Her background is in communications in the animal protection movement. She is also a contributing writer with Sentient Media. Reported Syngenta Spent Decades Attempting To Quiet Health Concerns About Its Profitable Herbicide. Health•21 min read More Health & Wellness Analysis Avian Flu: Sentient’s Latest Stories Health•1 min read Analysis Every Human Case of Avian Flu Reported So Far Human cases remain rare but the risk of an outbreak could change at any time. Health•2 min read Reported Animal Lab Workers Experience Mental Health Struggles, but Are Rarely Heard From The human emotional toll of experimenting on animals. Health•10 min read Climate Investigation UN Green Climate Fund Investing in Factory Farming, Report Finds Climate•6 min read Food Solutions Slaughterhouse Workers Seek a ‘Brave New Life,’ but Challenges Remain Food•9 min read Health Reported Why Vegan Restaurants Going Un-Vegan Isn’t Necessarily a Long-Term Problem Diet•5 min read Policy Explainer Do Government Subsidies Make Meat Cheaper? Yes, but With Some Important Caveats Meat Lobby•10 min read Science Explainer Weather Conspiracy Theories: How Misinformation Distracts from Climate Reality Mythbusting•7 min read Most Read Today • Wed November 6th Election 2024 Coverage: The Complete Guide Amazon Deforestation — How Much of the Rainforest Is Left? Children Are at the Core of MAHA. Some Moms Are Ecstatic. Smithfield Foods Is Owned by China, but Pollution and Price-Fixing Is the Real Problem The 11 Most Helpful Animals on Earth (Though It’s Quite a Competition) Marketing Masculinity: The Meat of the Matter Eating Less Meat Is the Most Effective Way to Fight Climate Change Is Bullfighting Cruel to the Bull? Stories + solutions for a changing world Instagram Facebook X Mastodon LinkedIn YouTube 18 Bartol Street #1150, San Francisco, CA 94133 Subscribe The Core: A weekly newsletter with exclusive insights and videos from our journalists * indicates required Email Address * Subscribe » Support Us Independent Journalism Needs You Custom amount $ Donate » -opens in new tab. Donate via PayPal Resources for Journalists Food & Farming Media Network How to Pitch Us Freelance Charter Work With Us Sentient Mission People Donate Funding Contact Environmental Policy Code of Ethics Testimonials Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Sentient Media. Sentient Media is a 501(c)3 tax-exempt organization, tax ID 83-0804345. English EspañolAlberta's flu season has been deadlier than most and it's not over yet | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Alberta's flu season has been deadlier than most and it's not over yet | CBC News LoadedCalgaryAlberta's flu season has been deadlier than most and it's not over yetAlberta's flu season, which is not over yet, is shaping up to be one of the deadliest in recent memory and that is sparking concern among doctors and scientists. 117 Albertans have died from influenza so far this flu seasonJennifer Lee · CBC · Posted: Apr 01, 2023 8:00 AM EDT | Last Updated: April 1, 2023According to provincial data, roughly 27 per cent of Albertans have been immunized against influenza this season. Prior to the pandemic, vaccination rates were higher. (Katherine Holland/CBC)Social SharingAlberta's flu season, which has yet to end, is shaping up to be one of the deadliest in recent memory and that is sparking concern among doctors and scientists.According to provincial data, there have been 117 confirmed influenza deaths — 111 hospitalized cases and six in the community — so far during the 2022-23 season."It's looking like the flu season is going to be one of the worst — if not the worst — flu seasons in the last decade," said Craig Jenne, associate professor of microbiology, immunology and infectious diseases at the University of Calgary."It's right up there there with the worst seasons we have seen over the past 10 years and far above what we were seeing immediately before the pandemic. So it's a little concerning that deaths have gone up in the province this year."While Alberta has the highest flu death count documented since standardized reporting began in 2009, the province has changed how it reports influenza deaths.During 2014-15 there were 114 flu deaths among hospitalized Albertans. At that time, the province didn't track influenza deaths outside the hospital setting.Community deaths, including those reported by paramedics, EMS, firefighters or police officers, became reportable in 2021-22, according to an Alberta Health spokesperson.Even when you account for the reporting changes, this year stands out."Those are really, really high numbers ... The season was really, really bad and we were feeling that in the fall and winter but I think this really demonstrates it," said Calgary-based public health physician, Dr. Jia Hu."We knew that a lot of hospitals were getting pretty inundated — both in the younger population as well as the traditionally older population."More than one-third of Alberta's flu deaths so far have been in people under the age of 70. There have been three deaths in youngsters between the ages of one and 19. Doctors warn Alberta's pediatric hospitals in 'chaos' as more children face care delays Frontline burnout a growing concern as Alberta hospitals battle trio of viral illnesses There are likely a number of factors at play, according to experts.Hu believes the virtually non-existent flu seasons, when public health measures were in place during the early part of the pandemic, are partly to blame."I think a lot of folks, and myself included, think this was in part driven by the lack of exposure to influenza, I think, over the past few years."As the bulk of Alberta's cases accumulated between October and January, H3N2, a subtype of influenza A, dominated."Anytime we see a predominantly [H3N2] year, we tend to have a more severe season," said Hu. "I think it shows that flu is something to be taking seriously.""It's looking like the flu season is going to be one of the worst — if not the worst — flu seasons in the last decade," said Craig Jenne, associate professor of microbiology, immunology and infectious diseases at the University of Calgary. (Colin Hall/CBC)Several other key factors are likely contributing to the trend, according to Jenne."We also have some emerging data that even people that were infected with COVID — it changes how their immune cells see other infections. So it can, for example, create an altered immune response to some other infections," he said, pointing to measles as an example of another virus that impacts the immune system. And, he said, Alberta's low vaccine uptake also plays a role.According to provincial data, 27.7 per cent of Albertans have been immunized against influenza this season. Prior to the pandemic, vaccination rates were higher, sitting at 33 per cent in 2019-20 and 31 per cent in 2018-19."We have unfortunately take a significant step backwards with a vaccine that we've had now ... for decades. We know it's safe. We know it works," said Jenne."There is a little bit of concern that lower vaccine rates are unfortunately correlating in a year where there's an increased loss of life in the province."Jenne said there needs to be a concerted effort to boost Alberta's free immunization program in the years to come.And, he warned, the flu season could last for a while yet."Influenza B is really just emerging in the last couple weeks," he said."We'll have to see, unfortunately, how far that one goes. But typically that's a much smaller wave."ABOUT THE AUTHORJennifer LeeReporterJennifer Lee is a CBC News reporter based in Calgary. She worked at CBC Toronto, Saskatoon and Regina before landing in Calgary in 2002. If you have a health or human interest story to share, let her know. Jennifer.Lee@cbc.caCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories Top stories from CBC Calgary Family says thief used Calgary explosion damage to break into home next door days after blast WestJet pilots set to launch strike authorization vote as negotiations fizzle Cash-strapped Albertans may be stuck repaying $200M cap on regulated rates, says report How to increase Blackfoot fluency? Knowledge keeper says create immersive programsFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowLucira COVID-19 & Flu Home Test Now Available for OTC Use Menu SECTIONS Home Drug Monographs Browse by brand Browse by generic Browse by therapeutic category Monograph Updates Resource Centers Allergic Disorders Cardiovascular Disease Chronic kidney disease Dermatological Disorders Diagnostic Agents Endocrine Disorders Gastrohepatic Disorders Geriatrics Hematological Disorders Immune Disorders Immunization Infectious Diseases Metabolic Disorders Musculoskeletal Disorders Neurologic Disorders Nutrition Ob/Gyn Oncology Ophthalmic Disorders Oral Health Otic Disorders Pain Management Pediatrics Poisoning & Drug Dependence Psychiatric Disorders Respiratory Disorders Urological Disorders News & Features News Drug News Alternative Medicine Safety Alerts And Recalls Biosimilars and Generics News Drugs In The Pipeline The Weekly Dose Podcast Conference Coverage Guidelines Medical Technology Healthcare Policy Features Clinical Challenge Practice, Policy & Legal Clinical Charts Clinical Tools Medical Calculators ICD-10 Special Collections CME/CE MPR App Haymarket Medical Network Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMedical BagMPRNeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Subscribe Part of the Search for a drug monograph: GO Share this article Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Share by Email Print Lucira COVID-19 & Flu Home Test Now Available for OTC Use Brian Park, PharmD | March 28, 2023 Credit: Lucira Health. The Lucira COVID-19 & Flu Home Test is available at a price of $34.99. The Lucira COVID-19 & Flu Home Test, the first over-the-counter (OTC) at-home diagnostic test that can detect and differentiate between SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses in individuals 2 years of age and older, is now available in the US. The test was granted Emergency Use Authorization by the Food and Drug Administration earlier this year. The single-use, nucleic acid amplification test is intended for individuals with signs and symptoms consistent with a respiratory tract infection, including COVID-19. The test works by swabbing the nasal cavity and swirling the sample in a vial, which is then placed in a test unit. Results are displayed in the test unit within 30 minutes and determine whether an individual is positive or negative for: Influenza A, Influenza B, and COVID-19. The performance of the Lucira COVID-19 & Flu Home Test was found to be comparable to lab-based PCR tests. “US consumers will, for the first time ever, be able to diagnose if they have COVID-19 or Flu A or B while at home,” said Erik Engelson, President and CEO of Lucira Health. “With one-touch access to telehealth via our Lucira Connect web platform, they can now get onto the path to treatment and recovery within hours of receiving a test result from the comfort of home.” The Lucira COVID-19 & Flu Home Test is available at a price of $34.99 at lucirahealth.com. References: Lucira Health announces US launch of first & only at-home combination COVID-19 & Flu test amidst sale process. News release. Company. Accessed March 28, 2023. https://www.globenewswire.comews-release/2023/03/28/2635636/0/en/Lucira-Health-Announces-U-S-Launch-of-First-Only-At-Home-Combination-COVID-19-Flu-Test-Amidst-Sale-Process.html Picked For You Atogepant Efficacious for Patients With Chronic Migraine Multivitamin Use Not Linked to Mortality Benefit in US Adults Pediatric Surgical Opioid Prescribing Concentrated Among a Few Procedures Latest News Exercise + GLP-1 RA Effective for Weight Loss While Preserving BMD CDC Strengthens RSV Vaccine Advice for Those Over 75 CDC Advises Updated COVID Vaccine for Everyone Over 6 Months of Age Cookie Settings ABOUT ADVERTISE CONNECT Remarkable healthcare content Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMcKnight’s Home CareMcKnight’s Long-term CareMcKnight’s Senior LivingMedical BagMPRmyCMENACENeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Copyright © 2024 Haymarket Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in any form without prior authorization. Your use of this website constitutes acceptance of Haymarket Media’s Privacy Policy and Terms & Conditions. Close more info about Lucira COVID-19 & Flu Home Test Now Available for OTC Use Loading... Close more info about Lucira COVID-19 & Flu Home Test Now Available for OTC Use Loading...A low dose of RBD and TLR7/8 agonist displayed on influenza virosome particles protects rhesus macaque against SARS-CoV-2 challenge | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article A low dose of RBD and TLR7/8 agonist displayed on influenza virosome particles protects rhesus macaque against SARS-CoV-2 challenge Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 28 March 2023 A low dose of RBD and TLR7/8 agonist displayed on influenza virosome particles protects rhesus macaque against SARS-CoV-2 challenge Gerrit Koopman1, Mario Amacker2,3, Toon Stegmann4, Ernst J. Verschoor1, Babs E. Verstrepen1, Farien Bhoelan4, Denzel Bemelman4, Kinga P. Böszörményi1, Zahra Fagrouch1, Gwendoline Kiemenyi-Kayere1, Daniella Mortier1, Dagmar E. Verel1, Henk Niphuis1, Roja Fidel Acar1, Ivanela Kondova5, Yolanda S. Kap1, Willy M. J. M. Bogers1, Petra Mooij1 & …Sylvain Fleury2 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 13, Article number: 5074 (2023) Cite this article 1596 Accesses 3 Citations 3 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects ImmunologyInfectious diseases AbstractInfluenza virosomes serve as antigen delivery vehicles and pre-existing immunity toward influenza improves the immune responses toward antigens. Here, vaccine efficacy was evaluated in non-human primates with a COVID-19 virosome-based vaccine containing a low dose of RBD protein (15 µg) and the adjuvant 3M-052 (1 µg), displayed together on virosomes. Vaccinated animals (n = 6) received two intramuscular administrations at week 0 and 4 and challenged with SARS-CoV-2 at week 8, together with unvaccinated control animals (n = 4). The vaccine was safe and well tolerated and serum RBD IgG antibodies were induced in all animals and in the nasal washes and bronchoalveolar lavages in the three youngest animals. All control animals became strongly sgRNA positive in BAL, while all vaccinated animals were protected, although the oldest vaccinated animal (V1) was transiently weakly positive. The three youngest animals had also no detectable sgRNA in nasal wash and throat. Cross-strain serum neutralizing antibodies toward Wuhan-like, Alpha, Beta, and Delta viruses were observed in animals with the highest serum titers. Pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-8, CXCL-10 and IL-6 were increased in BALs of infected control animals but not in vaccinated animals. Virosomes-RBD/3M-052 prevented severe SARS-CoV-2, as shown by a lower total lung inflammatory pathology score than control animals. Similar content being viewed by others Immunogenicity and protective efficacy of GBP510/AS03 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 delta challenge in rhesus macaques Article Open access 23 February 2023 SARS-CoV-2 RBD trimer protein adjuvanted with Alum-3M-052 protects from SARS-CoV-2 infection and immune pathology in the lung Article Open access 11 June 2021 Systemic prime mucosal boost significantly increases protective efficacy of bivalent RSV influenza viral vectored vaccine Article Open access 26 June 2024 IntroductionThe severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)1,2,3 is an airborne pathogen4,5 responsible for the pandemic coronavirus disease of 2019 (COVID-19)6,7. It enters the body primarily through the upper respiratory tract (nasal cavities, mouth, and throat) but the primary SARS-CoV-2 replication site is the nasal tissue8 from where it spreads to the lungs and other organs and can also infect the central nervous system9.SARS-CoV‐2 uses its receptor binding domain (RBD) present in the spike (S) viral membrane glycoprotein10 for binding to the cellular receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)11,12 for infecting cells13. The broad tissue distribution of the ACE214 may explain the numerous organs susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, isolation and characterization of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies from SARS-CoV-2 convalescent patients confirm that RBD and S are key targets for blocking infection15,16,17,18,19,20, indicating that RBD and S are promising vaccinal antigens. It was postulated that SARS-CoV-2 vaccines delivered intramuscularly for eliciting protective antibodies should prevent massive virus replication and tissue damage in the lungs. This protection is thought to be due in part by the ability of vaccine-induced circulating antibodies to reach the highly vascularized lung tissues and the transport of IgG across the mucosal lung tissue into the lumen by the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn)21,22.Using different vaccinal antigens and vaccine technologies23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34 numerous different vaccine products against COVID-19 have been evaluated between 2020 and 2022. The main current vaccines are: mRNA vaccines (BNT16b2/Comirnaty, mRNA-1273/Spikevax, CVnCoV), adenoviral vector vaccines (ChAdOx1/Vaxzevria or Covishield, Ad26.COV2.S, Ad5-nCoV/Convidecia, Ad5-Ad26/Sputnik V, Ad26/Sputnik V Light), peptide based vaccine (EpiVacCorona), inactivated vaccines (CoronaVac, BBIBP-CorV, WIBP-CorV BBV152/Covaxin, VLA2001, COVIran Barekat), S-based protein vaccines (NVX-CoV2373, VLP-S plant derived/Covifenz, CoV2 preS dTM/VidPrevtyn Beta, SCB-2019), RBD-based protein vaccines (Corbevax, ZF2001/Zifivax, CIGB-66/Abdala, UB-612 with S1-RBD with T cell epitopes from S2, membrane and nuclear protein), and RBD conjugated vaccines (FINLAY-FR-1/2 or Soberana 01/02). Although the antibody titer level for achieving protection is not yet determined, these prophylactic COVID-19 vaccines were successful in preventing disease complications, hospitalizations and death. However, the vaccine-induced antibody protective immunity seems to be short-lived35,36,37,38, as reported by rapid drops of antibody titers within 4–6 months post-vaccination.Furthermore, developing vaccines offering effective broad cross-strain protection is hampered by high genome mutation rates that are common to RNA viruses39,40 as also reported for SARS-CoV-241,42. Mutations result in amino acid changes in various viral proteins, including the S or RBD antigen that can significantly reduce to different degrees the recognition by neutralizing antibodies induced during natural infection or vaccination43,44,45,46,47. This evolution/selection process allows the emergence of new virus variants that escape antibody recognition, and the Omicron B.1.1.529 variant is a good example with 37 mutations located in S protein48. Therefore, the future vaccines targeting conserved S or RBD regions and/or combining antigens of different virus strains may hold better cross-strain protection. Due to rapid waning immunity, combined with the rapid emergence of new variants, regular boosts may be necessary for preserving the population protection by antibodies.According to the World Health Organization (WHO) website dedicated to the COVID-19 vaccine tracker, there are about 380 vaccines under investigation. By end of 2022, about 172 vaccines are in clinical development, and near 200 vaccine candidates are in pre-clinical development with about 80 candidates that are based on proteins and 20 using virus-like particles (VLPs) for displaying proteins, indicating that subunit vaccines are still an effective platform for the development of safe COVID-19 vaccines and can contribute to diversify the vaccine pipeline, with a demonstrated good tolerability and safety profile.Here, we report the development of a subunit COVID-19 vaccine based on recombinant SARS-CoV-2 RBD proteins produced in yeast49,50 that are displayed on influenza virosomes acting as antigen carriers51,52,53, together with membrane anchored 3M-052 as TLR7/8 agonist. As known in cell membrane biology, the proteins present in a fluid lipid membrane are free to move in cis and/or rotate on their axis, and similarly at the virosome lipid membrane surface, which may facilitate the access to antigen epitopes. Virosomes have a mean diameter of 80–120 nm, they are devoid of nucleic acid and are non-infectious, and they belong to the enveloped virus-like particles54,55. Influenza virosomes are constituted of synthetics lipids and viral components derived from the influenza membrane, such as the hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) glycoprotein that serve as a source of universal T-helper epitopes for the lipid-anchored vaccinal antigen51,52,53. As opposed to most VLPs that are mixed with 1–2 adjuvants for improving their immunogenicity55,56, which means the presence of free-form adjuvants, virosomes with lipid-anchored adjuvants into their lipid membrane have no free-form adjuvants.More than 80 million doses of virosome-based vaccines have been safely administered, with the hepatitis A vaccine (Epaxal® commercialized in 1994)57,58,59,60 and the seasonal influenza vaccine (Inflexal® commercialized in 1997)61,62. The excellent tolerability and safety profiles of those virosomal vaccines were documented in children59, adults60 and elderlies63, including subjects with chronic inflammatory diseases64,65 or immunocompromised61. Clinical stage virosomal vaccines against HIV-166 and Plasmodium falciparum malaria67,68 were also previously evaluated successfully in human Phase I trials. Influenza-based virosomes can be manufactured under liquid or lyophilized form for intramuscular or subcutaneous administration, as well as under liquid or thermostable spray-dried powder for intranasal delivery66,69. Virosomal vaccines are generally stored refrigerated, but a new thermostable spray-dried powder initially developed for our nasal HIV-1 vaccine remained stable for few months at 40 °C/75% relative humidity without compromising the vaccine bioactivity69.This new manufacturing process was also applied for the development of a thermostable nasal COVID-19 vaccine, starting with an intermediate product under a liquid form subsequently downstream processed into nasal powder, which is currently under investigation. Meanwhile, we were interested to find out if the liquid version of our COVID-19 vaccine, without the excipients for spray drying but having comparable virosome-RBD and buffer composition, could induce protection, when administered intramuscularly to non-human primates (NHP). As the liquid virosomal vaccine is formulated for being compatible for nasal administration, the 3M-052 was selected as mucosal adjuvant that serves as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMP) for targeting TLR7/870, mimicking the RNA immunostimulatory action of many respiratory viruses (ex. Influenza, SARS-CoV-2). A very low dose of 3M-052 was strategically proposed for the design of a nasal vaccine to favor an excellent vaccine tolerance and safety profile, and to facilitate the acceptance of regular boosts in the population. This explains the low adjuvant dose present into the tested intramuscular liquid vaccine reported here. The liquid COVID-19 vaccine was found safe and well tolerated, and vaccinated macaques were protected against SARS-CoV-2 nasal/intratracheal challenge, and lung tissues had weak cell infiltrations, respective to control animals. Virosome-RBD may represent an alternative to many subunit vaccines containing much higher antigen and/or adjuvant doses, with the advantage to be also compatible for nasal immunization.ResultsSafety, tolerance and immunogenicityWe have evaluated a COVID-19 vaccine candidate containing 15 μg of RBD and only 1 μg of 3M-052 adjuvant per dose, which might be sufficient as a seasonal COVID-19 vaccine to be administered to a population with pre-existing SARS-CoV-2 immunity. To mimic the natural influenza immunity present in humans with anti-HA antibodies that can bind influenza virosomes, rhesus macaques were primed with inactivated influenza virus four weeks before the first vaccine administration. The serum anti-HA titers were confirmed in the serum pools collected four weeks after the first (1/53,000) and second vaccination (1/63,000) (see Fig. S1 in the supplementary materials). Subsequently, animals were vaccinated intramuscularly twice at week 0 and 4 (Fig. 1).Figure 1Immunization and challenge schedule in rhesus macaques. Four weeks before vaccination (week -4), Rhesus macaques of the virosome vaccine group (n = 6) and the control group (n = 4) were immunized intramuscularly (i.m.) with inactivated influenza virus particles (grey arrow) to prime immune responses against influenza specifically the hemagglutinin (HA). Subsequently, animals of the vaccine group were immunized at weeks 0 and 4 by the i.m. route with influenza-derived virosomes displaying the RBD derived from the SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan strain (open arrow). At week 8 (day 56: d56 of the study design), all animals were challenged (corresponding to d0) by the combined intranasal and intratracheal route with 1 × 105 TCID50 of SARS-CoV-2 (green arrow). At different timepoints before and after challenge (d56 to d63-d65), diverse types of samples were collected, as indicated by color coded arrowheads. Animals were sacrificed either at day 7 (d63), 8 (d64) or 9 (d65) post-challenge.Full size imageThe vaccine was well tolerated and safe, and no local reactions were observed at the immunization site during the four days of observation following each immunization. Animals showed normal behavior and appetite, overall clinical chemistry (Table S1) and hematology parameters (Table S2) were in the normal range. We performed the systemic inflammatory cytokine profiles at 3 weeks post vaccination to better evaluate the residual mid-term effect due to vaccination. For this reason, levels of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10. IL-12p40, IL-17A, IL-23, GM-CSF, IFNβ, IFNγ, TNFα, CXCL10 and CCL2 were measured in serum collected two weeks after the second immunization (week 6).None of these cytokines or chemokines remained increased in serum and were all expressed at baseline levels (not shown). However, increased levels of IFNβ, TNFα and IFNγ were observed locally in the nasal wash collected three weeks after the second immunization in four out of 6 immunized animals, and IL-10 was increased in three immunized animals (Fig. 2). Meanwhile, one of the four control animals also showed an increase in these nasal cytokine levels (Fig. 2), indicating that other factors besides immunization may trigger the same kind of responses. There was no increase in any of these cytokines or chemokines observed in BAL fluid collected three weeks after the second immunization (data not shown).Figure 2Cytokine responses in nasal washes during immunization. IFNβ (upper left panel), TNFα (upper right panel), IFNγ (lower left panel) and IL-10 (lower right panel) cytokine levels (pg/mL) measured in nasal washes, either before immunization (week -4) or three weeks after the second immunization (week 7). Macaques immunized with virosomes-RBD (V1 to V6 in blue) and control animals (C1 to C4 in orange). Each animal is represented by a different symbol. For the serum, week -4 versus week 7 (21 days after last immunization), the vaccinated group is not significantly different from the control group for IFNβ, TNFα, IFNγ and IL-10 (Mann–Whitney test). However, there is a significant increase of cytokines in nasal washes of virosome vaccinated animals (week-4 versus week 7, Mann–Whitney test) for IFNβ (p = 0.087), TNFα (p = 0.013), IFNγ (p = 0.087), and IL-10 (p = 0.433), while these increases are not observed in control animals.Full size imageThe specific RBD antibody responses were measured in serums at weeks -4, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 9, with a vaccination at week 0 and 4 and the challenge from week 8 to week 9 (Fig. 1). Pre-existing influenza immunity did not prevent virosome-RBD immunogenicity, serum anti-RBD IgG titers are shown for immunized animals (Fig. 3a), with a pre-immune serum geomean titers (GMT) baseline < 100 that increases to 5,525 at four weeks after the first immunization, and four weeks after the second immunization (week 8) the serum GMT increased to 61,420. Those vaccine-induced serum GMTs at week 4 and 8 were significantly higher (p = 0.0095) than the serum GMTs of the control group (GMT around 100). Notably, macaques with the lowest serum titers (animals V1 and V2) were also the two older animals from that vaccinated group (Table 1). In our NHP study, we observed that at week 8, a weak serum IgA response was detected in only two macaques out of six (Fig. 3a), which are animals with high serum IgG titers. Further investigations are required to understand these differences.Figure 3RBD specific IgG and IgA ELISA and serum neutralizing activity. (a) ELISA serum IgG (left graph) and IgA (right graph) antibody titers overtime toward SARS-CoV-2 RBD are shown for the vaccinated and control group. Serum IgG titers at week 4 (p = 0.0095) and week 8 (p = 0.0095) are significanlty higher in the vaccinated group than the control group, but at week 9 there is no significant difference (p = 0.076). (b) ELISA nasal wash (NW) IgG (left graph) and IgA (right graph) antibody titers overtime against SARS-CoV-2 RBD. (c) ELISA BAL IgG (left graph) antibody titers overtime against SARS-CoV-2 RBD. Each animal is represented by a symbol, blue for vaccinated animals and orange for control animals. Mean and SEM are shown in columns for each group of animals. Blue arrows indicate the day of immunization at week 0 and week 4, green arrow the day of the challenge at d56/week 8. For IgA in serums, NWs and BALs, there was no significant difference between the groups (p > 0.05). (d) Individual serum neutralizing antibody titers from week 8/d56 were determined by neutralization assays with five different live SARS-CoV-2 strains. The determined geomean (GM) neutralizing titers (NT) are the following: Italian strain INMI1 from 2019 as an original Wuhan-like (GM NT 42), Alpha B.1.1. 7 (GM NT 85), Beta B.1.351 (GM NT 16), Delta B.1.617.2 (GM NT 40) and Omicron B.1.1.529 (geomean NT 7). There was no significant differences for the neutralizing titers between the Wuhan-like original strain with the Beta (p = 0.125) and Delta strain (p = 0.750), but a higher neutralizing titer against the Alpha strain was observed (p = 0.031). However, we observe an apparent reduced neutralizing activity toward the Omicron strain, respective to the Wuhan. The closed circles and squares in light blue are animals with the lowest serum RBD titers that are also the oldest animals. NIBSC 21/234 serves as a positive control (open black circle). The grey area is the baseline observed for pre-immune neutralizing activity (dilution 1/5), and serums for the V1 and V2 old animals. Data points beneath this area are below the detection limit.Full size imageTable 1 Animal name, age and weight at the start of the study.Full size tableThree of the vaccinated animals also had RBD specific IgG (but no IgA) in the nasal wash (Fig. 3b) and in BAL fluid (Fig. 3c) collected at week 7, while there were none detected in the control group (Fig. 3b). One week after SARS-CoV-2 challenge (week 9), all control animals developed RBD-specific serum IgGs and a modest IgA response (Fig. 3a), while the serum IgG responses decreased in five out of six immunized animals, with only animal V1 showing an increase in IgG levels. Despite the decrease in IgG, there was an increase in RBD specific IgA responses in five out of six immunized animals. Following the challenge, all immunized and control animals showed either an increase or became positive for RBD specific IgG and IgA in the nasal wash (Fig. 3b). After euthanasia, BAL were not collected due to the risk of interference with the histopathology evaluation.Emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOC) have increased resistance to neutralization by antibodies that reduces the vaccine efficacy47, with altered virus transmissibility, pathogenicity, and infection effectiveness71. Because the animal protection assesses only the SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan-like strain, it does not predict about the protection toward other VOCs. Therefore, the cross-strain serum neutralizing antibodies (week 8) were evaluated (Fig. 3d), using a validated neutralization assay with live viruses. The determined geomean (GM) neutralizing antibody titers (NT) were the following: Wuhan-like (GM NT 42), Alpha B.1.1. 7 (GM NT 85), Beta B.1.351 (GM NT 16), Delta B.1.617.2 (GM NT 40) and Omicron B.1.1.529 (geomean NT 7). When looking individual animals, the V1 oldest animals with the lowest serum titer (Fig. 3a) has also no neutralizing activity (Fig. 3d), and this impact strongly the calculated mean titers and it is preferable to show the geomean neutralizing titers. The four youngest animals with the highest serum titers (V3 to V6), those serums neutralize equally well the Wuhan, Alpha, Delta but slightly less the Beta strain (Fig. 3d), with no significant difference between the Wuhan and the most distant Delta variant (p = 0.750), The Omicron B.1.1.529 was poorly neutralized and this is most likely due to the heavily mutated RBD surface buried in the S down position of that variant48.RBD specific T-cell responses, as measured by IFNγ and IL-4 ELISpot assay, remained below detection level in all immunized animals (not shown). These results contrast with our rat study, immunization with virosome-RBD led to significant levels of T cells producing IFNγ and only low IL-4 responses in the draining lymph nodes (data not shown).One week after the challenge, the spleen cells were collected, and he percentage of Germinal center (GC) B cells, respective to the total B cell population, was relatively high in five out of six animals from the vaccinated group, as compared to the control group (Fig. 4), but did not reach significance (p = 0.068). Higher numbers of spleen follicular helper (Tfh) cells were only observed in 2 out of 6 vaccinated but there is no significant difference between the two groups (p = 0.325). Possibly, the five weeks post-vaccination time point might have been suboptimal for evaluating the Tfh cell population. Although the spleen was collected one week after the viral challenge, the infected control group had no or very low detectable GG B cells in the spleen and therefore, the virus production had no significant impact on the GC B cell number. This implies that vaccine-induced immune responses are mainly responsible for the increase of spleen GC B cells.Figure 4Immunization with Virosomes-RBD induces germinal center B cells in the spleen. The relative percentage of germinal center (GC) B cells over total B cells (left panel) and CD4 + T follicular helper cells (Tfh) over total CD4 + T cells (right panel) in the spleen is shown. Virosomes-RBD vaccinated (blue) and control animals (orange). Median values are indicated by horizontal black lines. Although we observed an increase in the percentage of GC B cells in the spleen at the day of necropsy in the virosomes-RBD group, it does not reach the 0.05 significance threhold (p = 0.068), in part because the increase was observed for only 3 out of 6 animals. Tfh cells were not significantly different between the virosomes-RBD vaccine and the control group (p = 0.325).Full size imageVirosomes-RBD vaccine efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 challengeThe virosomal vaccine efficacy for preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication in the upper and lower respiratory tract was daily monitored by quantifying the subgenomic mRNA (sgRNA) by real-time PCR as a marker of replicating virus in nasal washes, the throat (swabs) and the lungs (BAL fluid) (Fig. 5). All control animals became virus positive in the nasal wash, throat and BAL. In contrast, three out of six vaccinated animals had no detectable virus in either nasal wash, throat or BAL. Animal V1 that is the oldest vaccinated animal with the lowest serum RBD antibody titers had the highest virus load in nasal wash and throat, comparable to the virus loads observed in the control group, and this V1 animal was the only vaccinated animal that showed low level virus replication in the BAL (Fig. 5c). Two other animals, V3 and V6, showed modest to low virus replication in the throat and animal V2 developed low virus levels in the nasal wash. For the sgRNA in nasal wash at day 2 and 4 post challenge, there was no significant difference between the vaccine and control group (Fig. 5a, right panel), while there was a significant sgRNA reduction in the throat and BAL of vaccinated animals. In the immunized animals, no viral sgRNA could be detected in any of the processed tissues of the respiratory tract, which included the nasal mucosa, trachea, right and left bronchus and seven lung lobes (data not shown). Instead, three of the four control animals had detectable virus in either one (animal C1) or five (animal C2 and C4) lung lobes, while no virus was detected in the tissues of animal C3 (data not shown). Those data clearly indicate that animals vaccinated with virosomes-RBD were protected against SARS-CoV-2, although the old V1 animal had a lower level of protection.Figure 5Control of SARS-CoV-2 replication by virosomes-RBD vaccine. SARS-CoV-2 sgRNA load (copies/mL) and area under the curve (AUC) for the sgRNA load (copies/mL) in nasal washes (a), throat (b) and lung bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) (c) of virosomes-RBD immunized macaques (blue, left panels) and control animals (orange, middle panels) at different days post-challenge. Each animal is represented by a symbol. All data are shown relative to the day of challenge (day 0, day of virus administration) done at day 56 of the study. Panels on the right show statistical evaluation on SARS-CoV-2 sgRNA load in nasal washes on day 2 and 4 (upper right), in the throat (middle right panel) and in BAL fluid on day 2 and 4 (lower right panel). Median values are indicated by horizontal black lines. Significant differences between the groups are indicated in the graph by a horizontal line and p-value (Mann–Whitney test).Full size imageInflammatory cytokine profile and lung histology in macaques exposed to SARS-CoV-2It was previously shown that SARS-CoV-2 infection in humans and in NHPs induces an increase in inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in BAL and serum samples72,73,74 and that COVID-19 vaccines can provide a protective effect against such increase75,76,77. In agreement with these studies, we observed increased levels of IL-8, CXCL-10 and IL-6 in BAL samples of infected control animals, but not in any of the six vaccinated animals (Fig. 6b). In this study, the nasal washes were also analyzed. However only one of the four control animals showed increased levels of these inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, peaking at d4 for IL-8 and at d2 for CXCL10 and IL-6. The control animal C1 that remained strongly virus positive until d7 (Fig. 5a) and animal C4 that showed again an increased production of virus in the nose at d7, were the animals that showed these increased cytokine levels (Fig. 6a). A similar increase was also observed in the vaccinated old animal V1 that also had the highest level of virus replication in the nose. The data suggest that virus replication in the nose and lungs drives the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which is more consistently observed in BAL samples.Figure 6Control of SARS-CoV-2-induced cytokine storm in BAL fluids, but not in nasal washes, after intramuscular virosomes-RBD vaccination. Pro-inflammatory cytokine levels of IL-8, CXCL10 and IL-6 in (a) nasal washes (NW) and (b) BAL fluid of virosomes-RBD immunized (blue) and control (orange) animals. All data are shown relative to the day of challenge (day 0). Levels in each individual animal (indicated by different symbols) in time are shown. No measurements were performed on day of challenge, but data obtained at day 7 before challenge are shown.Full size imageEuthanasia was planned at day 7, 8 or 9 post SARS-CoV-2 infection, with the manipulation of only two to four animals during each day due to the heavy workload for sample preparation during necropsy. Pulmonary lobes (upper, middle, lower, accessory right and upper, middle, lower left) were processed for histopathological analyses. Microscopic examination showed reduced lung pathology in the immunized animals (Fig. 7b), as compared to the control animals (Fig. 7c), although some residual pathology was still observed in the immunized animals, as compared to healthy uninfected control (Fig. 7a). Quantitative assessment showed in immunized animals a reduction in total inflammatory pathology score as well as reduced levels of perivascular inflammatory infiltrates, peribronchiolar inflammatory infiltrates, alveolar cellular exudate and oedema, and alveolar septal inflammatory cells (Fig. 7d). Histology data have confirmed that vaccinated animals have better preserved lung tissues than control animals, indicating that RBD-induced antibodies have protected from severe SARS-CoV-2 lung pathology.Figure 7Immunization with virosomes-RBD reduces lung inflammatory pathology. Lung histopathology visualized by light microscopy of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) tissue staining of lung lobes from representative animals of each group. (a) Lung tissue from an uninfected animal showing intact pulmonary structures and lack of inflammation. (b) Lung tissue of animal V3 from the virosomes-RBD vaccine group exhibits minimal to mild interstitial infiltrate of inflammatory cells, and rare oedema and fibrin. (c) Lung tissue of animal C1 from unvaccinated, infected (control) group with histological features of moderate to severe interstitial inflammation, alveolar cellular infiltrates, abundant oedema and frequent fibrin presence. Image magnification 50x, representative images are shown. (d) Lung inflammatory pathology scores for the vaccinated (blue dots) and control group (orange dots). The total pathology score as well as the scores for perivascular inflammatory infiltrates, peribronchiolar inflammatory infiltrates, alveolar cellular exudate, and alveolar septal inflammatory cells are shown for animals immunized with virosomes-RBD (blue symbols) and control animals (orange symbols). Maximum total score is 336 and maximum score per individual parameter is 28. Significant differences between the groups are indicated in the graph by a horizontal line and p-value (Mann–Whitney test).Full size imageDiscussionThere is a growing interest for developing COVID-19 vaccines with regular strain adjustment for the S antigen or combining S antigens from different strains for a broader cross-strain antibody repertoire. However, studies have indicated that the various neutralizing regions are not equally accessible or exposed on the S protein of different virus strains, which can impact the breadth of the natural or S-based vaccine induced neutralizing antibodies78. For these reasons, a RBD-based vaccine is another attractive alternative vaccine strategy79. Most neutralizing antibodies predominantly target the RBD region15,16,17,18,19,20 that also harbors the few highly conserved antibody epitopes shared across other SARS-CoV-2 Beta coronaviruses44,80,81,82. Therefore, the RBD antigen without the surrounding S antigen structure could fully expose all potential neutralizing regions, favouring a focused immune response toward all key RBD sites, including cross-strain neutralizing antibodies to support the development of pan-sarbecovirus vaccines.Furthermore, most of the human population now harbours low to high levels of natural and/or vaccine-induced immunity toward SARS-CoV-2. In this context, subsequent recall vaccination with boosts may not necessarily require the administration of high antigen and adjuvant dose, as performed during the primary vaccination regimen with two vaccine doses in naive subjects. Therefore, we designed and tested a COVID-19 vaccine with a lower RBD dose (only 15 μg) with a single adjuvant at a very low dose (1 μg), administered intramuscularly to macaques of this NHP study, but other studies are ongoing for evaluating a similar virosome-RBD/3M-052 formulation for the nasal route.Such virosomal vaccines should retain good immunogenicity due to the presence of repetitive antigen motifs (RBD) displayed at the surface of particles that favors the cross linking of cell surface receptors that improves the immune system activation55,56. Therefore, dose sparing effect for both antigen and adjuvant is expected with virosomes as enveloped VLPs displaying RBD with adjuvant bound on the same particle56. The absence of free-form adjuvant is expected to prevent systemic circulation and minimize unspecific immune activation, improving the vaccine tolerability and safety profile83. When 3M-052 is physically bound to the antigen/particle, it improves the Th1 CD4 + and CD8 + T cell responses, respective to free 3M-05284. Therefore, similar observations might be also achieved with virosomes-RBD/3M-052 but this could not be investigated during our NHP study.Because the tested liquid vaccine is based on the nasal virosomal vaccine with a low dose adjuvant for safety reason, the intramuscular immunization was not expected to elicit a strong humoral RBD specific response. However, if such a vaccine candidate still supports protection in naïve macaques, one can then assume that a similar or stronger immune response would be achieved in NHPs or humans that acquired pre-existing SARS-CoV-2 immunity recently. The low adjuvant dose in our virosomal COVID-19 vaccine candidate is also a main differentiator, respective to most RBD-based subunit vaccines, using the RBD monomeric form85, the dimeric RBD86 or VLP displaying RBD77 that contain a high dose of adjuvant. Excluding alum based adjuvant, higher doses are used with squalene based oil-in water adjuvant87, 25 μg of M-Matrix88, 500 or 750 μg of each of CpG-alum combination85 or 5–10 μg of 3M-052 mixed with alum89,90.The currently tested COVID-19 vaccine based on virosomes-RBD/3M-052 was well tolerated and no safety or tolerability concern arose from the investigations, based on the monitoring of local and systemic effects, animal behavior, clinical chemistry, hematology, and the inflammatory cytokine profile measured in the serums, nasal washes and BALs (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10. IL-12p40, IL-17A, IL-23, IFNβ, IFNγ, TNFα, CXCL10 and CCL2). This excellent tolerance and safety profile is in line with other virosome-based vaccines toward various pathogens previously evaluated in humans60,61,66,67.Our study in male Rhesus macaques showed that a good priming in 5 out 6 animals (Fig. 3a) was observed, with a serum geometric mean titer (GMT) of 6,400, and after the second vaccine administration, a good boost effect is observed in all animals (GMT 97,000). However, the oldest animal V1 (16 years) had a weak antibody response after two immunizations. Regarding the immunogen-induced IgAs (Fig. 3a), the response was generally low respective to the IgG response, which correlates with the relative abundance of IgG over the IgA isotype in the serum, but was detected only in two animals with high serum IgG titers. This may suggest that the detection of IgA is more likely feasible if the vaccine induces high serum titers.Although most vaccinated animals have only low to intermediate serum titers, we evaluated the macaque serums in microneutralization with life viruses (Fig. 3d), keeping in mind the known correlation between serum titers and serum neutralizing activity. For the four animals (V3-V6) with good serum titers, comparable neutralizations were observed between the Wuhan-like, Alpha B.1.1.7, and also with the most distant Delta B.1.617.2 strain, while it was lower for the Beta B.1.351, with the lowest neutralizing activity toward the Omicron B.1.1.529. The data provide evidence that RBD can induce heterologous protection, but not necessarily toward all variants. The weak neutralization of Omicron is more likely due to poor antibody binding to the RBD of this VOC44,48. This suggests that RBD might not be always accessible on variants. For an optimal pan-sarbecovirus vaccines, it might be required, in addition to combine RBD antigens of different strains, to include S2 or other antigen targets that harbor different and complementary conserved epitopes.Designing a RBD-vaccine triggering antibodies toward most if not all RBD regions might have the best chance to achieve the broadest cross-strain protection, but this may also depend on how the RBD antigen is exposed to the immune system. Our virosomal vaccine displays Wuhan derived RBD with a certain number of random orientations, with the objective to maximize most epitope exposure. Meanwhile, we cannot exclude the possibility that epitopes underneath a given RBD anchored antigen proximal to the virosome membrane are poorly accessible. Ideally, the virosomal RBD vaccine should contain RBDs from two or three most representative VOC for eliciting the broadest protection toward a maximum number of VOC.All vaccinated animals were protected, with 5 out of 6 animals with no detectable sgRNA in BAL. The oldest vaccinated animal (V1) with the lowest serum titer had a single timepoint (day 2) with low BAL sgRNA. The three youngest animals had also no detectable RNA in nasal washes and throat swabs. Importantly, all vaccinated macaques were protected against severe SARS-CoV-2 lung pathology disease (Fig. 7), as shown by lower inflammatory scores than the control animals. Despite the presence of suboptimal RBD specific serum antibody titers with low serum neutralizing titers in 4 out of 6 animals (V2, V3, V5 and V6), with the oldest animal (V1) having no detectable serum neutralizing antibodies toward the Wuhan-like strain, it was remarkable that all vaccinated animals were protected against the lung pathology. Importantly, all vaccinated animals were also protected against an increase of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-8, CXCL-10 and IL-6 in the BALs, while those cytokines were increased in BALs of all infected control animals, which may drive a stronger recruitment of inflammatory cells into the lungs, causing more tissue damages.Although the limited number of animals doesn’t allow statistical analysis, we noticed that only the youngest macaques (V4 to V6, < 6 years of age during immunization) had detectable nasal and BAL IgGs (Fig. 3b,c). The nasal tissue is the primary SARS-CoV-2 replication site from where it spreads. The presence of nasal antibodies in the three younger animals (V4-V6) could also have contributed to neutralize a fraction of the SARS-CoV-2 inoculum administered during the challenge, and further prevented the early virus infection event in the nasopharynx, explaining the absence or very low levels of detectable sgRNA in the nose and throat of those animals (Fig. 5). It remains to be determined if such nasal antibodies could also reduce the virus transmission from vaccinated to naïve animals. Considering the importance of the mucosal antibody front line defense during early virus acquisition and infection in the upper and lower respiratory tract, we can postulate that the younger vaccinated population is more efficiently protected by intramuscular vaccines than the older vaccinated population, which could be potentially due to better systemic IgG migration to the respiratory tract.Immunosenescence or the immune system aging alters the function and quality of immune organs and immune cells, and consequently, the immunization of older individuals is generally associated with an immune response of a lower quantity and quality that contributes to a lower vaccine protection91. Therefore, detecting more SARS-CoV-2 sgRNA in the nasal, throat and BAL in the older animals might not be surprising, while in younger animal with a stronger immunity there are no detectable viruses. We should point out here that intramuscular vaccines are known to poorly induce good mucosal immunity. Therefore, achieving sterile immunity in the nose, throat and lungs is unlikely achievable. Some viruses could reach the upper and lower respiratory tracts and cause mild lung tissue inflammation under control and prevent disease complications (Fig. 7), for this reason, some people may prefer the term partial protection.There are evidence that SARS-CoV-2 specific CD4 + and CD8 + T cell responses may contribute to virus clearance and milder disase92. Interestingly, protein mutations affecting antibody epitopes have a limited impact on epitopes recognized by the memory T cells, as the overall T cell reactivty is maintained toward most defined T cell peptides in vaccinated or SARS-CoV-2 exposed subjects93. Therefore, the presence of CD4 + and CD8 + T cells induced during natural infection and/or vaccination could indeed contribute to protection against future VOC.The proposed virosomes-RBD vaccine is mainly intended for the induction of protective antibodies but virosomes can also induce CD8 T cells51,52,53. However, the frequency of induced CD8 T cell is expected to be low, particularly with a low RBD dose, as compared to viral vectors and mRNA that support de novo protein synthesis with efficient loading of major histocompatibility complex class I antigens with antigen-derived peptides. Furthermore, RBD is a small antigen (25 kDa) with a more limited set of potential peptides for eliciting a strong CD8 T cell response, as compared to a bigger S protein (180 kDa). These aspects may explain the difficulty to detect RBD specific T cell responses in our study. We cannot exclude the possibility that with a higher RBD dose, beside the improvement of the B cell response, also a higher frequency of CD8 T cells could be elicited in SARS-CoV-2 naïve subjects or boost the pre-existing RBD specific memory T cells established after vaccination and/or natural SARS-CoV-2 antigen exposure.With the complex logistic related to the vaccine freezing conditions during distribution and storage, it is encouraged to develop vaccines that are stored refrigerated (+ 2–8 °C). For this vaccine efficacy study on NHP, we used refrigerated liquid virosomes for intramuscular administration. Recently, we optimized a thermostable powder formulation with virosomes-RBD/3M-052 for nasal administration that is under currently investigation, as an alternative to the intramuscular route. Such nasal formulation will allow cold chain independent transport and is expected to efficiently elicit and boost protective mucosal IgG and IgA antibodies in the nasal and lung tissues.Material and methodsRBD antigenThe recombinant SARS-CoV-2 RBD219-N1C1 protein was designed and produced originally at Baylor College of Medicine (Texas, USA), using previously published methods49,94. The RBD219-N1C1 construct encodes a monomeric RBD protein of 218 amino acids (332–549) produced in Pichia pastoris, with the deletion of the asparagine 331 (N331) and the mutation of the last cysteine residue by an alanine substitution (C525A).Virosome formulationFor this immunogenicity study, RBD219-N1C1 protein was conjugated on a limited amount of lysine residues (≤ 4) to a reactive phospholipid (1,2-Dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(succinimidyloxy-glutaryl)-L-α-phosphatidylethanolamine, NOF Europe, Belgium). Virosomes with lipidated RBD integrated into their lipid bilayer were prepared as described earlier69,95.Briefly, β-propiolactone-inactivated influenza virus A/Brisbane/59/2007 H1N1 (Seqirus, Australia) was solubilized in 100 mM 1,2 dihexanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidylcholine (DCPC) (Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL, USA) in HN buffer (5 mM HEPES, 142.5 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) and the viral nucleocapsid was removed by high-speed centrifugation. To the supernatant, solubilized synthetic 1,2 dioleyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidylcholine (DOPC, Merck & Cie, Schaffhausen, Switzerland) in 100 mM DCPC, HN buffer was added. DCPC was then removed by dialysis in a gamma-irradiated slide-A-lyzer cassette (10 kDa cut-off; Thermo Scientific, Geel, Belgium) against HN buffer. The resulting pure and homogenous virosomes were stored at + 2–8 °C until further use. Adjuvant was inserted into the virosomal membrane by post-insertion. Briefly, 3M-052 (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA) was dissolved in ultrapure ethanol, and a small quantity of this adjuvant was rapidly mixed with the virosomes and incubated for 30 min at RT before long-term storage at + 2–8 °C.RBD-virosomes were characterized as described69 for their contents, RBD and 3M-052 by UPLC, and influenza HA by ELISA. Particle size and homogeneity was determined by nanoparticle tracking (NTA). Antigen and adjuvant integration was confirmed by sucrose density gradient analysis followed by UPLC. RBD coupling and epitope integrity on conjugated RBD was demonstrated by a sandwich ELISA in which antibodies to the virosomal hemagglutinin were used to coat ELISA plates. After blocking, plates were incubated with virosomes and the presence of native RBD on the virosomes was verified by using specific conformation-dependent antibodies to RBD78. The final virosomes were 0.22 µm sterile filtered and aliquoted into glass vials. Two separated glass vials were prepared, one for each day of immunization (d0 and d28), and each glass vial for intramuscular administration was supplied in HN buffer, containing 30 μg/mL of RBD and 2 μg/mL of 3M-052 as TLR7/8 agonist.Non-human primate studyThe study was performed with 10 adult healthy male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) randomly distributed into one vaccine treated group with 6 animals (V1-V6), and one untreated group (non-vaccinated) serving as control group with 4 animals (C1-C4). Age and weight of each animal is specified in Table 1. Enrolled animals were free of fecal pathogens and showed normal clinical chemistry and hematology values and did not have serum antibodies toward simian T-cell leukemia virus (STLV), to simian retrovirus (SRV), or to the RBD of the Spike protein of SARS-CoV-2, as tested by ELISA. Animals were housed in pairs with a compatible cage mate in ABSL3 facilities at the BPRC. The macaques were offered a daily diet which was optimized for rhesus macaques. Different enrichment items (toys, extra food puzzles) were offered daily. Drinking water was available ad libitum. At the start of the study (at time of influenza vaccination), the age of the animals ranged from 4.15 to 16.03 years (mean age 7.74 years), and they weighed between 7.02 and 18.27 kg (mean weight 11.79 kg). Animal anesthesia was performed according to the following procedures: (a) For blood sampling and intramuscular immunizations, we used Ketamin 5 mg/kg with Medetomidine 0.05 mg/kg (administered intramuscularly); (b) For BAL sampling and nasal wash, we used Ketamin 10 mg/kg with Medetomidine 0.05 mg/kg (administered intramuscularly). To help for faster recovery after anesthesia, animals received intramuscularly Atipamezol at 0.25 mg/kg. For euthanasia, animals received first intramuscularly Ketamin at 12 mg/kg with Medetomidine 0.05 mg/kg, then Pentobarbital at 70 mg/kg administered intravenously.The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Dutch “Centrale Commissie Dierproeven” (AVD5020020209404-2) according to Dutch law, article 10a of the “Wet op de Dierproeven” and BPRC’s Animal Welfare Body.All methods described into the protocol were performed according to Dutch guideline and approved by the Ethics Committee for the Biomedical Primate Research Centre (Rijswijk, Netherlands). The study is reported in accordance with ARRIVE guidelines.Immunization schedule and SARS-CoV-2 challengeFour weeks prior to vaccination, all animals (including controls) were primed intramuscularly with 0.5 mL of whole inactivated Influenza virus, containing 15 µg HA (A/Brisbane/59/2007 H1N1, solution at 30 µg HA/mL). Then, animals V1-V6 were immunized intramuscularly twice at day 0 and day 28 with 0.5 mL of adjuvanted virosomes-RBD (15 μg of RBD and 1 μg of 3M-052 adjuvant). Local reactions at the immunization sites were recorded on days 1, 2, 3, and 4 following each immunization by Draize scoring. Clinical chemistry and hematology measurements were performed to monitor systemic adverse effects. Two weeks post each vaccination, blood was drawn to monitor B and T-cell immune responses. Four weeks post final vaccination, at day 56 (week 8) all animals were exposed to 1 × 105 TCID50 SARS-CoV-2 (isolate BetaCoV/German/BavPat1/2020 p.4) that is like the Wuhan strain but containing the D614G mutation (obtained from the European Virus Archive, Charitéplatz 1, Berlin, Germany). Virus challenge was performed through the combined intranasal (0.25 mL per nostril) and intratracheal (1.5 mL) route. Animals were monitored for 7–9 days post challenge during which samples were collected: Nasal washes, throat swabs and bronchoalveolar lavages were analyzed for the presence of subgenomic RNA (sgRNA) representing replicative viruses, and animals were sacrificed, and lung histopathology was studied (see Fig. 1).ELISAIndividual serum samples obtained from rhesus macaques before and at two weeks after each immunization, at time of challenge and one week post SARS-CoV-2 challenge, were tested for the presence of binding IgG against SARS-CoV-2 RBD proteins using an ELISA, as previously described77. IgA antibodies were measured using a commercial monkey IgA ELISA kit (Mabtech, Nacka Strand, Sweden) according to manufacturer’s instruction. Additionally, nasal washes taken three weeks after the second immunization and post challenge and BAL fluid from three weeks after the second immunization were tested for the presence of IgG and IgA antibodies. Half area plates were used, that were coated overnight at 4 °C with 1 µg/mL recombinant RBD Spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 (ExpreS2ion Biotechnologies, Horsholm, Denmark), 50 µL per well. For IgG antibody detection the plates were blocked with PBS/3%BSA w/v (blocking solution) for 2 h at 37 °C. Serum, nasal wash or BAL samples were applied in two step serial diluted starting from 1:100 for serum, 1:5 for nasal washes and 1:10 for BAL fluid in PBS/1%BSA/0.05% Tween-20 and incubated 1 h at 37 °C. Bound anti-RBD antibodies were detected using GAHu-IgG (H + L)-HRP (1:1250 in 1% BSA/PBS). The reaction was developed with TMB substrate (50 µL/well for 20 min at RT in the dark) and stopped with 50 µL/well Stop solution (2N H2SO4). The absorbance was measured at 450 nm.SARS-CoV-2 neutralizationThe presence of serum neutralizing activity was outsourced to VisMederi (Siena, Italy)96,97, using a validated method with optimized conditions for each tested strain for detecting the cytopathic effect. Briefly, the micro neutralization assays were performed with Vero E6 cell line (from American Type Culture Collection) and live virus SARS-CoV-2 produced by VisMederi: Original strain 2019 nCOV ITALY/INMI1 similar to Wuhan, Alpha variant B.1.1.7 from the United Kindom, Beta variant B.1.351 from South Africa, the Delta variant B.1.617.2 from India and the Omicron B.1.1.529 from South Africa. As positive serum control (opened circle), we used the commercially available NIBSC human serum pool 21/234 containing high neutralizing antibody titer toward the SARS-CoV-2 original Wuhan-like strain. All macaque serums were heat inactivated at 56 °C for 30 min prior use. The neutralization titer (NT) is the reciprocal of the highest serum sample dilution that protects at least 50% of cells from cytopathic effect (NT50%).Cytokine and chemokine detectionNasal wash samples and lung brochoalveolar lavages (BAL) were tested for the presence of cytokines and chemokines using the LEGENDPLEX assay (Biolegend LEGENDplexTM NHP Inflammation Panel (13-plex, article no. 740332), according to the manufacturer’s instruction with some minor modifications. Provided by the manufacturer are incubation plates, assay buffer, matrix solution, bead solution, wash buffer and standards for each cytokine. Incubation plates were first pre-wet by adding 100 µL/well wash buffer. After removal of wash buffer, 15 µL of matrix-B followed by 15 µL of pre-diluted standard was added to the appropriate wells. For the test samples, first 15 µL of assay buffer was pipetted into the well, followed by 15 µL of undiluted sample. The standards were in duplicates, samples were tested singly. 15 µL of bead solution was added to all wells. After 2 h incubation at RT in a shaker, wells were washed twice with 100 µl/well wash buffer, 15 µL/well of detection antibody was added and plates were additionally incubated for 1 h at RT. Subsequently, 15 µL/well of Streptavidin-Phycoerhythrin was added, plates were incubated for 30 min. at RT, then washed twice with 100 µL/well wash buffer and beads were finally resuspended in 100 wash buffer/well. Samples were transferred to a 96 well plate and measured on a Aurora FACS machine (Cytek, Fremont, CA, USA) and analyzed by using company software. The following cytokines were measured: IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12p40, IL-17A, IL-23, GM-CSF, CXCL10 (IP-10), CCL2 (MCP-1), CXCL8 (IL-8), IFNβ, TNFα, and IFN-γ.Quantification of subgenomic mRNATracheal and nasal swabs, as well as BAL samples were analyzed for the presence of sgRNA of SARS-CoV-2 E gene using a quantitative real-time PCR as previously described75,98,99. Viral RNA was isolated using a QIAamp Viral RNA Mini kit (Qiagen Benelux BV, Venlo, The Netherlands) following the manufacturer's instructions. The RT-qPCR assay was carried out using the Brilliant II QRT-PCR Core Reagent Kit, 1-Step kit (Agilent Technologies BV, Amstelveen, The Netherlands), according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer in a 25 mL volume with final concentrations of 600 nM for both primers, 200 nM for the probe, and 5 nM MgCl2, using 10 mL RNA, extracted from 140 mL sample volume. RNA was reverse transcribed for 30 min at 50 °C. Then, after 10 min incubation at 95 °C, the cDNA was amplified for 45 cycles, consisting of 30 s denaturation at 95 °C, followed by a 1-min annealing-extension step at 60 °C. All the reactions were carried out with an iQ5 Multicolor Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad Laboratories BV, Veenendaal, The Netherlands). The amount of RNA was quantified based on a standard curve made via in vitro transcription of a synthetic target sequence.FACS analysisFACS analysis was performed on single cell suspensions that had been prepared from spleen obtained at autopsy. Mononuclear cells were isolated by lymphocyte separation medium (LSM) density gradient centrifugation (Organon-Teknica). Cells at the interface were collected and stored in liquid nitrogen. Thawed cells were first incubated with live/dead blue dead cell stain kit (Molecular Probes, cat. no. L23105). After 20 min. incubation, the cells were washed and then incubated with a mAb mixture containing: CD21BUV563 (BD bioscience, cat 741,362), CD27BUV661 (BD, cat 741,609), CD71B480 (BD, cat 746,247), CD95BV711(biolegend, cat 305,644), CD38FITC (Stem cell technologies, cat 10,415), goat anti-human IgDAlexa555 (Southern Biotechnology Inc, cat 2030–32), CD297BV785 (PD1) (biolegend, cat 329,930), CD185PE (CXCR5) (Ebioscience, cat 12–9185-42), IgMPerCP-Cy5.5 (BD, cat 561,285), IgGAPC (BD, cat 550,931), CD3Alexa700 (BD, cat 641,414) diluted in Brilliant Stain Buffer Plus (BD, cat 566,349). After 30 min. incubation at 4 °C in the dark, the cells were washed and fixed overnight at 4 °C in 2% paraformaldehyde solution in PBS. Flow cytometry was performed on an Aurora FACS machine using company software (Cytek, Fremont, CA, USA). For each tube the maximum number of events were recorded. Germinal center (GC) B cells and T follicular helper (Tfh) cells were analyzed by selecting cells within the lymphocyte gate, and then the singlets by using the forward scatter area plotted against the forward scatter height. Subsequently dead cells were excluded and GC were identified as: CD3neg/CD20pos/CD38neg/CD71pos cells, while Tfh were identified as CD3pos/CD4posCD279 (PD1)bright/CD185 (CXCR5)pos as descrined77,100. The cytometry gating strategy is described in the Supplementary section (Fig. S2).Lung histophathologyThe histopathology scoring on the lung sections was performed by a pathologist blinded to group allocation for having unbiased scores. Tissue samples from all pulmonary lobes, the upper respiratory tract (nasal mucosa, oroasopharynx, trachea, left and right bronchus), heart, kidney, liver, ileum and colon were collected for histopathology and preserved by immersion in 10% neutral-buffered formalin for 72 to 96 h. Specimens for microscopic examination were processed, embedded in paraffin and sections of 4 µm were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The lesions were quantified as follows: 0 = no lesions, 1 = minimal, 2 = mild, 3 = moderate, 4 = severe, using a pulmonary histopathology scoring system for SARS-CoV-2 infection in macaques as described75,99.Statistical analysisDifferences between groups were calculated by using the Mann–Whitney test. A two-sided α level of 0.05 was used to determine significance. For the neutralization assay, groups were compared by using the non-parametric Wilcoxon matched pair signed rank test.Ethics statementThe animal study was reviewed and approved by the Dutch “Centrale Commissie Dierproeven” or CCD (project code AVD5020020209404-2) according to Dutch law, article 10a of the “Wet op de Dierproeven,” and BPRC’s Animal Welfare Body (IvD). Data availability The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article material. Under reasonable request, the immunological datasets generated during this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. AbbreviationsACE2: Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 BAL: Bronchoalveolar lavage BSA: Bovine serum albumin COVID-19: Coronavirus disease of 2019 d: Day DLS: Dynamic light scattering eVLP: Enveloped virus-like particle ELISA: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay FcRn: Neonatal Fc receptor GC: Germinal center GMT: Geomean titer HA: Hemagglutinin H2SO4 : Sulfuric acid i.m.: Intramuscular IgG: Immunoglobulin G IgA: Immunoglobulin A mAb: Monoclonal antibody NHP: Non-human primate NT: Neutralizing titer NTA: Nanoparticle tracking analysis PBS: Phosphate buffer saline PDI: Polydispersity index RBD: Receptor binding domain RNA: Ribonucleic acid RT: Room temperature TCID50 : 50% Tissue culture infectious dose TLR7/8: Toll-like receptor 7 and 8 SARS-CoV-2: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 S: Spike envelope protein sgRNA: Subgenomic ribonucleic acid VOC: Variant of concern Tfh: T follicular helper cell UPLC: Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography WHO: World Health Organization ReferencesLi, Q. et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia. N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 1199–1207. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2001316 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270–273. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, P. et al. Real-time tentative assessment of the epidemiological characteristics of novel coronavirus infections in Wuhan, China, as at 22 January 2020. Euro. Surveill. https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.3.2000044 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Morawska, L. & Cao, J. Airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2: The world should face the reality. Environ. Int. 139, 105730. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.105730 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, R., Li, Y., Zhang, A. L., Wang, Y. & Molina, M. J. Identifying airborne transmission as the dominant route for the spread of COVID-19. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 14857–14863. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2009637117 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Helmy, Y. A. et al. The COVID-19 pandemic: A comprehensive review of taxonomy, genetics, epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, and control. J. Clin. Med. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9041225 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stefanelli, P. et al. Whole genome and phylogenetic analysis of two SARS-CoV-2 strains isolated in Italy in January and February 2020: Additional clues on multiple introductions and further circulation in Europe. Euro. Surveill. https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.13.2000305 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ahn, J. H. et al. Nasal ciliated cells are primary targets for SARS-CoV-2 replication in the early stage of COVID-19. J. Clin. Investig. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI148517 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Balcom, E. F., Nath, A. & Power, C. Acute and chronic neurological disorders in COVID-19: Potential mechanisms of disease. Brain 144, 3576–3588. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awab302 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tai, W. et al. Characterization of the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of 2019 novel coronavirus: Implication for development of RBD protein as a viral attachment inhibitor and vaccine. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 17, 613–620. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41423-020-0400-4 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wrapp, D. et al. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation. Science 367, 1260–1263. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb2507 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lan, J. et al. Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the ACE2 receptor. Nature 581, 215–220. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2180-5 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and is blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell 181, 271–280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, M. Y., Li, L., Zhang, Y. & Wang, X. S. Expression of the SARS-CoV-2 cell receptor gene ACE2 in a wide variety of human tissues. Infect. Dis. Poverty 9, 45. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40249-020-00662-x (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Min, L. & Sun, Q. Antibodies and vaccines target RBD of SARS-CoV-2. Front. Mol. Biosci. 8, 671633. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2021.671633 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kumar, S., Chandele, A. & Sharma, A. Current status of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. PLoS Pathog. 17, e1009885. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1009885 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wang, X. et al. A potent human monoclonal antibody with pan-neutralizing activities directly dislocates S trimer of SARS-CoV-2 through binding both up and down forms of RBD. Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 7, 114. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-022-00954-8 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Brouwer, P. J. M. et al. Potent neutralizing antibodies from COVID-19 patients define multiple targets of vulnerability. Science 369, 643–650. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abc5902 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, T. et al. Uncovering a conserved vulnerability site in SARS-CoV-2 by a human antibody. EMBO Mol. Med. 13, e14544. https://doi.org/10.15252/emmm.202114544 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zost, S. J. et al. Rapid isolation and profiling of a diverse panel of human monoclonal antibodies targeting the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Nat. Med. 26, 1422–1427. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0998-x (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Spiekermann, G. M. et al. Receptor-mediated immunoglobulin G transport across mucosal barriers in adult life: Functional expression of FcRn in the mammalian lung. J. Exp. Med. 196, 303–310. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20020400 (2002).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Peter, H. H. et al. Targeting FcRn for immunomodulation: Benefits, risks, and practical considerations. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 146, 479–491. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2020.07.016 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Alturki, S. O. et al. The 2020 pandemic: Current SARS-CoV-2 vaccine development. Front. Immunol. 11, 1880. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.01880 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fiolet, T., Kherabi, Y., MacDonald, C. J., Ghosn, J. & Peiffer-Smadja, N. Comparing COVID-19 vaccines for their characteristics, efficacy and effectiveness against SARS-CoV-2 and variants of concern: A narrative review. Clin. Microbiol. Infect 28, 202–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2021.10.005 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kaur, S. P. & Gupta, V. COVID-19 Vaccine: A comprehensive status report. Virus Res. 288, 198114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virusres.2020.198114 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Khan, W. H. et al. COVID-19 pandemic and vaccines update on challenges and resolutions. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 11, 690621. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2021.690621 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Krammer, F. SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in development. Nature 586, 516–527. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2798-3 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lund, F. E. & Randall, T. D. Scent of a vaccine. Science 373, 397–399. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abg9857 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Maharjan, P. M. & Choe, S. Plant-based COVID-19 vaccines: Current status, design, and development strategies of candidate vaccines. Vaccines https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines9090992 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Martinez-Flores, D. et al. SARS-CoV-2 vaccines based on the spike glycoprotein and implications of new viral variants. Front. Immunol. 12, 701501. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.701501 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rinoldi, C. et al. Nanotechnology-assisted RNA delivery: From nucleic acid therapeutics to COVID-19 vaccines. Small Methods 5, 2100402. https://doi.org/10.1002/smtd.202100402 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Schoenmaker, L. et al. mRNA-lipid nanoparticle COVID-19 vaccines: Structure and stability. Int. J. Pharm. 601, 120586. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2021.120586 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tenchov, R., Bird, R., Curtze, A. E. & Zhou, Q. Lipid nanoparticles horizontal line from liposomes to mRNA vaccine delivery, a landscape of research diversity and advancement. ACS Nano 15, 16982–17015. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.1c04996 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vu, M. N., Kelly, H. G., Kent, S. J. & Wheatley, A. K. Current and future nanoparticle vaccines for COVID-19. EBioMedicine 74, 103699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103699 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sughayer, M. A. et al. Comparison of the effectiveness and duration of anti-RBD SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibody response between different types of vaccines: Implications for vaccine strategies. Vaccine 40, 2841–2847. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.03.069 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, Z. et al. Humoral and cellular immune memory to four COVID-19 vaccines. Cell 185, 2434–2451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.05.022 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Goldberg, Y. et al. Protection and waning of natural and hybrid immunity to SARS-CoV-2. N. Engl. J. Med. 386, 2201–2212. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2118946 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hamady, A., Lee, J. & Loboda, Z. A. Waning antibody responses in COVID-19: What can we learn from the analysis of other coronaviruses?. Infection 50, 11–25. https://doi.org/10.1007/s15010-021-01664-z (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lauring, A. S. & Andino, R. Quasispecies theory and the behavior of RNA viruses. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1001005. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1001005 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Duffy, S. Why are RNA virus mutation rates so damn high?. PLoS Biol. 16, e3000003. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000003 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kim, J. S. et al. Genome-wide identification and characterization of point mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 genome. Osong. Public Health Res. Perspect. 11, 101–111. https://doi.org/10.24171/j.phrp.2020.11.3.05 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, Q. et al. The impact of mutations in SARS-CoV-2 spike on viral infectivity and antigenicity. Cell 182, 1284–1294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.07.012 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Greaney, A. J. et al. Complete mapping of mutations to the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain that escape antibody recognition. Cell Host Microbe 29, 44–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2020.11.007 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hastie, K. M. et al. Defining variant-resistant epitopes targeted by SARS-CoV-2 antibodies: A global consortium study. Science 374, 472–478. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abh2315 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Guruprasad, L. Human SARS CoV-2 spike protein mutations. Proteins 89, 569–576. https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.26042 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thakur, S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 mutations and their impact on diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines. Front. Med. 9, 815389. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2022.815389 (2022).Article Google Scholar Garcia-Beltran, W. F. et al. Multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants escape neutralization by vaccine-induced humoral immunity. Cell 184, 2372–2383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.03.013 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao, Z. et al. Omicron SARS-CoV-2 mutations stabilize spike up-RBD conformation and lead to a non-RBM-binding monoclonal antibody escape. Nat. Commun. 13, 4958. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32665-7 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, W. H. et al. Genetic modification to design a stable yeast-expressed recombinant SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain as a COVID-19 vaccine candidate. Biochim. Biophys. Acta (BBA) Gen. Sub.j 1865, 129893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2021.129893 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Pollet, J. et al. SARS-CoV-2 RBD219-N1C1: A yeast-expressed SARS-CoV-2 recombinant receptor-binding domain candidate vaccine stimulates virus neutralizing antibodies and T-cell immunity in mice. Hum. Vaccin. Immunother. 17, 2356–2366. https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2021.1901545 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Moser, C. et al. Influenza virosomes as a combined vaccine carrier and adjuvant system for prophylactic and therapeutic immunizations. Expert Rev. Vaccines 6, 711–721. https://doi.org/10.1586/14760584.6.5.711 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Moser, C., Amacker, M. & Zurbriggen, R. Influenza virosomes as a vaccine adjuvant and carrier system. Expert Rev. Vaccines 10, 437–446. https://doi.org/10.1586/erv.11.15 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Moser, C., Muller, M., Kaeser, M. D., Weydemann, U. & Amacker, M. Influenza virosomes as vaccine adjuvant and carrier system. Expert Rev. Vaccines 12, 779–791. https://doi.org/10.1586/14760584.2013.811195 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Asadi, K. & Gholami, A. Virosome-based nanovaccines; a promising bioinspiration and biomimetic approach for preventing viral diseases: A review. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 182, 648–658. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.04.005 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kushnir, N., Streatfield, S. J. & Yusibov, V. Virus-like particles as a highly efficient vaccine platform: Diversity of targets and production systems and advances in clinical development. Vaccine 31, 58–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.10.083 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cimica, V. & Galarza, J. M. Adjuvant formulations for virus-like particle (VLP) based vaccines. Clin. Immunol. 183, 99–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2017.08.004 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bovier, P. A. Epaxal: A virosomal vaccine to prevent hepatitis A infection. Expert Rev. Vaccines 7, 1141–1150. https://doi.org/10.1586/14760584.7.8.1141 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gluck, R. et al. Immunopotentiating reconstituted influenza virus virosome vaccine delivery system for immunization against hepatitis A. J. Clin. Investig. 90, 2491–2495. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI116141 (1992).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bovier, P. A. Recent advances with a virosomal hepatitis A vaccine. Expert. Opin. Biol. Ther. 8, 1177–1185. https://doi.org/10.1517/14712598.8.8.1177 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chappuis, F. et al. Immunogenicity and estimation of antibody persistence following vaccination with an inactivated virosomal hepatitis A vaccine in adults: A 20-year follow-up study. Vaccine 35, 1448–1454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.01.031 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Herzog, C. et al. Eleven years of Inflexal V-a virosomal adjuvanted influenza vaccine. Vaccine 27, 4381–4387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.05.029 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gasparini, R. & Lai, P. Utility of virosomal adjuvated influenza vaccines: a review of the literature. J. Prev. Med. Hyg. 51, 1–6 (2010).CAS PubMed Google Scholar de Bruijn, I. A., Nauta, J., Gerez, L. & Palache, A. M. Virosomal influenza vaccine: A safe and effective influenza vaccine with high efficacy in elderly and subjects with low pre-vaccination antibody titers. Virus Res. 103, 139–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virusres.2004.02.026 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Esposito, S. et al. Safe administration of an inactivated virosomal adjuvanted influenza vaccine in asthmatic children with egg allergy. Vaccine 26, 4664–4668. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.06.095 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schaad, U. B. et al. Comparison of immunogenicity and safety of a virosome influenza vaccine with those of a subunit influenza vaccine in pediatric patients with cystic fibrosis. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44, 1163–1167. https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.44.5.1163-1167.2000 (2000).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Leroux-Roels, G. et al. Randomized phase I: Safety, immunogenicity and mucosal antiviral activity in young healthy women vaccinated with HIV-1 Gp41 P1 peptide on virosomes. PloS One 8, e55438. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0055438 (2013).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Genton, B. et al. A randomized placebo-controlled phase Ia malaria vaccine trial of two virosome-formulated synthetic peptides in healthy adult volunteers. PloS One 2, e1018. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0001018 (2007).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cech, P. G. et al. Virosome-formulated Plasmodium falciparum AMA-1 & CSP derived peptides as malaria vaccine: Randomized phase 1b trial in semi-immune adults & children. PloS One 6, e22273. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0022273 (2011).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Amacker, M. et al. New GMP manufacturing processes to obtain thermostable HIV-1 gp41 virosomes under solid forms for various mucosal vaccination routes. NPJ Vaccines 5, 41. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-020-0190-9 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dowling, D. J. Recent advances in the discovery and delivery of TLR7/8 agonists as vaccine adjuvants. Immunohorizons 2, 185–197. https://doi.org/10.4049/immunohorizons.1700063 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hadj Hassine, I. Covid-19 vaccines and variants of concern: A review. Rev. Med. Virol. 32, e2313. https://doi.org/10.1002mv.2313 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Blanco-Melo, D. et al. Imbalanced host response to SARS-CoV-2 drives development of COVID-19. Cell 181, 1036–1045. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.026 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Del Valle, D. M. et al. An inflammatory cytokine signature predicts COVID-19 severity and survival. Nat. Med. 26, 1636–1643. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-1051-9 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lu, S. et al. Comparison of nonhuman primates identified the suitable model for COVID-19. Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 5, 157. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-020-00269-6 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mooij, P. et al. Poxvirus MVA expressing SARS-CoV-2 S protein induces robust immunity and protects rhesus macaques from SARS-CoV-2. Front. Immunol. 13, 845887. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.845887 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Routhu, N. K. et al. A modified vaccinia Ankara vector-based vaccine protects macaques from SARS-CoV-2 infection, immune pathology, and dysfunction in the lungs. Immunity 54, 542–556. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2021.02.001 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Volkmann, A. et al. A Capsid virus-like particle-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccine induces high levels of antibodies and protects rhesus macaques. Front. Immunol. 13, 857440. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.857440 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar van der Velden, Y. U. et al. A SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan spike virosome vaccine induces superior neutralization breadth compared to one using the Beta spike. Sci. Rep. 12, 3884. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07590-w (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kleanthous, H. et al. Scientific rationale for developing potent RBD-based vaccines targeting COVID-19. NPJ Vaccines 6, 128. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-021-00393-6 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Burnett, D. L. et al. Immunizations with diverse sarbecovirus receptor-binding domains elicit SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies against a conserved site of vulnerability. Immunity 54, 2908–2921. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2021.10.019 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Deshpande, A., Harris, B. D., Martinez-Sobrido, L., Kobie, J. J. & Walter, M. R. Epitope classification and RBD binding properties of neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. Front. Immunol. 12, 691715. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.691715 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Haynes, W. A. et al. High-resolution epitope mapping and characterization of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in large cohorts of subjects with COVID-19. Commun. Biol. 4, 1317. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02835-2 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Smirnov, D., Schmidt, J. J., Capecchi, J. T. & Wightman, P. D. Vaccine adjuvant activity of 3M-052: An imidazoquinoline designed for local activity without systemic cytokine induction. Vaccine 29, 5434–5442. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.05.061 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kastenmuller, K. et al. Protective T cell immunity in mice following protein-TLR7/8 agonist-conjugate immunization requires aggregation, type I IFN, and multiple DC subsets. J. Clin. Investig. 121, 1782–1796. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI45416 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thuluva, S. et al. Evaluation of safety and immunogenicity of receptor-binding domain-based COVID-19 vaccine (Corbevax) to select the optimum formulation in open-label, multicentre, and randomised phase-1/2 and phase-2 clinical trials. EBioMedicine 83, 104217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104217 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar An, Y. et al. A tandem-repeat dimeric RBD protein-based covid-19 vaccine zf2001 protects mice and nonhuman primates. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 11, 1058–1071. https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2022.2056524 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Arunachalam, P. S. et al. Adjuvanting a subunit COVID-19 vaccine to induce protective immunity. Nature 594, 253–258. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03530-2 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Toback, S. et al. Safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy of a COVID-19 vaccine (NVX-CoV2373) co-administered with seasonal influenza vaccines: an exploratory substudy of a randomised, observer-blinded, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Respir. Med. 10, 167–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00409-4 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pino, M. et al. A yeast expressed RBD-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccine formulated with 3M–052-alum adjuvant promotes protective efficacy in non-human primates. Sci. Immunol. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.abh3634 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Saunders, K. O. et al. Neutralizing antibody vaccine for pandemic and pre-emergent coronaviruses. Nature 594, 553–559. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03594-0 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Allen, J. C., Toapanta, F. R., Chen, W. & Tennant, S. M. Understanding immunosenescence and its impact on vaccination of older adults. Vaccine 38, 8264–8272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.11.002 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sette, A. & Crotty, S. Adaptive immunity to SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. Cell 184, 861–880. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.01.007 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tarke, A. et al. Impact of SARS-CoV-2 variants on the total CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cell reactivity in infected or vaccinated individuals. Cell Rep. Med. 2, 100355. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100355 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, J. et al. Process development and scale-up optimization of the SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain-based vaccine candidate, RBD219-N1C1. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 105, 4153–4165. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-021-11281-3 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stegmann, T. et al. Lipopeptide-adjuvanted respiratory syncytial virus virosomes: A safe and immunogenic non-replicating vaccine formulation. Vaccine 28, 5543–5550. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.06.041 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hyseni, I. et al. Characterisation of SARS-CoV-2 lentiviral pseudotypes and correlation between pseudotype-based neutralisation assays and live virus-based micro neutralisation assays. Viruses https://doi.org/10.3390/v12091011 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Manenti, A. et al. Evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies using a CPE-based colorimetric live virus micro-neutralization assay in human serum samples. J. Med. Virol. 92, 2096–2104. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25986 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wolfel, R. et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature 581, 465–469. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Salguero, F. J. et al. Comparison of rhesus and cynomolgus macaques as an infection model for COVID-19. Nat. Commun. 12, 1260. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-21389-9 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cirelli, K. M. et al. Slow delivery immunization enhances HIV neutralizing antibody and germinal center responses via modulation of immunodominance. Cell 177, 1153–1171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.012 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Carmelina Mahrer and Ronald Kempers for their continuous administrative support and inputs for this project. Special thanks to Mymetics main shareholders that have continuously supported Mymetics team effort. We thank the Animal Science Department at the BPRC for excellent care and handling of the animals. We are grateful to Maria Elena Bottazzi and her team from the Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children’s Hospital (Texas USA) that has kindly provided the RBD antigen, and their support for this virosomal COVID-19 project. Our thanks also to Mark Tomai from 3M Drug Delivery Systems Division for early discussions about the 3M-052 adjuvant and inputs, and all the other persons involved in the project that were not mentioned.FundingThis work on NHP (project acronym AVVAX-COVID-19) was supported by TRANSVAC2 grant (2002-08-AVVAX-COVID-19, TRANSVAC2_TNA2002-08), and also financially supported by the BPRC. This study was also sponsored by Mymetics Corporation that is funded through private investments.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Virology, Biomedical Primate Research Centre (BPRC), Rijswijk, The NetherlandsGerrit Koopman, Ernst J. Verschoor, Babs E. Verstrepen, Kinga P. Böszörményi, Zahra Fagrouch, Gwendoline Kiemenyi-Kayere, Daniella Mortier, Dagmar E. Verel, Henk Niphuis, Roja Fidel Acar, Yolanda S. Kap, Willy M. J. M. Bogers & Petra MooijMymetics SA, 4 Route de La Corniche, 1066, Epalinges, SwitzerlandMario Amacker & Sylvain FleuryDepartment for BioMedical Research DBMR, Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, 3008, Bern, SwitzerlandMario AmackerMymetics BV, JH Oortweg 21, 2333 CH, Leiden, The NetherlandsToon Stegmann, Farien Bhoelan & Denzel BemelmanAnimal Science Department, Biomedical Primate Research Centre (BPRC), Rijswijk, The NetherlandsIvanela KondovaAuthorsGerrit KoopmanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMario AmackerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarToon StegmannView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarErnst J. VerschoorView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBabs E. VerstrepenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFarien BhoelanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDenzel BemelmanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKinga P. BöszörményiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZahra FagrouchView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGwendoline Kiemenyi-KayereView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDaniella MortierView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDagmar E. VerelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHenk NiphuisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRoja Fidel AcarView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIvanela KondovaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYolanda S. KapView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWilly M. J. M. BogersView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPetra MooijView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSylvain FleuryView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsDesigned the study: S.F. and Y.S.K. Oversaw vaccine production and quality controls: T.S. and M.A. Supervised the non-human primate study at BPRC: G.K. B.E.V., Y.S.K. and P.M. Conceived the experiments and analyzed the data: M.A., T.S., G.K., P.M., E.J.V., B.E.V., F.B., K.P.B., D.B., I.K., W.M. J. M. B. and S.F. Performed the experiments: G.K., P.M., M.A., T.S., F.B., K.P.B., Z.F., G.K.K., D.M., D.E.V., H.N., R.F.A., D.B. Prepared the figures: G.K., P.M., and S.F. Wrote the manuscript: G.K., M.A., P.M., and S.F. All authors reviewed the manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Gerrit Koopman or Sylvain Fleury.Ethics declarations Competing interests S.F. and T.S. own equity in the mother company Mymetics Corporation that holds Mymetics BV and Mymetics SA. The remaining authors G.K., M.A., E.J.V., B.E.V., F.B., D.B., K.P.B., Z.F., G.K.-K., D.M., D.E.V., H.N., R.F.A., I.K., Y.S.K., W.M. J. M.B., and P.M. declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any financial and non-financial (also S.F. and T.S.) relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleKoopman, G., Amacker, M., Stegmann, T. et al. A low dose of RBD and TLR7/8 agonist displayed on influenza virosome particles protects rhesus macaque against SARS-CoV-2 challenge. Sci Rep 13, 5074 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-31818-yDownload citationReceived: 13 January 2023Accepted: 17 March 2023Published: 28 March 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-31818-yShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingCan bird flu turn deadly? Know symptoms of severe disease | Health - Hindustan Times Explore Search Tuesday, Nov 12, 2024 New Delhi oC Subscribe Games E-Paper Sign in My Account Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Enjoy unlimited access Subscribe Now! Get features like Ad lite A Minimal Ad Experience HT Premium Articles Expertly crafted articles Quickreads Segment News brief in summary format HT E-paper Access digital news experience Start 14 Days Free Trial Home Assembly Elections 2024 HT Premium HTCity Loan ₹10 Lakh India World Real Estate Powered by Entertainment Trending Astrology Lifestyle Education Business Cities Latest News Games & Puzzles IPL Auction Win iPhone 15 The Taste of Time Photos Web Stories Sports Delhi News Mumbai News Bengaluru News Technology Quickreads Daily Digest Following Games + 5 more Technology Quickreads Daily Digest Following Games Can bird flu turn deadly? Know symptoms of severe disease in humans from experts ByParmita Uniyal, New Delhi Mar 31, 2023 06:26 PM IST Read this news in brief form Share Via Copy Link Bird flu or H5N1 influenza virus rarely infects humans but has high fatality rates. All you want to know about the severe symptoms of the disease in humans. A severe case of bird flu was detected in Chile in a 53-year-old man who is now said to be in a stable condition. Also known as avian influenza, bird flu is a type A influenza virus that spreads between wild and domesticated birds and is lethal to them. The infection can also be passed from birds to humans and usually causes mild illness such as cough, sore throat, runny nose, muscle ache and conjunctivitis. However sometimes it can potentially have life-threatening complications from pneumonia to sepsis. (Also read: Bird Flu outbreak: Warning signs of avian influenza in humans) Bird flu or A(H5N1) virus is not found to be spread from person to person and its transmission from birds to humans is also rare(Shutterstock) Bird flu or A(H5N1) virus is not found to be spread from person to person and its transmission from birds to humans is also rare. However, unprotected contact with wild birds or domestic birds that look sick can cause severe disease in humans. The A(H5N1) virus has only been sporadically detected in European poultry or wild birds until 2021. "There has been a spurt in human cases of avian influenza in 2022. All reported human cases since last year have been identified in humans with recent poultry exposure, and no cases of human-to-human transmission have been identified. To date, the circulating H5NY strain of influenza A does not cause severe disease in humans. However, because of the potential for the influenza virus to rapidly evolve and to have wide global prevalence and danger of pandemics, surveillance in animals and humans is essential," says Dr Vineeta Taneja - Director - Internal Medicine, Fortis Hospital, Shalimar Bagh. What is bird flu and how does it spreadH5N1 influenza virus or bird flu has very limited transmission but extremely high fatality rate. "Bird flu is also known as Avian Influenza. It is a type of infection occurring mainly in birds. It may also spread in humans through unprotected contact with infected birds or surfaces contaminated with bird flu viruses or due to direct contact with infected birds. Human to human transmission is very rare and has only spread to a few people but it is possible that the bird flu virus may change and gain the ability to disseminate easily between people and therefore, close monitoring is required," says Dr. Santosh Kumar Agrawal, Senior Consultant, Internal Medicine, Marengo Asia Hospital Faridabad. Symptoms of bird flu“In India, the outbreak of bird flu has been reported in several states in recent years, including Maharashtra, Gujarat, and Kerala. The H5N1 strain of the virus is considered to be highly pathogenic, meaning it can cause severe illness in humans. Symptoms of the disease may include fever, cough, sore throat, muscle aches, and respiratory distress. Bird flu, also known as avian influenza, is a viral infection that affects birds, particularly wild waterfowl, such as ducks and geese, but can also spread to domestic poultry. In some cases, the virus can be transmitted from birds to humans, leading to serious illness or even death," says Dr. Ather Pasha – Consultant, General Medicine, CARE Hospitals, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad. "Symptoms of bird flu virus infections in humans may range from no symptoms or mild illness such as redness of eyes (conjunctivitis) or mild flu-like upper respiratory symptoms to severe (like pneumonia). Infected people may also present symptoms like fever or feeling feverish, cough, sore throat, runny or congested nose, muscle and body aches, headaches, fatigue, and shortness of breath and breathing difficulty. There are lesser common symptoms such as diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. If the symptoms are left untreated, Bird flu may pose the risk of serious and life-threatening complications like pneumonia, kidney dysfunction, respiratory failure, sepsis (blood infection) and heart problems," says Dr Agarwal. "The symptoms of bird flu in humans are very similar to other influenza viruses and include high temperature, aching muscles, runny nose, headache, cough, and shortness of breath. These symptoms develop after a variable incubation period of 1-7 days after exposure. Even though the current number of cases is not very high, humans do not have natural immunity to the virus and have a higher risk of developing severe disease," says Dr Taneja. Severe symptoms of bird fluIn extremely rare cases, bird flu can turn fatal and one can develop pneumonia, respiratory distress or sepsis. "The symptoms of severe bird flu can include pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and multi-organ failure. These complications can be life-threatening and may require hospitalization and intensive care," says Dr Pasha. "It is important to note that not all cases of bird flu in humans result in severe illness. In fact, many people who have been infected with the virus have only experienced mild symptoms or no symptoms at all. However, individuals who are at a higher risk of developing severe illness include those with weakened immune systems, pregnant women, young children, and older adults. Preventative measures such as avoiding contact with sick or dead birds, practicing good hygiene, and cooking poultry thoroughly can reduce the risk of contracting bird flu. If you experience any symptoms of illness after contact with birds or poultry, it is important to seek medical attention immediately," adds Dr Pasha. Preventive measures"Prevention measures include minimizing contact with wild birds or sick or dead poultry, wearing gloves and N95 masks while handling birds, practicing good hand hygiene, and avoiding contact with surfaces that may be contaminated with bird saliva, mucus, or faeces. Additionally, it is important to cook poultry thoroughly and avoid consuming raw or undercooked poultry," says Dr Pasha. Follow more stories on Facebook & Twitter Catch every big hit,... See more Catch every big hit, every wicket with Crick-it, a one stop destination for Live Scores, Match Stats, Quizzes, Polls & much more. Explore now!.Catch your daily dose of Fashion, Taylor Swift, Health, Festivals, Travel, Relationship, Recipe and all the other Latest Lifestyle News on Hindustan Times Website and APPs. News / Lifestyle / Health / Can bird flu turn deadly? Know symptoms of severe disease in humans from experts SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON Share this article Read this news in brief form Share Via Copy Link Bird Flu Avian Flu SHARE Copy Whatsapp Twitter Facebook Linkedin [Best Deals] Best air purifier brands for a healthier home: Fight pollution with top picks Best geysers in India: Top 11 energy-saving water heaters you can trust Best top load washing machines: Top 10 efficient, and effective options for you Best serums for sensitive skin: 10 top picks to soothe and nourish your skin Best 5 star geysers for home: Top 10 instant water heaters to choose from View All Join Hindustan Times Create free account and unlock exciting features like Newsletters, Alerts and Recommendations Get personalised news and exciting deals Bookmark the stories you want to read later REGISTER FOR FREE Already have an account? Sign In SKIP Subscribe to our best newsletters HT Daily Capsule Sign Up to Subscribe Newsletter subscribed successfully Latest News World News India News Cricket Live Score Cricket Schedule T20 World Cup Suryakumar Yadav Virat Kohli Yashasvi Jaiswal Axar Patel Hardik Pandya Ravindra Jadeja Shivam Dube Rishabh Pant Sanju Samson Arshdeep Singh Jasprit Bumrah Kuldeep Yadav Mohammed Siraj Yuzvendra Chahal Tim David David Warner Cameron Green Travis Head India vs Sri Lanka India vs South Africa India vs Pakistan India vs Netherlands India vs Ireland India vs England India vs Bangladesh India vs Australia India vs Afghanistan CITY NEWS Bengaluru News Bhopal News Chandigarh News Chennai News Dehradun News Delhi News Gurugram News Hyderabad News Indore News Jaipur News Kolkata News Lucknow News Mumbai News Noida News Patna News Pune News Ranchi News Other Cities Entertainment Bollywood News Hollywood News Music Tamil Cinema Telugu Cinema TV Web Series Entertainment Others Books HT Insight Brand Post Brand Stories Elections Upcoming Elections Income Tax Calculator ASTROLOGY Horoscope Education Admission News Board Exams Competitive Exams Employment News Exam Results Education News LIFESTYLE Art and Culture Brunch Fashion Festivals Health Recipes Relationship Travel Pet Web Stories Trending Business Photos Videos Environment Science Opinion Editorials Car and Bike Technology Sports Badminton Football Hockey Tennis Others Quickreads Covid 19 Assembly Election GAMES Daily Sudoku Daily Crossword Daily Word Jumble TRENDING NEWS CBSE Date Sheet 2025 UP Police Constable Result 2024 Live UGC NET 2024 Live SSC CGL Result 2024 Live India News Live Entertainment News Live World News Live Trending News Live US News Live Bollywood News LIVE Hollywood News Live Horoscope Today LIVE Cricket News Live Sanjiv Khanna Gautam Gambhir Pushpa 2 Trailer Singham Again box office collection IPL 2025 Auction Maharashtra Election 2024 Jharkhand Election 2024 Assembly Election 2024 Cricket Score LIVE Cricket Schedule Gold rate World News TRENDING TOPICS CBSE Date Sheet 2025 UP Police Constable Result 2024 Live UGC NET 2024 Live SSC CGL Result 2024 Live India News Live Entertainment News Live World News Live Trending News Live US News live Bollywood News LIVE Hollywood News Live Horoscope Today LIVE Cricket News Live Sanjiv Khanna Gautam Gambhir Pushpa 2 Trailer Singham Again box office collection Maharashtra Assembly Election 2024 IPL Auction 2025 Jharkhand Assembly Election Assembly Election 2024 Cricket Cricket Match Today India News World News Latest Lifestyle News Business News LIVE Updates Today November 12, 2024: Air India to serve ‘halal’ meals only on select routes | Check details Air India to serve ‘halal’ meals only on select routes | Check details Climate crisis 'Try to ban Pakistan if you have courage': ICC sent '1996 WC' reminder as India's refusal spark Champions Trophy chaos ‘Hopefully you can get Trump to…”: Vinod Khosla congratulates Elon Musk on President-elect’s election win Who is Elise Stefanik? 6 facts about new US ambassador to United Nations Sachin Tendulkar, Virat Kohli's elite ODI records shattered by Rahmanullah Gurbaz as Afghanistan script BAN series win Haryana Weather and AQI Today: Warm start at 21.73 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Punjab Weather and AQI Today: Warm start at 19.13 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Jammu and Kashmir Weather and AQI Today: Cool start at -15.84 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 About Us Contact us Terms of use Privacy policy Weather Today HT Newsletters Subscription Disclaimer Print Ad Rates Code of Ethics Site Map RSS Feeds © 2024 HindustanTimes Click to Top Story Saved Live Score OPEN APP Edit Profile Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Now Your Subscription Plan Renew Subscription Manage Subscription Saved Articles Following My Reads Sign out New Delhi 0C Tuesday, November 12, 2024 Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Now Home HTLS 2023 Astrology India News Lifestyle Entertainment Elections Trending Videos Education Photos Sports Cities Daily Digest Quickreads Opinion Analysis For You Following Web Stories Science HT Games Podcasts Weather Technology Latest News Cricket India vs Sri Lanka Live Cricket Score Cricket Teams Cricket Players ICC Rankings Cricket Schedule Shreyas Iyer Harshit Rana Kusal Mendis Ravi Bishnoi Rinku Singh Riyan Parag Washington Sundar Avishka Fernando Charith Asalanka Dasun Shanaka Khaleel Ahmed Pathum Nissanka World News US News Cities Delhi Mumbai Bengaluru Gurugram Noida Hyderabad Chennai Kolkata Bhopal Chandigarh Dehradun Indore Jaipur Lucknow Patna Pune Ranchi Other Cities Business Income Tax Calculator Petrol Prices UGC NET Answer Key 2024 Live Diesel Prices Gold Rate Silver Rate Lifestyle Fashion Health Relationships Art and Culture Travel Recipes Festivals Pet Brunch Entertainment Bollywood TV Web Series Music Hollywood Telugu Cinema Tamil Cinema Anime Education Study Abroad Board Exams JEE Exam Results Admission News Employment News Competitive Exams BBA Colleges Engineering Colleges Medical Colleges BCA Colleges BBA Exams BCA Exams Medical Exams Engineering Exams Astrology Horoscope Love Horoscope Tarot Chinese Panchang Annual Horoscope Festival Calendar Compatibility Calculator Career Horoscope Manifestation Transits HT Premium E-Paper The Economist Articles HT Insider HT Insight Elections 2024 Lok Sabha States Lok Sabha Parties Lok Sabha Candidates Videos india news infocus HT Insight Explainer Video On The Record HT Weekend Aur Batao Vikram Chandra Daily Wrap Photos Entertainment Photos Lifestyle Photos News Photos Sports Olympics 2024 Olympics Medal Tally Other Sports Sports Football Tennis EPL 2023-24 ISL 2023-24 Hockey Asian Games 2023 HT Insight Public Health Economic Policy International Affairs Climate Change Gender Equality knowledge future tech Governance More from HT HT Epaper Auto HT Tech HT Bangla HT School Quiz HT Friday Finance HT Premium Explore Hindustan Times HT Newsletters Weather Today About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Disclaimer Print Ad Rates Code of Ethics Sitemap RSS Feeds Subscription - Terms of Use Copyright © HT Digital Streams Ltd. All rights reserved. Follow Us On My Account Sign in Home Cricket Premium Games Sign In // // //Egg market may be improving ahead of Easter, but bird flu brings unknowns: Wells Fargo | Food Dive Skip to main content CONTINUE TO SITE ➞ Don't miss tomorrow's food industry news Let Food Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox. Daily Dive M-F Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Topics Sign up Search Sign up Search Finances & Deals Food Tech Manufacturing Ingredients Corporate Ops Packaging Policy Protein Beverages Sustainability An article from Egg market may be improving ahead of Easter, but bird flu brings unknowns: Wells Fargo As producers work to rebuild flocks, they remain cautious about the impact the virus will have this year, the banking giant’s Agri-Food Institute sector manager said. Published March 28, 2023 Chris Casey Staff Reporter post share post print email license Maryna Auramchuk via Getty Images While some worried consumers may abstain from dyeing and hiding eggs this Easter, the overall egg supply chain appears to be on the mend from the avian bird flu crisis. Nearly 59 million poultry flocks have been culled because of the outbreak of the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) that began last year, according to the CDC. Ahead of the holiday on April 9, egg prices are poised to moderate as the U.S. egg-laying hen flock is rebuilt, said Kevin Bergquist, sector manager at Wells Fargo’s Agri-Food Institute. While year-over-year inventory for the birds is 15 to 20% lower than last year, it is slowly regrowing, increasing 1% in February, according to USDA data quoted by Urner Barry and shared by Wells Fargo. “Holiday seasonal demand is one factor behind rising prices in the market, which have been increasing again before Easter, but the volume of egg movement is beginning to slow, meaning that the market could be finding a point of balance,” Bergquist said in an emailed statement. Egg prices fell 6.7% in February after months of increases, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported, with the cost of a dozen grade A eggs costing roughly $4.21. USDA Chief Economist Seth Meyer projected this year egg prices will fall 26.8% and production of the protein will increase 4%, Reuters reported. Optional Caption Preston Keres. (2018). "20180321-OC-PJK-7623_TONED" [photograph]. Retrieved from U.S. Department of Agriculture. Bird flu and other lingering questions Egg-flation, driven by the HPAI outbreak, stoked fears among producers because of the many unknowns associated with the virus, and there are still lingering concerns. Some experts fear this year’s migration season, which ends in May, could further the spread of HPAI — or cause the virus to mutate — from wild waterfowl to vulnerable commercial poultry and egg-laying hen flocks. The Biden administration has said it is testing a vaccine for poultry and may inoculate commercial flocks, which egg producers are more in favor of than the broiler chicken industry. Maurice Pitesky, a poultry health professor at University of California, Davis, told Food Dive earlier this month that a large vaccination program for birds would be a difficult task. “We have to figure out how to thread that needle and think about how much vaccine we can feasibly produce,” he said. Adoption of cage-free egg production, which at least nine states have passed laws to enforce by 2024 or 2025, may take longer as producers work to rebuild from the HPAI crisis. Some of the biggest questions for producers come from analyzing how the virus fared last year and trying to predict if it will be as widespread, Bergquist said. They are not sure whether the virus will fade as temperatures rise in the summer — which did not occur as it typically does in 2022 — or whether stakeholders will be able to halt birds from being vaccinated, the agricultural expert said. So far in 2023, there have only been 17 confirmed cases among commercial flocks, none of which were egg-laying hens, according to USDA data. Still, Bergquist said, producers are maintaining a high level of caution. “Egg producers are maintaining a high degree of awareness and diligence around farm biosecurity,” he said. “This can only help reduce HPAI infections but may not be totally preventative.” Optional Caption Brandon Bell via Getty Images How consumers are reacting to price hikes While higher demand ahead of Easter is contributing to increased prices for eggs, Bergquist said, this uptick happens in the weeks preceding the holiday each year. But purchasing volume of the protein in 2023 remains lower than usual. Based on Nielsen retail grocer data shared with Food Dive, year-over-year volume of egg sales declined 5.7% in January and 4.3% in February, following higher than average prices. When asked, consumers surveyed are almost universally cognizant of the elevated prices and are making purchasing decisions accordingly. Nearly 57% of consumers said egg prices will impact their Easter celebration this year, according to data compiled by the advocacy website PissedConsumer.com. “The rapid price gouging on eggs might have a lasting impact on consumers’ shopping habits,” the website’s CEO Michael Podolsky said in an email. Egg prices are having a cascading impact across different retailers. Dollar Tree announced this month the chain would stop selling eggs until later this year because of the high costs. Recommended Reading As US mulls vaccinating poultry for bird flu, chicken industry could stand in the way By Chris Casey • March 9, 2023 Experts worry migration season could further spread of bird flu By Chris Casey • March 14, 2023 Egg prices to remain high for as long as bird flu continues, experts say By Chris Casey • Feb. 2, 2023 purchase licensing rights Filed Under: Ingredients, Corporate Operations, Policy, Meat / Protein Food Dive news delivered to your inbox Get the free daily newsletter read by industry experts Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Editors' picks Permission granted by IFT Top food and beverage events in 2025 The coming year is filled with a variety of conferences, including food-tech and plant-based events, and new ingredient showcases. Food Dive has compiled a list of some of the biggest and best. By Elizabeth Flood • Oct. 1, 2024 Photo illustration: Industry Dive; Joe Readle/Getty Images; Brandon Bell/Getty Images Deep Dive Election 2024: Where Trump and Harris stand on agriculture Higher food prices, trade relations with China and other farm issues are becoming more central to party platforms. By Sarah Zimmerman • Oct. 4, 2024 Keep up with the story. Subscribe to the Food Dive free daily newsletter Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Get the free newsletter Subscribe to Food Dive for top news, trends & analysis Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Most Popular Deep Dive Political donations from 15 of the largest US food and beverage makers plunge Hershey buys candy brand Sour Strips for undisclosed amount Molson Coors to shutter Leinenkugel’s brewery in Wisconsin PepsiCo to shutter 3 more bottling plants, lay off hundreds Library resources Infographic Discover a Traceability Solution That Also Drives Sales Custom content for Kwik Lok Webinar - on demand How eCommerce CEOs are Expanding and Keeping Up in a Time of Tech Transformation Custom content for BigCommerce Playbook How To Adopt a Proactive Approach to Risk During Expansion Custom content for Allianz Trade View all Company Announcements Brightseed’s Forager® AI Platform Named One Of TIME’s Best Inventions Of 2024 From Brightseed Prime Shrimp Expands Retail Footprint to Include Select Whole Foods Market Locations Across th… From Prime Shrimp Truly Indian Launches Into 172 Stop & Shop Locations Across the Northeast From Truly Indian Applied Food Sciences Introduces PurGinseng™ – The First-of-Its-Kind GRAS Panax Ginseng Extrac… From Applied Food Sciences View all | Post a press release What We're Reading NOSH Weathering The Storm: Hurricane Helene’s Impact On CPG Food Market World Food Prices Reach 18-month High in October, UN says Food Navigator FDA’s strategic plan for food safety View all Events 20 NOV Webinar | 11 a.m. ET Mastering the FDA's Food Traceability Rules: Data-Driven Strategies for Food Processors Presented by studioID and Datacor 21 NOV Webinar | 11 a.m. ET Are You FSMA 204 Ready? Turn This Challenge into Opportunity Presented by studioID and GS1 US Promote an event Industry Intel Affordable Storage and Clean Energy: How Financing Enables Zero-Capital Projects Webinar - on demand • Provided by Enel Food Dive news delivered to your inbox Get the free daily newsletter read by industry experts Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Company Announcements View all | Post a press release Brightseed’s Forager® AI Platform Named One Of TIME’s Best Inventions Of 2024 From Brightseed October 30, 2024 Prime Shrimp Expands Retail Footprint to Include Select Whole Foods Market Locations Across th… From Prime Shrimp November 05, 2024 Truly Indian Launches Into 172 Stop & Shop Locations Across the Northeast From Truly Indian October 22, 2024 Applied Food Sciences Introduces PurGinseng™ – The First-of-Its-Kind GRAS Panax Ginseng Extrac… From Applied Food Sciences October 23, 2024 Editors' picks Permission granted by IFT Top food and beverage events in 2025 The coming year is filled with a variety of conferences, including food-tech and plant-based events, and new ingredient showcases. Food Dive has compiled a list of some of the biggest and best. By Elizabeth Flood • Oct. 1, 2024 Photo illustration: Industry Dive; Joe Readle/Getty Images; Brandon Bell/Getty Images Deep Dive Election 2024: Where Trump and Harris stand on agriculture Higher food prices, trade relations with China and other farm issues are becoming more central to party platforms. By Sarah Zimmerman • Oct. 4, 2024 Latest in Ingredients Leftovers: J&J Snack Foods bites into Bavarian pretzels | YouTube’s ‘Hot Ones’ spices up ramen By Food Dive staff Ingredients in Focus: Taurine By Elizabeth Flood Kerry Group acquires lactose testing technology By Elizabeth Flood Better Meat’s drying process will increase demand for its fermented meat fungus, CEO says By Elizabeth Flood Explore About Editorial Team Contact Us Newsletter Purchase Licensing Rights Press Releases What We're Reading Reach our audience Advertising Post a press release Submit an opinion piece Promote an event Related Publications Grocery Dive Restaurant Dive image/svg+xml Industry Dive is an Informa business © 2024 Industry Dive. All rights reserved. | View our other publications | Privacy policy | Terms of use | Take down policy. Cookie Preferences / Do Not Sell Search Home Topics Finances & Deals Food Tech Manufacturing Ingredients Corporate Ops Packaging Policy Protein Beverages Sustainability Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Get Food Dive in your inbox The free newsletter covering the top industry headlines Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Ingredients Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter.United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine Market Investors Anticipate PR-WikiImprint Search Categories Advertising, Media Consulting, Marketing Research Arts & Culture Associations & Organizations Business, Economy, Finances, Banking & Insurance Energy & Environment Fashion, Lifestyle, Trends Health & Medicine Industry, Real Estate & Construction IT, New Media & Software Leisure, Entertainment, Miscellaneous Logistics & Transport Media & Telecommunications Politics, Law & Society Science & Education Sports Tourism, Cars, Traffic RSS-Newsfeeds Submit Press Release Submit Press Release Free of Charge Pressemitteilung kostenlos veröffentlichen Order Credits Archive Magazine About Us About / FAQ Newsletter Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Imprint Press release United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine Market Investors Anticipate Significant Profits as Market Booms From 2023 To 2031 03-29-2023 02:02 PM CET | Advertising, Media Consulting, Marketing Research Press release from: Quadintel Quadintel's recent global United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine market research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine Market is rapidly increasing due to government support and surveillance regarding vaccination against influenza. Increase in government support and surveillance regarding vaccination against influenza on the regional level to monitor the supply, distribution, and administration of flu vaccines is one of the crucial factors driving the market growth. The COVID-19 pandemic has brought unprecedented changes in the healthcare industry. An increasing demand for the seasonal influenza vaccine to ensure better protection against the deadly pandemic is anticipated to favor the market growth in the near future. Download free sample of this report :-https://www.quadintel.comequest-sample/united-kingdom-influenza-vaccine-market/12-6-1083 This report focuses on value market at the country and regional level. This report represents overall Influenza Vaccine Market size by analyzing historical data from 2016-2020 and future prospect from 2021-2026. Market Segmentation: Breakup by Vaccine Type Quadrivalent Trivalent Breakup by Technology Egg-based Cell culture Breakup by Age Group Pediatric Adult Breakup by Route of Administration Injection Nasal Spray Request full Report Description, TOC, Table of Figure, Chart, etc : :-https://www.quadintel.comequest-sample/united-kingdom-influenza-vaccine-market/12-6-1083 Regional Analysis The report has been prepared after analyzing and studying various factors that determine regional growth such as economic, environmental, social, technological, and political factors of the country. The team have closely analyzed the data of revenue, production, and manufacturers of each region. These analyses will help the reader to identify the key regions as potential worth of investment in the coming years. Market Breakup by Region England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Competitive Landscape This section of the report identifies various key manufacturers of the market. It helps the reader understand the strategies and collaborations that players are focusing on combat competition in the market. The reader can will get an updated information on their revenue of manufacturers, product portfolio, recent development and expansion plans during the forecast period. Highlight the Following Key Factors: Business Description: a particular description of agency operations and enterprise departments. Company Strategy: The analyst's precis of the company's commercial enterprise strategy. SWOT Analysis: Detailed evaluation of the company's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. Company History: The development of predominant occasions associated to the company. Main merchandise and services: A listing of the company's fundamental products, services, and brands. Main Competitors: A listing of the company's fundamental competitors. Important places and subsidiaries: The company's major places and subsidiaries' listing and contact information. Detailed economic ratios of the previous 5 years: The trendy monetary ratios come from the annual economic statements issued by means of agencies with a record of 5 years. Request Full Report :-https://www.quadintel.comequest-sample/united-kingdom-influenza-vaccine-market/12-6-1083 About Quadintel: We are the best market research reports provider in the industry. Quadintel believes in providing quality reports to clients to meet the top line and bottom line goals which will boost your market share in today's competitive environment. Quadintel is a 'one-stop solution' for individuals, organizations, and industries that are looking for innovative market research reports. Robust, detailed segmentation In-depth analysis in all geographies. Detailed breakup in various segmentation. Rigorous primary and secondary research We will help you in finding the upcoming trends that will entitle you as a leader in the industry. We are here to work with you on your objective which will create an immense opportunity for your organization. Our priority is to provide high-level customer satisfaction by providing innovative reports that enable them to take a strategic decision and generate revenue. We update our database on a day-to-day basis to provide the latest reports. We assist our clients in understanding the emerging trends so that they can invest smartly and can make optimum utilization of resources available. Get in Touch with Us: Quadintel: Email:sales@quadintel.com Address: Office - 500 N Michigan Ave, Suite 600, Chicago, Illinois 60611, UNITED STATES Tel: +1 888 212 3539 (US - TOLL FREE) Website : https://www.quadintel.com/This release was published on openPR. Permanent link to this press release: Copy Please set a link in the press area of your homepage to this press release on openPR. openPR disclaims liability for any content contained in this release. Share Tweet Email You can edit or delete your press release United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine Market Investors Anticipate Significant Profits as Market Booms From 2023 To 2031 here Delete press release Edit press release News-ID: 2993437 • Views: … More Releases from Quadintel 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel Smart Textiles for Military Market Business Expansion Strategies for the Market … Quadintel's recent global " Smart Textiles for Military Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample… 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel China Home Appliances Market A Deep Dive into the Market: Trends, Insights, and … Quadintel's recent global " China Home Appliances Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample of… 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel Wireless Healthcare Market Unlocking New Growth Avenues in the Market: Strategie … Quadintel's recent global " Wireless Healthcare Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample of This… 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel Spatial omics Market The Impact of Economic Conditions on the Market in 2023-203 … Quadintel's recent global " Spatial omics Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample of This… All 5 Releases More Releases for Vaccine 07-23-2021 | Health & Medicine Stratagem Market Insights Flu Vaccine (Influenza Vaccine) Market: A look into the future of the “Univers … Latest update on Flu Vaccine (Influenza Vaccine) Market Analysis Report published with an SMI, the industry growth analysis, and Projection by 2021-2028. This report is highly predictive as it holds the overall market analysis of the topmost companies in the Flu Vaccine (Influenza Vaccine) industry. With the classified Flu Vaccine (Influenza Vaccine) market research based on various growing regions, this report provides leading players' portfolios along with sales, growth, market… 06-15-2021 | Health & Medicine Allied Market Research Vaccine Market Rise in the prevalence of infectious diseases, increase in immunization programs across the globe, and surge in R&D activities to develop new vaccine drive the growth of the global vaccine market. Global Vaccines Market was pegged at $32.46 billion in 2019, and is anticipated to hit $54.15 billion by 2027, registering a CAGR of 6.6% from 2020 to 2027. The report provides an in-depth analysis of the top investment pockets, top… 01-10-2020 | Business, Economy, Finances, B … DPI Research US Flu Vaccine [Influenza Vaccine] Market Research Report 2020 DPI Research offers a latest published report on “Influenza Vaccines in the United States – Market Size, Trends, Opportunities and Growth Potential” delivering key insights and providing a competitive advantage to clients through a detailed report. This report focuses on the key US flu vaccines market players, to define, describe and analyze the value, market share, market competition landscape, SWOT analysis and development plans in next few years. To analyze… 07-16-2019 | Health & Medicine QandQ Market Research Measles Vaccine Measles Vaccine Market describes its growth, size, share, Forecast and trends to 2025 Measles Vaccine Market Production and Demand Analysis 2019 to 2025 Measles Vaccine Market 2019 Manufacturing Analysis and Development Forecast 2025 Measles Vaccine Market 2019: Recent Study Including Growth Factors, Regional Drivers, Forecast 2025 Measles Vaccine Market to Insight By 2025: Top Key Vendors The global Measles Vaccine market is valued at million US$ in 2018 and will reach million US$ by the… 07-31-2018 | Health & Medicine Future Market Insights Monovalent vaccine segment to accumulate maximum Paediatric Vaccine Market share According to a new report published by Future Market Insights titled “Paediatric Vaccine Market: Global Industry Analysis & Opportunity Assessment, 2016 – 2026”, in terms of revenue, the global paediatric vaccine market is expected to increase at 12.2% CAGR during the forecast period 2016-2026. The global paediatric vaccine market is expected to reach US$ 27.97 Bn in 2016. Paediatric vaccine market is a billion dollar market accounting for a substantial proportion… 02-14-2018 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Envision Inteligence Key Tools for Innovative Vaccine Designs: Vaccine Adjuvants The report “NORTH AMERICA VACCINE ADJUVANTS MARKET” provides the detail description of market segmentation, applications, growth, size, and outlook. The market is projected to reach USD $278 Million by 2024, at a CAGR of 11.3%. An adjuvant is an immunological agent, which modifies the effect of other agents. Adjuvants can also act as an irritant, which engages and amplifies the body immune response. Adjuvants are added to vaccines to boost the… Comments about openPR OpenPR is clearly structured and remains true to its principle of confining itself to the essential parts. OpenPR has proven to be a very good and reliable partner to our media agency: Within the shortest time the releases are online and go down well with the media representatives. The success of OpenPR is reflected in the steadily increasing number of press releases. It is good that OpenPR exists!Ursula Koslik, Director Marketing & PR, F+W Hamburg Your Press Release on Google News Press Release in German on openPR.de © 2004 - 2024 openPR. All rights reserved. FAQ | Imprint | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Contact Point DSA | Reporting Form DSA | Cookie Settings Search Home Categories Advertising, Media Consulting, Marketing Research Arts & Culture Associations & Organizations Business, Economy, Finances, Banking & Insurance Energy & Environment Fashion, Lifestyle, Trends Health & Medicine Industry, Real Estate & Construction IT, New Media & Software Leisure, Entertainment, Miscellaneous Logistics & Transport Media & Telecommunications Politics, Law & Society Science & Education Sports Tourism, Cars, Traffic RSS-Newsfeeds Submit Press Release Submit Press Release Free of Charge Pressemitteilung kostenlos veröffentlichen Order Credits Archive Magazine PR-Wiki About Us About / FAQ Newsletter Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy ImprintCan bird flu turn deadly? Know symptoms of severe disease | Health - Hindustan Times Explore Search Tuesday, Nov 12, 2024 New Delhi oC Subscribe Games E-Paper Sign in My Account Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Enjoy unlimited access Subscribe Now! Get features like Ad lite A Minimal Ad Experience HT Premium Articles Expertly crafted articles Quickreads Segment News brief in summary format HT E-paper Access digital news experience Start 14 Days Free Trial Home Assembly Elections 2024 HT Premium HTCity Loan ₹10 Lakh India World Real Estate Powered by Entertainment Trending Astrology Lifestyle Education Business Cities Latest News Games & Puzzles IPL Auction Win iPhone 15 The Taste of Time Photos Web Stories Sports Delhi News Mumbai News Bengaluru News Technology Quickreads Daily Digest Following Games + 5 more Technology Quickreads Daily Digest Following Games Can bird flu turn deadly? Know symptoms of severe disease in humans from experts ByParmita Uniyal, New Delhi Mar 31, 2023 06:26 PM IST Read this news in brief form Share Via Copy Link Bird flu or H5N1 influenza virus rarely infects humans but has high fatality rates. All you want to know about the severe symptoms of the disease in humans. A severe case of bird flu was detected in Chile in a 53-year-old man who is now said to be in a stable condition. Also known as avian influenza, bird flu is a type A influenza virus that spreads between wild and domesticated birds and is lethal to them. The infection can also be passed from birds to humans and usually causes mild illness such as cough, sore throat, runny nose, muscle ache and conjunctivitis. However sometimes it can potentially have life-threatening complications from pneumonia to sepsis. (Also read: Bird Flu outbreak: Warning signs of avian influenza in humans) Bird flu or A(H5N1) virus is not found to be spread from person to person and its transmission from birds to humans is also rare(Shutterstock) Bird flu or A(H5N1) virus is not found to be spread from person to person and its transmission from birds to humans is also rare. However, unprotected contact with wild birds or domestic birds that look sick can cause severe disease in humans. The A(H5N1) virus has only been sporadically detected in European poultry or wild birds until 2021. "There has been a spurt in human cases of avian influenza in 2022. All reported human cases since last year have been identified in humans with recent poultry exposure, and no cases of human-to-human transmission have been identified. To date, the circulating H5NY strain of influenza A does not cause severe disease in humans. However, because of the potential for the influenza virus to rapidly evolve and to have wide global prevalence and danger of pandemics, surveillance in animals and humans is essential," says Dr Vineeta Taneja - Director - Internal Medicine, Fortis Hospital, Shalimar Bagh. What is bird flu and how does it spreadH5N1 influenza virus or bird flu has very limited transmission but extremely high fatality rate. "Bird flu is also known as Avian Influenza. It is a type of infection occurring mainly in birds. It may also spread in humans through unprotected contact with infected birds or surfaces contaminated with bird flu viruses or due to direct contact with infected birds. Human to human transmission is very rare and has only spread to a few people but it is possible that the bird flu virus may change and gain the ability to disseminate easily between people and therefore, close monitoring is required," says Dr. Santosh Kumar Agrawal, Senior Consultant, Internal Medicine, Marengo Asia Hospital Faridabad. Symptoms of bird flu“In India, the outbreak of bird flu has been reported in several states in recent years, including Maharashtra, Gujarat, and Kerala. The H5N1 strain of the virus is considered to be highly pathogenic, meaning it can cause severe illness in humans. Symptoms of the disease may include fever, cough, sore throat, muscle aches, and respiratory distress. Bird flu, also known as avian influenza, is a viral infection that affects birds, particularly wild waterfowl, such as ducks and geese, but can also spread to domestic poultry. In some cases, the virus can be transmitted from birds to humans, leading to serious illness or even death," says Dr. Ather Pasha – Consultant, General Medicine, CARE Hospitals, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad. "Symptoms of bird flu virus infections in humans may range from no symptoms or mild illness such as redness of eyes (conjunctivitis) or mild flu-like upper respiratory symptoms to severe (like pneumonia). Infected people may also present symptoms like fever or feeling feverish, cough, sore throat, runny or congested nose, muscle and body aches, headaches, fatigue, and shortness of breath and breathing difficulty. There are lesser common symptoms such as diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. If the symptoms are left untreated, Bird flu may pose the risk of serious and life-threatening complications like pneumonia, kidney dysfunction, respiratory failure, sepsis (blood infection) and heart problems," says Dr Agarwal. "The symptoms of bird flu in humans are very similar to other influenza viruses and include high temperature, aching muscles, runny nose, headache, cough, and shortness of breath. These symptoms develop after a variable incubation period of 1-7 days after exposure. Even though the current number of cases is not very high, humans do not have natural immunity to the virus and have a higher risk of developing severe disease," says Dr Taneja. Severe symptoms of bird fluIn extremely rare cases, bird flu can turn fatal and one can develop pneumonia, respiratory distress or sepsis. "The symptoms of severe bird flu can include pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and multi-organ failure. These complications can be life-threatening and may require hospitalization and intensive care," says Dr Pasha. "It is important to note that not all cases of bird flu in humans result in severe illness. In fact, many people who have been infected with the virus have only experienced mild symptoms or no symptoms at all. However, individuals who are at a higher risk of developing severe illness include those with weakened immune systems, pregnant women, young children, and older adults. Preventative measures such as avoiding contact with sick or dead birds, practicing good hygiene, and cooking poultry thoroughly can reduce the risk of contracting bird flu. If you experience any symptoms of illness after contact with birds or poultry, it is important to seek medical attention immediately," adds Dr Pasha. Preventive measures"Prevention measures include minimizing contact with wild birds or sick or dead poultry, wearing gloves and N95 masks while handling birds, practicing good hand hygiene, and avoiding contact with surfaces that may be contaminated with bird saliva, mucus, or faeces. Additionally, it is important to cook poultry thoroughly and avoid consuming raw or undercooked poultry," says Dr Pasha. Follow more stories on Facebook & Twitter Catch every big hit,... See more Catch every big hit, every wicket with Crick-it, a one stop destination for Live Scores, Match Stats, Quizzes, Polls & much more. Explore now!.Catch your daily dose of Fashion, Taylor Swift, Health, Festivals, Travel, Relationship, Recipe and all the other Latest Lifestyle News on Hindustan Times Website and APPs. News / Lifestyle / Health / Can bird flu turn deadly? Know symptoms of severe disease in humans from experts SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON Share this article Read this news in brief form Share Via Copy Link Bird Flu Avian Flu SHARE Copy Whatsapp Twitter Facebook Linkedin [Best Deals] Best air purifier brands for a healthier home: Fight pollution with top picks Best geysers in India: Top 11 energy-saving water heaters you can trust Best top load washing machines: Top 10 efficient, and effective options for you Best serums for sensitive skin: 10 top picks to soothe and nourish your skin Best 5 star geysers for home: Top 10 instant water heaters to choose from View All Join Hindustan Times Create free account and unlock exciting features like Newsletters, Alerts and Recommendations Get personalised news and exciting deals Bookmark the stories you want to read later REGISTER FOR FREE Already have an account? Sign In SKIP Subscribe to our best newsletters HT Daily Capsule Sign Up to Subscribe Newsletter subscribed successfully Latest News World News India News Cricket Live Score Cricket Schedule T20 World Cup Suryakumar Yadav Virat Kohli Yashasvi Jaiswal Axar Patel Hardik Pandya Ravindra Jadeja Shivam Dube Rishabh Pant Sanju Samson Arshdeep Singh Jasprit Bumrah Kuldeep Yadav Mohammed Siraj Yuzvendra Chahal Tim David David Warner Cameron Green Travis Head India vs Sri Lanka India vs South Africa India vs Pakistan India vs Netherlands India vs Ireland India vs England India vs Bangladesh India vs Australia India vs Afghanistan CITY NEWS Bengaluru News Bhopal News Chandigarh News Chennai News Dehradun News Delhi News Gurugram News Hyderabad News Indore News Jaipur News Kolkata News Lucknow News Mumbai News Noida News Patna News Pune News Ranchi News Other Cities Entertainment Bollywood News Hollywood News Music Tamil Cinema Telugu Cinema TV Web Series Entertainment Others Books HT Insight Brand Post Brand Stories Elections Upcoming Elections Income Tax Calculator ASTROLOGY Horoscope Education Admission News Board Exams Competitive Exams Employment News Exam Results Education News LIFESTYLE Art and Culture Brunch Fashion Festivals Health Recipes Relationship Travel Pet Web Stories Trending Business Photos Videos Environment Science Opinion Editorials Car and Bike Technology Sports Badminton Football Hockey Tennis Others Quickreads Covid 19 Assembly Election GAMES Daily Sudoku Daily Crossword Daily Word Jumble TRENDING NEWS CBSE Date Sheet 2025 UP Police Constable Result 2024 Live UGC NET 2024 Live SSC CGL Result 2024 Live India News Live Entertainment News Live World News Live Trending News Live US News Live Bollywood News LIVE Hollywood News Live Horoscope Today LIVE Cricket News Live Sanjiv Khanna Gautam Gambhir Pushpa 2 Trailer Singham Again box office collection IPL 2025 Auction Maharashtra Election 2024 Jharkhand Election 2024 Assembly Election 2024 Cricket Score LIVE Cricket Schedule Gold rate World News TRENDING TOPICS CBSE Date Sheet 2025 UP Police Constable Result 2024 Live UGC NET 2024 Live SSC CGL Result 2024 Live India News Live Entertainment News Live World News Live Trending News Live US News live Bollywood News LIVE Hollywood News Live Horoscope Today LIVE Cricket News Live Sanjiv Khanna Gautam Gambhir Pushpa 2 Trailer Singham Again box office collection Maharashtra Assembly Election 2024 IPL Auction 2025 Jharkhand Assembly Election Assembly Election 2024 Cricket Cricket Match Today India News World News Latest Lifestyle News Business News LIVE Updates Today November 12, 2024: Air India to serve ‘halal’ meals only on select routes | Check details Air India to serve ‘halal’ meals only on select routes | Check details Climate crisis 'Try to ban Pakistan if you have courage': ICC sent '1996 WC' reminder as India's refusal spark Champions Trophy chaos ‘Hopefully you can get Trump to…”: Vinod Khosla congratulates Elon Musk on President-elect’s election win Who is Elise Stefanik? 6 facts about new US ambassador to United Nations Sachin Tendulkar, Virat Kohli's elite ODI records shattered by Rahmanullah Gurbaz as Afghanistan script BAN series win Haryana Weather and AQI Today: Warm start at 21.73 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Punjab Weather and AQI Today: Warm start at 19.13 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Jammu and Kashmir Weather and AQI Today: Cool start at -15.84 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 About Us Contact us Terms of use Privacy policy Weather Today HT Newsletters Subscription Disclaimer Print Ad Rates Code of Ethics Site Map RSS Feeds © 2024 HindustanTimes Click to Top Story Saved Live Score OPEN APP Edit Profile Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Now Your Subscription Plan Renew Subscription Manage Subscription Saved Articles Following My Reads Sign out New Delhi 0C Tuesday, November 12, 2024 Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Now Home HTLS 2023 Astrology India News Lifestyle Entertainment Elections Trending Videos Education Photos Sports Cities Daily Digest Quickreads Opinion Analysis For You Following Web Stories Science HT Games Podcasts Weather Technology Latest News Cricket India vs Sri Lanka Live Cricket Score Cricket Teams Cricket Players ICC Rankings Cricket Schedule Shreyas Iyer Harshit Rana Kusal Mendis Ravi Bishnoi Rinku Singh Riyan Parag Washington Sundar Avishka Fernando Charith Asalanka Dasun Shanaka Khaleel Ahmed Pathum Nissanka World News US News Cities Delhi Mumbai Bengaluru Gurugram Noida Hyderabad Chennai Kolkata Bhopal Chandigarh Dehradun Indore Jaipur Lucknow Patna Pune Ranchi Other Cities Business Income Tax Calculator Petrol Prices UGC NET Answer Key 2024 Live Diesel Prices Gold Rate Silver Rate Lifestyle Fashion Health Relationships Art and Culture Travel Recipes Festivals Pet Brunch Entertainment Bollywood TV Web Series Music Hollywood Telugu Cinema Tamil Cinema Anime Education Study Abroad Board Exams JEE Exam Results Admission News Employment News Competitive Exams BBA Colleges Engineering Colleges Medical Colleges BCA Colleges BBA Exams BCA Exams Medical Exams Engineering Exams Astrology Horoscope Love Horoscope Tarot Chinese Panchang Annual Horoscope Festival Calendar Compatibility Calculator Career Horoscope Manifestation Transits HT Premium E-Paper The Economist Articles HT Insider HT Insight Elections 2024 Lok Sabha States Lok Sabha Parties Lok Sabha Candidates Videos india news infocus HT Insight Explainer Video On The Record HT Weekend Aur Batao Vikram Chandra Daily Wrap Photos Entertainment Photos Lifestyle Photos News Photos Sports Olympics 2024 Olympics Medal Tally Other Sports Sports Football Tennis EPL 2023-24 ISL 2023-24 Hockey Asian Games 2023 HT Insight Public Health Economic Policy International Affairs Climate Change Gender Equality knowledge future tech Governance More from HT HT Epaper Auto HT Tech HT Bangla HT School Quiz HT Friday Finance HT Premium Explore Hindustan Times HT Newsletters Weather Today About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Disclaimer Print Ad Rates Code of Ethics Sitemap RSS Feeds Subscription - Terms of Use Copyright © HT Digital Streams Ltd. All rights reserved. Follow Us On My Account Sign in Home Cricket Premium Games Sign In // // //United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine Market Investors Anticipate PR-WikiImprint Search Categories Advertising, Media Consulting, Marketing Research Arts & Culture Associations & Organizations Business, Economy, Finances, Banking & Insurance Energy & Environment Fashion, Lifestyle, Trends Health & Medicine Industry, Real Estate & Construction IT, New Media & Software Leisure, Entertainment, Miscellaneous Logistics & Transport Media & Telecommunications Politics, Law & Society Science & Education Sports Tourism, Cars, Traffic RSS-Newsfeeds Submit Press Release Submit Press Release Free of Charge Pressemitteilung kostenlos veröffentlichen Order Credits Archive Magazine About Us About / FAQ Newsletter Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Imprint Press release United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine Market Investors Anticipate Significant Profits as Market Booms From 2023 To 2031 03-29-2023 02:02 PM CET | Advertising, Media Consulting, Marketing Research Press release from: Quadintel Quadintel's recent global United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine market research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine Market is rapidly increasing due to government support and surveillance regarding vaccination against influenza. Increase in government support and surveillance regarding vaccination against influenza on the regional level to monitor the supply, distribution, and administration of flu vaccines is one of the crucial factors driving the market growth. The COVID-19 pandemic has brought unprecedented changes in the healthcare industry. An increasing demand for the seasonal influenza vaccine to ensure better protection against the deadly pandemic is anticipated to favor the market growth in the near future. Download free sample of this report :-https://www.quadintel.comequest-sample/united-kingdom-influenza-vaccine-market/12-6-1083 This report focuses on value market at the country and regional level. This report represents overall Influenza Vaccine Market size by analyzing historical data from 2016-2020 and future prospect from 2021-2026. Market Segmentation: Breakup by Vaccine Type Quadrivalent Trivalent Breakup by Technology Egg-based Cell culture Breakup by Age Group Pediatric Adult Breakup by Route of Administration Injection Nasal Spray Request full Report Description, TOC, Table of Figure, Chart, etc : :-https://www.quadintel.comequest-sample/united-kingdom-influenza-vaccine-market/12-6-1083 Regional Analysis The report has been prepared after analyzing and studying various factors that determine regional growth such as economic, environmental, social, technological, and political factors of the country. The team have closely analyzed the data of revenue, production, and manufacturers of each region. These analyses will help the reader to identify the key regions as potential worth of investment in the coming years. Market Breakup by Region England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Competitive Landscape This section of the report identifies various key manufacturers of the market. It helps the reader understand the strategies and collaborations that players are focusing on combat competition in the market. The reader can will get an updated information on their revenue of manufacturers, product portfolio, recent development and expansion plans during the forecast period. Highlight the Following Key Factors: Business Description: a particular description of agency operations and enterprise departments. Company Strategy: The analyst's precis of the company's commercial enterprise strategy. SWOT Analysis: Detailed evaluation of the company's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. Company History: The development of predominant occasions associated to the company. Main merchandise and services: A listing of the company's fundamental products, services, and brands. Main Competitors: A listing of the company's fundamental competitors. Important places and subsidiaries: The company's major places and subsidiaries' listing and contact information. Detailed economic ratios of the previous 5 years: The trendy monetary ratios come from the annual economic statements issued by means of agencies with a record of 5 years. Request Full Report :-https://www.quadintel.comequest-sample/united-kingdom-influenza-vaccine-market/12-6-1083 About Quadintel: We are the best market research reports provider in the industry. Quadintel believes in providing quality reports to clients to meet the top line and bottom line goals which will boost your market share in today's competitive environment. Quadintel is a 'one-stop solution' for individuals, organizations, and industries that are looking for innovative market research reports. Robust, detailed segmentation In-depth analysis in all geographies. Detailed breakup in various segmentation. Rigorous primary and secondary research We will help you in finding the upcoming trends that will entitle you as a leader in the industry. We are here to work with you on your objective which will create an immense opportunity for your organization. Our priority is to provide high-level customer satisfaction by providing innovative reports that enable them to take a strategic decision and generate revenue. We update our database on a day-to-day basis to provide the latest reports. We assist our clients in understanding the emerging trends so that they can invest smartly and can make optimum utilization of resources available. Get in Touch with Us: Quadintel: Email:sales@quadintel.com Address: Office - 500 N Michigan Ave, Suite 600, Chicago, Illinois 60611, UNITED STATES Tel: +1 888 212 3539 (US - TOLL FREE) Website : https://www.quadintel.com/This release was published on openPR. Permanent link to this press release: Copy Please set a link in the press area of your homepage to this press release on openPR. openPR disclaims liability for any content contained in this release. Share Tweet Email You can edit or delete your press release United Kingdom Influenza Vaccine Market Investors Anticipate Significant Profits as Market Booms From 2023 To 2031 here Delete press release Edit press release News-ID: 2993437 • Views: … More Releases from Quadintel 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel Smart Textiles for Military Market Business Expansion Strategies for the Market … Quadintel's recent global " Smart Textiles for Military Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample… 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel China Home Appliances Market A Deep Dive into the Market: Trends, Insights, and … Quadintel's recent global " China Home Appliances Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample of… 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel Wireless Healthcare Market Unlocking New Growth Avenues in the Market: Strategie … Quadintel's recent global " Wireless Healthcare Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample of This… 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel Spatial omics Market The Impact of Economic Conditions on the Market in 2023-203 … Quadintel's recent global " Spatial omics Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample of This… All 5 Releases More Releases for Vaccine 07-23-2021 | Health & Medicine Stratagem Market Insights Flu Vaccine (Influenza Vaccine) Market: A look into the future of the “Univers … Latest update on Flu Vaccine (Influenza Vaccine) Market Analysis Report published with an SMI, the industry growth analysis, and Projection by 2021-2028. This report is highly predictive as it holds the overall market analysis of the topmost companies in the Flu Vaccine (Influenza Vaccine) industry. With the classified Flu Vaccine (Influenza Vaccine) market research based on various growing regions, this report provides leading players' portfolios along with sales, growth, market… 06-15-2021 | Health & Medicine Allied Market Research Vaccine Market Rise in the prevalence of infectious diseases, increase in immunization programs across the globe, and surge in R&D activities to develop new vaccine drive the growth of the global vaccine market. Global Vaccines Market was pegged at $32.46 billion in 2019, and is anticipated to hit $54.15 billion by 2027, registering a CAGR of 6.6% from 2020 to 2027. The report provides an in-depth analysis of the top investment pockets, top… 01-10-2020 | Business, Economy, Finances, B … DPI Research US Flu Vaccine [Influenza Vaccine] Market Research Report 2020 DPI Research offers a latest published report on “Influenza Vaccines in the United States – Market Size, Trends, Opportunities and Growth Potential” delivering key insights and providing a competitive advantage to clients through a detailed report. This report focuses on the key US flu vaccines market players, to define, describe and analyze the value, market share, market competition landscape, SWOT analysis and development plans in next few years. To analyze… 07-16-2019 | Health & Medicine QandQ Market Research Measles Vaccine Measles Vaccine Market describes its growth, size, share, Forecast and trends to 2025 Measles Vaccine Market Production and Demand Analysis 2019 to 2025 Measles Vaccine Market 2019 Manufacturing Analysis and Development Forecast 2025 Measles Vaccine Market 2019: Recent Study Including Growth Factors, Regional Drivers, Forecast 2025 Measles Vaccine Market to Insight By 2025: Top Key Vendors The global Measles Vaccine market is valued at million US$ in 2018 and will reach million US$ by the… 07-31-2018 | Health & Medicine Future Market Insights Monovalent vaccine segment to accumulate maximum Paediatric Vaccine Market share According to a new report published by Future Market Insights titled “Paediatric Vaccine Market: Global Industry Analysis & Opportunity Assessment, 2016 – 2026”, in terms of revenue, the global paediatric vaccine market is expected to increase at 12.2% CAGR during the forecast period 2016-2026. The global paediatric vaccine market is expected to reach US$ 27.97 Bn in 2016. Paediatric vaccine market is a billion dollar market accounting for a substantial proportion… 02-14-2018 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Envision Inteligence Key Tools for Innovative Vaccine Designs: Vaccine Adjuvants The report “NORTH AMERICA VACCINE ADJUVANTS MARKET” provides the detail description of market segmentation, applications, growth, size, and outlook. The market is projected to reach USD $278 Million by 2024, at a CAGR of 11.3%. An adjuvant is an immunological agent, which modifies the effect of other agents. Adjuvants can also act as an irritant, which engages and amplifies the body immune response. Adjuvants are added to vaccines to boost the… Comments about openPR OpenPR is clearly structured and remains true to its principle of confining itself to the essential parts. OpenPR has proven to be a very good and reliable partner to our media agency: Within the shortest time the releases are online and go down well with the media representatives. The success of OpenPR is reflected in the steadily increasing number of press releases. It is good that OpenPR exists!Ursula Koslik, Director Marketing & PR, F+W Hamburg Your Press Release on Google News Press Release in German on openPR.de © 2004 - 2024 openPR. All rights reserved. FAQ | Imprint | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Contact Point DSA | Reporting Form DSA | Cookie Settings Search Home Categories Advertising, Media Consulting, Marketing Research Arts & Culture Associations & Organizations Business, Economy, Finances, Banking & Insurance Energy & Environment Fashion, Lifestyle, Trends Health & Medicine Industry, Real Estate & Construction IT, New Media & Software Leisure, Entertainment, Miscellaneous Logistics & Transport Media & Telecommunications Politics, Law & Society Science & Education Sports Tourism, Cars, Traffic RSS-Newsfeeds Submit Press Release Submit Press Release Free of Charge Pressemitteilung kostenlos veröffentlichen Order Credits Archive Magazine PR-Wiki About Us About / FAQ Newsletter Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy ImprintSamoa Observer | Cases of influenza-like illness recorded Samoa Observer Search Login Subscribe News Samoa World Sport Opinion Opinion Editorial Letter to the Editor Cartoon Op-Ed Columns Contributors Between the Lines Think a Minute Sponsored Today's Paper Daily Quiz Talk to us Share a tip or letter. Send Us A Tip or Letter Samoa World Sport Editorial Opinion Contributors Today's Paper Login Subscribe Home / Samoa / Cases of influenza-like illness recorded Samoa The MOH surveillance team works out of the Moto'otua hospital. (Photo: Piui Simi) By Alexander Rheeney • 28 March 2023, 7:00AM Samoa's Ministry of Health (M.O.H.) has advised that its surveillance division continues to record cases of Influenza-like illness (ILI) since the start of the month. In its latest Syndromic Surveillance & Covid-19 Update which was released to the media on Monday, the M.O.H. said that based on data collected by its National Health Surveillance and IHR Division for the period 13–19 March 2023, a total of 931 ILI cases were recorded but the reported cases were below the threshold. "However, even though the threshold has not [been] exceeded, the Ministry of Health still highly recommends the general public to continue the practice of preventative measures such as wearing masks, hand hygiene, and avoiding large gatherings," reads the M.O.H. report. "If you are feeling ill with flu-like symptoms, please stay home and take medications as prescribed by the clinician." The Ministry defined the ILI as "an acute respiratory infection with a history of fever or measured fever of ≥ 38 C° and cough, with onset within the last 10 days." As for severe acute respiratory infection (SARI), the Ministry's report said their surveillance staff recorded 11 cases for the period 13–19 March 2023. The cases were investigated by the MOH but "no known links were identified" and therefore did not meet the definition exceeding the threshold. "The SARI cases reported last week are people diagnosed with unresolved or severe pneumonia. The public is strongly advised to continue to practice preventative measures as mentioned above such as wearing masks, hand hygiene, and avoiding crowded places." According to the Ministry, the SARI is "an acute respiratory infection with a history of fever or measured fever of ≥ 38 C° and cough, with onset within the last 10 days, and requiring hospitalisation." There have also been cases of diarrhoea with 59 cases reported for the period 13–19 March 2023. However, the Ministry said the cases reported were below the threshold. Nonetheless, the M.O.H. appealed to the public to continue the practice of preventative measures "as we are still in the rainy/wet season". "Please ensure access to safe drinking water, use of improved sanitation, hand washing with soap, and ensure good personal hygiene. In addition for prevention, all children at 6 months should have rotavirus vaccination." Acute fever and rash (AFR) was another disease that was monitored by the M.O.H. with symptoms including "sudden onset of fever (>38◦C) and acute non-vesicular or non-blistering rash." But the Ministry said its surveillance division was not able to identify known links, therefore it did not exceed the threshold. "The Ministry of Health advises the public to ensure all children have had their MMR/MR and other routine vaccinations. The MMR vaccine defends against measles, mumps, and rubella." Another disease known as prolonged fever was also monitored for the period 13–19 March 2023 with only 11 cases reported. "Prolonged fever cases reported in the previous week are below the threshold. All cases of prolonged fever are advised to test for Typhoid Fever. In the previous week, there were no confirmed cases of typhoid fever." As for dengue-like illness, there were no cases reported for the period 13–19 March 2023. The M.O.H. said since October 2022 there have been zero reported cases of DLI. This syndrome is still monitored under the Syndromic Surveillance System. By Alexander Rheeney • 28 March 2023, 7:00AM Trending Stories Samoa $25M regional terminal now in operation The government-funded $25 million regional terminal at the Faleolo International A... By Sialai Sarafina Sanerivi • 17 October 2024, 8:20PM Samoa Nature trail launch goes live The fauna and flora will talk back to people thanks to the Nature Trail Project wh... By Vaelei Von Dincklage • 19 October 2024, 2:00PM PREMIUM Samoa Hero fisherman's brave rescue A Sataoa fisherman's bravery on the night the HMNZS Manawanui struck a reef on the... By Matai'a Lanuola Tusani T - Ah Tong • 19 October 2024, 11:00AM Samoa Low risk of mpox entry into Samoa As Samoa prepares to host thousands of delegates for the Commonwealth Heads of Gov... By Sialai Sarafina Sanerivi • 19 October 2024, 12:00PM Please enable Javascript in current site to keep going. Upgrade to Premium Subscribe toSamoa Observer Online Enjoy unlimited access to all our articles on any device + free trial to e-Edition. You can cancel anytime. Subscribe Subscribe Now Send Us A Tip or Letter News Samoa World Sport Opinion Opinion Editorial Letters to the Editor Cartoon Op-Ed Columns Contributors Between the Lines Think a Minute Sponsored Daily Quiz Contact Print Subscription Advertising Terms & Conditions Privacy Account Subscribe or Sign In Subscribe Now Sign In To My Account Talk to Us Feel free to share a tip or letter. Send Us A Tip or Letter © Samoa Observer 2024 | Contact | Print Subscription | Advertising | Terms & Conditions | Privacy Website designed by Flume >More than 1,500 sea lions in Chile die of H5N1 bird flu - BNO News Home U.S. News World Politics Legal Business Entertainment Menu Contact Us BNO News Wire Service ENS Alerts Editor’s Notes E-mail alerts Live feeds Connect with us BNO News More than 1,500 sea lions in Chile die of H5N1 bird flu Home U.S. NewsTrump names former ICE director Tom Homan as border czarFormer U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm from New York paralyzed after horse riding accidentDonald Trump secures 312 electoral votes with victory in ArizonaTony Todd, star of ‘Candyman’ and ‘Final Destination’, dead at 69Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in Columbus WorldStrong 6.8-magnitude earthquake hits southeast CubaGunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10Canada reports first human case of H5 bird fluIsrael signs deal to buy 25 F-15 fighter jets from BoeingBomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state says PoliticsTrump names former ICE director Tom Homan as border czarFormer U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm from New York paralyzed after horse riding accidentDonald Trump secures 312 electoral votes with victory in ArizonaBomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state saysNearly 85 million Americans vote early in 2024 election LegalGunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in ColumbusTexas Amber Alert: Jordan Maceachran missing from Hunt CountyDrunk driver hits 2 police officers at Colorado crash site, killing 1Bomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state says BusinessMcDonald’s says E. coli outbreak contained, Quarter Pounder coming backWashington Post stops endorsing presidential candidatesCloud, AI, and Data: The Triple Threat Transforming Small Business Operations7 Benefits of Attending Business ConferencesCasino Companies Continue to Fund Missouri Campaigns For and Against Sports Betting Entertainment Menu Contact Us BNO News Wire Service ENS Alerts Editor’s Notes E-mail alerts Live feeds Advertisment1 World More than 1,500 sea lions in Chile die of H5N1 bird flu Published on April 1, 2023 By BNO News A sea lion suspected to have died of H5N1 bird flu on the coast of Chile (Credit: Sernapesca) Advertisment17 Share Tweet More than 1,500 sea lions in Chile are believed to have died of H5N1 avian influenza, an increase of more than 1,000 in less than two weeks, according to government figures. It comes amid growing concern about the virus. The National Fisheries and Aquaculture Service said at least 1,535 sea lions have been found dead so far this year, a significant increase from mid-March, when 532 sea lions were reported to have died. On Friday alone, more than 70 sea lions were reported to have died on Santa María Island, a sparsely populated island about 42 kilometers (26 miles) southwest of Concepción. In addition to sea lions, more than 730 Humboldt penguins and 8 marine otters have been found dead so far this year. Most of the animals were found in Arica and Parinacota in northern Chile. Article continues below the player “This shows we are clearly facing an abnormal situation, which we attribute to the phenomenon of highly pathogenic avian influenza,” María Soledad Tapia Almonacid, the head of the aquaculture service, said. The sharp increase coincides with the country’s first-ever human case of H5N1 bird flu, which was reported in northern Chile earlier this week. The 53-year-old man, from the coastal city of Tocopilla, is in critical but stable condition. It’s still unknown how he was infected with the virus. Sea lions have been hit unusually hard in South America. Around 3,500 sea lions in Peru, which is next to Chile, are also reported to have died of avian influenza, raising the possibility of mammal-to-mammal transmission. The global spread of H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b – and the recent spread to a growing number of mammals – has raised concern about the possibility of a future variant which could lead to human-to-human transmission. So far, only a few cases have been found in humans after contact with infected birds. “The global H5N1 situation is worrying given the wide spread of the virus in birds around the world and the increasing reports of cases in mammals, including in humans,” Dr. Sylvie Briand, a WHO official, said on February 24. “WHO takes the risk from this virus seriously and urges heightened vigilance from all countries.” A sea lion suspected to have died of H5N1 bird flu on Santa María Island on Friday (Credit: Sernapesca) A Humboldt penguin which died of H5N1 bird flu on the coast of Chile (Credit: Sernapesca) A sea lion suspected to have died of H5N1 bird flu on the coast of Chile on February 17 (Credit: Sernapesca) Related Topics:bird fluChilefeaturedH5N1 bird flusea lion Advertisment15 Advertisment5 Latest Politics19 hours ago Trump names former ICE director Tom Homan as border czar Politics22 hours ago Former U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm from New York paralyzed after horse riding accident World1 day ago Strong 6.8-magnitude earthquake hits southeast Cuba Legal2 days ago Gunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10 Advertisment4 Trending World2 days ago Canada reports first human case of H5 bird flu Legal1 week ago Texas Amber Alert: Connor Young missing from Heartland Legal3 days ago Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in Columbus Advertisment6 Most Viewed World2 days ago Canada reports first human case of H5 bird flu Legal1 week ago Texas Amber Alert: Connor Young missing from Heartland Legal3 days ago Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in Columbus US News1 week ago Surfer attacked by shark near Hawaii’s Maui island, loses part of leg Entertainment1 week ago Music legend Quincy Jones, who worked with Michael Jackson, dead at 91 Legal6 days ago Bomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state says Legal2 days ago Gunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10 World1 day ago Strong 6.8-magnitude earthquake hits southeast Cuba Copyright © 2024 BNO News, B.V. All rights reserved. About Us | Privacy Policy | Terms | BNO en Español | Contact Us Advertisment18Russian Flu: Juggernaut of the 1890s | Nippon.com Home Topics Russian Flu: Juggernaut of the 1890s COVID-19 and Civilization Russian Flu: Juggernaut of the 1890s Health Science Society Lifestyle World Mar 30, 2023 The COVID-19 pandemic shares similarities with the 1889 Russian flu pandemic that spread around the world like wildfire, spreading at some 300 kilometers per week. The Russian flu claimed an estimated 1 million lives out of a total global population of 1.5 billion. English 日本語 简体字 繁體字 Français Español العربية Русский Spreading Like Wildfire According to European records, the Russian flu pandemic, which originated in the Russian city of Bukhara (now part of Uzbekistan), spread to 33 cities across Europe between the time of the initial November 1889 outbreak and February 1890. In the space of just six weeks, the infection had spread from Stuttgart to Berlin, Vienna, and Switzerland, and on to Amsterdam, Copenhagen, Brussels, and Prague. The virus then headed south to Lyon, Lisbon, and Rome, even reaching Corsica and other Aegean regions. In Madrid, the daily death toll peaked at 300. A cartoon printed in the French satirical magazine Le Grelot in January 1890. Before long, the first death had been reported across the Atlantic in Canton, Massachusetts. This was followed by more reports of cases from Boston and New York in December 1889, and then reports from Chicago, Detroit, Denver, Los Angeles, and San Francisco as the virus travelled down railway lines. Other cities also reported many cases, and total cases peaked on January 12, 1890. Most of those infected complained of severe pneumonia, with a total of 13,000 fatalities across the United States. The indigenous peoples of North America were particularly hard hit. From Mexico, the virus then spread to Central and South America, finally reaching Buenos Aires on February 2, 1890. The virus continued to spark outbreaks in far-flung locations, including a mass outbreak in Durban, South Africa, in November 1889, before spreading to port cities around the world between late December and January. The wave of infection spread to Australia and New Zealand, and even to Greenland and Iceland. 300 Kilometers per Week On January 6, 1890, The Times was the first British newspaper to report on the outbreak, which it referred to as the “Russian flu,” a name that stuck. Following newspaper articles from the time, we see that the British death toll had reached 110,000 by the end of 1892. The most famous victim was Queen Victoria’s grandson Prince Albert Victor, who became infected at a party to celebrate the New Year and developed serious pneumonia, dying five days later at the age of 28. The Duke of Clarence, who was second in line to the throne, also died after his pneumonia symptoms worsened. British Prime Minister Archibald Primrose (the fifth Earl of Rosebery) was infected that year as well, and while Primrose survived, according to newspaper reports he was rendered immobile by severe fatigue. In the UK, the mortality rate per million population jumped from 146 in 1890 to 544 in 1891. To give you an idea just how serious this is, in 2021 Japan’s COVID-19 mortality rate per million population was around 120. In 1890, Winston Churchill (1874–1965) was a 15-year-old student at Harrow. As the Russian flu broke out in schools and in towns in Sheffield and other parts of the North, its high mortality rate caused panic. In his poem “The Influenza,” Churchill expressed fear at the fact that that “The rich, the poor, the high, the low . . . Alike before it droop.” Denmark also experienced a nightmare situation that began when a Russian cargo ship arrived in Copenhagen from Saint Petersburg in December 1989. Immediately after the ship had berthed, the Russian captain was hospitalized with a high-grade fever, and a few days later six soldiers in Copenhagen’s barracks had fallen ill. The disease immediately spread to other barracks around the city, resulting in around 20 soldiers being admitted to garrison hospitals every day. The virus roared throughout Denmark like wildfire, with one record from December 14 stating that around 3,500 people had been infected in Copenhagen alone. It took two years for the virus to rage through the rest of the country, with estimates made at the time putting the infection rate at 75%. The third wave of infection—the result of a mutant strain—was particularly voracious, and was responsible for the highest number of deaths. In Asia, outbreaks were recorded in India in February 1890, Singapore and the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia) in March, and China in May. The virus continued to spread throughout the southern hemisphere, from Asia to Australia and New Zealand, and ultimately circumnavigated the globe and arrived back at its origins in Central Asia. The Russian flu virus spread extremely fast: in fact, estimates put the average speed of travel at 300 kilometers per week, meaning it went around the world in just four months. Despite the fact that the global population was younger then than it is now, the virus claimed a great many victims, causing an estimated 1 million fatalities out of a global population of 1.5 billion. Some researchers believe that the actual death toll was many times higher. After first appearing in Bukhara, the Russian flu roared around the globe. Edo Superstitions While the virus reached Japan in 1890 via India and Southeast Asia, information on deaths is sketchy in the absence of detailed records. However, based on death statistics from Tokyo and Kanagawa Prefectures, chief researcher at the National Institute of Public Health Ōmi Ken’ichi says he believes that there was an abnormal increase in deaths between 1889 and 1891. According to Ōmi, “while the pandemic claimed a lower death toll than the Spanish Flu epidemic of 1918 to 1920 [which claimed around 380,000 lives], in the Kantō region, no other outbreak matched or approached the Russian flu.” Excess mortality is a measure of the extent to which the actual mortality rate exceeds the rate that would normally be expected. In other words, it is a measure of hidden deaths. In addition to infectious diseases, excess mortality can be caused by extreme weather, famine, war, and other unforeseen events. COVID-19 is another pandemic that has caused an uptick in excess mortality. A research team from the University of Washington recently published an article in the Lancet that estimated excess mortality rates in 74 countries and regions between January 2020 and December 2021. The team article estimates excess mortality in Japan at 111,000, a number six times greater than Japan’s confirmed COVID-19 death toll of 18,400. In fact, Japan’s estimated excess mortality was higher than that of any of the other 38 OECD member states. Experts have expressed skepticism about this estimate, however, which they say is too high. According to a study by the National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Japan experienced a record 46,000 excess deaths from January to June 2022. While many believe these were the result of COVID-19, the number of confirmed COVID deaths for the period stands at 12,000. The significant disparity between excess mortality and confirmed COVID deaths suggests that the government was not aware of all COVID cases and that healthcare services were not reaching the entirety of the population. While the NIID attributes Japan’s high excess mortality to stress on the healthcare system, that alone does not explain the over 30,000 excess deaths are not attributed to COVID. The peak in excess mortality coincides with the peak in the administration of the booster shot, and it is believed that other than deaths caused directly by COVID-19, the greatest cause of the increase in excess mortality was the fact that strain on the healthcare system prevented many patients from accessing medical services, as elderly patients unable to leave their homes saw their health conditions deteriorate. Vaccine sceptics, on the other hand, put the deaths down to vaccine side-effects. In his collection of essays entitled Omoidegusa, novelist Okamoto Kidō (1872–1939), who is known for his work Hanshichi torimonochō (trans. The Curious Casebook of Inspector Hanshichi), describes Tokyo’s Kōjimachi district during the Russian flu pandemic. “This disease first broke out in Japan in the winter of 1890, and became an increasing menace through to the spring of 1891. This was the first we had heard of influenza, which was rumored to have been imported to Yokohama on a ship from France. At the time, however, the disease was generally referred to as osomekaze rather than influenza. . . . Tokyoites took to pasting notes that read Hisamatsu rusu, or ‘Hisamatsu is out,’ to the eaves of their houses.” A sign reading Hisamatsu rusu (Hisamatsu is out) on the eaves of a house. (Courtesy of the Kōtō City Fukagawa Edo Museum) But why did the people of the time refer to the disease as osomekaze? The answer: The name was taken from “Osome,” the name of the protagonist of a play that was a staple of kabuki and puppet theaters in the day. The play, which concerns a lovers’ suicide between Osome, the daughter of an oil seller from Kawarayabashi (Osaka), and Hisamatsu, has been performed many times since its first performance in 1813. In areas of Tokyo affected by the Russian flu, residents are said to have pasted notes that read Hisamatsu rusu, or “Hisamatsu is out,” on the eaves of their houses. By telling Osome that she couldn’t see her lover because he was unavailable, residents hoped the osomekaze would not come in. While Japan had entered the Meiji era by this time, the way people joked about a deadly disease gives you get a feel for the cheeky Edoite character. Incidentally, in Japan in that time, influenza epidemics were all named after characters who featured in kabuki. For example, oshichikaze was named after the arsonist Yaoya Oshichi. Infections were also given names like Ryūkyūkaze and Amerikakaze after the Ryūkyū islands and America, the places where they were believed to have originated. Interestingly, in Japan, January 9 is celebrated as “cold day” due to the fact that sumō wrestler Tanikaze Kajinosuke, who had an unbeaten record in the late 1700s, died of influenza on this day despite being in his prime. In this era, colds were referred to as tanikaze in memory of this mighty sumō wrestler who turned out to be no match for his illness. (Originally published in Japanese. Banner photo: A socially distanced audience watches an outdoor opera performance at Konzerthaus Berlin in June 2021. © Christian Ender/Getty Images.) influenza medicine history Russia health COVID-19 pandemicIndia Influenza Vaccine Market Analysts Predict Sustained PR-WikiImprint Search Categories Advertising, Media Consulting, Marketing Research Arts & Culture Associations & Organizations Business, Economy, Finances, Banking & Insurance Energy & Environment Fashion, Lifestyle, Trends Health & Medicine Industry, Real Estate & Construction IT, New Media & Software Leisure, Entertainment, Miscellaneous Logistics & Transport Media & Telecommunications Politics, Law & Society Science & Education Sports Tourism, Cars, Traffic RSS-Newsfeeds Submit Press Release Submit Press Release Free of Charge Pressemitteilung kostenlos veröffentlichen Order Credits Archive Magazine About Us About / FAQ Newsletter Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Imprint Press release India Influenza Vaccine Market Analysts Predict Sustained Growth for Key Sectors Through 2030 03-29-2023 02:48 PM CET | Advertising, Media Consulting, Marketing Research Press release from: quadintel Quadintel's recent global India Influenza Vaccine market research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. India Influenza Vaccine Market is rapidly increasing due to government support and surveillance regarding vaccination against influenza. Increase in government support and surveillance regarding vaccination against influenza on the national levels to monitor the supply, distribution, and administration is one of the crucial factors driving the market growth. Moreover, increase in investment by leading market players and rise in government funding have facilitated the launch of therapeutically effective vaccines drive the influenza vaccine market growth. Download free sample of this report :-https://www.quadintel.comequest-sample/india-influenza-vaccine-market/12-6-1089 This report focuses on value market at the country and regional level. This report represents overall Influenza Vaccine Market size by analyzing historical data from 2016-2020 and future prospect from 2021-2026. Market Segmentation: Breakup by Vaccine Type Quadrivalent Trivalent Breakup by Technology Egg-based Cell culture Breakup by Age Group Pediatric Adult Breakup by Route of Administration Injection Nasal Spray Request full Report Description, TOC, Table of Figure, Chart, etc :-https://www.quadintel.comequest-sample/india-influenza-vaccine-market/12-6-1089 Regional Analysis The report has been prepared after analyzing and studying various factors that determine regional growth such as economic, environmental, social, technological, and political factors of the country. The team have closely analyzed the data of revenue, production, and manufacturers of each region. These analyses will help the reader to identify the key regions as potential worth of investment in the coming years. Market Breakup by Region North India West India Central India East India South India Competitive Landscape This section of the report identifies various key manufacturers of the market. It helps the reader understand the strategies and collaborations that players are focusing on combat competition in the market. The reader can will get an updated information on their revenue of manufacturers, product portfolio, recent development and expansion plans during the forecast period. Highlight the Following Key Factors: Business Description: a particular description of agency operations and enterprise departments. Company Strategy: The analyst's precis of the company's commercial enterprise strategy. SWOT Analysis: Detailed evaluation of the company's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. Company History: The development of predominant occasions associated to the company. Main merchandise and services: A listing of the company's fundamental products, services, and brands. Main Competitors: A listing of the company's fundamental competitors. Important places and subsidiaries: The company's major places and subsidiaries' listing and contact information. Detailed economic ratios of the previous 5 years: The trendy monetary ratios come from the annual economic statements issued by means of agencies with a record of 5 years. Request Full Report :-https://www.quadintel.comequest-sample/india-influenza-vaccine-market/12-6-1089 About Quadintel: We are the best market research reports provider in the industry. Quadintel believes in providing quality reports to clients to meet the top line and bottom line goals which will boost your market share in today's competitive environment. Quadintel is a 'one-stop solution' for individuals, organizations, and industries that are looking for innovative market research reports. Robust, detailed segmentation In-depth analysis in all geographies. Detailed breakup in various segmentation. Rigorous primary and secondary research We will help you in finding the upcoming trends that will entitle you as a leader in the industry. We are here to work with you on your objective which will create an immense opportunity for your organization. Our priority is to provide high-level customer satisfaction by providing innovative reports that enable them to take a strategic decision and generate revenue. We update our database on a day-to-day basis to provide the latest reports. We assist our clients in understanding the emerging trends so that they can invest smartly and can make optimum utilization of resources available. Get in Touch with Us: Quadintel: Email:sales@quadintel.com Address: Office - 500 N Michigan Ave, Suite 600, Chicago, Illinois 60611, UNITED STATES Tel: +1 888 212 3539 (US - TOLL FREE) Website : https://www.quadintel.com/This release was published on openPR. Permanent link to this press release: Copy Please set a link in the press area of your homepage to this press release on openPR. openPR disclaims liability for any content contained in this release. Share Tweet Email You can edit or delete your press release India Influenza Vaccine Market Analysts Predict Sustained Growth for Key Sectors Through 2030 here Delete press release Edit press release News-ID: 2993610 • Views: … More Releases from quadintel 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel Smart Textiles for Military Market Business Expansion Strategies for the Market … Quadintel's recent global " Smart Textiles for Military Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample… 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel China Home Appliances Market A Deep Dive into the Market: Trends, Insights, and … Quadintel's recent global " China Home Appliances Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample of… 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel Wireless Healthcare Market Unlocking New Growth Avenues in the Market: Strategie … Quadintel's recent global " Wireless Healthcare Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample of This… 04-11-2023 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Quadintel Spatial omics Market The Impact of Economic Conditions on the Market in 2023-203 … Quadintel's recent global " Spatial omics Market " research report gives detailed facts with consideration to market size, cost revenue, trends, growth, capacity, and forecast till 2030. In addition, it includes an in-depth analysis of This market, including key factors impacting the market growth. This study offers information for creating plans to increase the market's growth and effectiveness and is a comprehensive quantitative survey of the market. Download Free Sample of This… All 5 Releases More Releases for India 12-02-2020 | Health & Medicine REPORTSANDMARKETS Ayurvedic Service Market is Flourishing Like Never Before | Patanjali Ayurved Li … RnM newly added a research report on the Ayurvedic Service market, which represents a study for the period from 2020 to 2026. The research study provides a near look at the market scenario and dynamics impacting its growth. This report highlights the crucial developments along with other events happening in the market which are marking on the growth and opening doors for future growth in the coming years. Additionally, the… 01-14-2019 | Business, Economy, Finances, B … Pasta Pasta Market Report 2019 Companies included Bambino (India), Nestle (USA), Field … We have recently published this report and it is available for immediate purchase. For inquiry Email us on: jasonsmith@marketreportscompany.com This market study includes data about consumer perspective, comprehensive analysis, statistics, market share, company performances (Stocks), historical analysis 2012 to 2017, market forecast 2019 to 2025 in terms of volume, revenue, YOY growth rate, and CAGR for the year 2019 to 2025, etc. The report also provides detailed segmentation on the… 10-09-2018 | Business, Economy, Finances, B … Pasta Market Pasta Market Report 2018 Companies included Bambino (India), Nestle (USA), Field … We have recently published this report and it is available for immediate purchase. For inquiry Email us on: jasonsmith@marketreportscompany.com ********* This market study includes data about consumer perspective, comprehensive analysis, statistics, market share, company performances (Stocks), historical analysis 2012 to 2017, market forecast 2018 to 2025 in terms of volume, revenue, YOY growth rate, and CAGR for the year 2018 to 2025, etc. The report also provides… 06-22-2011 | Arts & Culture Synergy Corporate Interiors Pvt. Ltd Interior Designers India, Designers and Architects India, Interior Design Consul … Synergy Corporate Interiors Pvt. Ltd. are offer Designers and Architects India Our architects, designers are working an national and international client base. The final design output is then integrated with the various technical and engineering aspects and taken into production. The expression is also individualistic, based on the communication of the correct corporate identity. Our designers, engineers and architects perform any plan successfully combine handy knowledge with creative ideas into… 11-23-2010 | Business, Economy, Finances, B … Indiainternet Domain Registration India, Web Hosting India, VPS Hosting India , SSL Certificat … All the Domain Registration services are at affordable price and assure you for the 100% quality. India Internet offers cheap domain name registration for many domain extensions available. We are a full-service web site solutions provider. We offer a full range of web services including domain registration India, Web Hosting India, Web design, SEO marketing and etc. We offer different standard and different Windows .NET low-cost, full-featured, all-inclusive web hosting and domain… 11-16-2010 | Advertising, Media Consulting, … Indiainternet Domain Registration India, Web Hosting India, Payment Gateway India Indiainternet.in is a Quality Web Hosting Company India, provide all web related support and Web hosting services like linux web hosting, windows web hosting, web hosting packages, domain registration in india, Corporate email solution, business email hosting, payment gateway integration, SSL with supports like free php, cgi, asp, free msaccess, free cdonts, free webmail, web based control panel, unlimited ftp access, unlimited data transfer. During the domain registration process, you will… Comments about openPR OpenPR ist the nicest and most clearly laid out PR platform I have seen to this day. The press releases are displayed very nicely and clearly and without any unnecessary frills. The updates are fast and the finished release looks appealing and is clearly legible. Even with 16 years of experience one discovers new things from time to time. Congratulations!Gabriele Ketterl, Director Marketing & PR, Menads Your Press Release on Google News Press Release in German on openPR.de © 2004 - 2024 openPR. All rights reserved. FAQ | Imprint | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Contact Point DSA | Reporting Form DSA | Cookie Settings Search Home Categories Advertising, Media Consulting, Marketing Research Arts & Culture Associations & Organizations Business, Economy, Finances, Banking & Insurance Energy & Environment Fashion, Lifestyle, Trends Health & Medicine Industry, Real Estate & Construction IT, New Media & Software Leisure, Entertainment, Miscellaneous Logistics & Transport Media & Telecommunications Politics, Law & Society Science & Education Sports Tourism, Cars, Traffic RSS-Newsfeeds Submit Press Release Submit Press Release Free of Charge Pressemitteilung kostenlos veröffentlichen Order Credits Archive Magazine PR-Wiki About Us About / FAQ Newsletter Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy ImprintHow India has become a growing market for anti-flu drug Oseltamivir - BusinessToday - Issue Date: Apr 16, 2023 Business Today BT Bazaar India Today Northeast India Today Gaming Cosmopolitan Harper's Bazaar Brides Today Ishq FM Aaj Tak GNTTV iChowk Kisan Tak Lallantop Malyalam Bangla Sports Tak Crime Tak Aajtak Campus Astro tak Subscribe Home India Magazine Cover Story Editor's Note Deep Dive Interview The Buzz BT TV Market Today Easynomics Drive Today BT Explainer Market Today Trending Stocks Indices Stocks List Stocks News Share Market News IPO Corner Tech Today Unbox Today Authen Tech Tech Deck Tech Shorts Money Today Tax Investment Insurance Tools & Calculator Mutual Funds Industry Banking IT Auto Energy Commodities Pharma Real Estate Telecom Visual Stories BT Reels events Special PMS Today US News Economic Indicators UPSTART Weather BT Shorts NRI Clear all Search COMPANIES No Data Found INDICES ANALYSIS No Data Found AMCs No Data Found MUTUAL FUNDS No Data Found NEWS No Data Found Sign in Subscribe Home India Magazine Cover Story Editor's Note Deep Dive Interview The Buzz BT TV Market Today Easynomics Drive Today BT Explainer Market Today Trending Stocks Indices Stocks List Stocks News Share Market News IPO Corner Tech Today Unbox Today Authen Tech Tech Deck Tech Shorts Money Today Tax Investment Insurance Tools & Calculator Mutual Funds Industry Banking IT Auto Energy Commodities Pharma Real Estate Telecom Visual Stories BT Reels PMS Today US News Economic Indicators UPSTART Weather BT Shorts NRI events Special Save 41% with our annual Print + Digital offer of Business Today Magazine SUBSCRIBE News Magazine The Buzz How India has become a growing market for anti-flu drug Oseltamivir Feedback How India has become a growing market for anti-flu drug Oseltamivir The market for anti-flu drug Oseltamivir in India has grown over 3x in the past three years, with Cipla, Hetero and Macleods being the biggest gainers Neetu Chandra Sharma Print Edition: Apr 16, 2023 The market for anti-flu drug Oseltamivir in India has grown over 3x in the past three years, with Cipla, Hetero and Macleods being the biggest gainers It’s that time of the year again when the spread of influenza reaches fever pitch. And with the flu season on us, can medication to treat it be far behind? Data from Pharmarack, an integrated B2B healthcare platform, reveals that sales of antiviral drug Oseltamivir, commonly known as Tamiflu, has seen healthy growth in the past three months. In December 2022, at least 227,000 units of the drug were sold, which shot up to 294,000 units in January 2023 and 395,000 units in February 2023, with a value of Rs 9.7 crore, Rs 12.8 crore and Rs 29 crore, respectively. The uptick in sales can be linked to the rising flu cases in the country. According to the data available on the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme-Integrated Health Information Platform (IDSP-IHIP) under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, a total of 3,038 laboratory-confirmed cases of various subtypes of influenza, including H1N1 and H3N2, had been reported till March 9, 2023, by the states. According to the ministry, seasonal influenza is an acute respiratory infection caused by viruses that circulate in all parts of the world and the cases are seen to increase during certain months globally. India witnesses two peaks of seasonal influenza every year: one from January to March and the other after the monsoon season. The cases arising from seasonal influenza are expected to decline from March end, the government has said. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends Oseltamivir for influenza. The central government had also allowed its sale under Schedule H1 (prescription medicine) of the Drug and Cosmetic Act in February 2017 for wider accessibility and availability. In India, Oseltamivir has also been made available through the public health system free of cost. Meanwhile, sales of the drug have spiked in the past few months. “A similar uptick was seen in February 2021, but that was more of the Covid-19 impact,” says Sheetal Sapale, VP of Commercial at Pharmarack, adding that the annual market has multiplied more than 3x in terms of value and volume since 2019. Since 2020, a combination of events such as the Covid-19 pandemic and the flu season have led to the spike in sales. Pharma majors Cipla, Hetero Drugs and Macleods Pharmaceuticals have been the biggest gainers in the Oseltamivir business, says data from Pharmarack. In February 2021, Cipla recorded a growth of 65 per cent in value terms for its Oseltamivir drug named Antiflu. The growth stood at 29 per cent in February 2022 and 6 per cent in February 2023. Similarly, Hetero Drugs saw growth of its drug Fluvir at 16 per cent in 2021, 18 per cent in 2022 and 15 per cent in 2023. Macleods’ Fluvia clocked growth of 200 per cent, 279 per cent and 21 per cent in 2021, 2022 and 2023, respectively. While the pace of growth may have moderated, Oseltamivir sales still show an upward trend. These pharma majors aren’t the only ones making the drug in India. Some other firms that manufacture it include Glenmark Pharmaceuticals, JB Pharmaceuticals, Natco Pharma, MSN Laboratories and Overseas Pharma. Meanwhile, according to financial services firm Anand Rathi, among sales by Indian pharmaceutical companies, a strong value growth was seen in therapies such as respiratory (55 per cent) and anti-infectives (35 per cent) in the month of February alone. As the flu season peaks, and with the recent rise in Covid-19 cases as well, the upward trend for Oseltamivir looks set to continue. @neetu_csharma Economy Corporate Markets Trending Magazine COVID-19 Infra Pharma Real Estate Stocks Auto World Education Jobs Lifestyle About us Contact us Advertise with us Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Partners Press Releases Design Partner Copyright©2024 Living Media India Limited. For reprint rights: Syndications Today Add Business Today to Home Screen Home Market BT TV Reels Menu MenuHealth Minister receives Bahrain’s National Influenza Centre team About BNAContactLive TV/Radio English عربي 12 November 2024 عربي HomeLatest News NewsLocal NewsGCC NewsArab NewsWorld NewsSports NewsCulture NewsBusinessSociety & PeopleVarietiesISF Gymnasiade BNA ServicesBNA ZamanPhotosReportsVideos MoreNews Agencies & PressInfographicsArchive Toggle navigation HomeLatest NewsNewsLocal NewsGCC NewsArab NewsWorld NewsSports NewsCulture NewsBusinessSociety & PeopleVarietiesISF GymnasiadeBNA ServicesBNA ZamanPhotosReportsVideosAbout BNAContactLive TV/RadioMoreNews Agencies & PressInfographicsArchive Home NewsLocal NewsHealth Minister receives Bahrain’s ... Health Minister receives Bahrain’s National Influenza Centre team 01 Apr 2023 Created: 03:15 PM Last Updated: 03:15 PM Views: 417 Manama, Apr. 1 (BNA): Minister of Health, Dr. Jaleela bint Al-Sayed Jawad Hassan, has stressed the importance of developing national capabilities in order to achieve the reference vision for public health laboratories, increase their capacity and use the necessary technologies at all levels. She also urged more efforts to continue success in contributing to global efforts to combat influenza viruses. The minister was speaking while meeting Bahrain’s National Influenza Centre, led by Chief of the Public Health Lab, Amjad Ghanem Zayed, following the Centre’s success in winning the World Health Organisation (WHO) Award for the Eastern Mediterranean Region, in recognition of its continuous participation in supporting surveillance activities and the exchange of influenza viruses with collaborating centres over the past two years (2021-2022). The minister expressed thanks and appreciation to Bahrain’s National Influenza Centre’s team for the tremendous efforts they have exerted over the previous years in the areas of Virological surveillance and response. The WHO award was announced at the conclusion of the third scientific conference and the sixth meeting of the Acute Respiratory Infection Surveillance Network in the Eastern Mediterranean Region, which was held in the Sultanate of Oman The WHO award also recognised the centre’s active role and contributions, especially during the Covid-19 pandemic, in supporting surveillance activities and the exchange of influenza viruses with centers collaborating with the Geneva-based organisation. The aim was to ramp up surveillance of influenza and other emerging respiratory diseases and optimise the use of data to prepare control programmes and conduct research related to influenza and other respiratory viruses. Established in 2011 in the public health laboratories, the National Influenza Centre was accredited as a national center for influenza and a member of the Global Network for Influenza Surveillance and Export (GISRS) by the World Health Organization in 2012. The centre, an offshoot of the Health Ministry, was approved after it passed all the quality requirements specified in the international standards, and participated in the external quality assessment programs (EQAP) provided by the World Health Organization through the GISRS network, The accreditation was renewed in 2018, after a delegation of WHO experts visited the center to verify the continuity of the implementation of the requirements and passing all local and international quality requirements. WHQ Share this article: Most Viewed Bahrain introduces new tax for Multinational Enterprises, aligns with OECD standards 01 Sep 2024 06:41 PM | Views: 11481 HM King congratulates Chad President 10 Aug 2024 05:35 PM | Views: 10686 Jaffari Endowments Chairman commends Foreign Ministry, Bahrain’s Embassy in Iraq for addressing issue with Bahraini visitors 28 Aug 2024 11:44 PM | Views: 7483 HH Shaikh Khalid congratulates HM King, HRH Crown Prince and Prime Minister on Bahrain winning the gold medal in the women's 3000m steeplechase race at the Paris 2024 Olympics 07 Aug 2024 12:51 AM | Views: 6157 Royal Court mourns the passing of Shaikh Khalid bin Mohammed Al Khalifa 20 Sep 2024 10:58 PM | Views: 3275 HRH the Crown Prince and Prime Minister meets with the UN Secretary-General 24 Sep 2024 10:46 PM | Views: 2569 Coast Guard: Armed robbery targets five dhows in northern Bahrain waters 24 Aug 2024 05:19 PM | Views: 2109 Royal Court mourns the passing of Shaikh Hamoud bin Abdullah Al Khalifa 18 Oct 2024 11:56 PM | Views: 1699 Address Ministry of Information Office of BNA Director General Tel: +973 17 455 400 Editorial and Correspondents Section Tel: +973 17 455 455 P.O. Box: 253 Manama / Kingdom of Bahrain Links Social Connect Twitter Youtube Instagram RSS Subscription © Bahrain News Agency.Influenza B/Victoria strain in predominant circulation in Fiji - Health Ministry - The Fiji Times Influenza B/Victoria strain in predominant circulation in Fiji - Health Ministry - The Fiji Times Sign In Register Logout Subscribe Home News Local News Business Regional Politics World Sport Rugby Rugby League Football Netball Coca-Cola Games Fijian Drua Other Sports Lifestyle Cartoons Music Fashion Art Motoring Bollybaat The Shopper Games Puzzles Property Guide Kaila Competitions DYON People Local Travel Dining & Entertainment Fijian Drua Opinion Archive Nai Lalakai Letters To The Editors Editors Comment From The Crowd Search Home News Local News Business Regional Politics World Sport Rugby Rugby League Football Netball Coca-Cola Games Fijian Drua Other Sports Lifestyle Cartoons Music Fashion Art Motoring Bollybaat The Shopper Games Puzzles Property Guide Kaila Competitions DYON People Local Travel Dining & Entertainment Fijian Drua Opinion Archive Nai Lalakai Letters To The Editors Editors Comment From The Crowd Sign In Register Logout Subscribe Search Search Influenza B/Victoria strain in predominant circulation in Fiji – Health Ministry Local News, News, Regional | Published: March 28, 2023 | Last Updated: March 27, 2023 | By Timoci Vula Listen to this article: Image: MOHMS The Fiji Centre of Disease Control (CDC) has confirmed that the influenza-like illness in predominant circulation in the country is that of the Influenza B/Victoria strain. The Ministry of Health and Medical Services say this may be the likely cause of the second surge of influenza-like illnesses being reported and observed locally. According to the ministry, its surveillance systems had shown the resurgence in reporting of influenza-like and acute respiratory illnesses since early December last year. And earlier this year (2023), the ministry recorded an outbreak of a type of influenza type A virus scientifically labeled as FluA/H1 Pdm. The ministry stated that this outbreak had receded. “…However, we now have indications of another outbreak of flu-like illness. Essentially, we are observing a ‘double peak trend’ (bi-phasic) of influenza-like illness case reports over the last several months since December 2022. “As observed from past years’ trends, Fiji’s influenza season usually runs from January to May-June annually.” While confirming the Influenza B/Victoria strain in circulation, the ministry stated that the increased presence of influenza B in circulation “is similarly being observed in other countries of the region and the world”. The ministry stated there was the Tamiflu antiviral medication stock being distributed. “We are getting more flu vaccines, which will be offered to those vulnerable to the severe effects of influenza – individuals with chronic illness, pregnant women and frontline staff. “Surveillance has also been escalated and we await more recent reports to determine ongoing trends.” It said while it still had stocks of flu testing reagents and consumables, the ministry was also working with the World Health Organization (WHO) to increase its stocks. The ministry had also advised members of the public to stay at home when feeling unwell or to wear face masks when going outside in order to minimise the spread of infection. Amount of FJD: Convert To: Australian DollarCanadian DollarChinese YuanEuroU.K. Pound SterlingHong Kong DollarIndonesian RupiahIndian RupeeJapanese YenSouth Korean WonMalaysian RinggitNew Zealand DollarPhilippine PesoSingapore DollarThai BahtNew Taiwan Dollar U.S. DollarVietnamese DongSwiss FrancDanish KroneEgyptian PoundIsraeli New SheqelJordanian DinarLebanese PoundNorwegian KroneSwedish KronaSouth African RandU.A.E DirhamBulgarian LevBrazilian RealCzech KorunaHungarian ForintIcelandic KronaMoldova LeiMexican PesoPolish ZlotyRomanian New LeuSerbian DinarRussian RoubleTurkish LiraUkrainian HryvniaChilean PesoArmenia DramAzerbaijan ManatBangladeshi takaDominican PesoAlgerian DinarGeorgian lariIraqi dinarKyrgyzstan SomKazakhstani TengeLibyan DinarMoroccan DirhamPakistani RupeeSaudi RiyalTajikistan RubleNew Turkmenistan ManatTunisian DinarUzbekistan SumCentral African CFA FrancWest African CFA FrancBelarussian RubleVenezuelan BolivarPeruvian Nuevo SolArgentine PesoBolivian BolivianoColombian PesoCosta Rican ColónHaitian gourdePanamanian BalboaParaguayan GuaraníUruguayan PesoNigerian NairaAfghan afghaniAlbanian lekNeth. Antillean GuilderAngolan kwanzaAruban florinBosnia and Herzegovina convertible markBarbadian DollarBahrain DinarBurundian francBrunei DollarBahamian DollarBotswana PulaBelize dollarCongolese francCuban pesoCape Verde escudoDjiboutian francEritrean nakfaEthiopian birrGhanaian CediGibraltar poundGambian dalasiGuinean francGuatemalan QuetzalGuyanese dollarHonduran LempiraIranian rialJamaican DollarKenyan shillingCambodian riel Comoro francKuwaiti DinarLao kipSri Lanka RupeeLiberian dollarLesotho lotiMalagasy ariaryMacedonian denarMyanma KyatMongolian togrogMacanese patacaMauritanian ouguiyaMauritian RupeeMaldivian rufiyaaMalawian kwachaMozambican meticalNamibian dollarNicaraguan CórdobaNepalese RupeeOmani RialPapua New Guinean kinaQatari RialRwandan francSolomon Islands dollarSeychelles rupeeSudanese poundSomali shillingSurinamese dollarSouth Sudanese poundSão Tomé and Príncipe DobraSalvadoran colonSyrian poundSwazi lilangeniTongan paʻangaTrinidad Tobago DollarTanzanian shillingUgandan shillingVanuatu vatuSamoan talaEast Caribbean DollarCFP FrancYemeni rialZambian kwacha Receive: Array ( [post_type] => post [post_status] => publish [orderby] => date [order] => DESC [update_post_term_cache] => [update_post_meta_cache] => [cache_results] => [category__in] => 1 [posts_per_page] => 4 [offset] => 0 [no_found_rows] => 1 [date_query] => Array ( [0] => Array ( [after] => Array ( [year] => 2024 [month] => 08 [day] => 12 ) [inclusive] => 1 ) ) ) UK News Uncategorized ‘Association faces ongoing challenges’ 8 November, 2024 Uncategorized Knight’s Choice wins Cup 6 November, 2024 Uncategorized Bypass road ‘still at discussion level’ 30 October, 2024 Uncategorized Boost for campaign 30 October, 2024 © 2024 FijiTimes. All rights reserved. Download our App Useful links Contact Us Advertise With Us Terms Privacy Policy Powered by PageSuite