Influenza (Seasonal) Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English العربية 中文 Français Русский Español Donate Donate Home Health Topics All topicsABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Resources Fact sheets Facts in pictures Multimedia Podcasts Publications Questions and answers Tools and toolkits Popular Dengue Endometriosis Excessive heat Herpes Mental disorders Mpox Countries All countriesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Regions Africa Americas Europe Eastern Mediterranean South-East Asia Western Pacific WHO in countries Data by country Country presence Country strengthening Country cooperation strategies Newsroom All news News releases Statements Campaigns Events Feature stories Press conferences Speeches Commentaries Photo library Headlines Emergencies Focus on Cholera Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Greater Horn of Africa Israel and occupied Palestinian territory Mpox Sudan Ukraine Latest Disease Outbreak News Situation reports Weekly Epidemiological Record WHO in emergencies Surveillance Operations Research Funding Partners Health emergency appeal International Health Regulations Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee Data Dashboards Triple Billion Progress Health Inequality Monitor Delivery for impact COVID-19 dashboard Data collection Classifications SCORE Surveys Civil registration and vital statistics Routine health information systems Harmonized health facility assessment GIS centre for health Reports World Health Statistics UHC global monitoring report About WHO About WHO Partnerships Committees and advisory groups Collaborating centres Technical teams Organizational structure Who we are Our work Activities Initiatives General Programme of Work WHO Academy Funding Investment in WHO WHO Foundation Accountability External audit Financial statements Internal audit and investigations Programme Budget Results reports Governance Governing bodies World Health Assembly Executive Board Member States Portal Home/ Newsroom/ Fact sheets/ Detail/ Influenza (Seasonal) WHO / Khaled Mostafa © Credits Influenza (Seasonal) 3 October 2023 Key factsThere are around a billion cases of seasonal influenza annually, including 3–5 million cases of severe illness.It causes 290 000 to 650 000 respiratory deaths annually.Ninety-nine percent of deaths in children under 5 years of age with influenza-related lower respiratory tract infections are in developing countries.Symptoms begin 1–4 days after infection and usually last around a week.OverviewSeasonal influenza (the flu) is an acute respiratory infection caused by influenza viruses. It is common in all parts of the world. Most people recover without treatment.Influenza spreads easily between people when they cough or sneeze. Vaccination is the best way to prevent the disease.Symptoms of influenza include acute onset of fever, cough, sore throat, body aches and fatigue.Treatment should aim to relieve symptoms. People with the flu should rest and drink plenty of liquids. Most people will recover on their own within a week. Medical care may be needed in severe cases and for people with risk factors.There are 4 types of influenza viruses, types A, B, C and D. Influenza A and B viruses circulate and cause seasonal epidemics of disease. Influenza A viruses are further classified into subtypes according to the combinations of the proteins on the surface of the virus. Currently circulating in humans are subtype A(H1N1) and A(H3N2) influenza viruses. The A(H1N1) is also written as A(H1N1)pdm09 as it caused the pandemic in 2009 and replaced the previous A(H1N1) virus which had circulated prior to 2009. Only influenza type A viruses are known to have caused pandemics.Influenza B viruses are not classified into subtypes but can be broken down into lineages. Influenza type B viruses belong to either B/Yamagata or B/Victoria lineage.Influenza C virus is detected less frequently and usually causes mild infections, thus does not present public health importance.Influenza D viruses primarily affect cattle and are not known to infect or cause illness in people.Signs and symptomsSymptoms of influenza usually begin around 2 days after being infected by someone who has the virus. Symptoms include:sudden onset of fevercough (usually dry)headachemuscle and joint painsevere malaise (feeling unwell)sore throatrunny nose. The cough can be severe and can last 2 weeks or more. Most people recover from fever and other symptoms within a week without requiring medical attention. However, influenza can cause severe illness or death, especially in people at high risk.Influenza can worsen symptoms of other chronic diseases. In severe cases influenza can lead to pneumonia and sepsis. People with other medical issues or who have severe symptoms should seek medical care.Hospitalization and death due to influenza occur mainly among high-risk groups. In industrialized countries most deaths associated with influenza occur among people aged 65 years or older (1). The effects of seasonal influenza epidemics in developing countries are not fully known, but research estimates that 99% of deaths in children under 5 years of age with influenza related lower respiratory tract infections are in developing countries (2). EpidemiologyAll age groups can be affected but there are groups that are more at risk than others.People at greater risk of severe disease or complications when infected are pregnant women, children under 5 years of age, older people, individuals with chronic medical conditions (such as chronic cardiac, pulmonary, renal, metabolic, neurodevelopmental, liver or hematologic diseases) and individuals with immunosuppressive conditionsreatments (such as HIV, receiving chemotherapy or steroids, or malignancy).Health and care workers are at high risk of acquiring influenza virus infection due to increased exposure to the patients, and of further spreading particularly to vulnerable individuals. Vaccination can protect health workers and the people around them.Epidemics can result in high levels of worker/school absenteeism and productivity losses. Clinics and hospitals can be overwhelmed during peak illness periods. TransmissionSeasonal influenza spreads easily, with rapid transmission in crowded areas including schools and nursing homes. When an infected person coughs or sneezes, droplets containing viruses (infectious droplets) are dispersed into the air and can infect persons in close proximity. The virus can also be spread by hands contaminated with influenza viruses. To prevent transmission, people should cover their mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing and wash their hands regularly.In temperate climates, seasonal epidemics occur mainly during winter, while in tropical regions, influenza may occur throughout the year, causing outbreaks more irregularly. The time from infection to illness, known as the incubation period, is about 2 days, but ranges from 1–4 days.DiagnosisMost cases of human influenza are clinically diagnosed. However, during periods of low influenza activity or outside of epidemics situations, the infection of other respiratory viruses (e.g. SARS-CoV-2, rhinovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza and adenovirus) can also present as influenza-like illness (ILI), which makes the clinical differentiation of influenza from other pathogens difficult. Collection of appropriate respiratory samples and the application of a laboratory diagnostic test is required to establish a definitive diagnosis. Proper collection, storage and transport of respiratory specimens is the essential first step for laboratory detection of influenza virus infections. Laboratory confirmation is commonly performed using direct antigen detection, virus isolation, or detection of influenza-specific RNA by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Various guidance on the laboratory techniques is published and updated by WHO.Rapid diagnostic tests are used in clinical settings, but they have lower sensitivity compared to RT-PCR methods and their reliability depends largely on the conditions under which they are used. TreatmentMost people will recover from influenza on their own. People with severe symptoms or other medical conditions should seek medical care.People with mild symptoms should:stay home to avoid infecting other peoplerestdrink plenty of fluidstreat other symptoms such as feverseek medical care if symptoms get worse.People at high risk or with severe symptoms should be treated with antiviral medications as soon as possible. They include people who are: pregnantchildren under 59 months of ageaged 65 years and olderliving with other chronic illnessesreceiving chemotherapyliving with suppressed immune systems due to HIV or other conditions.The WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) monitors resistance to antivirals among circulating influenza viruses to provide timely evidence for national policies related to antiviral use. PreventionVaccination is the best way to prevent influenza. Safe and effective vaccines have been used for more than 60 years. Immunity from vaccination goes away over time so annual vaccination is recommended to protect against influenza. The vaccine may be less effective in older people, but it will make the illness less severe and reduces the chance of complications and death. Vaccination is especially important for people at high risk of influenza complications and their carers. Annual vaccination is recommended for:pregnant womenchildren aged 6 months to 5 yearspeople over age 65people with chronic medical conditionshealth workers.Other ways to prevent influenza: wash and dry your hands regularlycover your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezingdispose of tissues correctlystay home when feeling unwellavoid close contact with sick peopleavoid touching your eyes, nose or mouth.VaccinesVaccines are updated routinely with new vaccines developed that contain viruses that match those circulating. Several inactivated influenza vaccines and recombinant influenza vaccines are available in injectable form. Live attenuated influenza vaccines are available as a nasal spray. WHO responseWHO, through the Global Influenza Programme and GISRS, in collaboration with other partners, continuously monitors influenza viruses and activity globally, recommends seasonal influenza vaccine compositions twice a year for the northern and southern hemisphere influenza seasons, guides countries in tropical and subtropical areas as to which formulation vaccines to use, supports decisions for timing of vaccination campaigns, and supports Member States to develop prevention and control strategies. WHO works to strengthen national, regional and global influenza response capacities including diagnostics, antiviral susceptibility monitoring, disease surveillance and outbreak response, to increase vaccine coverage among high-risk groups, and to support research and development of new therapeutics and other countermeasures. References1. Estimates of US influenza-associated deaths made using four different methods.Thompson WW, Weintraub E, Dhankhar P, Cheng OY, Brammer L, Meltzer MI, et al. Influenza Other Respi Viruses. 2009;3:37-49 2. Global burden of respiratory infections due to seasonal influenza in young children: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Nair H, Abdullah Brooks W, Katz M et al. Lancet 2011; 378: 1917–3 Related Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS)More on Seasonal influenzaInfluenza vaccines News Pioneering regional collaboration to enhance regulatory practices in the Americas 16 October 2024 Yemen begins sharing seasonal influenza viruses with WHO Collaborating Centre in London 16 October 2024 Putting participatory surveillance into practice: new WHO publication released 16 October 2024 Fact sheets Influenza (Avian and other zoonotic) 3 October 2023 Feature stories The burden of Influenza 30 March 2024 Faces of the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) 15 December 2023 70 years of GISRS – the Global Influenza Surveillance & Response System 19 September 2022 Events Preparing for containment and mitigation of pandemic H5N1 influenza, Uses of statistical and mathematical modeling 14 November 2024 13:00 – 18:00 CET Documents Agenda Scientific pandemic H5N1 modeling (694 KB) Regions Africa Americas Eastern Mediterranean Europe South-East Asia Western Pacific Policies Cybersecurity Ethics Information disclosure Permissions and licensing Preventing sexual exploitation Terms of use About us Careers Frequently asked questions Library Newsletters Procurement Publications Contact us Report misconduct Privacy policy © 2024 WHOGlyco-engineered MDCK cells display preferred receptors of H3N2 influenza absent in eggs used for vaccines | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Glyco-engineered MDCK cells display preferred receptors of H3N2 influenza absent in eggs used for vaccines Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 04 October 2023 Glyco-engineered MDCK cells display preferred receptors of H3N2 influenza absent in eggs used for vaccines Chika Kikuchi ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7609-41251,2 na1, Aristotelis Antonopoulos ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1592-40923 na1, Shengyang Wang1,2, Tadashi Maemura4, Rositsa Karamanska3, Chiara Lee3, Andrew J. Thompson1,2, Anne Dell3, Yoshihiro Kawaoka4,5,6,7, Stuart M. Haslam ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-5563-679X3 & …James C. Paulson ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4589-53221,2 Show authors Nature Communications volume 14, Article number: 6178 (2023) Cite this article 4494 Accesses 4 Citations 15 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects GlycobiologyGlycomicsInfluenza virus AbstractEvolution of human H3N2 influenza viruses driven by immune selection has narrowed the receptor specificity of the hemagglutinin (HA) to a restricted subset of human-type (Neu5Acα2-6 Gal) glycan receptors that have extended poly-LacNAc (Galβ1-4GlcNAc) repeats. This altered specificity has presented challenges for hemagglutination assays, growth in laboratory hosts, and vaccine production in eggs. To assess the impact of extended glycan receptors on virus binding, infection, and growth, we have engineered N-glycan extended (NExt) cell lines by overexpressing β3-Ν-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 2 in MDCK, SIAT, and hCK cell lines. Of these, SIAT-NExt cells exhibit markedly increased binding of H3 HAs and susceptibility to infection by recent H3N2 virus strains, but without impacting final virus titers. Glycome analysis of these cell lines and allantoic and amniotic egg membranes provide insights into the importance of extended glycan receptors for growth of recent H3N2 viruses and relevance to their production for cell- and egg-based vaccines. Similar content being viewed by others Glycan remodeled erythrocytes facilitate antigenic characterization of recent A/H3N2 influenza viruses Article Open access 14 September 2021 Enhanced isolation of influenza viruses in qualified cells improves the probability of well-matched vaccines Article Open access 09 December 2021 Human-type sialic acid receptors contribute to avian influenza A virus binding and entry by hetero-multivalent interactions Article Open access 13 July 2022 IntroductionInfluenza A virus has two surface glycoproteins, hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), that mediate the interaction of the virus with host cell glycan receptors1,2. HA attaches the virus to the surface of host cells by binding to sialic acid-containing glycan receptors, while NA cleaves virus receptors by hydrolyzing sialic acid linkages and release of newly-formed virus particles, allowing infection to subsequently spread to surrounding cells2. Maintaining an appropriate balance of HA and NA activities against the host glycome is essential to maintain virus fitness3,4.These two glycoproteins are also major viral antigens and are thus subject to frequent mutation as a result of natural selection to evade host immunity1,5. Since its introduction in the pandemic of 1968, the H3N2 influenza A virus has been circulating in humans for more than 50 years6. Despite the accumulation of numerous antigenic mutations under immune selective pressure, the virus has remained fit for transmission in the human population7, attesting to H3N2 viruses having successfully maintained efficient binding to sialic acid-containing receptors on the human airway.Human influenza viruses specifically recognizes glycan receptors with N-acetylneuraminic acid (NeuAc, or sialic acid) linked α2-6 to galactose (NeuAcα2-6 Gal), referred to as human-type receptors, in contrast to avian viruses that bind predominantly to α2-3-linked sialic acids (NeuAcα2-3 Gal)8. Over the last 25 years, however, it has become evident that mutations in the human H3 HA were increasingly impacting its receptor binding properties9,10,11,12. The first indication was a gradual loss of HA-mediated binding of viral isolates to chicken red blood cells (RBC) used in standard laboratory hemagglutination and hemagglutination inhibition assays13,14,15,16. Human H3N2 viruses isolated after 2000 became more difficult to grow in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, the standard mammalian host cell line10,12,17. A series of analyses of the avidity and specificity of H3 HAs to human-type receptor glycans by biolayer-interferometry (BLI)12 and glycan microarrays18,19 showed H3 HAs have gradually lost their avidity to the exemplary human-type receptor Neu5Acα2-6 Galβ1-4GlcNAc, and by 2010 a majority of strains retained little or no ability to bind this model receptor fragment. Subsequent analysis using an expanded glycan library showed that H3 HAs and H3N2 viruses have evolved to bind specifically to α2-6-sialylated extended glycans, which have three or more LacNAc (Galβ1-4GlcNAc) repeats, and lost the avidity to the short glycans20,21,22. This narrowed receptor specificity could account for the reduced hemagglutination of chicken RBC and poor growth in MDCK cells, as their glycomes mostly consist of short glycans with one or two LacNAc units23,24.To improve the growth of human influenza viruses in MDCK cells, several genetically engineered cell lines have been developed to date25,26,27. MDCK-SIAT1 (SIAT) cells were developed by stably overexpressing an α2-6-sialyltransferase ST6GAL1 to increase the presentation of human-type Neu5Acα2-6Gal receptors on the cell surface23,25. SIAT cells dramatically improved the growth of strains after 2003, recovered human H3N2 clinical specimens more efficiently, and isolated viruses were shown to exhibit increased genetic stability in HA and NA genes upon serial passage in SIAT cells10,12,17,28,29,30. Takada et al26. further advanced this strategy by eliminating all competing α2-3-sialyltransferases in addition to stably overexpressing ST6GAL1 in MDCK cells23,26. The resulting humanized MDCK (hCK) cells exhibit high recovery of H3N2 viruses from clinical samples isolated in 2017–2018, and allowed the propagation of viruses to high titer with fewer mutations in HA and NA upon serial passage compared to its parental MDCK cells26. Thus, engineering MDCK cells to overexpress ST6GAL1 in SIAT and hCK substantially improved infection and propagation of recent H3N2 viruses10,12,17,26,29.These strategies, however, focused on the density of human-type α2-6-sialylated receptors without regard for the underlying poly-LacNAc structures that are essential for the receptor recognition by recent H3N2 influenza viruses. Here we have developed MDCK, SIAT, and hCK cells with N-linked glycans with poly-LacNAc extensions (NExt) by overexpressing an N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase, B3GNT2, a key enzyme for the biosynthesis of extended glycans to assess the contribution of these preferred receptors for infection and production of recent H3N2 influenza viruses. Glycoengineered cell lines, SIAT-NExt and hCK-NExt, showed higher avidity binding and single-round infection of recent H3N2 viruses without impacting final virus titers. Glycome analysis revealed that parental MDCK cells do produce some poly-LacNAc extensions but without α2-6-linked sialic acids needed for recognition by recent H3N2 viruses. In contrast, both SIAT and hCK cells have increased α2-6 sialic acids on N-linked glycans, including those with poly-LacNAc extensions, and these were further enriched in SIAT-NExt and hCK-NExt cells. Glycome analysis of allantoic and amniotic egg membranes shows a complete lack of α2-6-sialylated poly-LacNAc extended glycans accounting for poor growth of recent H3N2 viruses in eggs. The results are discussed for their implications for the production of egg- and cell-based influenza virus vaccines.ResultsEngineering MDCK cell lines with extended N-linked glycansOur goal was to engineer MDCK cell lines to express N-linked glycans with poly-LacNAc extensions capped with α2-6-linked sialic acids, the preferred receptors of recent H3N2 influenza viruses (Fig. 1a). Biosynthesis of poly-LacNAc units is a coordinated reaction of two glycosyltransferases. A complex type N-linked glycan core with a single LacNAc can be further extended with a LacNAc unit by the action of a β1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (β3GnT) followed by a β4-galactosyltransferase (β4GalT). This structure can then be further extended by the addition of another LacNAc unit by the same two enzymes or capped by a sialic acid by a sialyltransferase (Fig. 1a). Since the β4GalT is constitutively expressed in all mammalian cells, we hypothesized that the expression of β3GnTs limits the poly-LacNAc extensions, and a shift to longer extensions could be accomplished by overexpressing human beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 2 (B3GNT2), which is known for the efficient extension of N-linked glycans (Fig. 1a)31,32.Fig. 1: Development of N-glycan Extended (NExt) cell lines.MDCK, SIAT, and hCK cell lines were transfected with the β3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase-2 (B3GNT2) to enhance the expression of α2-6 sialylated poly-LacNAc structures recognized as preferred receptors by recent H3N2 viruses. a Illustration of the strategy for developing NExt cells. MDCK cells, and MDCK-derived SIAT and hCK cells that are engineered to express increased levels of glycans capped with α2-6 sialic acids, were further engineered with B3GNT2 to further extend glycan chains with poly-LacNAc repeats. b Representative flow cytometry diagrams comparing the binding of Vic/11 HA (Alexa Fluor 488) to B3GNT2 transfected NExt cell lines (solid color) relative to parental cell lines (solid line).Full size imageTo test this hypothesis, we transfected MDCK, SIAT, and hCK cells with a plasmid encoding the gene for human B3GNT2. Following selection and growth at limiting dilution, single clones were screened for glycan extensions by flow cytometry using A/Victoria/361/2011 (Vic/11) recombinant HA (rHA) that binds only to α2-6-sialylated glycans with three or more LacNAc repeats21. Transfected clones with the highest mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) were selected as the corresponding MDCK-NExt, SIAT-NExt, and hCK-NExt cell lines (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1).Characterization of NExt cell lines for binding of H3N2 HAsThe three parental lines and their NExt counterparts were characterized for expression of α2-3 and α2-6 sialosides by flow cytometry using Sambucus nigra Agglutinin (SNA), a lectin specific for NeuAcα2-6 Gal, and an H5 rHA specific for NeuAcα2-3 Gal from an avian virus A/Viet Nam/1203/2004 (H5N1; Viet/04)33 (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Fig. 2a). As expected, MDCK and MDCK-NExt cells showed the weakest expression of NeuAcα2-6 Gal and strongest expression of NeuAcα2-3 Gal. In contrast, SIAT, SIAT-NExt, hCK, and hCK-NExt that overexpress ST6GAL1 showed strong expression of NeuAcα2-6 Gal and corresponding decreased expression of NeuAcα2-3 Gal, which was effective to background level for hCK cells, as previously described23,26. For the most part, there was little change in the binding of these probes between parental and NExt cells, except for a significant increase in the binding of SNA to SIAT-NExt over its parental cell line SIAT (Fig. 2a, left panel). This is possibly due to the improved efficiency of ST6GAL1 for using extended glycans as a substrate.Fig. 2: Enhanced binding of H3 HAs from recent H3N2 isolates to SIAT-NExt cells.a–c Flow cytometric analysis for binding of SNA-biotin or recombinant influenza virus hemagglutinins. Values represent fold increase over the negative control without SNA or rHA (dotted line). Cells were probed with (a) SNA lectin (NeuAcα2-6 Gal specific; left panel) or recombinant avian H5N1 Viet/04 HA (NeuAcα2-3 Gal specific; right panel), (b) with a recent human H1N1 (Hawaii/19) HA, or (c) H3 HAs from representative H3N2 isolates including HK/68, Vic/11, WI/18, and Camb/20. d Specificity of HK/68 (left), Vic/11 (middle), and WI/18 (right) for α2-6-sialylated N-glycans with tri- (N-6SLN3), di- (N-6SLN2), or mono-LacNAc (N-6SLN1) repeats assessed in an ELISA format. An α2-3-sialylated tri-LacNAc linear glycan (L-3SLN3) was used as a control. a–c Bars indicate the mean of three replicate experiments. d Data indicate the mean of two replicate experiments. a–c Error bars indicate the standard deviation. P values calculated using the one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test are shown as actual values except for P < 0.0001 designated as #. a–d Source data are provided as Source Data file.Full size imageNext, we evaluated the binding of a panel of rHAs from a human H1N1 pdm09 strain A/Hawaii/70/2019 (Hawaii/19) (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 2b), and a series of H3N2 strains: A/Hong Kong/1/1968 (HK/68); Vic/11; A/Wisconsin/04/2018 (WI/18); A/Cambodia/e0826360/2020 (Camb/20) (Fig. 2c, Supplementary Fig. 2c). The Hawaii/19 H1 rHA showed strong binding to the SIAT and hCK cell lines over MDCK cells as reported previously10,25,26, with statistically significantly increased binding to NExt cell counterparts, likely a result of the increased expression of glycans with two or more LacNAc units known to bind to H1 HAs with higher avidity34,35. Notably, binding to the hCK and hCK-NExt cell lines was higher than binding to the SIAT and SIAT-NExt cell lines.Comparison of the rHA from the pandemic (HK/68) and more recent H3N2 strains binding to the six cell lines revealed significant differences (Fig. 2c). The HK/68 HA showed stronger binding to SIAT and hCK cells over MDCK cells with a further boost in binding to both SIAT-NExt and hCK-NExt cells (Fig. 2c), as seen for the Hawaii/19 H1 rHA, reflecting the increase in Neu5Acα2-6 Gal sequence detected with SNA (Fig. 2a). In contrast, rHAs from the more recent isolates, Vic/11, WI/18, and Camb/20, showed a significantly stronger binding to SIAT-NExt cells, followed by hCK-NExt cells. Overexpression of the B3GNT2 enzyme resulted in up to 10-fold increased binding of the HAs to SIAT-NExt cells relative to SIAT cells, and up to 2.4-fold increased binding to hCK-NExt cells relative to hCK cells.The receptor specificity of the HK/68, Vic/11, and WI/18 rHAs was confirmed by ELISA using biotinylated synthetic N-linked glycans with one to three LacNAc repeats (Fig. 2d). HK/68 rHA shows weak binding to the α2-6-sialylated glycan with one LacNAc repeat, and higher avidity binding to glycans with two and three LacNAc repeats. In contrast, the recent H3 rHAs from Vic/11 and WI/18 exhibit strict specificity for α2-6-sialylated glycans with three LacNAc repeats and bind with nearly 10-fold higher avidity than the HK/68 rHA. Taken together, the results suggest that the expression of B3GNT2 in the SIAT-NExt and hCK-NExt cells increased the expression of extended N-linked glycan receptors preferred by recent H3N2 influenza viruses.Glycome analysis of MDCK parental and NExt cell linesTo directly assess the cellular glycome, N-linked glycans of MDCK, SIAT, and hCK cells and their corresponding NExt cells were analyzed by matrix assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) (Fig. 3, Supplementary Figs. 3–10, Supplementary Data 1). The primary objective was to determine the degree to which glycans were capped with human-type NeuAcα2-6Gal sequence and to determine the extent to which poly-LacNAc extension is induced in NExt cells by B3GNT2. To assess NeuAcα2-6Gal content, spectra were collected for permethylated glycans of each cell line before and after enzymatic digestion with Sialidase S (Sial-S), a bacterial sialidase that removes only α2-3-linked NeuAc residues. Since treatment with Sial-S leaves glycans capped with α2-6-linked NeuAc residues, this experiment allows us to compare the relative expression of α2-6-sialylated glycans between cell lines. For selected molecular ions of high molecular weight glycans, poly-LacNAc extensions were confirmed using MALDI-TOF/TOF MS/MS fragmentation analysis. Spectral peaks were annotated for N-glycan structures based on composition, tandem mass spectrometry, and standard biosynthetic rules that assume constant Man3GlcNAc2 core and LacNAc extensions with NeuAc, Fuc, or Galα1-3Gal (GalαGal) modifications manually and with the assistance of the Glycoworkbench tool36,37. For each cell line, we have provided a list of all molecular ions corresponding to complex N-glycans (m/z 2966 and above) normalized to the sum of their relative intensities (Supplementary Data 1).Fig. 3: Partial MALDI-TOF mass spectra of N-glycans of SIAT, SIAT-NExt, hCK, and hCK-NExt cell lines.a–d MALDI-TOF MS analysis of permethylated N-glycans from (a) SIAT; (b) SIAT-NExt; (c) hCK; (d) hCK-NExt. Red, yellow- and blue-shaded areas highlight the distribution shift of poly-LacNAcs on bi-, tri-, and tetra-sialylated N-glycans, respectively. Shaded areas were manually inserted to assist clarity. The same colored peaks differ only in the number of LacNAcs present. All molecular ions are [M+Na]+. Putative structures are based on composition, tandem mass spectrometry, and biosynthetic knowledge and annotated manually with the aid of GlycoWorkBench36. Annotated structures were drawn according to the Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans (SNFG) guidelines63. Full MALDI-TOF mass spectra of the N-glycans can be found in Supplementary Fig. 7 (SIAT and SIAT-NExt cells), Supplementary Fig. 10 (hCK and hCK-NExt cells), and full annotations in Supplementary Fig. 8. e–g Percent difference of the molecular ions corresponding to complex N-glycans (m/z 2966 and above) calculated between (e) SIAT vs SIAT-NExt cells, (f) SIAT vs SIAT-NExt cells after Sial-S treatment, (g) hCK vs hCK-NExt cells, and (h) hCK vs hCK-NExt cells after Sial-S treatment. The percentage difference was calculated after normalizing the relative intensity of each molecular ion to the sum of their relative intensities for each of the above cell lines. The data can be found in Supplementary Data 1. i Relative quantification of the peak areas of tetra- and tri-sialylated N-glycans annotated in blue- and yellow-colored peaks, respectively, in (a–d). Italic numbers represent glycan species confirmed to contain three (3) or more linear LacNAc repeats by tandem mass spectrometry. *% Difference was calculated as described above (e–g). **% Difference not calculated because the molecular ions on the control were not detected. Source data are provided as Source Data file.Full size imageThe N-glycome of MDCK and MDCK-NExt cells consist of high mannose and complex N-glycans that are mostly core-fucosylated and capped with NeuAc residues and GalαGal structures (Supplementary Figs. 3 and 4). Low levels of bisected N-glycans comprising GlcNAcβ1-4Manβ- were also seen as reported previously23. After Sial-S digestion, the glycome profiles of MDCK and MDCK-NExt cells yielded different glycome profiles resulting from decreased abundance of sialylated N-glycans (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b vs Fig. 3c, d; and Supplementary Fig. 4). We conclude that the majority of sialylated glycans on MDCK and MDCK-NExt cells are α2-3-linked, consistent with findings in a recent report on the glycome of MDCK cells23.Poly-LacNAcs were observed in high mass glycans reaching up to 12 total LacNAc units (m/z 8181). Annotation of these structures before Sial-S treatment revealed sialylated poly-LacNAc-structures in tetra-sialylated, tri-sialylated, and di-sialylated N-glycans in order of relative abundance (Supplementary Fig. 5a, b, compare blue, orange, and red shaded areas respectively). The vast majority of sialylated poly-LacNAcs were linear, ranging 1 to 4 LacNAc units (Supplementary Fig. 6, MDCK panels). Branched poly-LacNAcs (I-branched) were also detected in low abundance, as indicated from the characteristic fragment ion at m/z 2106 (Supplementary Fig. 6f, h, MDCK panels). Importantly, glycan profiles for the MDCK and MDCK-NExt cells exhibited a minimal shift to higher molecular weight glycans before or after Sial-S treatment, suggesting little impact of the expression of the B3GNT2 enzyme in MDCK-NExt cells (Supplementary Fig. 5c, d). In summary, the glycome profiles of MDCK and MDCK-NExt cells are consistent with the weak binding of H3 HAs due to poor expression of α2-6 sialic acids and minimal impact on extension of poly-LacNAc structures by expression of B3GNT2 in MDCK-NExt cells.Glycome analysis of SIAT and SIAT-NExt cells exhibited significant differences from MDCK and MDCK-NExt cells that could be attributed to increased expression of ST6GAL1. (Fig. 3a, b, e, f and Supplementary Figs. 7 and 8). Increased sialylation was observed across the entire mass range in both SIAT and SIAT-NExt cells. For example, N-glycans in the high-mass region revealed high capping with NeuAc in SIAT and SIAT-NExt cells compared to the MDCK cells (compare Fig. 3a, b with Supplementary Fig. 5a, b; m/z 5485 to 5124, m/z 5934 to 5573, m/z 6383 to 6022 and m/z 6833 to 6472). Importantly, nearly all sialylated glycans were retained following the Sial-S treatment (Supplementary Figs. 7c, d and 8, or see red peaks in Supplementary Fig. 7a), in contrast to MDCK and MDCK-NExt cells, which lost almost all sialylated glycans after Sial-S treatment (Supplementary Figs. 3c, d and 4, or see red peaks in Supplementary Fig. 3a). These results confirm that the majority of sialic acids in SIAT and SIAT-NExt cells are α2-6-linked, induced by the ST6GAL1 overexpression.Increases in the relative abundance of higher mass N-glycan structures were observed in SIAT-NExt cells compared to SIAT cells, consistent with additional LacNAc extensions by B3GNT2 transfection (Fig. 3a, b, e, f, i). This can readily be seen in MALDI-TOF MS spectra of SIAT and SIAT-NExt glycans in the 5000–7000 m/z range (Fig. 3a, b). Indeed, there was a clear increase in the relative abundance of tetra-sialylated N-glycans, as revealed by the shift in the distribution of these structures towards higher masses (Fig. 3a, b, see blue shaded area). This shift to higher molecular weight species is highlighted by comparing peak relative intensities normalized to the sum of the relative intensities for either native or Sial-S treated spectra (Fig. 3e, f). Relative intensities of the tetra- and tri-sialylated glycans differing in the number of LacNAc units show an increase of up to 892% in SIAT-NExt cells compared to SIAT cells (Fig. 3i). The shift to the higher molecular weight species was retained after Sial-S treatment (Fig. 3f, i), demonstrating that the increased poly-LacNAcs contain α2-6-sialylated branches. Following Sial-S treatment, however, there was a reduction of tetra-sialylated to tri-sialylated glycans, consistent with loss of α2-3 sialic acids from one branch of the tetra-sialylated glycans (Fig. 3e, f, see blue vs yellow bars). Further characterization of the poly-LacNAc sequences on selected molecular ions by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS/MS fragmentation analysis revealed that both SIAT and SIAT-NExt cells contained NeuAc-poly-LacNAcs up to six (6) LacNAc units, with the most abundant ranging from two (2) to four (4) units long (Supplementary Fig. 6 and 9). Overall, the results show that SIAT-NExt cells have increased extended N-glycans capped with α2-6-linked sialic acids, consistent with the increased binding of recent H3 HAs (Fig. 2).N-linked glycans of hCK and hCK-NExt cells exhibited high levels of terminal α2-6-linked sialic acid similar to SIAT and SIAT-NExt cells, and they also had poly-LacNAc extensions (Fig. 3c, d, Supplementary Fig. 10). Concerning the relative abundance of α2-6-linked sialic acids, a comparison of the MALDI-TOF MS spectra of hCK and hCK-NExt cells before (Supplementary Fig. 10a, b) and after (Supplementary Fig. 10c, d) treatment with Sial-S did not reveal any significant changes, in accordance with the vast majority of the sialic acids being α2-6-linked as reported previously23,26.As seen in the MALDI-TOF MS spectra in the m/z 5000–7000 range, there was also a high relative abundance of poly-LacNAc tetra- and tri-sialylated N-glycans (Fig. 3c, d). Notably, however, there was only a minor shift in the distribution of N-glycans of hCK-NExt towards higher masses compared to hCK cells before or after Sial-S treatment (Fig. 3g, h), an observation also reported recently for B3GNT2 transfected hCK cells38. This is in contrast to the case for the SIAT-NExt cells (compare Fig. 3e–g). The relative intensities of the molecular ions in the hCK-NExt compared to hCK cells for the tetra- and tri-sialylated glycans was increased by 182%, in contrast to the 892% increase in SIAT-NExt cells (Fig. 3i). Additional MALDI-TOF/TOF MS/MS fragmentation analysis confirmed that the B3GNT2 expression in the hCK-NExt cells did not affect the distribution of poly-LacNAcs chains, with both having sialic acid terminated poly-LacNAcs with up to 5 LacNAc units (Supplementary Figs. 6, 9).Glycome analysis of chicken egg amniotic and allantoic membranesGiven the importance of chicken eggs for the growth of human influenza viruses and vaccine production and the difficulty of growth of H3N2 influenza viruses in eggs without selection of receptor binding variants, we also analyzed the N-linked glycans from membranes lining the allantoic and amniotic cavities of the chicken embryo (Fig. 4, and Supplementary Fig. 11, allantoic; Supplementary Fig. 12, amniotic). While influenza viruses are grown in the allantoic cavity for large scale production of vaccines, human influenza viruses have historically been shown to be more easily recovered in the amniotic cavity39,40. Previous reports found that the major complex type N-linked glycans of the amniotic and allantoic membranes were predominantly di- and tri-branched glycans with a single LacNAc unit capped with α2-3- and α2-6-linked sialic acids41. For direct comparison of the two egg membrane glycomes to the MDCK cell lines, we performed MALDI-TOF MS and TOF/TOF MS/MS analysis before (Fig. 4a, Supplementary Fig. 12a) or after (Supplementary Figs. 11 and 12b) enzymatic digestion with sialidase A (Sial-A). In addition to high-mannose type glycans found in all cells, complex N-glycans were observed in both allantoic and amniotic membranes ranging from bi- to penta-antennary structures, mainly being core-fucosylated and capped with NeuAc residues. In contrast to the MDCK, SIAT, and hCK cell lines, NeuAc-LacNAc extensions were of very minor relative abundance, and when found, they were principally restricted to two (2) LacNAc repeats. Sial-S digestion of allantoic and amniotic cell membrane-derived N-glycans to remove α2-3-linked sialic acids revealed sialic acid-containing glycans with α2-6-linked NeuAc residues in both types of membranes (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Fig. 12c). Based on the proportion of sialic acids removed after sialidase S digestion, α2-3-linked sialic acids are more abundant than α2-6-linked sialic acids in both membranes, a conclusion reached in previous studies41. Taken together, the data indicate that N-glycans from amniotic and allantoic chicken cell membranes contained minimal LacNAc units that were limited principally to two (2) LacNAc repeats long capped mainly with α2-3-linked and less with α2-6-linked sialic acids.Fig. 4: MALDI-TOF MS analysis of permethylated N-glycans from allantoic membrane before and after Sial-S digestion.MALDI-TOF MS analysis of permethylated N-glycans from allantoic membrane (a) before and (b) after Sial-S digestion. Putative structures are based on composition, tandem mass spectrometry, and biosynthetic knowledge and annotated manually with the aid of GlycoWorkBench36. Percentages on the top left of each panel correspond to the relative percentage of the maximum peak of the corresponding panel compared to the relative intensity of the maximum peak of the top panel. N-glycans with core-fucosylation had higher relative abundance when compared to their non-core-fucosylated counterparts (compare m/z 2850 vs 2676, 3054 vs 2880, 3299 vs 3125, 3503 vs 3329). Compare panels a and b for the decrease of the relative abundance of the α2-3-linked NeuAc residues. Similarly, compare the relative abundance of the tetra-antannary N-glycans with various levels of NeuAc residues (m/z 3503, 3864, 4314, and 4587) compared to the base peak tetra-antennary N-glycan without any NeuAc residue (m/z 3142). Source data are provided as Source Data file.Full size imageSusceptibility of MDCK cell lines to infection and propagation of H3N2 virusesTo determine if the increased avidity of H3 HAs for binding to SIAT-NExt cells (Fig. 2) impacts their susceptibility to virus infection, we first employed a single-round infectivity assay with a short adsorption time to focus the assay on the efficiency of the adsorption of virus to surface receptors. Cells were inoculated with the virus for 10 min to allow viral adsorption and then washed to remove non-adsorbed viruses. They were then incubated for 16 h in a fresh medium without tosyl-phenylalanyl-chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-trypsin to limit the infection to a single-round of replication. This assay enables us to compare cells for the efficiency of the HA-mediated adsorption step in virus infection.Representative H3N2 virus strains tested for HA binding (Fig. 2), HK/68, Vic/11, and WI/18 were evaluated for infection of the six MDCK cell lines in the single-round infectivity assay (Fig. 5a). The introductory HK/68 pandemic strain infected all six cell lines with similar efficiency as expected based on binding of the recombinant HA to these cells. For the more recent strains Vic/11 and WI/18 with extended glycan specificity, SIAT-NExt cells showed higher susceptibility over other cell lines. The difference was the most remarkable for WI/18, which showed significantly higher infectivity to SIAT-NExt over the other five cell lines. These results are consistent with the HA avidity assays in which Vic/11 and WI/18 showed the highest avidity binding to SIAT-NExt cells (Fig. 2c).Fig. 5: Susceptibility of cell lines to infection by recent H3N2 viruses.Representative strains and recent clinical isolates of the human H3N2 virus were evaluated for infection of MDCK, SIAT, hCK, and corresponding NExt cell lines. a, b Single-round infectivity assay to assess HA-mediated adsorption-dependent virus infectivity. c Growth kinetics of viruses in the cell lines. d Quantification of plaque size of WI/18 virus in SIAT, SIAT-NExt, hCK, and hCK-NExt cell lines. 10 plaques from each cell line were used to obtain the statistical analysis. a, b Bars indicate the mean of three replicate experiments. c Points indicate the mean of three replicate experiments. a–c Error bars indicate the standard deviation. d The center line indicates the median, upper and lower box lines show quartiles; and whiskers show the maximum and minimum values. a, b, d P values calculated using the one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test are shown as actual values except for P < 0.0001 designated as #. a–d Source data are provided as Source Data file.Full size imageTo confirm that this observation applies to the clinical isolates, we ran the single-round infectivity assays against H3N2 virus isolates from 2017–2018 season, A/Tokyo/UT-DA23-1/2017(DA23/17), A/Tokyo/UT-DA30/2018 (DA30/18), A/Tokyo/UT-HP62/2018 (HP62/18), which were previously shown to efficiently infect hCK cells over MDCK cells26, and two isolates from 2021, A/Yamagata/1/2021 (Yamagata/21), and A/Miyagi/1/2021 (Miyagi/21) (Fig. 5b). All virus isolates showed highest infectivity to SIAT-NExt cells compared to other three cell lines tested, consistent with higher avidity binding of H3 HAs of other recent H3N2 influenza viruses to extended receptors on SIAT-NExt cells (Fig. 2c).Six recent human H3N2 influenza isolates (DA23/17; DA30/18; HP62/18; A/Yokohama/1/2021; A/Yokohama/2/2021; and A/Yokohama/3/2021) were also tested for growth kinetics to see how viral adsorption translated to virus propagation (Fig. 5c). Overall, while these recent H3N2 viruses grew poorly in MDCK and MDCK-NExt cells, they grew efficiently in SIAT, SIAT-NExt, hCK, and hCK-NExt cells with no significant difference in viral titers at 72 h post-infection. Interestingly, the growth in SIAT-NExt cells was delayed for several viruses, showing lower titers at 24 h compared to the other three cell lines (Fig. 5c). One possible explanation is that the strong avidity of the viruses for SIAT-NExt cells hindered their diffusion from infected cells at early rounds of infection. Notably, this delay in kinetics coincides with a reduced plaque size of H3N2 viruses grown in SIAT-NExt cells compared to hCK-NExt cells, as shown for WI/18 in Fig. 5d. Collectively, these results showed that SIAT, SIAT-NExt, hCK, and hCK-NExt cells are equally efficient in multi-round replication of recent H3N2 viruses.DiscussionCurrently circulating H3N2 viruses, dominated by subclade 3C2.a, exhibit strict specificity for α2-6-sialylated extended glycans with three or more LacNAc repeats, having gradually lost avidity towards short glycans over the last two decades11,20,21,22,42. This change in receptor recognition presents challenges for growing viruses in MDCK cells or eggs without selection of hemagglutinin (or neuraminidase) variants that can also alter antigenicity26,28,29,43,44,45,46,47,48. In this report, given the importance of MDCK cells in laboratory isolation and cell-based production of influenza viruses, we engineered MDCK cells, and MDCK-derived SIAT and hCK cells, to overexpress an extension enzyme, B3GNT2, to enhance N-glycan extension (NExt) and assessed its impact on H3N2 virus HA binding and virus infection.We found that SIAT-NExt cells, and to a lesser extent hCK-NExt cells, exhibit increased HA binding to the cell surface and improved susceptibility to infection by recent H3N2 virus strains compared to MDCK cells (Figs. 2 and 5). Glycome analysis showed that MDCK cells have the capacity to produce extended N-linked glycans as recently reported23, however, they exhibit poor binding of HA and growth of H3N2 viruses because they lack sufficient capping with α2-6-linked sialic acid. By contrast, glycans on SIAT and hCK cells are predominantly capped with α2-6-linked sialic acids as a result of overexpression of ST6GAL123. Glycome profiles of SIAT-NExt cells compared to that of parental SIAT cells show a substantial shift towards higher molecular weight glycans, and a similar but weaker shift was shown for hCK-NExt cells compared to hCK cells (Fig. 3). Collectively, the glycome profiles support the importance of α2-6-sialylated, poly-LacNAc extended N-glycans in the high-avidity binding and infection of these cells by recent H3N2 viruses.It is evident that SIAT-NExt cells exhibited the highest avidity binding of the HA of recent H3N2 viruses, and H3N2 virus infection in the single round infection assay, showing these cells have more functional glycan receptors on the surface (Figs. 2 and 5). Yet the hCK and hCK-NExt cells exhibited similar high molecular weight glycan profiles. There is a limit to which the glycome analysis can provide information for a structural explanation for these differences, particularly when the shift to higher masses represents a small percentage of the total glycome. While the number of LacNAc units in a large glycan can be determined by molecular weight and poly-LacNAc extensions of multi-antennary glycans can be derived by MALDI-TOF MS/MS analysis, our analysis indicates multiple structural isomers for each molecular ion. For example, a tetra sialylated glycan with 8 LacNAc units can theoretically make tetra-antennary glycans each branch containing only 2 LacNAcs or with one branch extended with three or more LacNAcs, and the other branches with only one or two LacNAcs. It is also not possible to accurately derive absolute quantitative levels of N-glycans between MALDI-TOF MS spectra. Such limitations could obscure meaningful structural differences in quantitative comparisons of the glycomes between cell lines.It is likely there is variation in poly-LacNAc extension of glycans in SIAT-NExt and hCK-NExt cells that result from differential expression of other glycosyltransferases that compete with the sialyltransferases and B3GNT2 enzymes during biosynthesis. One example of such competitive glycosylation is evident in the glycan profiles of MDCK and SIAT cells. The increased expression of ST6GAL1 in SIAT cells very effectively competes with the endogenous α2-3-sialyltransferases for a common LacNAc acceptor, resulting in a switch from capping the glycan with α2-3-linked to α2-6-linked sialic acids. Similarly, the β3GnT extension enzyme(s) also compete with sialyltransferases for the same LacNAc acceptor substrate. There is a major difference between SIAT-NExt and hCK-NExt cells in this regard. While both are engineered to express ST6GAL1, the hCK cells were further engineered to delete all the α2-3-sialyltransferases. As one consequence of the deletion of these enzymes, Byrd-Leotis et al. noted an increase in 3-O-sulfate-Gal in hCK cells relative to MDCK cells, which they attributed to increased activity of the endogenous sulfotransferases in the absence of competition with α2-3-sialyltransferases23. While this increased 3-O-sulfate-Gal in hCK cells did not affect the high α2-6-sialylation of hCK and hCK-NExt cells as shown here, this observation suggests that deletion of the sialyltransferses induced unintended changes in the glycome. Furthermore, the observed shift to higher molecular weight glycans in hCK cells compared to MDCK cells (Fig. 3c vs Supplementary Fig. 5a) could also be attributed to the deletion of α2-3-sialyltransferases. Sialic acid deficiency is known to promote N-glycan branching49, therefore loss of α2-3-sialyltransferases mapped to the medial- and trans-Golgi50,51 could also promote increased branching before the addition of sialic acid by ST6Gal I that predominately occurs at a later stage of biosynthetic pathway in the trans-Golgi and trans-reticular network52. Similarly, the delay of medial-Golgi capping of glycan chains in hCK cells could also promote the extension of LacNAc repeats due to less competition for the endogenous β3GnT(s) to use the LacNAc substrate for extension.The results provide insights into the impact of increased α2-6-sialylated extended receptors for adsorption to and infection by recent H3N2 influenza viruses. Clearly, the increased receptors on SIAT-NExt cells permit more avid adsorption of the HA (Fig. 2). As a result, in an assay favoring adsorption as a limiting step, there is a more efficient infection of the cells (Fig. 5a, b). For some H3N2 strains, however, slower kinetics of virus production were observed as a consequence of higher avidity. The higher avidity of HA can result in in viruses being more slowly released from the infected cells by the NA, resulting in reduced plaque size and slower kinetics of virus production, without impacting the final production of the virus (Fig. 5c). It has been clearly demonstrated that the expression of ST6GAL1 in SIAT and hCK cells has improved recovery of human H3N2 viruses from clinical isolates compared to parental MDCK cells26,53. The even higher avidity binding of H3N2 viruses to SIAT-NExt cells indicates that it may also be of value in the isolation of new H3N2 influenza viruses from clinical samples.We believe that these results are particularly relevant to the production of recent H3N2 viruses for inactivated influenza viruses for egg-based and cell-based vaccines. Changes in receptor specificity upon adaptation of human influenza viruses to eggs have been observed since the early days of Burnet11,54, and it is now well documented that recent H3N2 isolates grow poorly in eggs and acquire adaptive mutations that exhibit altered receptor binding properties44,45,46,47. The viruses for egg-based vaccines are produced by cells in the membranes lining the allantoic cavity55. Glycome analysis reported here and by others clearly show that allantoic membranes have N-glycans with only one or possibly two LacNAc repeats41 representing a mismatch for the receptor specificity of recent H3N2 viruses that require extended glycans. This glycan-mismatch will further drive the selection of mutants that alter receptor binding for improved growth, and as a result, can change antigenicity that impacts vaccine efficacy45,46,47,56,57. Currently, MDCK cells are used for the production of cell-based vaccines given the viruses grown in the MDCK cells show fewer mutations than egg-grown viruses45,48,58. However, given the poor growth of recent H3N2 viruses in MDCK cells, the potential for selection of receptor binding variants is still a concern9. Indeed, extended glycans of MDCK cells are mostly α2-3-sialylated, therefore are sub-optimal for the growth of recent H3N2 viruses (Supplementary Figs. 3–5). In contrast, we have shown that SIAT and hCK cells have sufficient amounts of the α2-6-sialylated extended glycan receptors to support the production of viruses equivalent to their NExt counterparts that display even more functional receptors (Figs. 3, 5c). In this regard, several groups have reported that viruses maintain higher genetic stability when grown on either SIAT or hCK cells compared to MDCK cells17,26,28,29. Thus, there is strong mechanistic justification to consider the use of hCK or SIAT cells for the production of H3N2 viruses for cell-based vaccines.MethodsEthical statementThe experiments using live seasonal human influenza were approved by the Scripps Research Institutional Biosafety Committee under IBC protocol 04-08-20-01 “Influenza/HIV/Coronavirus”.Cell cultureMDCK cells (ATCC) were maintained in MEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM L-Glutamine, and 100 U mL−1 of Penicillin-Streptomycin. MDCK-SIAT1 cells (Sigma-Aldrich) were maintained in MEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-Glutamine, 100 U mL−1 of Penicillin-Streptomycin, and 1 mg mL−1 G418 sulfate. hCK cells (from Kawaoka lab26) were maintained in MEM supplemented with 5% newborn calf serum, 10 µg mL−1 blasticidin, and 2 μg mL−1 puromycin. Cells were incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO2 unless otherwise described.Expression and purification of recombinant HARecombinant HA were expressed using previously published plasmids (A/Hong Kong/1/68, A/Victoria/361/201121, A/Viet Nam/1203/200433) and newly constructed plasmids. HA coding sequences of A/Wisconsin/4/2018, A/Cambodia/e0826360/2020, and A/Hawaii/70/2019 were synthesized from the amino acid sequences deposited to GISAID (Isolate ID EPI_ISL_296103, EPI_ISL_296103, and EPI_ISL_397028, respectively). HA ectodomain (residues 11-521; H3 numbering) were amplified and cloned under CMV promoter on a customized DNA vector for expression in mammalian tissue culture with an N-terminal CD5 signal peptide for secretion, a C-terminal leucine zipper (GCN4) motif for trimerization following a short linker, and His8-tag in the C-terminal of the construct using the NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix (New England Biolabs). Final expression constructs were transfected into HEK293F cells (Freestyle 293F, Thermo Scientific) using linear PEI (polyethylimine) at 5:1 (w/w). Typically 150 mL of 1 × 106 cells/mL culture was transfected with 150 μg plasmid with 600 μg PEI. After 6 days, cell culture supernatant was collected, and proteins were purified by IMAC using 1 mL HisTrapFF column. HAs were eluted in a gradient of Tris-HCl buffer containing 0.5 M (final) imidazole, washed, and concentrated typically to 800 μg/mL for experiments. HAs were stored at 4 °C until used for experiments and experiments were done within 5 days post-purification of the protein.HA/lectin binding assayA monolayer of cultured cells were detached and digested to single cells by TrypLE Express Enzyme (Gibco). Cells were washed with PBS and stained with Zombie NIR dye (BioLegend) for Live/Dead staining. After washing with PBS three times, cells were blocked with canine Fc block (1:20, Invitrogen) on ice for 10 min. The cells were subsequently incubated with respective staining reagents on ice for 45 min: biotinylated SNA (1:500, Vector Labratories) precomplexed with Streptavidin-AF488 (1:500, Biolegend); recombinant 50 μg/mL HAs precomplexed with anti-His mouse IgG2a (25 μg/mL, J095G46, Biolegend) and Alexa fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse IgG2a (12.5 μg/mL, RMG2a-62, Biolegend). The cells were washed twice with PBS before flow cytometry. See Supplementary Fig. 13a for the gating strategy. The data were analyzed using FlowJo software. For establishment of B3GNT2 stable overexpression (NExt) cell lines, the mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) of B3GNT2 transfectants were compared to their respective parental cell lines to assess the increase of the rHA binding by the B3GNT2 transfection. For the lectin binding and HA-avidity assays, the MFI was normalized to the negative control lacking the primary reagent (lectin or HA) to account for the differences of background MFI of each cell lines and enable the comparison across cell lines.Establishment of B3GNT2 stable overexpression (NExt) cell linesFull-length human B3GNT2 gene was cloned under CMV promoter on a customized DNA vector encoding neomycin (MDCK and hCK) or hygromycin (SIAT) resistance using the NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix (New England Biolabs). Electroporation was conducted using the BTX ECM600 Electro Cell Manipulator according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 2.5 × 106 MDCK, SIAT, and hCK cells were resuspended in 500 μL of PBS and mixed with 5 μg expression vector. The mixtures were transferred to 2 mm gap cuvettes and immediately electroporated at 270 V, 1040 μF capacitance, and 720 Ω resistance. After electroporation, cells were cultured with either 0.5 mg mL−1 G418 sulfate (MDCK and hCK) or 25 μg mL−1 hygromycin (SIAT) for selection and maintenance in addition to respective basal media. Clones were isolated by limiting dilution and phenotypically screened by binding of Vic/11 recombinant HA which has known specificity for extended glycans to select respective NExt cell lines.Preparation of biotinylated glycansBiotinylated glycans were prepared as previously described21. Briefly, the poly-LacNAc chains were obtained by the enzymatic extension of glycan cores with H. pylori β1,3-GlcNAcT and recombinant N. meningitidis β4galT-galE fusion. Subsequent sialylation of the poly-LacNAc chains was achieved by using either recombinant human ST6GAL1 or rat ST3GAL3. The resultant sialosides were treated with NHS-LCLC-biotin (#21343, Thermo scientific) in the presence of DIPEA (#496219, Sigma-Aldrich) to provide the desired biotinylated linear or N-linked sialosides. Synthesized compounds were confirmed by high-resolution mass spectrometer (HRMS) as follows: 6SLN1-N, ESI TOF-HRMS m/z calculated for C110H183N12O68S, [M + 3H]3+: 931.0328, found 931.0348; 6SLN2-N, ESI TOF-HRMS m/z calculated for C138H229N14O88S, [M + 3H]3+: 1174.4543, found 1174.4567; 6SLN3-N, ESI TOF-HRMS m/z calculated for C166H276N16O108S, [M + 3H]3+: 1418.2117, found 1418.2285; 3SLN3-L, ESI TOF-HRMS m/z calculated for C77H131N9O43S, [M + 2H]2+: 1901.8061, found 1901.7952.ELISA with biotinylated glycansStreptavidin-coated high binding capacity 384-well plates (Pierce) were rinsed with PBS and each well was incubated with 50 μL of a 2.4 μM solution of biotinylated glycans (6SLN1-N, 6SLN2-N, 6SLN3-N, 3SLN3-L) in PBS overnight at 4 °C. The plate was washed with PBS-T (0.05% Tween 20 in PBS) to remove the excess glycan, and each well was incubated with 100 μL of blocking buffer (1% BSA and 0.6 μM desthiobiotin in PBS) at room temperature for 1 h. The plate was subsequently washed with PBS-T (0.05% Tween 20 in PBS) and used without further processing. Purified His-tagged HA trimers were precomplexed with anti-His mouse IgG2a (J095G46, Biolegend) and HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (H + L) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the ratio 4:2:1 (w/w/w) with 1% BSA and incubated on ice for 20 min. The highest HA concentration was typically 100 μg/mL and then diluted in twofold steps. 50 μL of precomplexed HA was added to each glycan-coated well and incubated at RT for 2 h. The wells were washed with PBS-T completely and 50 μL of TMB substrate was added. The plate was incubated at room temperature for development and then quenched by adding 50 μL of 2 M sulfuric acid. The absorbance at 450 nm was measured by BioTek Synergy H1 microplate reader and data was plotted using GraphPad Prism software.Processing of MDCK cell lines and egg membranes to obtain N-linked glycans107 cells per each cell line were collected. Allantoic and amniotic membranes were extracted from 10-day old chicken embryos. All samples were treated as described previously37,59. Briefly, each cell line was subjected to sonication in the presence of detergent 3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate hydrate (CHAPS, #10810118001, Roche), reduction in 4 M guanidine-HCl (#24115, Thermo), carboxymethylation, and trypsin (#T0303, Sigma) digestion. The digested glycoproteins were then purified by plus short HLB-Sep-Pak (#186000132, Waters Corp.). N-glycans were released by peptide N-glycosidase F (E.C. 3.5.1.52; #11365177001, Roche) digestion. Released N-glycans were permethylated using the sodium hydroxide procedure and purified by classic short C18-Sep-Pak (#WAT051910, Waters). Permethylated N-glycans were eluted at the 50% acetonitrile fraction.Sialidase digestionsCleavage of α2-3-linked sialic acids from each cell line, or α2-3- and α2-6-linked sialic acids from egg amniotic and allantoic membranes, were performed with sialidase-S (Streptococcus pneumoniae; E.C. 3.2.1.18; Agilent Technologies, GK80021) and sialidase-A (Arthrobacter ureafaciens, E.C. 3.2.1.18; Agilent Technologies, GK80040) digestions respectively as previously described59. Released N-glycans by peptide N-glycosidase F were incubated in 200 μl of 50 mM sodium acetate (37 °C, pH 5.5) and 170 milliunits of the enzyme were added to the sample for 24 h. The digested N-glycans were lyophilized and purified on a classic short C18 Sep-Pak (#WAT051910, Waters), followed by the same permethylation and purification procedures as described above.Mass spectrometry and analysisMS and MS/MS data were acquired a 4800 MALDI-TOF/TOF (Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany) mass spectrometer. Permethylated glycans were dissolved in 10 μl of methanol, and 1 μl of dissolved sample was premixed with 1 μl of matrix (10 mg/ml 3,4-diaminobenzophenone (#184800250, Acros Organics) in 75% (v/v) aqueous acetonitrile), spotted onto a target plate, and dried under vacuum. For the MS/MS studies the collision energy was set to 1 kV, and argon was used as collision gas. The 4700 Calibration standard kit, calmix (Applied Biosystems), was used as the external calibrant for the MS mode, and [Glu1] fibrinopeptide B human (Sigma) was used as an external calibrant for the MS/MS mode.The MS and MS/MS data were processed using Data Explorer 4.9 Software (Applied Biosystems). The processed spectra were subjected to manual assignment and annotation with the aid of a glycobioinformatics tool, GlycoWorkBench36. The proposed assignments for the selected peaks were based on 12C isotopic composition together with knowledge of the biosynthetic pathways. The proposed structures were then confirmed by data obtained from MS/MS analysis. The bar chart graph was prepared with Originlab with data prepared in Microsoft Excel with relative abundances deriving from the Data Explorer software. All figures were prepared/finalised in Adobe Illustrator.Preparation of H3N2 influenza virusesThe H3N2 viruses A/Hong Kong/1/68, A/Victoria/361/2011, A/Wisconsin/4/2018 were obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Influenza Reagent Resource (CDC-IRR). They were grown in SIAT cells. Recent clinical isolates (A/Tokyo/UT-DA23-1/2017, A/Tokyo/UT-DA30/2018, A/Tokyo/UT-HP62/2018, A/Yamagata/1/2021, A/Miyagi/1/2021, A/Yokohama/1/2021, A/Yokohama/2/2021, A/Yokohama/3/2021) were provided by Kawaoka lab. They were grown in hCK cells.SIAT or hCK cells were cultured to 90% confluence in MEM medium supplemented with 2 mM L-Glutamine and 100 U mL−1 of Penicillin-Streptomycin. Cell cultures were washed twice in warm PBS prior to the addition of virus, typically diluted 1:1000 in MEM containing 0.1% BSA. Diluted virus was incubated with cell cultures for 1 h before being removed and replaced with growth medium supplemented with 1 μg mL−1 tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-trypsin and further incubated at 33 °C. At day 3, culture supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 1000 × g to remove cell debris and stored at −80 °C. For titering the virus stocks, 0.75 × 104 hCK cells per well were plated in 96-well plates and incubated at 37 °C overnight to allow cells to attach. Cells were washed twice with PBS, then 100 μL of virus stock (10-fold dilution series in MEM containing 0.1% BSA) were added to the wells, and incubated at 33 °C. After 1 h, 100 μL 1.2% (w/w) colloidal microcrystalline cellulose overlay in MEM containing 0.1% BSA and 5 μg mL−1 tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-trypsin was added and further incubated at 33 °C. After 44–48 h, the overlay was removed by suction and cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution in PBS for 30 min. Cells were washed with PBS once then stained with anti-NP antibody (1 μg/mL, H16-L10-4R5 (HB-65), BioXcell) in PBS containing 0.1% BSA and 0.1% saponin for 2 h at RT. Cells were washed with PBS with 0.05% Tween-20 three times before stained with HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG antibody (1:2000, Southern Biotech) for 1 h at RT. After washing three times with PBS with 0.05% Tween-20, cells were incubated in KPL TrueBlue (Seracare) to visualize the plaques. Stained plates were washed with tap water to stop the reaction and dried until plaques were counted.Single-round infectivity assayProtocol was modified from the viral titering assay previously described60. Briefly, 105 cells per well were plated in 12-well plates in the corresponding medium to allow cells to adhere to the plate, at least 6 h followed by washing with PBS. Viruses in 100 µl MEM containing 0.1% BSA (≤1 × 104 pfu/mL in hCK cells) were overlayed onto cells at 33 °C to allow for viral attachment. After 10 min, virus containing medium was removed and cells were washed with PBS before adding fresh MEM containing 0.1% BSA but not TPCK-trypsin to restrain the infection to a single-round. Cells were incubated for 16 h at 33 °C to allow viral growth. After 16 h, cells did not show cytopathic effect. Cells were collected, fixed, and permeabilized with the FOXP3 Fix/Perm Buffer Set (BioLegend) following the manufacturer’s protocol, and stained with FITC-conjugated anti-NP monoclonal antibody (1:100, D67J, ThermoFisher) for 45 min on ice. Cells were washed twice with perm buffer before being resuspended in PBS containing 1% BSA for flow cytometry. See Supplementary Fig. 13b for the gating strategy. The ratio of NP-positive population was calculated by the number of infected cells using Flowjo software and Microsoft Excel. The inoculating virus concentration was titrated to ensure the ratio of NP-positive population does not exceed 50% of the samples in any cell lines tested.Viral kinetics assayMDCK, MDCK-NExt, SIAT, SIAT-NExt, hCK, and hCK-NExt cells were infected with viruses at a multiplicity of infection of 0.002, which was determined using a separate measurement of virus titer by plaque assay using hCK cells. The supernatants of the infected cells were harvested at 24, 48, 72 h post-infection, and virus titers were determined by means of plaque assays in hCK cells.Quantitation of plaque sizeA monolayer of cells in 6-well plates were infected with WI/18 virus at the dilution that gives 10-20 plaques per well for each cell line. Cells were washed with PBS at 1 h post-infection. Cells were covered with an overlay consisting of MEM, 1.2% (w/w) colloidal microcrystalline cellulose, 2 mg mL−1 L-Glutamine, 1 μg mL-1 TPCK-trypsin and incubated for 3 days at 37 °C. After being fixed by 4% PFA and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton-X100, infected cells were stained with anti-NP antibody (1 μg/mL, H16-L10-4R5 (HB-65), BioXcell) and subsequently stained with a secondary HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG antibody (1:2000, Southern Biotech). Plaques were visualized with KPL TrueBlue (Seracare). Images were acquired with Keyence BZX700 Widefield fluorescence microscope and analyzed using image analysis software ilastik61 and Fiji62.Statistics and reproducibilityStatistics were generated and calculated in GraphPad Prism 9. All data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (S.D.) of at least three technical replicates unless otherwise stated. Statistical details (e.g. P-values, sample sizes, analysis type) for individual experiments are listed in Figure legends. Not all statistical comparisons are shown.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability All data supporting the findings of this study are found within the paper and the Supplementary Information, or the Source Data. The materials generated in this study are available from corresponding authors under a standard materials transfer agreement between institutions. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesKrammer, F. et al. Influenza. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 4, 3 (2018).PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Thompson, A. J., de Vries, R. P. & Paulson, J. C. Virus recognition of glycan receptors. Curr. Opin. Virol. 34, 117–129 (2019).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Wagner, R., Matrosovich, M. & Klenk, H.-D. Functional balance between haemagglutinin and neuraminidase in influenza virus infections. Rev. Med. Virol. 12, 159–166 (2002).PubMed Google Scholar Gaymard, A., Le Briand, N., Frobert, E., Lina, B. & Escuret, V. Functional balance between neuraminidase and haemagglutinin in influenza viruses. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 22, 975–983 (2016).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Webster, R. G., Bean, W. J., Gorman, O. T., Chambers, T. M. & Kawaoka, Y. Evolution and ecology of influenza A viruses. Microbiolog. Rev. 56, 152–179 (1992).CAS Google Scholar Jester, B. J., Uyeki, T. M. & Jernigan, D. B. Fifty years of influenza A(H3N2) following the pandemic of 1968. Am. J. Public Health 110, 669–676 (2020).PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Merced-Morales, A. et al. Influenza activity and composition of the 2022–23 influenza vaccine—United States, 2021–22 season. Morbidity Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 71, 913 (2022).CAS Google Scholar Rogers, G. N. & Paulson, J. C. Receptor determinants of human and animal influenza virus isolates: differences in receptor specificity of the H3 hemagglutinin based on species of origin. Virology 127, 361–373 (1983).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chambers, B. S., Li, Y., Hodinka, R. L. & Hensley, S. E. Recent H3N2 influenza virus clinical isolates rapidly acquire hemagglutinin or neuraminidase mutations when propagated for antigenic analyses. J. Virol. 88, 10986 LP–10910989 (2014). Google Scholar Oh, D. Y., Barr, I. G., Mosse, J. A. & Laurie, K. L. MDCK-SIAT1 cells show improved isolation rates for recent human influenza viruses compared to conventional MDCK cells. J. Clin. Microbiol. 46, 2189–2194 (2008).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Thompson, A. J. & Paulson, J. C. Adaptation of influenza viruses to human airway receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 296, 100017 (2021).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lin, Y. P. et al. Evolution of the receptor binding properties of the influenza A(H3N2) hemagglutinin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 109, 21474–21479 (2012).ADS CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Nobusawa, E., Ishihara, H., Morishita, T., Sato, K. & Nakajima, K. Change in receptor-binding specificity of recent human influenza A viruses (H3N2): a single amino acid change in hemagglutinin altered its recognition of sialyloligosaccharides. Virology 278, 587–596 (2000).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ciappi, S., Azzi, A., Stein, C. A., De Santis, R. & Oxford, J. S. Isolation of influenza A(H3N2) virus with “O”–>“D” phase variation. Res. Virol. 148, 427–431 (1997).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gulati, U. et al. Mismatched hemagglutinin and neuraminidase specificities in recent human H3N2 influenza viruses. Virology 339, 12–20 (2005).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mögling, R. et al. Neuraminidase-mediated haemagglutination of recent human influenza A(H3N2) viruses is determined by arginine 150 flanking the neuraminidase catalytic site. J. Gen. Virol. 98, 1274–1281 (2017).PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Lin, Y. et al. The characteristics and antigenic properties of recently emerged subclade 3C.3a and 3C.2a human influenza A(H3N2) viruses passaged in MDCK cells. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 11, 263–274 (2017).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Gulati, S. et al. Human H3N2 influenza viruses isolated from 1968 To 2012 show varying preference for receptor substructures with no apparent consequences for disease or spread. PLoS One 8, e66325 (2013).ADS CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Stevens, J. et al. Receptor specificity of influenza A H3N2 viruses isolated in mammalian cells and embryonated chicken eggs. J. Virol. 84, 8287–8299 (2010).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Broszeit, F. et al. Glycan remodeled erythrocytes facilitate antigenic characterization of recent A/H3N2 influenza viruses. Nat. Commun. 12, 5449 (2021).ADS CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Peng, W. et al. Recent H3N2 viruses have evolved specificity for extended, branched human-type receptors, conferring potential for increased avidity. Cell Host Microbe 21, 23–34 (2017).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yang, H. et al. Structure and receptor binding preferences of recombinant human A(H3N2) virus hemagglutinins. Virology 477, 18–31 (2015).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Byrd-Leotis, L. et al. Sialylated and sulfated N-Glycans in MDCK and engineered MDCK cells for influenza virus studies. Sci. Rep. 12, 12757 (2022).ADS CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Byrd-Leotis, L. et al. Antigenic pressure on H3N2 influenza virus drift strains imposes constraints on binding to sialylated receptors but not phosphorylated glycans. J. Virol. 93, e01178–01119 (2019).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Matrosovich, M., Matrosovich, T., Carr, J., Roberts, N. A. & Klenk, H.-D. Overexpression of the α-2,6-Sialyltransferase in MDCK cells increases influenza virus sensitivity to neuraminidase inhibitors. J. Virol. 77, 8418–8425 (2003).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Takada, K. et al. A humanized MDCK cell line for the efficient isolation and propagation of human influenza viruses. Nat. Microbiol. 4, 1268–1273 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hatakeyama, S. et al. Enhanced expression of an α2, 6-linked sialic acid on MDCK cells improves isolation of human influenza viruses and evaluation of their sensitivity to a neuraminidase inhibitor. J. Clin. Microbiol. 43, 4139–4146 (2005).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Li, D. et al. In vivo and in vitro alterations in influenza A/H3N2 virus M2 and hemagglutinin genes: effect of passage in MDCK-SIAT1 cells and conventional MDCK cells. J. Clin. Microbiol 47, 466–468 (2009).PubMed Google Scholar Matsumoto, S., Chong, Y., Kang, D. & Ikematsu, H. High genetic stability in MDCK-SIAT1 passaged human influenza viruses. J. Infect. Chemother. 25, 222–224 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar McWhite, C. D., Meyer, A. G. & Wilke, C. O. Sequence amplification via cell passaging creates spurious signals of positive adaptation in influenza virus H3N2 hemagglutinin. Virus Evol. 2, vew026 (2016).PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Shiraishi, N. et al. Identification and characterization of three novel β 1,3-N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases structurally related to the β1,3-Galactosyltransferase Family. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 3498–3507 (2001).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Togayachi, A. et al. Chapter eleven - β3GnT2 (B3GNT2), a major polylactosamine synthase: analysis of B3gnt2-deficient mice. Methods Enzymol. 479, 185–204 (2010).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Thompson, A. J. et al. Human influenza virus hemagglutinins contain conserved oligomannose n-linked glycans allowing potent neutralization by lectins. Cell Host Microbe 27, 725–735.e725 (2020).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Chandrasekaran, A. et al. Glycan topology determines human adaptation of avian H5N1 virus hemagglutinin. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 107–113 (2008).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Canales, A. et al. Revealing the specificity of human H1 influenza a viruses to complex N-Glycans. JACS Au 3, 868–878 (2023).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Ceroni, A. et al. GlycoWorkbench: a tool for the computer-assisted annotation of mass spectra of glycans. J. Proteome Res. 7, 1650–1659 (2008).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Jang‐Lee, J. et al. Glycomic profiling of cells and tissues by mass spectrometry: fingerprinting and sequencing methodologies. Methods Enzymol. 415, 59–86 (2006).PubMed Google Scholar Spruit, C. M. et al. Contemporary human H3N2 influenza a viruses require a low threshold of suitable glycan receptors for efficient infection. Glycobiology 20, cwad060 (2023). Google Scholar Burnet, F. M. Influenza virus infections of the chick embryo lung. Br. J. Exp. Pathol. 21, 147 (1940).PubMed Central Google Scholar Hoyle, L. & Hoyle, L. The influenza viruses. (Springer, 1968).Sriwilaijaroen, N. et al. Analysis of N-glycans in embryonated chicken egg chorioallantoic and amniotic cells responsible for binding and adaptation of human and avian influenza viruses. Glycoconj. J. 26, 433–443 (2009).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bolton, M. J. et al. Antigenic and virological properties of an H3N2 variant that continues to dominate the 2021-22 Northern Hemisphere influenza season. Cell Rep. 39, 110897 (2022).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Barman, S. et al. Egg-adaptive mutations in H3N2v vaccine virus enhance egg-based production without loss of antigenicity or immunogenicity. Vaccine 33, 3186–3192 (2015).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Parker, L. et al. Effects of egg-adaptation on receptor-binding and antigenic properties of recent influenza A (H3N2) vaccine viruses. J. Gen. Virol. 97, 1333–1344 (2016).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Rajaram, S., Boikos, C., Gelone, D. K. & Gandhi, A. Influenza vaccines: the potential benefits of cell-culture isolation and manufacturing. Ther. Adv. Vaccines Immunother. 8, 2515135520908121 (2020).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Zeng, Z. et al. Characterization and evolutionary analysis of a novel H3N2 influenza a virus glycosylation motif in Southern China. Front. Microbiol. 11, 1318 (2020).PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Zost, S. J. et al. Contemporary H3N2 influenza viruses have a glycosylation site that alters binding of antibodies elicited by egg-adapted vaccine strains. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 12578–12583 (2017).ADS CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Rajaram, S. et al. The impact of candidate influenza virus and egg-based manufacture on vaccine effectiveness: literature review and expert consensus. Vaccine 38, 6047–6056 (2020).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pham, N. D. et al. Effects of altered sialic acid biosynthesis on N-linked glycan branching and cell surface interactions. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 9637–9651 (2017).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Kitano, M. et al. Rab11-mediated post-Golgi transport of the sialyltransferase ST3GAL4 suggests a new mechanism for regulating glycosylation. J. Biol. Chem. 296, 100354 (2021).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Stern, C. A., Braverman, T. R. & Tiemeyer, M. Molecular identification, tissue distribution and subcellular localization of mST3GalV/GM3 synthase. Glycobiology 10, 365–374 (2000).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Taatjes, D. J., Roth, J., Weinstein, J. & Paulson, J. C. Post-Golgi apparatus localization and regional expression of rat intestinal sialyltransferase detected by immunoelectron microscopy with polypeptide epitope-purified antibody. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 6302–6309 (1988).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Abdoli, A. et al. Comparison between MDCK and MDCK-SIAT1 cell lines as preferred host for cell culture-based influenza vaccine production. Biotechnol. Lett. 38, 941–948 (2016).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Burnet, F. M. et al. The genetic character of O-D change in influenza A. Br. J. Exp. Pathol. 30, 419–425 (1949).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Audsley, J. M. & Tannock, G. A. Cell-based influenza vaccines. Drugs 68, 1483–1491 (2008).PubMed Google Scholar Martin, E. T. et al. Low influenza vaccine effectiveness against A(H3N2)-associated hospitalizations in 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 of the hospitalized adult influenza vaccine effectiveness network (HAIVEN). J. Infect. Dis. 223, 2062–2071 (2021).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chen, H., Alvarez, J. J. S., Ng, S. H., Nielsen, R. & Zhai, W. Passage adaptation correlates with the reduced efficacy of the influenza vaccine. Clin. Infect. Dis. 69, 1198–1204 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sinilaite, A., Gemmill, I. & Harrison, R. Summary of the NACI supplemental statement on mammalian cell culture-based influenza vaccines. Can. Commun. Dis. Rep. 46, 324–332 (2020).PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Bateman, A. C. et al. Glycan analysis and influenza A virus infection of primary swine respiratory epithelial cells: the importance of NeuAcα2-6 glycans. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 34016–34026 (2010).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Xue, K. S., Hooper, K. A., Ollodart, A. R., Dingens, A. S. & Bloom, J. D. Cooperation between distinct viral variants promotes growth of H3N2 influenza in cell culture. Elife 5, e13974 (2016).PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Berg, S. et al. ilastik: interactive machine learning for (bio)image analysis. Nat. Methods 16, 1226–1232 (2019).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682 (2012).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Neelamegham, S. et al. Updates to the symbol nomenclature for glycans guidelines. Glycobiology 29, 620–624 (2019).CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by NIH grant R01 AI114730 (to JCP), the Kwang Hua Educational Foundation (to JCP), by the NIAID-funded Center for Research on Influenza Pathogenesis and Transmission (CRIPT, Contract Number 75N93021C00014; to YK), and Grant 082098 from The Wellcome Trust (to SMH). We thank Ruben Donis of the Centers for Disease Control for providing membranes from the allantois and amnion for glycome analysis. We gratefully acknowledge the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and International Reagent Resource (IRR; www.internationalreagentresource.org) for seasonal H3N2 virus samples utilized in this study.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Chika Kikuchi, Aristotelis Antonopoulos.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USAChika Kikuchi, Shengyang Wang, Andrew J. Thompson & James C. PaulsonDepartment of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USAChika Kikuchi, Shengyang Wang, Andrew J. Thompson & James C. PaulsonDepartment of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UKAristotelis Antonopoulos, Rositsa Karamanska, Chiara Lee, Anne Dell & Stuart M. HaslamInfluenza Research Institute, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USATadashi Maemura & Yoshihiro KawaokaDivision of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanYoshihiro KawaokaThe Research Center for Global Viral Diseases, National Center for Global Health and Medicine Research Institute, Tokyo, JapanYoshihiro KawaokaPandemic Preparedness, Infection and Advanced Research Center, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanYoshihiro KawaokaAuthorsChika KikuchiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAristotelis AntonopoulosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShengyang WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTadashi MaemuraView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRositsa KaramanskaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChiara LeeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrew J. ThompsonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnne DellView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYoshihiro KawaokaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarStuart M. HaslamView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJames C. PaulsonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsC.K., A.J.T., S.M.H., and J.C.P. conceived the project. A.J.T. and C.K. cloned the plasmids. C.K. designed and conducted cell line development, HA protein purification, flow cytometry assays, first-round infectivity assays, and plaque size quantification. S.W. synthesized biotinylated glycans and performed glycan ELISA. A.A., R.K., and C.L. performed the N-glycan MS analysis. C.K. and T.M. grew and characterized virus stocks. T.M. performed virus replication assay. J.C.P., A.J.T., S.M.H., A.D., and Y.K. supervised the research. C.K., A.A., and J.C.P. wrote the initial draft of the manuscript and all authors assisted with editing.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Stuart M. Haslam or James C. Paulson.Ethics declarations Competing interests Y.K. has received collaborative research funds from FUJIFILM Toyama Chemical Co. LTD, Shionogi & Co. LTD, Daiichi Sankyo Pharmaceutical, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, KM Biologics, Kyoritsu Seiyaku, Fuji Rebio, Tauns Laboratories, Inc., Matsubara Co. LTD and is a cofounder of FluGen. The other authors declare no competing interest with this work. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Prasert Auewarakul, and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review file is available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationPeer Review FileReporting SummaryDescription of Additional Supplementary FilesSupplementary Data 1Source dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleKikuchi, C., Antonopoulos, A., Wang, S. et al. Glyco-engineered MDCK cells display preferred receptors of H3N2 influenza absent in eggs used for vaccines. Nat Commun 14, 6178 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41908-0Download citationReceived: 24 January 2023Accepted: 15 September 2023Published: 04 October 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41908-0Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Probing altered receptor specificities of antigenically drifting human H3N2 viruses by chemoenzymatic synthesis, NMR, and modeling Luca UnioneAugustinus N. A. AmmerlaanGeert-Jan Boons Nature Communications (2024) Epistasis mediates the evolution of the receptor binding mode in recent human H3N2 hemagglutinin Ruipeng LeiWeiwen LiangNicholas C. Wu Nature Communications (2024) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingHere’s How Dangerous the Flu Can BeLocations:Abu Dhabi|Canada|Florida|London|Nevada|Ohio|Health EssentialsHealth LibraryFind a DoctorMake an AppointmentNewsCareersContact UsSearchAdvertisementOctober 5, 2023/Health Conditions/Cold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesHere’s How Dangerous the Flu Can BeInfluenza puts stress on your body and can lead to serious conditions like pneumonia or strokeWith so many symptoms in common, it can be hard to tell the difference between a cold and the flu. Here’s how to tell which is which.Newer illnesses like COVID-19 may grab headlines, but old-and-familiar ailments such as influenza, or the flu, remain a serious health concern — a fact that many might learn during the upcoming flu season.AdvertisementCleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. PolicyFor example, in the U.S. from October 1, 2022 through April 30, 2023, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated that there were 27 to 54 million flu illnesses, with 300,000 to 650,000 flu hospitalizations — and 19,000 to 58,000 deaths related to the flu.Yet despite those numbers, the flu often gets talked about as if it’s little more than the sniffles. That’s a serious underestimation of the illness, cautions infectious disease specialist Kristin Englund, MD.“It’s not a common cold,” stresses Dr. Englund. “The flu taxes your body. There’s a lot of stress put on your system as it works to fight off the infection — and that can lead to all sorts of complications.”How dangerous is the flu?So, why is influenza sometimes mislabeled as a cold? Well, the viruses share symptoms such as a cough, fever and an overall cruddy feeling. But with the flu, symptoms often hit harder and last longer.“Perfectly healthy people can get severe complications from influenza,” says Dr. Englund. “But if you have any underlying health issues, the risk becomes much greater.”In severe cases, the flu can lead to:Pneumonia and bacterial pneumonia, which can lead to respiratory failure and ventilator use. Dr. Englund calls pneumonia “the No. 1 complication” seen from the flu.A heart attack or cardiac issues such as myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle).Stroke.AdvertisementSomewhere between 3% and 11% of the U.S. population — which represents millions upon millions of people — get infected with influenza every year, says the CDC. Most will recover within three to seven days, though some may see symptoms last a few weeks.But your risk for developing severe flu complications increases if you have:Asthma.Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).Diabetes.Heart disease.Kidney disease.Lung disease.In addition, people at opposite ends of the age spectrum — those younger than 5 years old or older than 65 — tend to be more vulnerable when it comes to flu-related complications. Ditto for those who are pregnant.Why you should get the flu shotAvoiding the worst that the flu dishes out begins with avoiding the flu … and the most effective way to do that is to get your flu shot, advises Dr. Englund.The CDC reports that getting a flu vaccine lowers your risk of getting sick by 40% to 60%. During the 2021-2022 flu season in the U.S., influenza vaccinations prevented an estimated:1.8 million flu-related illnesses.1 million medical visits.22,000 flu-related hospitalizations.1,000 flu-related deaths.And even if you do get flu, research shows that a flu shot helps reduce the severity of the illness. A 2021 study found that a flu vaccination lowered the risk of intensive care unit (ICU) admission by 26% and death by 31%.“It’s a simple shot that’s extraordinarily safe,” states Dr. Englund. “So, why not protect yourself?”(On a side note, we want to emphasize that the flu shot CANNOT give you the flu.)Other ways to prevent the fluWant to keep the flu bug at bay this flu season? Aside from getting your flu shot, consider these tips:Wear a mask. The flu spreads quickly through droplets made by people who cough, sneeze or talk while they’re infected. Wearing a mask over your mouth and nose can help keep you from breathing in the virus.Practicing good hand hygiene. Washing your hands thoroughly limits the possibility of transferring the virus from a surface — a doorknob, perhaps — to your mouth or nose.Avoid contact with people who are sick. Be cautious at large gatherings during the peak months of flu season, typically December through February. Maybe go with a friendly wave or fist bump over a hearty handshake. And stay home if you’re feeling unwell — your friends and family will understand.Live healthy. Taking care of your overall health with diet and exercise can help strengthen your immune system and fortify your body to fight off infection.Despite best efforts, it’s still possible you may get the virus. Don’t ignore flu-like symptoms like fever, cough and body aches. Talk to a healthcare provider right away, especially if you’re in a high-risk group.AdvertisementQuick action could allow you to benefit from antiviral medications, which can lessen flu symptoms and help you bounce back a little more quickly.Final flu thoughtsThe bottom line on the flu? Take it seriously.“We see so many people in hospitals every year because of influenza,” emphasizes Dr. Englund. “People die from the virus every year, too. It’s not something to ignore, so take the precautions you can to stay healthy.”AdvertisementLearn more about our editorial process.Health LibraryFlu (Influenza)OverviewSymptoms and CausesDiagnosis and TestsManagement and TreatmentPreventionHealth LibraryFlu (Influenza)OverviewSymptoms and CausesDiagnosis and TestsManagement and TreatmentPreventionAdvertisementRelated ArticlesOctober 29, 2024/Children's HealthRSV vs. Pneumonia: Sorting out Your Child’s Fever and CoughRSV can lead your child to develop pneumonia and have trouble breathingOctober 23, 2024/Cold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesWhat Is Respiratory Season, and Are You Ready?Getting vaccinated in October can help protect you against severe illness between November and MarchOctober 8, 2024/Mental HealthHands Off! How To Stop Touching Your FaceFace-touching is a common habit, but one that can be overcome, like by learning to recognize when you’re doing it and keeping your hands distractedSeptember 27, 2024/Cold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesGot Flu-Like Symptoms? A New At-Home COVID-19 and Flu Test Can HelpThis at-home test for COVID-19 and flu can help you figure out what’s causing your symptoms, and how best to treat themSeptember 12, 2024/Cold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesHow Long Are You Contagious With the Flu?You may be spreading the flu virus before your symptoms start and up to a week afterJune 21, 2024/Brain & Nervous SystemWhat You Need To Know About MS and VaccinesMost routine vaccines are safe for people living with multiple sclerosis — but be sure to talk with your care team about your needsApril 18, 2024/Children's HealthHow To Keep Your Kids Healthy When They Go to DaycareYou can help strengthen your child’s immune system by focusing on hand washing and staying up-to-date on their vaccinesFebruary 2, 2024/Primary CareWhat To Eat, Drink and Avoid When You Have the Stomach FluStart slowly with clear fluids, and then move to bland, easy-to-digest foodsTrending TopicsEar, Nose & ThroatHome Remedies for an Ear Infection: What To Try and What To AvoidNot all ear infections need antibiotics — cold and warm compresses and changing up your sleep position can helpNutrition52 Foods High In IronPump up your iron intake with foods like tuna, tofu and turkeyNutritionIs Starting Your Day With Lemon Water Healthy?A glass of lemon water in the morning can help with digestion and boost vitamin C levels, and may even help get you into a better routineHealth Categories to ExploreBrain & Nervous SystemChildren's HealthExercise & FitnessHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthNutritionOrthopaedicsPrimary CareSkin Care & BeautyWellnessWomen's HealthOther Popular CategoriesAging WellAllergiesCancer Care & PreventionChronic PainCold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesDiabetes & EndocrinologyDigestiveEar, Nose & ThroatEye CareInfectious DiseaseLungOral HealthParentingPregnancy & ChildbirthRecipesRheumatology & ImmunologySenior HealthSex & RelationshipsSleepUrinary & Kidney HealthWeight LossAdRendered: Tue Nov 12 2024 03:31:04 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)FacebookTwitterYouTubeInstagramLinkedInPinterestSnapchatCleveland ClinicHomeAbout Cleveland ClinicCareers at Cleveland ClinicGivingOffice of Diversity & InclusionCommunity OutreachResearch & InnovationsHealth LibraryFree Health eNewslettersResources for Medical ProfessionalsMedia RelationsSite Information & PoliciesSend Us FeedbackAbout this WebsiteAdvertising PolicySocial Media PolicyCopyright, Reprints & LicensingWebsite Terms of UseWebsite Privacy PolicyNotice of Privacy PracticesNon-Discrimination NoticeResourcesMobile AppsPodcasts9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195 | 800.223.2273 | © 2024 Cleveland Clinic. All Rights Reserved.Influenza (Avian and other zoonotic) Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. Select language Select language English العربية 中文 Français Русский Español Donate Donate Home Health Topics All topicsABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Resources Fact sheets Facts in pictures Multimedia Podcasts Publications Questions and answers Tools and toolkits Popular Dengue Endometriosis Excessive heat Herpes Mental disorders Mpox Countries All countriesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Regions Africa Americas Europe Eastern Mediterranean South-East Asia Western Pacific WHO in countries Data by country Country presence Country strengthening Country cooperation strategies Newsroom All news News releases Statements Campaigns Events Feature stories Press conferences Speeches Commentaries Photo library Headlines Emergencies Focus on Cholera Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Greater Horn of Africa Israel and occupied Palestinian territory Mpox Sudan Ukraine Latest Disease Outbreak News Situation reports Weekly Epidemiological Record WHO in emergencies Surveillance Operations Research Funding Partners Health emergency appeal International Health Regulations Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee Data Dashboards Triple Billion Progress Health Inequality Monitor Delivery for impact COVID-19 dashboard Data collection Classifications SCORE Surveys Civil registration and vital statistics Routine health information systems Harmonized health facility assessment GIS centre for health Reports World Health Statistics UHC global monitoring report About WHO About WHO Partnerships Committees and advisory groups Collaborating centres Technical teams Organizational structure Who we are Our work Activities Initiatives General Programme of Work WHO Academy Funding Investment in WHO WHO Foundation Accountability External audit Financial statements Internal audit and investigations Programme Budget Results reports Governance Governing bodies World Health Assembly Executive Board Member States Portal Home/ Newsroom/ Fact sheets/ Detail/ Influenza (Avian and other zoonotic) Influenza (Avian and other zoonotic) 3 October 2023 Key factsHumans can be infected with avian, swine and other influenza viruses.Direct contact with infected animals (through handling, culling, slaughtering or processing) or indirect contact (through environments contaminated with bodily fluids from infected animals) represent a risk for human infection.Exposure to animal influenza viruses can lead to infection and disease in humans – ranging from mild, flu-like symptoms or eye inflammation to severe, acute respiratory disease and/or death. Disease severity will depend upon the virus causing the infection and the characteristics of the infected individual.Currently circulating zoonotic influenza viruses have not yet demonstrated sustained person-to-person transmission. As influenza viruses have a natural reservoir in aquatic birds they are impossible to eradicate. Zoonotic influenza infections will continue to occur. To minimize public health risk, quality surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every human infection, and risk-based pandemic planning are essential.OverviewThere are 4 types of influenza viruses, types A, B, C and D. Influenza A and B viruses circulate and cause seasonal epidemics of disease in humans although only type A viruses can cause global pandemics based on current knowledge and understanding. Influenza A viruses are established in many animal species. The emergence of an influenza A virus, with the ability to infect people and sustain human-to-human transmission, could cause an influenza pandemic. Influenza type A viruses are classified into subtypes according to the combinations of the proteins on the surface of the virus. When animal influenza viruses infect their host species, they are named according to the host – as avian influenza viruses, swine influenza viruses, equine influenza viruses, canine influenza viruses, etc. These animal influenza viruses are distinct from human influenza viruses and do not easily transmit to and among humans. Wild aquatic birds are the primary natural reservoir for most subtypes of influenza A viruses. Avian influenza outbreaks in poultry can have immediate and severe consequences for the agricultural sector. Pandemic potentialThere will be pandemics in future, but when, where and how they spread is difficult to predict. They can have significant health, economic and social consequences. An influenza pandemic will occur when an influenza virus emerges with the ability to cause sustained human-to-human transmission, and the human population has little to no immunity against the virus. With the growth of global travel, a pandemic can spread rapidly. Whether currently circulating avian, swine and other influenza viruses will result in a future pandemic is unknown. However, the diversity of zoonotic influenza viruses that have caused human infections necessitates strengthened surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every zoonotic infection and pandemic preparedness planning. Signs and symptoms in humansExposure to avian influenza viruses can lead to infection and disease in humans, ranging from mild, flu-like symptoms or eye inflammation to severe, acute respiratory disease and/or death. Disease severity will depend upon the virus causing the infection and the characteristics of the infected individual. Rarely, gastrointestinal and neurological symptoms have been reported. The case fatality rate for A(H5) and A(H7N9) subtype virus infections among humans is higher than that of seasonal influenza infections. Epidemiology of human infections Human infections with avian and other zoonotic influenza viruses, though rare, have been reported sporadically. Direct or indirect contact with infected animals represent a risk for human infection. Current zoonotic influenza viruses have not demonstrated sustained person-to-person transmission.For avian influenza viruses, the primary risk factor for human infection appears to be exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments, such as live bird markets. Slaughtering, defeathering, handling carcasses of infected poultry, and preparing poultry for consumption, especially in household settings, are also likely to be risk factors. There is no evidence to suggest that A(H5), A(H7N9) or other avian influenza viruses can be transmitted to humans through properly prepared and cooked poultry or eggs. A few influenza A(H5N1) human cases have been linked to consumption of dishes made with raw contaminated poultry blood.In 1997, human infections with A(H5N1) viruses were reported during an outbreak in poultry in Hong Kong SAR, China. Since 2003, this virus has spread in bird populations from Asia to Europe and Africa, and to the Americas in 2021, and has become endemic in poultry populations in many countries. Outbreaks have resulted in millions of poultry infections, several hundred human cases, and many human deaths. Human cases have been reported mostly from countries in Asia, but also from countries in Africa, the Americas and Europe. In 2013, human infections with A(H7N9) viruses were reported for the first time in China. The virus spread in the poultry population across the country and resulted in over 1500 reported human cases and many human deaths from 2013 to 2019. No further human cases have been reported to WHO since 2019. Since 2014, sporadic human infections with avian influenza A(H5N6) viruses have been reported almost exclusively from China. Other avian influenza viruses have resulted in sporadic human infections. For swine influenza viruses, risk factors include close proximity to infected pigs or visiting locations where pigs are exhibited. Sporadic human infections with swine influenza viruses of the A(H1) and A(H3) subtypes have also been detected. DiagnosisLaboratory tests are required to diagnose human infection and testing should be done at a lab capable of safely processing and confirming zoonotic infections. The collection of appropriate specimens from suspected human cases for virus identification and the rapid and precise characterization of the virus and/or its isolate is done at specialized reference laboratories. This is essential for proper response measures.TreatmentIf a person is suspected of having zoonotic influenza, the health authorities should be notified and appropriate clinical case management provided, including testing, triage, clinical assessment for disease severity classification, assessment of risk factors for severe disease, and isolation and treatment (for example, with antivirals and supportive care). Patients with influenza should be managed properly to prevent severe illness and death. PreventionInfluenza viruses are impossible to eradicate and zoonotic infections will continue to occur. To minimize public health risk, quality surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every human infection and risk-based pandemic planning are essential. Public health and animal health authorities should work together and share information during investigations of human cases of zoonotic influenza.The public should minimize contact with animals in areas known to be affected by animal influenza viruses, including farms and settings where live animals may be sold or slaughtered, and avoid contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces. Children, older people, pregnant and postpartum women (up to 6 weeks) or people with suppressed immune systems should neither collect eggs nor assist with slaughtering or food preparation. The public should strictly avoid contact with sick or dead animals, including wild birds, and should report dead animals or request their removal by contacting local wildlife or veterinary authorities.Everyone should perform hand hygiene, preferably washing their hands either with soap and running water (especially if there is visible soiling of hands) or using alcohol hand rubs, and in all cases as frequently, thoroughly and often as possible – but especially before and after contact with animals and their environments.Everyone should practice good food safety habits: separating raw meat from cooked or ready-to-eat foods, keeping clean and washing hands, cooking food thoroughly, and handling and storing meat properly.Travelers to countries and people living in countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should, if possible, avoid poultry farms, contact with animals in live poultry markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, and contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travelers returning from affected regions should report to local health services if respiratory symptoms suspecting zoonotic influenza virus infection. WHO responseWHO continuously monitors avian and other zoonotic influenza viruses closely through its Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS). WHO, in collaboration with the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), conducts surveillance at the human-animal interface, assesses the associated risks and coordinates response to zoonotic influenza outbreaks and other threats to public health. Twice a year, WHO consults with experts from WHO Collaborating Centres, Essential Regulatory Laboratories and other partners to review data generated by GISRS and animal health partners on influenza viruses with pandemic potential and assesses the need for additional candidate vaccine viruses for pandemic preparedness purposes.Based on risk assessment, WHO provides guidance, develops and adjusts surveillance, preparedness and response strategies to seasonal, zoonotic and pandemic influenza, and communicates timely risk assessment outcomes and intervention recommendations with Member States to enhance preparedness and response nationally and globally. The WHO Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework implements a global approach to prepare for the next influenza pandemic. Related Avian influenza A(H7N9) virusQuestions and answers: Avian influenzaCumulative number of confirmed human cases for avian influenza A(H5N1)Global Influenza and Surveillance Response System (GISRS)Food safety authorities networkWorld Organisation for Animal HealthFood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations News Pioneering regional collaboration to enhance regulatory practices in the Americas 16 October 2024 Yemen begins sharing seasonal influenza viruses with WHO Collaborating Centre in London 16 October 2024 Feature stories The burden of Influenza 30 March 2024 Faces of the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) 15 December 2023 Regions Africa Americas Eastern Mediterranean Europe South-East Asia Western Pacific Policies Cybersecurity Ethics Information disclosure Permissions and licensing Preventing sexual exploitation Terms of use About us Careers Frequently asked questions Library Newsletters Procurement Publications Contact us Report misconduct Privacy policy © 2024 WHOUnmasking the risk and burden of seasonal influenza in the Middle East: Strengthening prevention and control strategies for a healthier tomorrow - Economist Impact Skip to main content - Click here or hit enter to search - Home Latest Updates Popular Impact Perspectives Series Sections Technology & Innovation Talent & Education Sustainability Financial Services Energy Health Infrastructure & Cities Strategy & Leadership Marketing Economic Development Trending Topics Automation Data & Analytics Digital Transformation Cyber Security Artifical Intelligence Blockchain Cancer Trade Transportation All Topics Regions Global Africa Asia Australasia Europe Latin America Middle East North America Content Types Articles Whitepapers Infographics Videos Blogs Case Study Podcast Our Editors Our Contributors Economist Impact Events General Menu About Us Contact Us Media Centre Follow Us Twitter Facebook LinkedIn Toggle navigation Sign up to our Perspectives newsletter Menu Close - Click here or hit enter to search - Technology & Innovation Financial services Health Strategy and Leadership Sustainability All Sections + EIU Digital Economy podcast Home Unmasking the risk and burden of seasonal influenza in the Middle East: Strengthening prevention and control strategies for a healthier tomorrow Download Whitepaper Sign up to our Perspectives newsletter Health Unmasking the risk and burden of seasonal influenza in the Middle East: Strengthening prevention and control strategies for a healthier tomorrow October 04, 2023 Global Clare Roche Social Share: LinkedIn Twitter Facebook Email October 04, 2023 Global Clare Roche Social Share: LinkedIn Twitter Facebook Email Sponsored By Sponsored By Clare Roche Manager - Health Policy & Insights Clare is a manager in the Health Policy and Insights practice at Economist Impact. Clare has over ten years of experience working in the healthcare industry in the Middle East. At Economist Impact, Clare is involved in project management, consultancy and custom research with a focus on the MENA region. Before joining Economist Impact, Clare worked with PwC’s Middle East Healthcare practice as a strategy and operations consultant and Enterprise Ireland, the trade and technology arm of the Irish Government, as an advisor to healthcare and life science companies. Clare holds a Bachelor in International Commerce from NUI Galway and is currently completing an MSc in Health Economics, Policy and Management at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE). Read more from Clare Roche Contact Seasonal influenza is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Annually, the respiratory virus infects approximately one billion people, resulting in severe illness in up to five million cases, and is responsible for up to 650,000 deaths.Influenza affects all countries, communities and individuals with those at the extremes of the age spectrum, and those with underlying chronic health conditions, being the most vulnerable to influenza and its resulting complications. Influenza viruses circulate and evolve continuously, with outbreaks potentially leading to epidemics or pandemics with far-reaching and longlasting consequences. While the substantial morbidity and mortality due to influenza is well recognised during a pandemic, it is often underestimated in the context of year-round seasonal influenza. As infection and mortality rates due to influenza are difficult to determine precisely, reported data often underrepresent the burden of seasonal influenza and its impact on health systems, society and the economy. A number of common priorities could improve seasonal influenza prevention and control in all countries, as well as prepare health systems, healthcare workers and other key stakeholders to manage and mitigate tomorrow’s burden and, in turn, enhance pandemic preparedness. Improve systematic surveillance of seasonal influenza by enhancing, integrating and expanding national and regional surveillance systems. Using covid-19 as a catalyst, position influenza as a public health priority to build stronger multi-sector policies and plans for surveillance, prevention and control of seasonal influenza. Understand the drivers of mis- and disinformation while simultaneously taking action to improve health literacy, and empower populations to find, understand and use evidence-based information. Leverage the trust and knowledge of healthcare workers to advocate for seasonal influenza, and embed prevention and surveillance of seasonal influenza into broader chronic disease management strategies. Engage other sectors to support influenza prevention and control and to facilitate policies and programmes for community engagement and social interventions that could reduce and mitigate the threat of seasonal and pandemic influenza. Explore our findings in the full report, alongside our country snapshots which provide an overview of influenza prevention and control strategies and areas of focus in Turkey, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Turkey Saudi Arabia UAE Download Whitepaper Related content18182 Health Value-based healthcare in Sweden: Reaching the next level The need to get better value from healthcare investment has never been more important as ageing populations and increasing numbers of people with multiple chronic conditions force governments to make limited financial resources go further. These pressures, along with a greater focus on patient-centred care, have raised the profile of VBHC, especially in European healthcare systems. Sweden, with its highly comprehensive and egalitarian healthcare system, has been a leader in implementing VBHC from the beginning, a fact that was underscored in a 2016 global assessment of VBHC published by The Economist Intelligence Unit. This paper looks at the ways in which Sweden has implemented VBHC, the areas in which it has faced obstacles and the lessons that it can teach other countries and health systems looking to improve the value of their own healthcare investments. Read more Health Breast cancer patients and survivors in the Asia-Pacific workforce With more older women also working, how will the rising trend of breast cancer survivorship manifest in workplace policies, practices and culture? What challenges do breast cancer survivors face when trying to reintegrate into the workforce, or to continue working during treatment? How can governments, companies and society at large play a constructive role? This series of reports looks at the situation for breast cancer survivors in Australia, New Zealand and South Korea. It finds that while progress has been made, more needs to be done, particularly in South Korea, where public stigma around cancer remains high. Read more Health The Cost of Silence Cardiovascular diseases levy a substantial financial toll on individuals, their households and the public finances. These include the costs of hospital treatment, long-term disease management and recurring incidence of heart attacks and stroke. They also include the costs of functional impairment and knock-on costs as families may lose breadwinners or have to withdraw other family members from the workforce to care for a CVD patient. Governments also lose tax revenue due to early retirement and mortality, and can be forced to reallocate public finances from other budgets to maintain an accessible healthcare system in the face of rising costs. As such, there is a need for more awareness of the ways in which people should actively work to reduce their CVD risk. There is also a need for more primary and secondary preventative support from health agencies, policymakers and nongovernmental groups. To inform the decisions and strategies of these stakeholders, The Economist Intelligence Unit and EIU Healthcare, its healthcare subsidiary, have conducted a study of the prevalence and costs of the top four modifiable risk factors that contribute to CVDs across the Asian markets of China, Australia, Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. Download the report to learn more. Read more Enjoy in-depth insights and expert analysis - subscribe to our Perspectives newsletter, delivered every week Technology & Innovation Talent & Education Sustainability Financial Services Energy Health Infrastructure & Cities Strategy & Leadership Marketing Economic Development Latest Updates Popular Our Editors Our Contributors General Menu About Us Contact Us Media Centre EIU.com Economist.com Economist Impact Events Executive Education Economist Impact Twitter Facebook LinkedIn Youtube Privacy Policy Cookie Information Manage Cookies Copyright © The Economist Newspaper Limited 2024. All rights reserved. × Newsletter Signup Salutation - Please Select -Dr.Mr.Mrs.Ms.Mx. First Name* Last Name* Job Title* Company / Institution* Industry* -- Please Select --Academia & EducationAdvertisingAgriculture, Forestry & FishingAssociations & CharitiesChemicals/MiningCommunicationsConstructionFinancial ServicesGovernment, NGO & Local AuthoritiesHealthcare, PharmaceuticalsInformation TechnologyManufacturingMediaOil & GasOtherProfessional ServicesRecreational Services & SportRetailStudent / UnemployedTrade UnionsTransportTravel, Tourism & HospitalityUtilities Work Email* Country* -- Please Select -- Please indicate your topic interests here. Economic Development Energy Financial Services Healthcare Infrastructure & Cities Marketing Strategy & Leadership Sustainability Talent & Education Technology & Innovation All Economist Impact is a part of the Economist Group. Occasionally, we would like to keep you informed about our newly-released content, events, our best subscription offers, and other new product offerings from The Economist Group. I wish to be contacted by email by the Economist Group* -- Please Select --YesNo The Economist Group is a global organisation and operates a strict privacy policy around the world. Please see our privacy policy here Close × Join our Opinion Leaders Panel Complete the form to join our panel and receive rewards every time you complete our business surveys. You will also receive the weekly newsletter, containing the latest cutting edge reports, blogs and industry data. Name and Company Salutation* -- Please Select --Dr.Mr.Mrs.Ms.Mx. First Name* Last Name* Job Title* Company* Industry* -- Please Select --Academia & EducationAdvertisingAgriculture, Forestry & FishingAssociations & CharitiesChemicals/MiningCommunicationsConstructionFinancial ServicesGovernment, NGO & Local AuthoritiesHealthcare, PharmaceuticalsInformation TechnologyManufacturingMediaOil & GasOtherProfessional ServicesRecreational Services & SportRetailStudent / UnemployedTrade UnionsTransportTravel, Tourism & HospitalityUtilities Contact Details Email* Country* -- Please Select -- Economist Impact is a part of the Economist Group. Occasionally, we would like to keep you informed about our newly-released content, events, our best subscription offers, and other new product offerings from The Economist Group. I wish to be contacted by email by the Economist Group* -- Please Select --YesNo The Economist Intelligence Unit is part of the Economist Group. The Economist Group is a global organisation and operates a strict privacy policy around the world. To read more about us and our privacy policy please go to http://www.economistgroup.com/privacy CloseWake County Animal Center pauses services to combat dog flu outbreak | Wake County Government Skip to main content Notice Wake County offices will be closed Monday, Nov. 11, in observance of Veterans Day. Some locations may have altered schedules. Check our Holiday Schedule for more information. Wake County, NC Living & Visiting Children & Family Services Cities & Towns Explore the Libraries Find Housing North Carolina Department of Military & Veterans Affairs State Scholarship Program Register for Emergency Notifications Register to Vote View Restaurant Sanitation Scores Behavioral Health Having a Crisis? Connect to Services Data & Research Library Initiatives in Action Get Involved! Doing Business Find Planning & Zoning Info Local & State Permits Municipal Requirements Starting a Business State License Information & Federal Referrals Wake County Tax Information Departments & Government 86it Anti-Litter Campaign Advisory Boards Food Security Human Resources NC Cooperative Extension – Wake County Center Office of Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Onsite Water Protection Animal Services Board of Commissioners Board of Elections Budget & Management Services City-County Bureau of Identification (CCBI) Communications Office Community Services County Attorney Office County Manager's Office Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Environmental Health & Safety Environmental Services Facilities Design & Construction Finance Fire Services & Emergency Management General Services Administration Geographic Information Services (GIS) Housing Affordability & Community Revitalization Health & Human Services Information Technology Libraries Parks, Recreation & Open Space Planning, Development & Inspections Register of Deeds Sheriff's Office Soil & Water Conservation Tax Administration Veterans Services Waste & Recycling Water Quality News Events Search Menu Close Translate | Careers Breadcrumb Home News Wake County Animal Center pauses services to combat dog flu outbreak Wake County Animal Center pauses services to combat dog flu outbreak October 5, 2023 Shelter to close to public beginning Friday, Oct. 6, for quarantine for an undetermined length of time In response to a recent outbreak of canine influenza including the deaths of two dogs, the Wake County Animal Center is taking proactive steps to ensure the health and safety of animals and the community. The shelter will close beginning Friday, Oct. 6 for at least 35 days to help contain the outbreak and the center will stop accepting animals to prevent new cases and protect the total of 449 animals currently being cared for at the shelter. “As our community knows all too well, the number of pets coming to us has been pushing our shelter past capacity for well over a year – and unfortunately, it’s that situation – tons of dogs living together in one space – that’s the perfect breeding ground for viruses like this,” said Wake County Commissioner Cheryl Stallings. “Animal Center staff are working overtime trying to quarantine, treat and care for these pets – but to do it most effectively, we need to temporarily close. It’s not a decision we’re taking lightly.” At this time, there have been two dogs that tested positive for canine influenza, and unfortunately both were fatal. Approximately 57 dogs have been diagnosed with upper respiratory infections since September 15, 2023 – an uncommonly high number of cases. Cases of dog flu have been on the rise across North Carolina, with veterinarians reporting that many dogs are picking up the respiratory illness after stays at boarding or day care facilities. While most dogs recover after two to three weeks, the severity of the illness can range from no symptoms to pets developing secondary infections that lead to pneumonia and sometimes death. The virus spreads through the respiratory droplets when dogs cough or sneeze and there are cases of the virus being transmitted to cats. As staff members work to quarantine, treat and care for the affected animals in the shelter over the next month, the following services will be affected: Adoptions: Adoptions of all pets, including dogs, cats and other small animals, are being paused. This means the October Pit Bull adoption special has been cancelled. Community Pet Days: Community Pet Days have been cancelled as well. Surrenders: The Wake County Animal Center will NOT allow owners to surrender any animals during this closure. Anyone with an existing appointment to surrender a pet will be notified of their cancellation. Animal Control: All five Animal Control agencies across county (Wake County, Raleigh, Cary, Garner and Holly Springs) will continue responding to emergency animal calls, however, they will not be picking up strays or owner surrenders in the field. Bite Animals: The Animal Center often holds pets on quarantine following bite incidents, however, at this time, those animals will need to be quarantined instead at veterinary offices or in private homes. Services that will continue to be offered: Lost Pets: If you believe your pet is currently at the Animal Center, please call at 919-212-PETS (7387) for instructions on providing proof of ownership and the process to reclaim your pet. Please note that lost pet walk-thrus inside the building will not be offered during the quarantine period. Owner-Requested Euthanasia: If you need to euthanize your pet due to health or behavioral issues, you can call and request an appointment for euthanasia. Owners will be asked to provide veterinary notes detailing the animal's medical condition or specific behavioral issues. Euthanasia requested by owners will be carried out immediately upon surrender to the Animal Center. Staff reserves the right to refuse this service if the animal does not appear to be in need of euthanasia. Owners will then be referred to a private veterinarian for assistance. Phone Support for Rehoming: If you need to rehome your pet and adopted it from a local organization, we recommend reaching out to them for assistance in finding a new home for your pet or returning it to their programs. We strongly encourage pet owners to work to rehome their pet by using these tips. Phone Support for Stray Pets: If you've found a stray pet and are looking to locate its owner, we provide phone support and guidance on how to reunite the pet with its owner. “We pride ourselves on the care we provide to the animals that come to us and being a partner to our community,” said Dr. Jennifer Federico, the director of the Wake County Animal Center. “This drastic measure is necessary to help stop the spread of this virus and save as many lives as possible. More than ever, we need our community partners and residents to step up and help people rehome pets as well as reunite lost pets with their owners. We know this virus is in the community and we want all pet owners to do what they can to take care of their own animals and work to keep our pet population as healthy as possible.” Tips for keeping your pets safe include: Making sure your pet follows a recommended vaccine schedule. If you board your pet, make sure the kennel is clean and well maintained, and has an isolation and care plan for dogs that develop signs of kennel cough or other illness. Do not take your pets to dog parks or other places if they have signs of kennel cough or other infectious diseases. Keep your dog at home for three weeks after recovery. Make sure your pet has current ID tags with your address and phone number clearly displayed so that your pet can be returned to you as soon as possible. Keep your pet in overall good health – a strong immune system is the best defense against infection. At this time, we are recommending that owners not gather with other unknown dogs (i.e., dog parks, dog events, etc.) as the risk of disease spread is high. Owners should consult with their veterinarian about risks associated with boarding and daycares for their dogs. If you think your dog may have the flu, follow these steps: Call your veterinarian before going to their office and let them know your dog’s symptoms. This will allow the veterinarian to determine how to minimize exposure within the practice and prepare for your dog’s arrival. Keep your dog away from other dogs and public areas until your dog is seen by your veterinarian. The only way to confirm whether your dog has canine influenza is to have your veterinarian test for the virus. Generally, older dogs, younger dogs and dogs with a weakened immune system are more susceptible. View these frequently asked questions. Department Animal Services Category Press Release Print Share twitter facebook email Related Articles Wake County celebrates Adopt a Senior Pet Month October 31, 2024 Department Animal Services Starry Night and Smarty Pants, Heartwarming Cat Tales of Love, Snuggles and Family October 29, 2024 Department Animal Services Wendell woman arrested on charges of animal cruelty October 18, 2024 Department Animal Services I want to... I want to... Select a task Find Real Estate Information Explore the Libraries Pay a Tax Bill Find Records & Certificates Adopt a Pet Apply for a Job Access iMAPS Register to Vote Get Trash & Recycling Info Get Permits Get a Marriage License Apply for Benefits & Assistance Access Housing Assistance File a Discrimination Complaint Locate a Park Request a Public Record Apply for an Advisory Board Find Planning & Zoning Info Learn About Water Quality Register as a Vendor Report Lost or Found Pets Request a Zoning Verification Go Footer Menu (First Column) Core Values Living & Visiting Doing Business News Events Employee Access Footer Menu (Second Column) About Wake County Public Records Explore the Libraries Books & More Strategic Plan Transparency Portal Facebook X Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Footer Utilities Menu Disclaimers Accessibility Site Help Copyright © 2024. All rights reserved.As Avian Flu Ravaged Wild Condors, One Chick Became a Ray of Hope | Audubon Skip to main content Menu Audubon Magazine Español Our Work Protecting Bird Habitats Coasts and Oceans Rivers, Lakes, and Wetlands Grasslands, Aridlands, and Forests Cities, Towns, and Parks Audubon Across the Hemisphere Bending the Bird Curve Climate Solutions Our Climate Strategy Birds and Clean Energy Natural Climate Solutions Restoration and Resiliency Policy and Advocacy Audubon Advocacy Climate Policy and Renewable Energy Our Science in Action Audubon Science Migratory Bird Initiative Birds and Climate Change Important Bird Areas Latest News Bird and Conservation News Press Room Why Birds? About Us The National Audubon Society protects birds and the places they need, today and tomorrow, throughout the Americas using science, advocacy, education, and on-the-ground conservation. Our Mission Our History Equity, Diversity, Inclusion & Belonging Leadership & Board of Directors Reports & Financials Find Audubon Near You Work With Us Explore Birds Bird Search & ID Visit Our Guide To North American Birds Download the Audubon Bird Guide App Get Into Birding Birding Hub How to Get Started Tips For Identifying Birds In the Field Advice and Stories Frequently Asked Bird Questions Birding at Home Bird Feeding and Care Search for Native Plants Audubon Birdseed, Houses, and More Gear Guides Gear and Resources Binocular Guide Spotting Scope Guide Photography Bird Photography Hub Tips for Photographing Birds Camera and Equipment Advice Audubon Photography Awards Avian Art The Aviary The Audubon Mural Project John James Audubon's Birds of America The Sketch by Jason Polan The Birdsong Project AUDUBON BIRD GUIDE Search for Birds in Your Area Get Involved Audubon Near You Audubon Near You Events Audubon on Campus Visit an Audubon Center Community Science Community Science at Audubon Christmas Bird Count Climate Watch Great Backyard Bird Count For Kids Audubon for Kids Audubon Adventures Audubon Nature Camps Find Ways to Get Involved Membership & Giving Membership Become a Member Renew Your Membership Gift a Membership Donate Donate Monthly Donate Annually Donate One-time In Memorial Gifts In Honor Gifts Adopt a Bird Giving Other Assets Gifts of Appreciated Stock IRA Charitable Gifts Real Estate Gifts Legacy Gifts Donor Advised Funds Shop Official Audubon Apparel Audubon Marketplace Birdhouses and Feeders Bird Seed Calendars Puzzles, Games and DIY Kits More Ways to Give Search Search all things birds Choose where to search EverythingBird GuideBirds of America Search Shortcuts Audubon Bird GuideFrequently asked bird questionsSearch for native plants Take Action Donate Audubon Magazine / Fall 2023 As Avian Flu Ravaged Wild Condors, One Chick Became a Ray of Hope Helpless to stop the virus, biologists did everything in their power to protect the endangered species amid the deadly crisis—including trials of an avian flu vaccine never before used on U.S. birds. The rescued condor egg begins to hatch in a small incubator at Liberty Wildlife Center in Phoenix on May 9. Photo: Karine Aigner Words by Zoe Grueskin Associate Editor, Audubon magazine Photography by Karine Aigner Contributor, Audubon magazine Published Fall 2023 The egg posed a problem. Biologist Shawn Farry and his crew had spent much of March and April collecting sick and dying California Condors from the red rock landscape of northern Arizona, including a bird officially known as 316. The 20-year-old female had succumbed to avian influenza shortly after laying her egg in a high cliffside cave. Her mate, 680, now tended the nest alone in a small space that likely harbored the deadly virus. “There wasn’t really anything we could do to help him,” says Farry, manager of the California Condor program at The Peregrine Fund, the conservation group that manages the southwest condor flock—115 birds that roost and roam from the Grand Canyon to Zion National Park. On his own, 680’s chances of hatching the egg were vanishingly small and, unwilling to leave the nest very long to eat or drink, the 10-year-old male was himself in danger. So, not knowing if the chick inside was dead or alive or whether it, too, was infected with avian flu, Farry and his team decided to take the one action they knew could give 680 a shot at survival: bring the egg into captivity. If humans could successfully hatch it, they could also bring one more condor into the world that had almost lost them forever. North America’s largest land birds, the vultures with nine-foot wingspans once flew over much of the continent, but poisoning and habitat loss took a terrible toll. By 1982 just 22 individuals survived. In a high-stakes gamble to save the species, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service captured every remaining California Condor and launched an intensive captive-breeding program that would eventually involve dozens of private and public partners. The effort succeeded. Today more than 300 condors fly free in five flocks across California, Arizona, Utah, and Baja California, Mexico. Another 200 birds live in captivity. Though the species remains critically endangered and highly managed—each bird has a number and most have a GPS or radio tracker—the California Condor’s comeback is among the most famous conservation stories in the world. This past spring, however, a grave new threat to the species’ survival emerged. The avian influenza that has been devastating birds around the globe since 2021 reached the largest wild flock of California Condors. By the time the crew found 680 incubating his egg without a mate, 21 condors—or one in six members of his flock—were dead. On April 17 Farry and his colleagues waited outside 680’s cave until he made a rare departure to briefly stretch his wings. They scrambled inside, bundled the precious cargo into a small cooler with hand warmers and towels, and transferred it to their rehabilitation partners at Liberty Wildlife in Phoenix. The clinic staff typically treat a couple of condors a year, usually for lead poisoning. In the past month, they’d received eight infected with the flu, half of which died on site—including 316. Veterinary technician Jan Miller initially had little hope for 316’s chick. Parents usually alternate egg duty, sitting on it to maintain a consistently warm temperature. For three weeks 680 had gone it alone. With tempered expectations, Miller “candled” the egg, illuminating the contents with a bright light. She was looking for blood vessels or an embryo—signs of life. Miller flipped the switch and, amid the rosy glow of the egg’s interior, saw more than she’d hoped for: The embryo moved. From that moment, tending to the unhatched chick became a round-the-clock, all-hands-on-deck operation. From that moment, tending to the unhatched chick became a round-the-clock, all-hands-on-deck operation. It was the first condor egg they’d ever taken in and, the size of a softball, was too big for the clinic’s brooder, which mechanically mimics how adult birds shift their eggs in the nest. Instead, staff gently rotated it four times a day and carefully monitored its development. “It was stressful, yet exciting at the same time,” Miller says. “All of us were really pulling for this little chick that wasn’t even here yet.” When the chick began hatching on May 8, they realized something was wrong. It was pipping at the end of the egg, not the center—the avian version of a breech baby. To survive its eggshell birth, the bird needed assistance. Using surgical pliers to remove pieces of the shell, they painstakingly yet briskly freed the tiny condor. The hatchling was alive, but its fate remained uncertain as they swabbed it to test for avian flu. An infected bird couldn’t be sent to The Peregrine Fund’s captive breeding facility, a critical step to one day releasing it to the wild. If the chick had the virus, it would likely die within the week. A vian flu has been around for ­centuries. Italian farmers first described a contagious disease wiping out their poultry in the 1800s. The virus has since predominantly affected domestic birds, at times leading governments to mandate mass culling. In recent decades, however, the virus has evolved to become lethal to wild birds, too. A mild version, called low pathogenic avian influenza, is present year-round in some species, particularly waterfowl, and typically doesn’t cause serious illness. But the virus can travel through waste, infect farmed birds, and mutate into a more aggressive form. The highly pathogenic avian influenza, a strain called H5N1, can pass back to wild ducks, geese, and swans, which can carry the virus across oceans and over thousands of miles as they migrate. The last major outbreak in the United States occurred in 2014–2015, causing the deaths of more than 50 million domestic chickens and turkeys along with a few dozen wild birds, mostly geese, before it died out. The death toll of the current wave has far eclipsed that. The avian influenza in circulation since 2021 can cause severe neurological and respiratory issues and has affected more than 400 bird species in 81 countries. In the United States alone, it is responsible for a record 58 million domestic poultry deaths, and FWS has confirmed or suspected avian flu in more than 33,000 wild birds. The virus has killed raptors and swans, ravens and egrets, hundreds of seabirds, and thousands of ducks. Avian flu has made its way into mammals, too, sporadically infecting raccoons, black bears, and other meat eaters. This has raised fears that the virus could jump to humans and become contagious among people, too. (To date, the only case of human infection reported in this country was a poultry worker who recovered quickly.) The disaster in wild birds has unfolded with seemingly few possibilities for intervention. The disaster in wild birds has unfolded with seemingly few possibilities for intervention. Avian researchers, including the FWS waterfowl-banding program staff, have heightened their hygiene and sanitation procedures. State governments have urged duck hunters to steer clear of—and report—any birds that appear sick. The U.S. Department of Agriculture recommended that backyard poultry-keepers take down any wild bird feeders. Yet as humans have learned all too well during the COVID-19 pandemic, containing a virus is a formidable challenge—even more so when it’s carried by organisms that can fly. “It’s really impacted not only conservation, but conservationists,” says Samantha Gibbs, an avian flu expert at FWS. “It’s been shocking and heartbreaking, and people feel a little helpless.” Biologists watched with dread as condors began getting sick. The scavengers are remarkably hardy, consuming carrion that could carry disease or toxins, thanks to powerfully acidic stomachs. But if a pathogen afflicts them, condors’ extremely social behavior makes them more likely to fall ill and infect others. They eat and roost in groups, and they poop on themselves to stay cool, giving any harmful hitchhikers the opportunity to spread. Yet condors are so imperiled that they have some advantages. The five wild flocks are intentionally separated by hundreds of miles or more, a safety measure to help ensure that a single disaster or threat doesn’t knock down every group. What’s more, each individual is closely monitored, and condors are used to being handled by humans, since the wild birds are trapped annually for health checks. Responding to the crisis, therefore, felt uniquely feasible. “It’s an opportunity where there are very few opportunities,” Gibbs says. Fish and Wildlife Service officials briefly discussed bringing every wild condor into captivity, as they did 40 years ago. FWS officials briefly discussed bringing every wild condor into captivity, as they did 40 years ago. But they opted not to after weighing the daunting logistics, the possible dangers from concentrating the entire species during an outbreak, and the fact that the virus was so far restricted to the southwest flock. Instead, managers watched the birds closely for lethargy or other signs of illness and tightened bio­security measures. To help prevent super-spreader events, they stopped putting out food and water for wild condors where possible. By the time 316’s chick hatched, the tide of death and disease moving through the southwest flock appeared to be ebbing. Warmer temperatures and longer days had weakened the UV-sensitive virus, and the field team was no longer finding sick condors. But they knew the flu hadn’t loosened its grip elsewhere, and it may only be a matter of time before it returned. So officials began planning to perform an even more dramatic intervention: vaccinate every single condor against the virus. The effort marks the first attempt to inoculate any birds—wild or domestic—against avian flu in the United States. “We still don’t know if it’ll work,” Gibbs says, “but it’s doing something as opposed to just counting dead birds.” In May the USDA granted emergency authorization for the vaccine, developed for poultry and used for years in China and other countries with mixed results—mostly due to the challenge of achieving herd immunity among billions of domesticated birds. It isn’t the first time California Condors have been inoculated against a deadly disease; vaccination protected the endangered vultures from West Nile virus in the early 2000s. Even so, officials are proceeding with great caution. First they tested the avian flu vaccine in Black Vultures, a relative with strong populations, to make sure it is safe and to ensure there was a good immune response. That trial was a success, and this past summer FWS employees vaccinated 16 captive condors. If all goes according to plan, they’ll turn to wild condors next. I n Phoenix, the liberty team spent two anxious days caring for the hatchling, awaiting test results that would spell out its fate. They breathed a sigh of relief when the results came back negative. They also learned the chick is female. Her outlook more certain, she received her official number: 1221. Liberty staff called her Milagra, “miracle” in Spanish. In order to one day return to the wild, Milagra needed to be raised by condors, not people. So in May, Liberty Wildlife veterinarian Stephanie Lamb flew the week-old bird to The Peregrine Fund’s breeding facility in Boise, where two foster parents awaited. Among California Condors, her adoptive dad, Cuyama (officially known as 27), is a distinguished elder: After hatching in the wild in 1983 he was one of the original condors brought into captivity, where he helped sire and raise the captive-bred population. Leah Esquivel, the group’s propagation manager, put Milagra with Cuyama and his mate, Rotciwi, or 59, because they are gentle and have a track record of caring for chicks that eventually thrive in the wild. Cuyama’s nurturing instincts kicked in immediately. “He just looked around a little bit, and then hopped in and started brooding,” Esquivel says. Milagra will stay with Cuyama and Rotciwi for around seven months before joining the rest of this year’s 14 captive-hatched chicks for condor school. A mentor bird will teach the youngsters to strengthen their flight muscles, to eat communally, and to navigate social hierarchy. Where they’ll be released, typically in their second summer, is determined mainly by each bird’s DNA. Biologists carefully consider which population is the best fit to maintain genetic diversity—a crucial concern since the species dwindled to so few individuals in the 1980s. The Peregrine Fund’s condor program director, Tim Hauck, hopes Milagra will return to her flock in Arizona. In the meantime, experts say avian flu will likely come raging back this fall and winter, buoyed by migration and cooler temperatures that make the virus more stable. While condors may have newly acquired resistance, other wild birds won’t have that luxury; it simply isn’t feasible to vaccinate myriad far-flung, free-flying creatures. Species with more robust populations may build up natural immunity after exposure, but biologists remain highly concerned. Where local outbreaks occur, birders, farmers, hunters, and avian researchers will continue to have a role in stemming the spread. “It really is the avian equivalent of a pandemic,” Gibbs says. For condors, vaccination could help allay one imminent danger, but that alone won’t guarantee their survival. The species still faces other threats, especially the deadly presence of lead in the environment, often introduced by hunters’ ammunition in carcasses the birds scavenge. To truly secure condors’ future, experts agree we need to protect the areas they call home. “That’s the essential piece,” says Ashleigh Blackford, coordinator of the FWS condor recovery program. Healthy landscapes are the real foundation of resilience for every wild bird, including all the ones we could never vaccinate. While Hauck estimates that losing 21 condors has set back the southwest flock’s recovery by at least a decade, he’s still optimistic about the species’ trajectory. Today, if you’re lucky, you might see a condor soar over the California redwoods or swoop through a Utah canyon. The birds still need help from humans to build their numbers, preserve genetic strength, and face enduring threats. But for the most part, when condors are returned to their land, they thrive. “I don’t know why we always are amazed,” says Farry, who helped rescue Milagra and now roots for her return to the desert. “Millennia of evolution have shaped them into being exceptional at what they do, and then we’re still kind of surprised by it.” For reasons that aren’t fully understood, condor males outnumber females, making Milagra’s survival even more significant. If she can be released into the wild, she could play a key role in rebuilding her battered flock. Her mother, 316, had raised two other chicks in previous years, but neither survived to adulthood. Milagra is now her last descendant—and a hope for the future of her ancient, iconic species. This story originally ran in the Fall 2023 issue as “Special Delivery.” To receive our print magazine, become a member by making a donation today. Visit Birds Tell Us to Act on Climate page Birds Tell Us to Act on Climate Pledge to stand with Audubon to call on elected officials to listen to science and work towards climate solutions. Sign the Pledge Audubon Audubon Discover Who We Are Our History Leadership & Board of Directors Notice of Annual Meeting Reports & Financials Audubon Action Fund Connect Work With Us Fellowships Press Room Contact Us Sign up for SMS updates Support Us Adopt a Bird Audubon Near You Audubon Products Donate Now Legacy Gifts Renew Membership Charity Navigator © 2024 National Audubon Society Legal Notices Privacy Policy Contact Us Join our mission Get the Latest Bird Conservation News Thank you for signing up! Email Phone (optional) By submitting my mobile number I agree to receive periodic text messages from Audubon at 42248 about how I can help birds. Reply STOP to any message to unsubscribe. Message & data rates may apply. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Great Egret. Photo: Melissa Groo/Audubon Photography AwardsKMC Service Members called to arms… for flu shots! | Article | The United States Army MENU HOME SEARCH About Who We Are Organization Quality of Life Army A-Z News Army Worldwide Press Releases Soldier Features Multimedia Photos Videos Publications Leaders Secretary Under Secretary Chief of Staff Vice Chief of Staff Sergeant Major of the Army Features Valor Events Heritage Army 101 Newsroom Public Affairs Social Media Guide Join FAQs AKO Contact Us Search news, photos and videos on Army.mil KMC Service Members called to arms… for flu shots! By Marcy SanchezOctober 5, 2023 Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share on Reddit Share on LinkedIn Share via Email U.S. Air Force Airman 1st Class Kevin Donovan, an aerospace medical technician assigned to Landstuhl Regional Medical Center’s Medical, Surgical, Pediatric Inpatient Ward, administers an influenza vaccine to U.S. Army Sgt. Jairo Zavala, a cargo specialist with 1st Inland Cargo Transfer Company, 39th Transportation Battalion, 21st Theater Sustainment Command, during the seasonal flu vaccination event at LRMC, Oct. 4. (Photo Credit: Marcy Sanchez) VIEW ORIGINAL As temperatures decline and foliage falls through surrounding forests, another inevitable season looms—flu season. For the military community, the annual ritual of receiving a flu vaccination is more than just a precaution; it’s about readiness and safeguarding the larger community. To support a medically ready military force, Landstuhl Regional Medical Center began community influenza vaccination events and expects to continue through November. Events will be held as indicated below: Who: All eligible beneficiaries ages 3+ What: 2023 Influenza Vaccination Where: LRMC’s 10C Ward (located on the second floor) When: Hours for October (except federal holidays) Monday – Wednesday, Friday 9-11 a.m., 1-6 p.m. Thursdays 7-9 a.m., 1-6 p.m. Saturdays (Oct. 14, 21, 28) 9 a.m.-3 p.m. How: Patients may sign up for an appointment online - https://informatics-stage.health.mil/DAP/ Landstuhl Regional Medical Center influenza vaccine schedule for October 2023. (Photo Credit: Marcy Sanchez) VIEW ORIGINAL Beneficiaries should obtain their own / children’s DOD identification numbers before presenting for vaccinations. The Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System (DEERS) should contain all necessary information for families. Patients are encouraged to bring all required information to their appointment and wear clothing which allows easy access to vaccination site (upper arm). According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), influenza can lead to hospitalization and sometimes even death. In any given year, the flu affects millions, putting significant strain on healthcare systems. Vaccination is particularly important for people who are at higher risk of developing serious flu complications to include: Infants and children ages 5 and younger; Adults ages 65 and older; Pregnant women (and women up to two weeks postpartum); and individuals with certain chronic health conditions. Additionally, the CDC states children younger than five, especially those younger than two – are at higher risk of developing serious flu-related complications due to immature immune systems. U.S. Army Spc. Hannah Dalber, a healthcare specialist with Landstuhl Regional Medical Center’s Physical Medicine Clinic, administers an influenza vaccine to a patient during the seasonal flu vaccination event at LRMC, Oct. 4. (Photo Credit: Marcy Sanchez) VIEW ORIGINAL Studies also indicate vaccination against the flu reduces the risk of catching the virus by 40% to 60%. Additionally, the flu vaccine has been shown to significantly reduce the risk of flu-related hospitalizations among adults. And for those who may still harbor reservations, it's essential to dispel a prevalent myth: the flu vaccine cannot give you the flu. While some might experience mild side effects from the vaccination, they are far from the debilitating symptoms of the actual flu. Vaccinations are a force multiplier. When Service Members are vaccinated, they are at a lower risk of contracting and spreading the flu. This means fewer medical visits, fewer hospitalizations, and a more robust, mission-ready force. RELATED STORIES May 20, 2024Media Roundtable with Maj. Gen. Brett Sylvia, 101st Airborne Division commander March 28, 2024Army Exceptional Family Member Program Central Office will better support Soldiers and families August 26, 2022Chief Warrant Officer 3 Sarah Stone is just ‘one of four’ July 22, 2022Department of the Army announces Total Army COVID-19 vaccination statistics July 15, 2022Army announces Total Army COVID-19 vaccination statistics March 11, 2022Department of the Army announces updated COVID-19 vaccination statistics March 4, 2022Department of the Army announces updated COVID-19 vaccination rates February 10, 2022Department of the Army announces updated COVID-19 vaccination statistics May 12, 2021U.S. Army surpasses one million COVID vaccines administered at Medical Treatment Facilities March 17, 2021Update on Army Soldiers supporting FEMA and NORTHCOM COVID-19 vaccination mission October 6, 2016U.S. Army STAND-TO! | Army Safety Awards Program KMC Service Members called to arms… for flu shots! KMC Service Members called to arms… for flu shots! KMC Service Members called to arms… for flu shots! Official U.S. Army Facebook Official U.S. Army Twitter Official U.S. Army YouTube Official U.S. Army Instagram Official U.S. Army LinkedIn Home Contact Us Privacy Terms Of Use Accessibility FOIA No FEAR Act Social Sharing Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share on Reddit Share on LinkedIn Share via EmailSouth Africa culls about 7.5 million chickens in an effort to contain bird flu outbreaks | AP News Menu Menu World U.S. Election 2024 Politics Sports Entertainment Business Science Fact Check Oddities Be Well Newsletters Photography AP Investigations Climate Health Tech Lifestyle Religion Español AP Buyline Personal Finance AP Buyline Shopping Press Releases My Account ... World Mideast Wars Israel-Hamas War Russia-Ukraine War Global elections ESPAÑOL China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East Australia U.S. Election 2024 Results Advance vote Explaining 2024 AP Votecast Politics Election 2024 Congress U.S. Supreme Court Sports AP Top 25 NFL MLB NBA NHL Men’s College Basketball Women’s College Basketball Auto Racing Soccer Entertainment Movie reviews What to Stream Television Book reviews Music Celebrity Interviews Business Inflation Financial Markets Financial wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Newsletters Photography AP Investigations Climate Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Religion Español AP Buyline Personal Finance AP Buyline Shopping Press Releases My Account Search Query Submit Search Show Search Submit Search World Mideast Wars Israel-Hamas War Russia-Ukraine War Global elections ESPAÑOL China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East Australia SECTIONS Mideast Wars Israel-Hamas War Russia-Ukraine War Global elections ESPAÑOL China Asia Pacific Latin America U.S. Election 2024 Results Advance vote Explaining 2024 AP Votecast SECTIONS Results Advance vote Explaining 2024 AP Votecast Politics Election 2024 Congress U.S. Supreme Court SECTIONS Election 2024 Congress U.S. Supreme Court Sports AP Top 25 NFL MLB NBA NHL Men’s College Basketball Women’s College Basketball Auto Racing Soccer SECTIONS AP Top 25 NFL MLB NBA NHL Men’s College Basketball Women’s College Basketball Auto Racing Entertainment Movie reviews What to Stream Television Book reviews Music Celebrity Interviews SECTIONS Movie reviews What to Stream Television Book reviews Music Celebrity Interviews Business Inflation Financial Markets Financial wellness Technology SECTIONS Inflation Financial Markets Financial wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine SECTIONS Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Newsletters Photography AP Investigations Climate Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media SECTIONS Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Religion Español AP Buyline Personal Finance AP Buyline Shopping Press Releases My Account The Associated Press is an independent global news organization dedicated to factual reporting. Founded in 1846, AP today remains the most trusted source of fast, accurate, unbiased news in all formats and the essential provider of the technology and services vital to the news business. More than half the world’s population sees AP journalism every day. twitter instagram facebook The Associated Press ap.org Careers Advertise with us Contact Us Accessibility Statement Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Limit Use and Disclosure of Sensitive Personal Information CA Notice of Collection More From AP News About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook SECTIONS About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook Copyright 2024 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. World News South Africa culls about 7.5 million chickens in an effort to contain bird flu outbreaks Chickens on a chicken farm in Lichtenburg, South Africa, Thursday, March 23, 2023. South Africa has culled nearly 2.5 million chickens in an effort to contain outbreaks of two separate strains of avian influenza that have threatened to create a shortage of eggs for consumers and are hitting an industry already struggling because of the country’s electricity supply crisis, the government said on Tuesday Oct. 3, 2023. (AP Photo/Denis Farrell) By GERALD IMRAY Share Share Copy Link copied Email Facebook X Reddit LinkedIn Pinterest Flipboard Print CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) — South Africa has culled about 7.5 million chickens in an effort to contain dozens of outbreaks of two separate strains of avian influenza that threaten to create a shortage of eggs and poultry for consumers, the government and national poultry association said Tuesday.At least 205,000 chickens have died from bird flu in at least 60 separate outbreaks across the country, with more than half of those outbreaks in Gauteng province, which includes the country’s biggest city, Johannesburg, and the capital, Pretoria.Some grocery stores in Johannesburg were limiting the number of eggs customers were allowed to buy this week — in some cases to one carton of six eggs — and the government acknowledged there were “supply constraints.”The government announced approximately 2.5 million chickens bred for their meat had been culled. The South African Poultry Association said another 5 million egg-laying chickens had been culled. The 7.5 million birds represented about 20-30% of South Africa’s total chicken stock, South African Poultry Association general manager Izaak Breitenbach said. The government was moving to fast-track new import permits for companies to bring in eggs from other countries “to ensure sufficient supplies for consumers,” Agriculture Minister Thoko Didiza said. Her ministry is also considering embarking on a vaccination program to halt the bird flu outbreaks and said the number of farms with cases was increasing. RELATED COVERAGE Mauritius’ prime minister says his ruling coalition is set for a ‘huge’ election defeat Rights group calls for international force to protect Sudanese amid a rampage by paramilitaries Mauritius holds an election with the ruling party seeking a new term Neighboring Namibia has banned chicken meat and egg imports from South Africa. The outbreaks are hitting an industry already struggling due to an electricity crisis. Breitenbach said South Africa has had three major bird flu outbreaks in recent years, and the latest ones were “by far the worst,” already costing the industry losses of at least $25 million.Vaccines would need to be imported and hopefully be ready to use in two to six months, he said. Wilhelm Mare, chairman of the poultry group in the South African Veterinary Association, said as many as 8.5 million egg-laying chickens could be affected and more than 10 million birds overall.“It tells me we’re going to have problems with this situation for quite a while,” Mare said, calling it “catastrophic” for the industry.The United States’ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said last month that bird flu outbreaks were on the rise globally, with more than 21,000 outbreaks across the world between 2013 and 2022. Bird flu only rarely infects humans.Eggs are an important and affordable source of protein in South Africa, but prices have risen steadily this year and the shortages caused by bird flu were expected to push prices up again and add to high food inflation for South Africans.The chicken industry in South Africa has already been hit hard this year by power shortages, which have resulted in planned regular electricity blackouts to save energy, but badly impacting businesses.South African farmers said in January they had been forced to cull nearly 10 million young chicks, as Africa’s most advanced economy experienced record blackouts at the start of the year, causing production to slow dramatically and leading to overcrowding on chicken farms.The poultry industry has also lobbied the South African government to impose permanent duties on countries like Brazil, Denmark, Poland, Spain, and the United States for what the industry refers to as the “dumping” of cheap chicken products in South Africa, threatening local businesses. ___AP Africa news: https://apnews.com/hub/africa The Associated Press is an independent global news organization dedicated to factual reporting. Founded in 1846, AP today remains the most trusted source of fast, accurate, unbiased news in all formats and the essential provider of the technology and services vital to the news business. More than half the world’s population sees AP journalism every day. The Associated Press ap.org Careers Advertise with us Contact Us Accessibility Statement Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Limit Use and Disclosure of Sensitive Personal Information CA Notice of Collection More From AP News About AP News Values and Principles AP’s Role in Elections AP Leads AP Definitive Source Blog AP Images Spotlight Blog AP Stylebook Copyright 2024 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. twitter instagram facebookSelf-amplifying mRNA seasonal influenza vaccines elicit mouse neutralizing antibody and cell-mediated immunity and protect ferrets | npj Vaccines Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature npj vaccines articles article Self-amplifying mRNA seasonal influenza vaccines elicit mouse neutralizing antibody and cell-mediated immunity and protect ferrets Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 04 October 2023 Self-amplifying mRNA seasonal influenza vaccines elicit mouse neutralizing antibody and cell-mediated immunity and protect ferrets Michael Cheung ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0021-38021 na1, Cheng Chang1 na1, Raveen Rathnasinghe1, Evan Rossignol1, Yunfei Zhang1, Annette Ferrari1, Harsh Patel1, Yanjun Huang1, Michelle Sanchez Guillen1, Tina Scalzo1, Changkeun Lee1, Gillis R. Otten ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5312-64221, Ethan C. Settembre1, Nedzad Music1, Giuseppe Palladino1 & …Yingxia Wen ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3313-15391 Show authors npj Vaccines volume 8, Article number: 150 (2023) Cite this article 5372 Accesses 1 Citations 10 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusPreclinical research AbstractCurrently licensed influenza vaccines focus immune responses on viral hemagglutinin (HA), while the other major surface glycoprotein neuraminidase (NA) is not tightly controlled in inactivated vaccine formulations despite evidence that anti-NA antibodies reduce clinical disease. We utilized a bicistronic self-amplifying mRNA (sa-mRNA) platform encoding both HA and NA from four seasonal influenza strains, creating a quadrivalent influenza vaccine. sa-mRNA vaccines encoding an NA component induced the production of NA-inhibiting antibodies and CD4+ T-cell responses in both monovalent and quadrivalent formulations. Including NA in the vaccine enabled cross-neutralization against antigenically drifted strains and provided greater protection than HA alone upon A(H3N2) challenge in ferrets. These results demonstrate that next-generation bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccines expressing HA and NA induce potent antibodies against both viral coat proteins, as well as vaccine-specific cell-mediated immunity. When formulated as a quadrivalent seasonal influenza vaccine, the sa-mRNA platform provides an opportunity to increase the breadth of protection through cross-neutralizing anti-NA antibodies. Similar content being viewed by others A computationally optimized broadly reactive hemagglutinin vaccine elicits neutralizing antibodies against influenza B viruses from both lineages Article Open access 23 September 2023 Synthetic multiantigen MVA vaccine COH04S1 and variant-specific derivatives protect Syrian hamsters from SARS-CoV-2 Omicron subvariants Article Open access 16 March 2023 Anatomy of Omicron BA.1 and BA.2 neutralizing antibodies in COVID-19 mRNA vaccinees Article Open access 13 June 2022 IntroductionSeasonal influenza vaccination is an effective means of generating widespread immunity to limit the considerable burden of annual influenza epidemics. An effective anti-influenza immune response relies on two important components: the production of virus-neutralizing antibodies to prevent the attachment and release of infective virions and the generation of adaptive immune effector and memory cells, including CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and memory B cells. Vaccine efficacy has traditionally been assessed through the generation of inhibitory antibody responses against the viral coat protein hemagglutinin (HA), and the current generation of licensed quadrivalent influenza vaccines focuses immunity on the HA associated with four circulating seasonal strains, including two A and two B strains1. Humoral responses generated against vaccine strains are generally strong; however, mismatches due to antigenic drift from point mutations in the viral genome can substantially reduce vaccine efficacy against circulating strains2,3. This antigenic drift also limits the protection afforded by preexisting antibodies4.The other major viral coat glycoprotein, neuraminidase (NA), is either entirely absent from or not quantified in vaccine formulations despite extensive evidence from both animal and human studies that NA-specific antibodies reduce influenza virus replication, shedding, and transmission and thus the occurrence of clinical disease5,6. Because changes in the HA and NA antigenic sites occur asynchronously7,8, structurally similar NAs may circulate for several seasons even as selective pressure drives HA antigens to rapidly mutate away from each other. Robust immunity to NA could compensate for reduced vaccine efficacy due to HA drift in circulating strains. Challenge studies in animal models have demonstrated that although antibodies to NA do not achieve sterilizing immunity, a higher NA inhibition (NAI) titer is associated with reduced viral load9. In humans, clinical studies have demonstrated that higher titers of NA-inhibiting antibodies in sera before exposure correlate with reduced disease duration and severity and protection from drifted strains10,11. Another benefit of targeting NA with seasonal influenza vaccines is cross-protection against potential pandemic viruses, as demonstrated against avian H5N1 influenza in mice immunized with N1 from a circulating human A(H1N1) strain12. An analysis of human sera revealed that some individuals bear antibodies capable of inhibiting avian strains of N112, further suggesting that NA-specific antibodies could limit negative outcomes in the case of emergent pandemic influenza.Another limitation of contemporary seasonal influenza vaccine consisting of HA subunits or recombinant HA is a failure to induce or boost robust CD8+ cytotoxic T-cell responses13,14,15. Because stimulation of CD8+ T cells occurs via antigen presented on MHC class I molecules, induction of strong CD8 vaccine responses depends on endogenously generated antigen, such as through vaccines based on live-attenuated viruses or nucleic acids. CD8+ T cells are known to play a critical role in antiviral immunity. Following infection, virus-specific CD8+ T cells become activated and begin the processes of expansion and differentiation to effector T cells, which produce antiviral cytokines, including interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and mediate the killing of virus-bearing cells via granzyme and perforin release16. Following the resolution of the immune response, a subset of CD8+ T cells is retained as long-lived memory cells capable of rapid expansion upon secondary exposure to the virus16. In addition, CD8+ T cells may impart immunity against heterosubtypic strains14, underscoring the benefits of targeting cytotoxic T cells in seasonal influenza vaccines.The advent of mRNA vaccines and their recent successful use during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic have demonstrated the potential of mRNA technology to generate protective antiviral responses through both neutralizing antibodies and cell-mediated immunity17,18. Because the target protein is expressed endogenously, potential egg- and cell culture–derived antigenic adaptations associated with recombinant protein and subunit vaccines are avoided19,20. Self-amplifying mRNA (sa-mRNA) vaccines, which exhibit the benefits of mRNA vaccines, offer an opportunity to generate immunity to multiple viral proteins with a much-reduced RNA dose21,22, decreasing the potential for adverse events following immunization and providing a promising avenue for rapid and cost-effective vaccine production for both seasonal and pandemic preparedness23,24. In addition to encoding the target gene of interest, sa-mRNA constructs also contain replicase genes encoding an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) that amplifies the transcription of the construct and the antigen targets, leading to greater antigen expression per mRNA dose and extending the duration of expression25. Our next-generation sa-mRNA construct advances this technology by providing balanced expression of multiple genes of interest per sa-mRNA molecule, reducing the amount of mRNA and packaging lipid nanoparticles (LNP) needed for multiantigen vaccines26. In this study, we designed multiple sa-mRNA constructs expressing HA and/or NA from four clinically relevant influenza strains. We demonstrate that each bicistronic sa-mRNA LNP induced the production of specific, robust, and dose-dependent neutralizing antibodies to both HA and NA and reveal their capacity to generate humoral and cell-mediated immune responses when formulated together as a novel quadrivalent vaccine against seasonal influenza.ResultsBicistronic sa-mRNA constructs induce the expression of HA and NA in vitroTo examine whether sa-mRNA could be used as a platform for a complex vaccine with multiple antigenic targets, such as a quadrivalent seasonal influenza formulation, we utilized our previously reported bicistronic sa-mRNA construct25,26, consisting of a series of four nonstructural proteins (NSPs) required to amplify the mRNA construct and two subgenomic promoter (SGP) sites, one for each gene of interest (GOI) (Fig. 1a). For these experiments, we developed four bicistronic constructs, including one for each seasonal influenza strain: A/Delaware/55/2019 (H1N1), A/Delaware/39/2019 (H3N2), B/Darwin/7/2019 (B/Vic), and B/Singapore/INFTT-16-0610/2016 (B/Yam). In each construct, HA was incorporated into the GOI1 site, while NA was inserted into the GOI2 site. In addition, we designed eight monocistronic sa-mRNA constructs to encode each HA or NA antigen alone for comparison (Fig. 1a). The expression of both antigens was evaluated in BHK-V cells by flow cytometry. As expected, transfection with bivalent sa-mRNA constructs produced HA and NA double-positive populations as the dominant positive population (Fig. 1b), except for the B/Yamagata sa-mRNA-HA-NA construct, which was not analyzed by flow cytometry due to the lack of a B/Yamagata NA-specific antibody.Fig. 1: Monocistronic and bicistronic sa-mRNA constructs.a Monocistronic and bicistronic design schematic. UTR untranslated region, NSP, nonstructural protein, SGP subgenomic promoter, GOI gene of interest. b Expression of HA and NA following transfection with bicistronic sa-mRNA constructs, or in non-transfected (NT) control cells. Numbers indicate the frequency (%) of cells that fall within the gate.Full size imageQuadrivalent sa-mRNA-HA-NA vaccine induced neutralizing antibody responses against four seasonal HA and NA in miceWhile we have reported on the robust immunogenicity of monovalent bicistronic sa-mRNA-HA-NA vaccines previously27, it remains an open question whether the platform is capable of inducing immune responses to the eight antigenic targets necessary for a quadrivalent seasonal influenza vaccine encoding both HA and NA. To address this, we immunized mice with a quadrivalent bicistronic sa-mRNA HA-NA vaccine against all four seasonal influenza strains testing three doses of RNA, including 0.1 µg, 0.01 µg, or 0.001 µg per construct. In addition, some mice received only one of the four monovalent sa-mRNA-HA-NA vaccines (mHA-NA) as a control. Three weeks after the second dose we compared monovalent and quadrivalent vaccines for neutralizing HA- and NA-specific antibody responses by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), short-form microneutralization (SF MN), and NAI. The production of vaccine-specific memory B cells was assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot (ELISpot). Quadrivalent HA-NA (qHA-NA) vaccines expressing eight antigen targets produced functional antibody titers above the threshold of detection against A(H1N1), A(H3N2), and B/Yamagata across three doses, as indicated by SF MN assays, which are primarily used to measure anti-HA antibody neutralizing capability (Fig. 2a), and NAI (Fig. 2b). HA-specific neutralizing antibodies against B/Victoria were reduced in the qHA-NA vaccine group compared to the mHA-NA group (Fig. 2a), although B/Victoria NAI titers were similar (Fig. 2b). The qHA-NA vaccine stimulated anti-HA and anti-NA immunoglobulin G (IgG) responses which were similar to each corresponding mHA-NA group (Supplementary Fig. 1a and b). Moreover, immunization with the qHA-NA vaccine (0.1 µg dose) established antigen-specific splenic memory B cells against all four vaccine strains (Supplementary Fig. 2). The inclusion of six additional targets in the quadrivalent formulation resulted in a modest reduction in the neutralizing antibody response against A(H1N1) and A(H3N2) HA and NA. The difference between the quadrivalent and monovalent vaccines was more prominent against B/Victoria, which showed significantly reduced SF MN titers at all three doses (Fig. 2a), and against B/Yamagata NA, which similarly exhibited reduced titers in the quadrivalent vaccine groups. The impact of this effect on protective immunity is unknown, as the quadrivalent vaccine-induced NAI titers were above the threshold of detection against all four strains of influenza when both the 0.1 and 0.01 µg doses were used. Reduced neutralizing titers resulting from additional antigenic targets are expected and have been observed with other vaccine platforms, such as adjuvanted subunit vaccines, in comparisons of monovalent and multivalent formulations (Supplementary Fig. 3). These results will help establish the best dose to use for the development of future quadrivalent vaccines and suggest there may be a need for slightly higher doses to compensate for reduced response to influenza B strains.Fig. 2: Quadrivalent bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccines potently induce the production of HA- and NA-neutralizing antibody titers.BALB/c mice (10 per group) were vaccinated twice, 3 weeks apart with the indicated dose and type of vaccine. HA-specific (a) and NA-specific (b) responses are compared across monovalent bicistronic (mHA-NA) and quadrivalent bicistronic mRNA vaccines. a HA-specific neutralizing antibody responses induced by monovalent bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccines in vivo were measured by a short-form microneutralization (MN) assay. b The NA-specific neutralizing antibody response induced in vivo was measured by enzyme-linked lectin assay (ELLA). mHA-NA and qHA-NA compared by two-way ANOVA, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.Full size imageImmunization with quadrivalent sa-mRNA vaccines induces the production of influenza-specific CD4 and CD8 T cellsTo analyze the T-cell responses in vaccinated mice, we assessed T-cell responses in splenocytes 21 days after the second vaccination. Splenocytes were stimulated ex vivo by vaccine-homologous subunit antigens, which were predominantly HA with an unquantified amount of NA, then characterized after 6 h of stimulation by intracellular cytokine staining and multiparameter flow cytometry (Fig. 3a). In response to homologous subunits, the CD4+ T cells that were produced through the vaccine (Fig. 3b) produced IFN-γ, TNF-α, and interleukin-2 (IL-2) with little or no IL-5 or IL-13 expression, indicating a predominantly Th1 response. The proportions of CD4+ cells produced through the vaccine were similar between groups administered the different doses and between those administered monovalent and quadrivalent vaccines, with the exception of B/Victoria-specific CD4+ cells, which were reduced in the qHA-NA compared to the monovalent B/Victoria vaccine group. Similarly, influenza A H1 and influenza B HA-specific CD8+ T cells were detected after both quadrivalent and monovalent administration of the bicistronic vaccines at similar levels (Fig. 3c). The levels of influenza A H3- and NA-specific CD8+ cells could not be measured in our study due to the lack of appropriate CD8+ T cell antigen. The CD8+ responses to antigen predominantly involved the expression of IFN-γ and/or TNF-α, with low levels of IL-2. Neither CD4+ nor CD8+ T cells showed cross-reactivity among A(H3N2) and A(H1N1) subtypes, which were 41.9% and 41.6% identical at the amino acid level for HA and NA, respectively. Cross-reactivity was observed between B/Yamagata and B/Victoria, which are 92.5% and 92.9% identical for HA and NA, respectively. In summary, these results indicate that quadrivalent vaccination is capable of inducing CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses against these antigens.Fig. 3: Bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccines induce the production of virus-specific helper and cytotoxic T cells.a Gating strategy for antigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ splenocytes. b Splenic CD4+ T cells from immunized mice were pooled (5 per group) and stimulated with vaccine monobulks ex vivo. T cells producing the cytokines IL-2, TNF-α, INF-γ, IL-5, and IL-13 were identified by flow cytometry. c CD8+ T cells from immunized mice were stimulated with peptides from H1N1, B/Victoria (B/Vic), or B/Yamagata (B/Yam), and cells producing IL-2, TNF-α, and INF-γ were quantified by flow cytometry. Bars represent the mean cytokine-positive CD4 subsets (b) or CD8 T cells (c) and T-bars the 95% confidence interval, which is calculated from duplicate measurements on pooled spleens and indicates the precision of the measurement.Full size imageBicistronic quadrivalent vaccination induced immune responses that were similar to the responses to monocistronic quadrivalent or octavalent vaccinesIn inactivated or recombinant seasonal influenza vaccines, HA has been used as either the primary or only viral component of seasonal influenza subunit vaccines. Therefore, we immunized mice with quadrivalent monocistronic or bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccines to determine the benefits and tradeoffs of a qHA-NA approach compared with quadrivalent HA-only (qHA) and NA-only (qNA) vaccines. In addition, we tested an octavalent formulation, consisting of four monocistronic sa-mRNA constructs expressing seasonal HAs and four monocistronic sa-mRNA constructs expressing seasonal NAs (qHA+qNA). With a few exceptions, the neutralizing anti-HA antibody response, measured by SF MN, was similar between groups receiving qHA regardless of whether qNA was included in a separate or the same sa-mRNA molecule (Fig. 4a). Even at the low dose of 0.001 µg mRNA, the geometric mean of the neutralization titer was above the threshold of detection for all four seasonal strains. NAI was similar among the three vaccine groups for influenza A N1 and both B strain NAs (Fig. 4b), with the response to influenza A N2 being reduced in the qHA-NA groups. Taken together, these results show that with the addition of NA, either in an additional cistron or on a second monocistronic construct, neutralization of both HA and NA can be achieved with limited loss of titer.Fig. 4: Monocistronic HA or NA and bicistronic HA-NA sa-mRNA vaccines stimulate the production of neutralizing antibodies.a The levels of neutralizing HA-specific antibodies induced by monocistronic or bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccines were measured by MN of vaccine strains in the Focus forming assay (FFA) MN assay. b Inhibition of NA by neutralizing antibodies was assayed by ELLA. B/Vic, B/Victoria; B/Yam, B/Yamagata. 2-way ANOVA, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.Full size imageThe quadrivalent seasonal bicistronic sa-mRNA influenza vaccine provides expanded cross-neutralization through an NA-specific antibody response in vitroOne anticipated benefit of targeting NA in a seasonal influenza vaccine is the potential for extending protection to target heterologous strains. To examine potential cross-neutralization of heterologous strains due to anti-NA antibodies, we utilized a long-form microneutralization assay. As heterologous strains, we selected historical seasonal A(H3N2) viruses with varying phylogenic distances (Supplementary Fig 4): A/Indiana/08/2018, A/North Carolina/04/2016, and A/Singapore/GP2050/2015 (Fig. 5a). We found that immunization with a 0.1 µg dose of the qHA vaccine containing H3 from A/Delaware/39/2019 failed to effectively neutralize all three HA antigen-drifted heterologous strains ( ≥ 90% reduction in titer, Fig. 5b). In contrast, immunization with qNA containing N2 from A/Delaware/39/2019 resulted in LF MN titers against both A/Indiana/08/2018 and A/North Carolina/04/2016 that were equivalent to those of the vaccine strain, while the LF MN titer was 50% lower against the A/Singapore/GP2050/2015 strain (Fig. 5b), which showed more distant N2 drift (Supplementary Fig. 4b). Similarly, when we incorporated NA in our quadrivalent bicistronic design, the mice immunized with 0.1 µg of the qHA-NA vaccine had a much lower reduction (55%) in the LF MN titer against A/Indiana/08/2018 and A/North Carolina/04/2016 and an 83% reduction in titer against A/Singapore/GP2050/2015 H3N2 virus (Fig. 5b), with a geometric mean titer (GMT) similar to that in the qNA group (Fig. 5a). For all three heterologous A(H3N2) viruses, the qHA-NA and qNA groups exhibited higher cross-neutralizing titers than the qHA group (Fig. 5a), supporting the value of including NA in future quadrivalent influenza vaccines.Fig. 5: Quadrivalent bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccines induce the production of cross-neutralizing NA-specific antibodies.a The NA-specific neutralizing antibody response was measured by a long-form (LF) MN assay. b Cross-neutralizing response against heterologous A(H3N2) viruses are expressed as percent homologous (H3N2 A/Delaware/39/2019) LF MN titer (mean ± SEM). Titers against heterologous strains compared to A/Delaware/39/2019 by two-way ANOVA, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.Full size imageBicistronic sa-mRNA vaccines encoding HA and NA of seasonal A(H3N2) influenza viruses confer enhanced protection in a ferret challenge modelThe effectiveness of bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccine effectiveness was next tested in the well-established ferret influenza challenge model28, commonly used to evaluate the protective capacity of a vaccination regimen and potential for severe outcomes for hospitalized patients29. As our previous results with H3N2 sa-mRNA vaccines indicated similar immunogenicity of monovalent and quadrivalent formulations (Fig. 2, Supplementary Fig. 1) and to focus on the effect of including both HA and NA while avoiding cross-subtype responses, monovalent vaccination was chosen over quadrivalent formulation for this study. Ferrets were primed and boosted with sa-mRNA vaccines encoding H3, N2, or both in a bicistronic construct (Fig. 6a). Four weeks after the second immunization ferrets were challenged with A(H3N2) virus. Daily infectious virus titers in the upper respiratory tract were quantified by plaque assays from nasal swabs. Peak viral loads for vaccinated animals occurred at day 1 post infection (D49), which subsided by each consecutive day, whereas peak viral load in mock immunized animals occurred at day 2 post challenge (D50) (Fig. 6b). By 2 days post challenge (D50), all vaccinated animals, regardless of the vaccine construct, had significantly lower viral titers compared to mock immunized animals, between 1 and 2 logs below the control (Fig. 6b). By day 3 post infection (D51), most immunized animals had virus titers near or below the limit of detection, while viral loads in mock immunized animals were in the range of 103 PFU/mL (Fig. 6b). Ferrets that received 5 µg of bicistronic H3N2 sa-mRNA vaccines had a plaque-forming unit (PFU) titers that trended lower compared to all groups at each time point post challenge, although these differences were not statistically significant (Fig. 6b). Similarly, quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), as a more sensitive approach, from nasal swabs indicated lower virus genome copies in all immunized groups on day 2 post challenge (D50), when viral genomes peaked in mock immunized animals (Fig. 6c). Recovery of live virus from nasal turbinates demonstrated significantly less infectious virus 3 days post challenge in all vaccinated groups except for animals that received the monocistronic sa-mRNA vaccine expressing N2 alone, although 4 of 6 ferrets in that group had more than a tenfold reduction in virus titer versus mock immunized animals (Fig. 6d). In addition, measurement of viral genome copies from nasal turbinates indicated that all vaccinated groups had lower total viral load compared to mock immunized animals (Fig. 6e). Ferrets that received bicistronic H3N2 sa-mRNA vaccines had the lowest nasal turbinate viral load compared to all groups, even at the low (0.5 µg RNA) dose (Fig. 6d,e). These data clearly indicate the benefit of including NA in the sa-mRNA vaccine in that it provides an enhanced protective immunity in the upper respiratory tract compared to HA alone. Beyond the upper respiratory tract, viral loads from throat swabs indicated similar results for vaccinated groups, particularly at 1 day post challenge, wherein both infectious and total viral loads were significantly lower in vaccinated animals compared to animals that received a mock vaccine (Supplementary Fig. 5a,b). Viral titers in lung tissues suggested no detectable infectious virus by day 3 post challenge (D51) for all animals except for 2 animals from the mock immunized group (Supplementary Fig. 5c). However, qRT-PCR showed vaccinated groups had lower viral genome in the lung versus mock immunized animals and several vaccine recipients had no detectable amounts of viral genomes from lung tissue (Supplementary Fig. 5d). In addition, sera from ferrets immunized with N2-containing sa-mRNA vaccines had cross-neutralizing antibodies against heterologous A(H3N2) strains, measured by LF MN (Supplementary Fig. 6), resembling our previous results in mice (Fig. 5). Taken together, this clinically relevant ferret-challenging model indicated an enhanced infectious and total virus clearance by the addition of NA using the bicistronic sa-mRNA approach.Fig. 6: Bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccines targeting seasonal A(H3N2) protects ferrets from influenza challenge.a Experimental design for ferret protective study included a prime-boost vaccination regimen with two doses 3 weeks apart with pre- and post-immunization bleeds. Animals were challenged with 106 TCID50 of A/Delaware/39/19 A(H3N2) per animal, and nasal swabs were taken daily during the challenge phase. Nasal turbinates and lung tissues were harvested 3 days post infection. Viral load in nasal swabs were determined by plaque assays (b) and qRT-PCR (c). Viral load in homogenized nasal turbinates was established by plaque assays (d) and qRT-PCR (e). Each dot represents one animal and data are presented as geometric means. Log-transformed nasal swab data were analyzed by using a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with multiple comparisons using Dunnett’s adjustment. Log-transformed nasal turbinate data was analyzed by using a one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons using Dunnett’s multiple comparisons. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.Full size imageDiscussionCurrent licensed inactivated influenza vaccines focus on eliciting immunity against the HA protein, resulting in reduced vaccine efficacy when the HA associated with the vaccine and circulating strains differ due to antigenic drift or mismatch30,31. In contrast, the second major viral surface protein, NA, evolves more slowly7,8, and vaccines targeting NA may have increased breadth of protection32,33,34,35. Here, we demonstrate that sa-mRNA vaccines containing an NA component potently induce the production of NA-inhibiting antibodies in both monovalent and quadrivalent formulations. Furthermore, we demonstrate the in vivo enhanced efficacy of a bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccine expressing both HA and NA in a ferret challenge model. Immunization with sa-mRNA vaccines resulted in reduced viral loads in the upper respiratory tract, which is the primary site of A(H3N2) replication in this model36,37. In addition, we found reduced replication-competent virus in the throats and lungs of vaccinated ferrets, although internal studies and reports in the literature have demonstrated tissue tropism of most seasonal A(H3N2) viruses is limited to the ferret upper respiratory tract37,38. Although not statistically significant, animals that received the bicistronic sa-mRNA vaccine with both an HA and NA component bore consistently lower viral loads measured by PFU and qRT-PCR in both their upper and lower airways versus HA or NA alone, even 1 day post challenge or when the sa-mRNA dose was 10-fold lower, suggesting the additive protection afforded when both viral components were included.In addition to neutralizing the vaccine strain, we demonstrated that anti-N2 antibodies generated using mRNA from the H3N2 A/Delaware/39/2019 strain circulating during the Northern Hemisphere (NH) 2020-2021 season were equally effective against strains circulating in the previous NH2019-2020 and NH2018-2019 seasons (A/Indiana/08/2018 and A/North Carolina/04/2016, respectively) and still maintained detectable neutralizing capacity against a strain from NH2017-2018 (A/Singapore/GP2050/2015). This finding was in contrast to the dramatic reduction in the cross-neutralizing capacity of anti-H3 antibodies, likely due to the more rapid, season to season antigenic drift of the H3 protein compared with N2. Sera from H3N2 sa-mRNA immunized ferrets recapitulated these results, and we have reported similar anti-NA-mediated cross-neutralization following immunization with sa-mRNA encoding the N1 of the seasonal H1N1 A/Delaware/55/2019 (NH20/21) against H5N1 pandemic influenza Aurkey/Turkey/1/201527,39. Others have demonstrated that immunization with NA provides broad heterologous cross-protection against infection with both influenza A and B strains, albeit using different vaccine platforms35,40,41. While investigating cross-protective immunity against heterologous infective challenge was beyond the scope of these experiments, NAI titers have been shown to correlate with protection against heterologous influenza42. Therefore, a quadrivalent bicistronic sa-mRNA-HA-NA vaccine could provide both strong immunity against influenza A and B virus strains as well as broad protection against co-circulating and future seasonal strains.In addition to vaccine-specific Th1-biased CD4+ T cell activation, the sa-mRNA-based vaccines induced influenza-specific CD8+ T-cell responses, which are absent when traditional inactivated and recombinant protein vaccines are used15. Because HA and NA are produced endogenously in the cytoplasm, the antigens are readily available for MHC-I presentation to virus-specific cytotoxic T cells. The presence of CD8+ T cells targeting conserved viral epitopes has been shown to compensate for the lack of cross-neutralizing influenza-specific antibodies and may provide cross-protection against symptomatic infection43.In some cases, we found that increasing the antigen number per immunization by using a bicistronic sa-mRNA construct or a quadrivalent formulation of multiple sa-mRNA constructs resulted in reduced antibody titers and antigen-specific T cells, compared to the monocistronic or monovalent vaccine formulations, respectively. However, in most cases the magnitude of the reduction in antibody titers was small and therefore the immune consequences are unclear. Moreover, due to the self-amplifying nature of the vaccines, the dose range of sa-mRNA tested was very low when compared with the current generation mRNA-based vaccines. Therefore, it may be possible to compensate for a reduced titer by optimizing the dose of sa-mRNA, increasing antigen quantity with a modest increase in mRNA and LNP content44. Although we demonstrated that eight individual monocistronic sa-mRNA vaccines could be successfully delivered and induce neutralizing immunity, the use of four bicistronic HA-NA constructs was also successful. The benefits of the bicistronic quadrivalent approach include both a decrease in total amount of mRNA used per dose, reduced production of replicase proteins, and a lower amount of LNP components per immunization. These features may lessen the risk of adverse events, as well as the amount of materials and therefore the production cost per dose. As demonstrated throughout the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, these considerations are vital when designing flexible and feasible vaccine platforms for future use, particularly for pandemic preparedness.One limitation of the animal models used in this study was that they did not account for how preexisting immunity to influenza, which is prevalent in human populations, could affect both humoral and cellular responses generated by sa-mRNA vaccines. So-called original antigenic sin, or immunodominance, has been well described for anti-HA responses45,46 and may skew or otherwise alter responses to NA as well. Also, while our ferret studies have demonstrated reduced viral shedding during the early stage of influenza infection, future studies are needed to address other important vaccine-mediated effect, such as reduced duration of viral shedding and morbidity. In addition, while the presence of cross-neutralization by anti-NA antibodies would suggest protection against infection by antigenically drifted influenza in vivo, this phenomenon was not tested as a part of this study and future work will determine whether the NA component extends protection to heterologous strains, as indicated by the LF MN assay.In summary, this work demonstrates that bivalent vaccines using sa-mRNA technology induce robust neutralizing and protective anti-influenza adaptive immune responses in vivo against both HA and NA, and these bivalent constructs can be co-formulated in a quadrivalent vaccine against four seasonal influenza strains, generating immunity to eight viral antigens simultaneously.MethodsConstruct design and cloningAll bicistronic constructs were generated based on the Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) TC-83 strain that has a chimeric 3′untranslated region (UTR) from Sindbis virus (SINV). SGPv2 contained the exact same full SGP sequence as described by Blakney, et al. (2018)47. To create a quadrivalent vaccine, the influenza A H1 and N1 were obtained from the A/Delaware/55/2019 isolate, influenza A H3 and N2 were obtained from the A/Delaware/39/2019 isolate; B/Victoria HA and NA were obtained from the B/Darwin/7/2019 isolate, and B/Yamagata HA and NA were obtained from the B/Singapore/INFTT-16-0160/2016 isolate. All clones and constructs were generated seamlessly by Gibson assembly into a sa-mRNA DNA construct for in vitro (IVT) that has a T7 promoter with G as the first nucleotide and a poly A (A = 37) tail.DNA linearization and IVTLinearized DNA templates were enzymatically transcribed into RNA with T7 RNA polymerase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts, USA), digested with Turbo DNAse (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, California, USA) to remove template DNA, and capped using a Vaccinia capping system (New England BioLabs). RNA from the transcription/capping reaction was purified by LiCl precipitation and frozen at −80 °C.sa-mRNA and LNP formulationRNA was formulated into LNPs in citrate buffer using a proprietary ionizable lipid, 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC; Avanti Polar Lipid), 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(polyethylene glycol)-2000] (PEG-DMG 2000; NOF America Corporation, White Plains, NY, USA), and cholesterol (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo, USA), dissolved in ethanol through a NanoAssemblr mixing instrument (Precision Nanosystems, Vancouver, Canada). These nanoparticles were buffer-exchanged into a Tris buffer with NaCl and sucrose by TFF, sterile-filtered, and stored at −80 °C for use in in vitro potency and in vivo immunogenicity experiments26,27.Cell culture, sa-mRNA transfection, and staining for flow cytometryTo evaluate the transfection efficiency of each sa-mRNA construct, baby hamster kidney V (BHK-V) cells, a proprietary derivative of BHK21 (ATCC, Manassas, Virginia, USA) were used. Cells were grown in high glucose Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM; Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; HyClone, Cytiva, Marlborough, Massachusetts, USA), 2 mM L-glutamine, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). Following transfection, high glucose DMEM with 1% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 1% antibiotic was used as the BHK-V outgrowth medium. For flow cytometry staining, monoclonal antibodies against HA and NA were labeled using Zenon kits (Thermo Fisher).For sa-mRNA LNP transfection, 100 µL of LNP in room-temperature optiMEM (Thermo Fisher) with the indicated RNA concentrations was prepared. The 1E6 BHK-V cells were washed once with plain optiMEM and resuspended in 250 µL room-temperature optiMEM before being added to the LNP solution with gentle pipetting. The LNP-cell mixture was gently added to outgrowth medium and prewarmed to 37 °C. After 17–19 h, the cells were scraped, fixed, and permeabilized with Cytofix/Cytoperm (BD Biosciences, San Jose, California, USA) and stained with AF-647 conjugated human anti-HA (made in-house) and/or AF-488 conjugated human anti-NA (made in-house) antibodies. The proportions of HA- and NA-positive cells were enumerated by flow cytometry using a Fortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences).Mouse immunogenicity studiesMouse studies were conducted at Biomodels LLC (Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Female BALB/c mice, 6–8 weeks old, maintained at Biomodels LLC, were immunized (10 mice per group) with bilateral 50 µL intramuscular injections in the rear quadriceps on days 1 and 22. Three weeks after the second immunization, the mice were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation, and blood was collected to evaluate the serum antibody response. To assess cell-mediated immunity, spleens were removed from each animal immediately after euthanasia. All experiments were approved by the Biomodels LLC Institutional Care and Use Committee (IACUC) under IACUC protocol #22-0624-1 and carried out in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals48.Ferret challenge studiesOutbred, castrated and de-scented male ferrets aged 6 months were purchased from Marshall Bio-Resources (North Rose, New York, USA). Ferret studies were completed at Labcorp Early Development Laboratories Inc. and were reviewed and approved by Labcorp Early Development Laboratories, Denver Site IACUC, protocol #0135-22. The animals were handled by trained personnel per the provisions of the Animal Welfare Act, principles of the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, together with the internal procedures and policies of CSL Seqirus and Labcorp. An ABSL-2 vivarium with 12 h light/dark cycles and appropriate temperature and humidity was used to host the animals and the subsequent experimental procedures. Prior to the commencement of the experiments the animals were confirmed seronegative for influenza A and B viruses using standard hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assays. Randomly grouped (n = 6 or 5 per group) influenza-free ferrets were immunized intramuscularly at the quadriceps using a volume of 0.5 mL at indicated timepoints (Fig. 6a). Ferrets were bled under light isoflurane anesthesia to obtain serum prior to each immunization and 3 weeks post-boost on day 42. On study day 48, the ferrets were intranasally challenged with 106 median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) A/Delaware/32/2019 H3N2 influenza virus in a volume of 1 mL (0.5 mL per nostril). Following challenge, nasal and throat swabs were taken daily under light isoflurane anesthesia and animals were monitored for morbidity/mortality in accordance with the Animal Welfare Act and the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International (AAALACi) guidelines. At the end of the study ferrets were euthanized after deep sedation with isoflurane via cardiac terminal bleed followed by intracardiac injection of Euthasol. Tissues were collected after confirmation of death and double thoracotomy.VirusesThe seasonal influenza viruses used in this study included A/Delaware/55/2019 (H1N1), A/Delaware/39/2019 (H3N2), B/Darwin/7/2019 (B/Victoria), and B/Singapore/INFTT-16-0610/2016 (B/Yamagata). To investigate NA-mediated cross neutralization, we used additional A(H3N2) strains, including Indiana/08/2018, A/North Carolina/04/2016, and A/Singapore/GP050/2015. All viruses were propagated in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells (proprietary 33016-PF, Seqirus) at 34 °C for 72 h. Working virus stocks were then characterized by sequencing HA, NA, and nucleoprotein (NP) and titrated. For the purposes of this study, these viruses were titrated by a fluorescent focus-based method and/or by obtaining a TCID50 using MDCK cells.Short-form microneutralization assaysThe neutralization capacity of the sera was examined by a virus fluorescent focus-based SF MN assay developed in house against homologous vaccine strains49. Serial dilutions of receptor-destroying enzyme (RDE) treated heat-inactivated sera were preincubated with 1000-2000 foci-forming units (FFU) of virus per well and allowed to react for 2 h at 37 °C before monolayers of MDCK cells were inoculated. Following overnight incubation at 37 °C, the monolayers were fixed, and infected cells were stained for the nucleoprotein of influenza A (clones A1, A3 blend, MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA, USA) or influenza B (clones B2, B4 blend, MilliporeSigma) and labeled with a goat anti-mouse IgG (H + L) secondary antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Fluorescent foci were imaged by an immunospot analyzer (Cellular Technology Limited, Beachwood, Ohio, USA) and quantified with Immunospot 7.0.12.1 software (Cellular Technology Ltd., Cleveland, Ohio, USA). The MN titer was determined using Excel software (Microsoft, Redmond, Washington, USA) by calculating the reciprocal of the dilution that caused a 60% reduction in viral foci versus the no serum controls.Long-form MN assayTo assess MN mediated by anti-NA antibodies, a hemagglutination quantification-based LF MN assay was used. Serial dilutions of previously RDE and heat-treated serum samples were mixed with an equal volume of influenza virus solution containing 100 TCID50 of A(H3N2) in U-Bottom 96-well plates in neutralization medium consisting of 33016 MDCK protein-free media (Gibco #041-94718 A, Thermo Fisher) and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. This serum-virus mixture was transferred onto confluent MDCK 33016-PF cell monolayers and incubated for an additional 1 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The inoculating medium containing sera and virus was removed, monolayers were washed twice with sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to remove unbound virus, and cells were incubated for 5 days (37 °C and 5% CO2) in the presence of serially diluted serum in neutralizing media supplemented with L-(tosylamido-2-phenyl) ethyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)–trypsin (#T1426, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Control wells containing virus and cells, virus back-titration, and cells without virus were included in each plate. After 5 days, the plates were examined by hemagglutination assay to determine the LF MN titers. Fifty microliters of supernatant were transferred to each well of specific rows into V-bottomed 96-well microtiter plates, an equal volume of 0.7% guinea pig red blood cells (GPRBC; Lampire Biological Laboratories, Pipersville, Pennsylvania, USA) was added, and the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The presence of RBC agglutination (no neutralization) or absence (neutralization) was observed for the vaccine strain (A/Delaware/39/2019) as well as heterologous A(H3N2) strains. The reciprocal of the highest serum dilution that protected the cells from infection was taken as the neutralization titer.Enzyme-linked lectin assayOn day 42 postimmunization, sera were examined for NAI activity by enzyme-linked lectin assay (ELLA)50. Briefly, NA from the homologous or heterologous vaccine strains was mixed with serial dilutions of heat-inactivated sera in buffer containing 33.3 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES, pH 6.5; Alfa Aesar, Haverhill, Massachusetts, USA), 4 mM calcium chloride (KD Medical, Columbia, Maryland, USA), 0.5% Tween-20, and 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) fraction V (Calbiochem, San Diego, California, USA) in plates coated with fetuin (25 µg/ml in PBS, Sigma-Aldrich). Following overnight incubation at 37 °C, the cleavage of sialic acid was detected by peanut agglutinin-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) conjugate (1 µg/ml in PBS, Sigma), the plates were treated with 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB; Rockland, Royersford, Pennsylvania, USA), and the reactions were stopped with 2 N sulfuric acid (Sigma-Aldrich). Absorbance was measured on a Synergy H1 plate reader (BioTek, Winooski, Vermont, USA). The NAI titer was determined by performing a nonlinear regression in GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA) and calculating the reciprocal of the dilution that resulted in a 50% reduction in neuraminidase activity versus the no serum controls.T-cell antigen stimulation and intracellular cytokine stainingFor T-cell analysis, spleens from immunized mice were pooled from 5 mice per group, and single-cell suspensions were prepared in Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium (RPMI, Gibco #22400, Thermo Fisher) containing 100 units of penicillin, 100 µg streptomycin, and 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol. Duplicate cultures of 2 × 106 splenocytes for each stimulation condition were prepared for each splenocyte pool, as well as unstimulated cultures that did not contain antigens but were otherwise identical to stimulated cultures. Influenza subtype-specific CD4 T cells were stimulated with homologous MDCK cell–derived monovalent influenza vaccine component, or monobulk, at a final concentration of 10 µg/mL. In the same wells, CD8 T cells were stimulated with peptides (1 µg/mL) representing influenza A H1 amino acids 533-541 for H1 (peptide IYSTVASSL) and conserved antigen 551-559 (peptide YYSTAASSL) for B/Victoria and B/Yamagata. All cultures contained anti-CD28 antibody (BD Biosciences #553294) at a final concentration of 1 µg/mL, and after stimulation for 2 h, BD GolgiPlug™ Protein Transport Inhibitor (containing Brefeldin A) (BD Biosciences #555029) was added. Stimulation was performed for a total of 6 h in a humidified incubator at 37°C (5% CO2). After stimulation, the cells were stained with a LIVE/DEADTM fixable aqua dead cell stain kit (Invitrogen #L34966), washed, and stained with APC-H7-labeled anti-CD4 (1:20, BD Biosciences #560181) and Alexa Fluor 700-labeled anti-CD8 (1:100, BD Biosciences #557959). Cells were washed, fixed with Perm/Wash buffer (BD Biosciences) and stained with a mixture of Brilliant Violet 605-labeled anti-IL-2 (1:80, BD Biosciences #563911), Alexa Fluor 488-labeled anti-TNFα (1:160, BD Biosciences #557719), PerCP/Cy5.5-labeled anti-IFN-γ (1:160, #45-7311-82, eBioscience, San Diego, California, USA), allophycocyanin-labeled anti-IL-5 (1:80, #504306, BioLegend, San Diego, California, USA), and phycoerythrin-labeled anti-IL-13 (1:80, eBioscience #12-7133-82). Flow cytometry was performed on a Fortessa (BD Biosciences) and analyzed by FlowJo software v10.8.1 (BD Biosciences). The net percent of Ag-specific CD4 or CD8 T cells was calculated as the difference between the percent cytokine-positive cells in the Ag-stimulated and unstimulated cultures. The 95% confidence limits for the percent Ag-specific cells were determined using standard statistical methods in Microsoft Excel. Reported values are the results of duplicate measurements on pooled spleens; therefore, these error bars represent the precision of the measurement, rather than variability within the group.Viral load determination using plaque assaysMDCK-33016-PF cells were seeded in 12 well cell culture plates in DMEM (Gibco #11960, Thermo Fisher) with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin-glutamine (Gibco #10378016, Thermo Fisher) a day before the assays. Homogenized and clarified tissues or clarified supernatants from swabs were subjected to tenfold serial dilutions in virus diluent (Opti-MEM; Thermo Fisher #31985070). Monolayers were washed twice with sterile PBS and inoculated with the serially diluted samples for 1 h while rocking the plates every 10 min to avoid drying out the cells. After virus adsorption, the inoculum was removed, and a semisolid overlay composed of Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM; VWR #12001-584, Radnor, Pennsylvania, USA), 5% sodium bicarbonate (VWR #470302-440), diethylaminoethyl (DEAE) dextran (VWR #AAJ63781-14), and penicillin-streptomycin-glutamine with a final concentration of 0.7% of purified oxoid agar (Thermo Fisher #LB0028B) supplemented with TPCK-treated trypsin (1 µg/mL) was added to wells. The plates were incubated for 3 days at 37 °C with 5% CO2 and fixed using 4% PFA (Thermo Fisher #J199943) overnight. Viral plaques were stained using anti-influenza A virus NP antibody (MilliporeSigma #MAB8251) followed by an anti-mouse-HRP conjugated secondary antibody and developed using KPL TrueBlue reagent (#5510-0030, Seracare, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Stained plaques were manually counted using a white light-transilluminator.Viral load determination using qRT-PCRA(H3N2) viral load was determined by nucleic acid-based quantification51. Viral RNA (vRNA) extraction from homogenized-clarified tissue supernatants or clarified swab supernatants was performed using the QIAGEN vRNA extraction kit as per manufacturer’s instructions (#52906, Qiagen Inc, Valencia, California, USA). To determine the copy number, a purified and quantified molecular standard for A(H3N2) was obtained from ATCC (#VR-1882DQ) and was used to establish a standard curve using known copy numbers. vRNA extracted from samples was used to run the assay and copy numbers were established by extrapolation by the standard curve. The primers and probe sequences used for this study targeted the viral matrix (M) gene were Forward 5′-AGATGAGCCTTCTTACCGAGGTCG-3′, Reverse 5′-AGCAAAGACATCTTCAAGTCTCTG-3′, and Probe 5′-6 FAM- TCAGGCCCCCTCAAAGCCGA-TAMRA-3′ (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, Iowa, USA). The qRT-PCR assay was performed using the Qiagen OneStep RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen #210212) and a Quantstudio 3.0 real-time thermal cycler (Thermo Fisher). All samples were run in triplicate with appropriate assay controls, and final values were normalized to appropriate volumes and/or weights.StatisticsFor serological assays, log-transformed titers were compared between groups by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the Šidák multiple comparisons test using GraphPad Prism software (version 9.1.2, GraphPad Software). The GMT was plotted as a bar graph, and individual titers were plotted as points to show the distribution. To evaluate the magnitude of cross-neutralization in LF MN experiments, the neutralization titer for heterologous A(H3N2) strains in each serum sample was divided by the vaccine strain GMT to provide a percent homologous LF MN titer, which was plotted as the mean ± the standard error of the mean (SEM).Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The authors declare that all relevant data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper. ReferencesAmbrose, C. S. & Levin, M. J. The rationale for quadrivalent influenza vaccines. Hum. Vacc. Immunother. 8, 81–88 (2012).Article Google Scholar Heikkinen, T., Ikonen, N. & Ziegler, T. Impact of influenza B lineage-level mismatch between trivalent seasonal influenza vaccines and circulating viruses, 1999-2012. Clin. Infect. Dis. 59, 1519–1524 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar de Jong, J. C., Beyer, W. E., Palache, A. M., Rimmelzwaan, G. F. & Osterhaus, A. D. Mismatch between the 1997/1998 influenza vaccine and the major epidemic A(H3N2) virus strain as the cause of an inadequate vaccine-induced antibody response to this strain in the elderly. J. Med. Virol. 61, 94–99 (2000).Article PubMed Google Scholar Wohlbold, T. J. & Krammer, F. In the shadow of hemagglutinin: a growing interest in influenza viral neuraminidase and its role as a vaccine antigen. Viruses 6, 2465–2494 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Couch, R. B., Kasel, J. A., Gerin, J. L., Schulman, J. L. & Kilbourne, E. D. Induction of partial immunity to influenza by a neuraminidase-specific vaccine. J. Infect. Dis. 129, 411–420 (1974).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kim, Y. J. et al. Roles of antibodies to influenza A virus hemagglutinin, neuraminidase, and M2e in conferring cross protection. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 493, 393–398 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Abed, Y., Hardy, I., Li, Y. & Boivin, G. Divergent evolution of hemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes in recent influenza A:H3N2 viruses isolated in Canada. J. Med. Virol. 67, 589–595 (2002).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kilbourne, E. D., Johansson, B. E. & Grajower, B. Independent and disparate evolution in nature of influenza A virus hemagglutinin and neuraminidase glycoproteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 87, 786–790 (1990).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Johansson, B. E., Bucher, D. J. & Kilbourne, E. D. Purified influenza virus hemagglutinin and neuraminidase are equivalent in stimulation of antibody response but induce contrasting types of immunity to infection. J. Virol. 63, 1239–1246 (1989).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Laguio-Vila, M. R. et al. Comparison of serum hemagglutinin and neuraminidase inhibition antibodies after 2010-2011 trivalent inactivated influenza vaccination in healthcare personnel. Open Forum Infect. Dis. 2, ofu115 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar Weiss, C. D. et al. Neutralizing and neuraminidase antibodies correlate with protection against influenza during a late season A/H3N2 outbreak among unvaccinated military recruits. Clin. Infect. Dis. 71, 3096–3102 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sandbulte, M. R. et al. Cross-reactive neuraminidase antibodies afford partial protection against H5N1 in mice and are present in unexposed humans. PLoS Med. 4, e59 (2007).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bodewes, R. et al. Annual vaccination against influenza virus hampers development of virus-specific CD8(+) T cell immunity in children. J. Virol. 85, 11995–12000 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Altenburg, A. F., Rimmelzwaan, G. F. & de Vries, R. D. Virus-specific T cells as correlate of (cross-)protective immunity against influenza. Vaccine 33, 500–506 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Koutsakos, M. et al. Circulating TFH cells, serological memory, and tissue compartmentalization shape human influenza-specific B cell immunity. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaan8405 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar Kaech, S. M. & Wherry, E. J. Heterogeneity and cell-fate decisions in effector and memory CD8+ T cell differentiation during viral infection. Immunity 27, 393–405 (2007).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Absalon, J., Koury, K. & Gruber, W. C. Safety and efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 vaccine. Reply. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 1578 (2021).PubMed Google Scholar El Sahly, H. M. et al. Efficacy of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine at completion of blinded phase. N. Engl. J. Med. 385, 1774–1785 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kishida, N. et al. Evaluation of influenza virus A/H3N2 and B vaccines on the basis of cross-reactivity of postvaccination human serum antibodies against influenza viruses A/H3N2 and B isolated in MDCK cells and embryonated hen eggs. Clin. Vaccin. Immunol. 19, 897–908 (2012).Article CAS Google Scholar Xie, H. et al. H3N2 mismatch of 2014-15 northern hemisphere influenza vaccines and head-to-head comparison between human and ferret antisera derived antigenic maps. Sci. Rep. 5, 15279 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vogel, A. B. et al. Self-amplifying RNA vaccines give equivalent protection against influenza to mRNA vaccines but at much lower doses. Mol. Ther. 26, 446–455 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bloom, K., van den Berg, F. & Arbuthnot, P. Self-amplifying RNA vaccines for infectious diseases. Gene Ther. 28, 117–129 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kim, M. S. et al. Comparative safety of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines to influenza vaccines: a pharmacovigilance analysis using WHO international database. J. Med. Virol. 94, 1085–1095 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hekele, A. et al. Rapidly produced SAM((R)) vaccine against H7N9 influenza is immunogenic in mice. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 2, e52 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Geall, A. J. et al. Nonviral delivery of self-amplifying RNA vaccines. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 14604–14609 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Palladino, G. et al. Self-amplifying mRNA SARS-CoV-2 vaccines raise cross-reactive immune response to variants and prevent infection in animal models. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 25, 225–235 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chang, C. et al. Self-amplifying mRNA bicistronic influenza vaccines raise cross-reactive immune responses in mice and prevent infection in ferrets. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 27, 195–205 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bouvier, N. M. & Lowen, A. C. Animal Models for Influenza Virus Pathogenesis and Transmission. Viruses 2, 1530–1563 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, N. et al. Viral loads and duration of viral shedding in adult patients hospitalized with influenza. J. Infect. Dis. 200, 492–500 (2009).Article PubMed Google Scholar Wilson, I. A. & Cox, N. J. Structural basis of immune recognition of influenza virus hemagglutinin. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 8, 737–771 (1990).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Couch, R. B. Seasonal inactivated influenza virus vaccines. Vaccine 26, D5–D9 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, Z. et al. Cross-protection against a lethal influenza virus infection by DNA vaccine to neuraminidase. Vaccine 18, 3214–3222 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rockman, S. et al. Neuraminidase-inhibiting antibody is a correlate of cross-protection against lethal H5N1 influenza virus in ferrets immunized with seasonal influenza vaccine. J. Virol. 87, 3053–3061 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Quan, F. S. et al. Influenza M1 VLPs containing neuraminidase induce heterosubtypic cross-protection. Virology 430, 127–135 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wohlbold, T. J. et al. Vaccination with adjuvanted recombinant neuraminidase induces broad heterologous, but not heterosubtypic, cross-protection against influenza virus infection in mice. mBio 6, e02556 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pearce, M. B. et al. Pathogenesis and transmission of swine origin A(H3N2)v influenza viruses in ferrets. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 3944–3949 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar van den Brand, J. M. et al. Comparison of temporal and spatial dynamics of seasonal H3N2, pandemic H1N1 and highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 virus infections in ferrets. PLoS ONE 7, e42343 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bodewes, R. et al. Infection of the upper respiratory tract with seasonal influenza A(H3N2) virus induces protective immunity in ferrets against infection with A(H1N1)pdm09 virus after intranasal, but not intratracheal, inoculation. J. Virol. 87, 4293–4301 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, Y. Q. et al. Influenza Infection in Humans Induces Broadly Cross-Reactive and Protective Neuraminidase-Reactive Antibodies. Cell 173, 417–429.e410 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mooney, A. J. et al. Vaccination with recombinant parainfluenza virus 5 expressing neuraminidase protects against homologous and heterologous influenza virus challenge. J. Virol. 91, e01579–01517 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Skarlupka, A. L., Bebin-Blackwell, A. G., Sumner, S. F. & Ross, T. M. Universal influenza virus neuraminidase vaccine elicits protective immune responses against human seasonal and pre-pandemic strains. J. Virol. 95, e0075921 (2021).Article PubMed Google Scholar Walz, L., Kays, S. K., Zimmer, G. & von Messling, V. Neuraminidase-inhibiting antibody titers correlate with protection from heterologous influenza virus strains of the same neuraminidase subtype. J. Virol. 92, e01006–e01018 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sridhar, S. et al. Cellular immune correlates of protection against symptomatic pandemic influenza. Nat. Med. 19, 1305–1312 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Keitel, W. A., Atmar, R. L., Nino, D., Cate, T. R. & Couch, R. B. Increasing doses of an inactivated influenza A/H1N1 vaccine induce increasing levels of cross-reacting antibody to subsequent, antigenically different, variants. J. Infect. Dis. 198, 1016–1018 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Andrews, S. F. et al. Immune history profoundly affects broadly protective B cell responses to influenza. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 316ra192 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Angeletti, D. et al. Outflanking immunodominance to target subdominant broadly neutralizing epitopes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 13474–13479 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Blakney, A. K., McKay, P. F. & Shattock, R. J. Structural components for amplification of positive and negative strand VEEV splitzicons. Front. Mol. Biosci. 5, 71 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar National Research Council (US) Committee for the Update of the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. in Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals The National Academies Collection: Reports funded by National Institutes of Health (National Academies Press, 2011).Heeringa, M. et al. Comparability of titers of antibodies against seasonal influenza virus strains as determined by hemagglutination inhibition and microneutralization assays. J. Clin. Microbiol. 58, e00750–00720 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Couzens, L. et al. An optimized enzyme-linked lectin assay to measure influenza A virus neuraminidase inhibition antibody titers in human sera. J. Virol. Methods 210, 7–14 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Spackman, E. et al. Development of a real-time reverse transcriptase PCR assay for type A influenza virus and the avian H5 and H7 hemagglutinin subtypes. J. Clin. Microbiol. 40, 3256–3260 (2002).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsEditorial support was provided by medical consultant C. Gordon Beck and was funded by CSL Seqirus, Inc.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Michael Cheung, Cheng Chang.Authors and AffiliationsCSL Seqirus, 225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA, 02451, USAMichael Cheung, Cheng Chang, Raveen Rathnasinghe, Evan Rossignol, Yunfei Zhang, Annette Ferrari, Harsh Patel, Yanjun Huang, Michelle Sanchez Guillen, Tina Scalzo, Changkeun Lee, Gillis R. Otten, Ethan C. Settembre, Nedzad Music, Giuseppe Palladino & Yingxia WenAuthorsMichael CheungView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCheng ChangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRaveen RathnasingheView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEvan RossignolView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYunfei ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnnette FerrariView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHarsh PatelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYanjun HuangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMichelle Sanchez GuillenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTina ScalzoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChangkeun LeeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGillis R. OttenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEthan C. SettembreView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNedzad MusicView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGiuseppe PalladinoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYingxia WenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsConceptualization: E.S., Y.W., G.P., G.O., N.M., C.L.; Methodology: M.C., C.C., R.R., E.R., Y.Z.; Investigation: M.C., C.C., R.R., E.R., Y.Z., A.F., H.P., Y.H., M.S.G., T.S.; Writing—original draft: M.C., C.C., R.R., E.R., N.M.; Writing—review & editing: M.C., C.C., R.R., E.R., G.O., N.M., G.P., Y.W.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Yingxia Wen.Ethics declarations Competing interests All authors were employed by Seqirus at the time they completed the work described in this publication. Seqirus funded this research; some authors own stock in CSL Limited. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplemental MaterialReporting SummaryRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleCheung, M., Chang, C., Rathnasinghe, R. et al. Self-amplifying mRNA seasonal influenza vaccines elicit mouse neutralizing antibody and cell-mediated immunity and protect ferrets. npj Vaccines 8, 150 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-023-00747-2Download citationReceived: 03 May 2023Accepted: 19 September 2023Published: 04 October 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-023-00747-2Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Content types Journal Information About the Editors Contact Open Access Calls for Papers Editorial policies Article Processing Charges Journal Metrics About the Partner Publish with us For Authors and Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies npj Vaccines (npj Vaccines) ISSN 2059-0105 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingFDA panel backs idea of removing a component from flu vaccine Skip to Main Content Election 2024 FDA Congress Newsletters Log In My Account Subscribe Now My Account Settings Billing Log Out Reporting from the frontiers of health and medicine Newsletters Log In My Account Subscribe Now BiotechPharmaPublic HealthHealth TechPolicyScienceFirst OpinionSTAT+STAT Events Search Log In Try STAT+ My Account Home News Latest Business Biotech Pharma Health Tech Health Insurance Hospitals Medical Devices Washington Policy FDA CDC NIH Science CRISPR Gene Therapy Research Neuroscience Public Health H5N1 Bird Flu Addiction Covid-19 Abortion Health Disparities Infectious Disease Mental Health Disease Cancer Cardiovascular Disease Chronic Disease Diabetes Alzheimer's Obesity Features Coercive Care The Obesity Revolution The War on Recovery Newsletters Opinion Columns Adam Feuerstein Matthew Herper Ed Silverman Reports E-books Podcasts Tools & Trackers CRISPR Tracker Breakthrough Device Tracker Generative AI Tracker Obesity Drug Tracker Events Upcoming Events Summits 2025 Breakthrough East 2025 Breakthrough West Community STAT Wunderkinds '24 STAT Madness Video Advertise STAT Brand Studio Don't miss out Subscribe to STAT+ today, for the best life sciences journalism in the industry Learn more HealthFDA expert panel endorses idea of removing a component from flu vaccine By Helen Branswell Oct. 5, 2023 Reprints Patrick Sison/AP The Food and Drug Administration’s expert vaccine advisory panel on Thursday unanimously endorsed the idea of taking a strain of influenza viruses that no longer appears to circulate out of flu shots as quickly as possible, pressing the FDA and manufacturers to try to get the work done on an expedited timeline. While a representative of vaccine manufacturers warned it may not be possible to remove the influenza B/Yamagata component from the flu vaccines that will be made for the Northern Hemisphere’s 2024-25 season, several members of the Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee suggested that should be a goal, at least for the U.S. market.advertisement Arnold Monto, a veteran influenza expert from the University of Michigan, stressed that while there isn’t enough time left to recommend the B/Yamagata component be removed from vaccines soon to be made for the next Southern Hemisphere winter, it is possible manufacturers could clear the regulatory hurdles in time for the formulation of 2024-25 flu shots for the U.S. market. VRBPAC is scheduled to meet next March to vote on the 2024-25 winter flu vaccine composition. Thursday’s meeting was called to vote on this question, as well as on what strains should go into the 2024 Southern Hemisphere shot. Two flu vaccine manufacturers — Sanofi and Seqirus — make Southern Hemisphere vaccines in the United States and export between 10 million and 20 million doses to 10 Latin American countries, explained David Greenberg, a Sanofi executive who represented the flu manufacturing sector at the meeting. Related: WHO recommends dropping component of many flu vaccines While a couple of members of the committee appeared to be leaning toward recommending the change immediately, Greenberg and Monto stressed that would threaten supplies of vaccine that Southern Hemisphere countries are already negotiating to purchase. In the end, the committee voted unanimously to recommend a formulation of the 2024 Southern Hemisphere vaccine that includes the B/Yamagata component.advertisement “It would be quite disruptive to move ahead with removal right now in the Southern Hemisphere formulation,” said Monto. But he did not side with Greenberg’s suggestion that the industry may need two-full cycles — one for the Southern Hemisphere and one for the Northern Hemisphere — to effect the change. “I feel uncomfortable at promising that B/Yamagata lineage would be included in the Northern Hemisphere formulation [for 2024-25],” Monto said. “I think we need to try to see if it’s possible to do it in the United States at least by the time we meet next March.” Greenberg warned, though, that it is not clear all U.S. manufacturers could meet the timeline the committee appeared to be favoring, noting decisions are already being made about the Northern Hemisphere vaccine production for 2024-25. “At the end of the day, when it comes to filling and packaging the product to ship starting in July [2024] in the U.S., those decisions are made really in the next few months,” he said. “And so if we were to take that risk, I’m really worried that we would have a major shortfall in vaccine distribution next summer and fall.” The VRBPAC vote followed a recommendation last week from the World Health Organization that the B/Yamagata component that is in some — though not all — flu shots made globally should be removed because that lineage of viruses no longer appears to be circulating. B/Yamagata was being outcompeted by the other flu B lineage, B/Victoria, even before the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, the committee was told. The social distancing, masking, and dramatic reduction of global travel that followed the start of the pandemic appeared to have sounded a death knell for B/Yamagata. No confirmed viruses of this lineage have been spotted since late March 2020, David Wentworth, the outgoing director of the WHO Collaborating Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology and Control of Influenza at the CDC, told the committee. While the move to drop B/Yamagata from the flu shots is logical, Greenberg and the FDA’s Jerry Weir, director of the division of viral products at the agency’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, noted it took some years to move from previous trivalent (three-in-one) formulations of flu shots to quadrivalents (four-in-one shots) when it was decided in the late 2000s that adding a second lineage of flu B to the shots would increase the effectiveness of the jabs. After years of work, the first quadrivalent shots began to roll out in 2012. Not all countries use quadrivalent vaccines; the four-in-one shots are mainly used in affluent countries. The U.S. flu shot supply at this point is exclusively quadrivalent vaccine. A number of the previous trivalent licenses manufacturers of quadrivalent vaccines held still exist but have been discontinued, Weir told the committee. Procedures to remove them from the “discontinued products” list exist here. But procedures may be different in other countries, he said, warning it’s unlikely there could be a synchronized global switch to drop B/Yamagata from all flu vaccines. The committee also discussed the idea of using the space in the vaccine that would be freed up by removing the B/Yamagata component to try to improve the performance of flu shots some other way, either by increasing the dose per component, or adding a second influenza A/H3N2 strain, to try to broaden protection against this particularly difficult family of flu viruses. Weir said the FDA was keen to hear VRBPAC members’ thoughts on how this could be done, saying the burden of disease from influenza remains high and there is substantial room for improving the available vaccines. “And that, I think, presents us with an opportunity to ask ourselves whether this is a chance to make a vaccine that is somewhat better,” he said. But Monto warned that while the influenza research community is intrigued by a number of ideas for improving flu shots, there is no consensus at the moment about the best path to do so and little research has been done to lay the groundwork for such a change. Greenberg noted that while individual flu shot makers are exploring ideas for improving the vaccines, they would need to conduct clinical trials before they could apply for licenses for reformulated quadrivalent vaccines. “I think as an industry we’re sincerely interested,” he said. About the Author Reprints Helen Branswell Senior Writer, Infectious Diseases Helen Branswell covers issues broadly related to infectious diseases, including outbreaks, preparedness, research, and vaccine development. Follow her on Mastodon and Bluesky. @HelenBranswell linkedin.com/in/helen-branswell-22ab936/ Tags infectious disease Vaccines To submit a correction request, please visit our Contact Us page. Trending Compounding group sues FDA for removing Lilly’s obesity drug… Compounding group sues FDA for removing Lilly’s obesity drug from its shortages list White House should declare national emergency over IV fluid… White House should declare national emergency over IV fluid shortages caused by Helene, says hospital group With boost from RFK Jr. and Tucker Carlson, two… With boost from RFK Jr. and Tucker Carlson, two chronic disease entrepreneurs vault into Trump’s orbit Recommended A STAT Investigation: Pain, loss, and coercive care A STAT Investigation: Pain, loss, and coercive care Cardiovascular health disparities persist in puzzling ways, studies find Cardiovascular health disparities persist in puzzling ways, studies find What the Trump administration could mean for the health… What the Trump administration could mean for the health care industry, from hospitals to pharma Recommended Stories Health Care Inc. Newsletter Bob Herman STAT Plus: What a second Trump term means for hospitals, insurers, and Medicare Pharmalot Ed Silverman STAT Plus: Pharmalittle: We’re reading about GSK leaving BIO, an AbbVie schizophrenia drug failing, and more advertisement Who to Know Isabella Cueto STAT Plus: ‘MAHA’ is moving into Trump’s White House. Here’s who RFK Jr. could bring along for the ride Politics Lizzy Lawrence STAT Plus: What letting RFK Jr. ‘go wild’ might mean for Trump’s FDA Biotech Allison DeAngelis, Matthew Herper, Andrew Joseph, Jason Mast, and Ed Silverman STAT Plus: Biotech and pharma executives on what Trump and RFK Jr. could mean for the industry Reporting from the frontiers of health and medicine Back to top Company About Our Team Contact Us Careers Diversity & Inclusion Our Awards Advertise With Us STAT Brand Studio Supporters Licensing Stories Account STAT+ Group Subscriptions FAQ My Account Log In Subscribe More Events Newsletters Reports App Podcasts Community Privacy Comment Policy Terms Do Not Sell My Data ©2024 STATFlu treatment shift or drift? A focus on combination therapy News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Account Account Anonymous User Log In Log In Log Out Log Out News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Specialties Choose a specialty All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Menu Close Specialties All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Infectious Disease Subspecialties Antimicrobials Dermatology Emerging Diseases Fungal Diseases Gastrointestinal Infections Hepatitis C HIV/AIDS Influenza MRSA Nosocomial Infections Pediatric ID Practice Management Respiratory Infections STDs Vaccination Viral Hepatitis Zoonotic Infections Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Account Account Log In Log In Log Out Log Out Account Account Anonymous User Close Searchbar Healio News Infectious Disease Influenza ByJennifer Ross, PharmD, BCIDP Fact checked byCarol L. DiBerardino, MLA, ELS Read more October 01, 2023 5 min read Save Flu treatment shift or drift? A focus on combination therapy ByJennifer Ross, PharmD, BCIDP Fact checked byCarol L. DiBerardino, MLA, ELS Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Influenza poses significant health and socioeconomic threats despite cases drastically dropping during the COVID-19 pandemic. Jennifer Ross Influenza vaccines, masking and other infection prevention methods are effective control measures. Still, threats of a severe influenza seasonal epidemic or pandemic persists because of antigenic mismatch between circulating viruses and vaccine strains, inadequate vaccine response among high-risk and immunocompromised patients, and the risk of zoonotic spillover to humans. Antivirals have become a mainstay in influenza treatment to lessen viral replication and associated symptoms. Image: CDC Antivirals have become a mainstay in influenza treatment to lessen viral replication and associated symptoms. Three classes of antiviral drugs — adamantanes, neuraminidase inhibitors and polymerase acidic endonuclease inhibitors — are approved for use in the United States. The efficacy of antiviral monotherapy — namely neuraminidase inhibitors such as oseltamivir, peramivir or zanamivir — in more severe infection and hospitalized patients is limited to observational studies. The 2018 Infectious Diseases Society of America influenza guidelines recommend starting antiviral treatment with a single neuraminidase inhibitor as soon as possible in those who are hospitalized regardless of illness duration. The guidelines recommend against the use of combination therapy. Combination antiviral therapy has improved clinical outcomes in other viral illnesses like HIV, hepatitis C and hepatitis B virus. Newer influenza agents with novel mechanisms of action expand the potential for combination therapy as a way to improve clinical outcomes, especially in severe disease. Why combination therapy? Seasonal influenza A or B infection have a wide range of manifestations, from asymptomatic infection to severe disease. As a single-stranded RNA virus, influenza’s lack of RNA polymerase proofreading during viral replication yields high mutation rates and a subsequent variation in disease severity. Antigenic drift results in single-point mutations that lead to changes in surface proteins called hemagglutinin and neuraminidase. Antigenic drift is an important reason why people can be infected with influenza multiple times over a lifetime and why influenza vaccine composition is reviewed annually. Antigenic shift causes an abrupt, major change resulting in new hemagglutinin and/or neuraminidase surface proteins. When antigenic shift happens, people often have little to no immunity. The constant evolution of the influenza virus continues to spark pursuit of combination antiviral therapy. The paradigm of combination antivirals was explored in influenza as early as the 1970s. Several in vitro studies of dual antivirals have been published since, yet translation to improved efficacy and outcomes remains inconsistent. Combination therapy may reduce selection of antiviral resistance mechanisms. Resistant viral strains have been detected for all FDA-approved influenza antivirals. Adamantanes, which target the M2 proton channel of the influenza A viruses, now have limited clinical use because nearly all viruses have an M2 substitution that confers resistance. Combination antiviral therapy for HIV and HCV has been shown to decrease the selection of resistant viruses with optimal adherence. In addition, combination therapy may have the greatest benefit in high-risk groups, such as immunocompromised patients or severely ill patients, because extended antiviral durations may increase the probability of selecting for resistant viruses. Other reasons driving interest in combination therapy include possible reduction in dosages that lower drug toxicity risks or adverse effects. However, combination therapy enhances the need for careful evaluation of drug-drug interactions. The possibility of reduced severe outcomes or complications of secondary infection with combination therapy is another possible advantage. Previous studies have shown shortened hospitalizations and reduced progression to severe disease with timely monotherapy; it will be important to compare these outcomes with combination therapy. An additional area of further examination is determining how in vitro antiviral combination synergistic effects (ie, viral load reduction) correlate to clinical outcomes and symptoms. FLAGSTONE study Kumar and colleagues performed a randomized, parallel-group, double-blind, placebo-controlled, superiority trial among hospitalized patients aged 12 years or older with severe influenza in 25 countries, called FLAGSTONE. They assigned patients to receive either baloxavir plus a neuraminidase inhibitor or placebo plus a neuraminidase inhibitor between January 2019 and March 2020. Baloxavir marboxil is a cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitor, administered as a one-time dose, that was approved by the FDA in 2018 for the treatment of acute, uncomplicated influenza in patients aged 12 years or older who have been symptomatic for up to 48 hours. The phase 3 CAPSTONE-1 and CAPSTONE-2 randomized controlled trials showed baloxavir led to faster symptom improvement and viral load reduction, as well as reduced complications among patients at high risk for influenza-associated complications, respectively, when compared with placebo. Additionally, the time to symptom improvement was similar between baloxavir and oseltamivir, with the greatest benefit occurring when the antivirals were given within 48 hours of symptoms. In the FLAGSTONE trial, researchers administered baloxavir enterally on Day 1 for patients weighing between 40 kg and 80 kg, and on Days 1 and 4 for patients weighting greater than 80 kg. It was administered on Day 7 if no clinical improvement was seen at Day 5. The study enrolled 366 patients up to 96 hours after symptom onset and randomly assigned them to either the baloxavir-oseltamivir group (n = 241) or the placebo-oseltamivir group (n = 125). Of these, 322 patients were included in the modified intention-to-treat population (208 in the baloxavir group and 114 in the control group), which all efficacy analyses were based on. Of the 322 patents, 87% had an influenza A infection. Only 39% of patients in the baloxavir group received baloxavir within 48 hours of symptom onset. In all, 27 patients in the baloxavir cohort and 17 in the control group required ICU admission at baseline, with six and nine patients being mechanically ventilated, respectively. The median time to clinical improvement was 97.5 hours (95% CI, 75.9-117.2) in the baloxavir group and 100.2 hours (95% CI, 75.9-144.4) in the control group. Subanalyses, including time from symptom onset to study treatment and viral subtype, showed similar time to clinical improvement. The median time to cessation of viral shedding of culturable virus was significantly shorter in the baloxavir group (23.9 hours; 95% CI, 23.2-24.5) than the control group (63.7 hours; 95% CI, 46.4-68.1). Similar safety outcomes were seen between the two groups, with both being well-tolerated. Combination therapy in the FLAGSTONE study did not result in improved clinical outcomes, even with the duration of viral shedding being longer in the control group. The timing of baloxavir administration — with most patients receiving it after 48 hours of symptom onset — may have impacted clinical outcomes. Combination antiviral therapy aiming to rapidly inhibit viral replication may not be as efficacious in advanced, more severe disease. More investigation is needed to better understand the impact of combination therapy — especially baloxavir plus a neuraminidase inhibitor — among immunocompromised patients in whom prolonged viral shedding may be seen. Although immunosuppression was not an exclusion criterion in the FLAGSTONE study, very few patients with this clinical characteristic were enrolled. Combination antiviral therapy for influenza is not going to be the silver bullet, nor should it be administered per current guidelines until more robust, supportive data are published. As with other infections, a multipronged approach to optimally treating and managing influenza is needed. Development of new antivirals to combat the emergence of antiviral resistance is warranted. Presently, influenza treatment drift is on the horizon, although a shift could take place with strategies that allow for earlier recognition, and subsequent treatment may not only improve antiviral efficacy, but also support key influenza infection prevention measures. References: Batool S, et al. Microorganisms. 2023;doi:10.3390/microorganisms11010183. Beigel JH, et al. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(17)30476-0. Koszalka P, et al. PLoS Pathog. 2022;doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1010481. Kumar D, et al. Lancet Infect Dis. 2022;doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00469-2. Uyeki TM, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;doi:10.1093/cid/ciy866. Jennifer Ross, PharmD, BCIDP, is an infectious diseases clinical pharmacist at M Health Fairview – University of Minnesota Medical Center. Ross can be reached at jross13@fairview.org. Published by: Sources/DisclosuresCollapse Disclosures: Ross reports no relevant financial disclosures. Read more about influenza vaccination influenza antiviral therapies Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print Comment Continue Reading Related Content Play on Healio Follow Healio Twitter Facebook Instagram Threads LinkedIn About About Healio About Healio About the Wyanoke Group About the Wyanoke Group Editorial Policy and Philosophy Editorial Policy and Philosophy Sitemap Sitemap Account Information My Account Login My Account My Account Help Help Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Unknown Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Contact Us Email Us Email Us Contact Newsroom Contact Newsroom Advertising Information Advertising Information Permissions and Reprints Permissions and Reprints Legal Do Not Sell My Personal Information Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms and Conditions Terms and Conditions Medical Disclaimer Medical Disclaimer Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Sign Up for Email Get the latest news and education delivered to your inbox Email address Enter your email Update email address Specialty All Specialties Allergy & Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology/Hepatology Hematology Oncology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women’s Health & OB/GYN Subscribe Update email address The email address associated with your Healio account is: If you would like to edit or change the email address that your subscriptions and alerts are sent to, use the "Update email address" link. Update email address © Healio All Rights Reserved. Job board for health care professionals Job Opportunities We’re sorry, but an unexpected error has occurred. Please refresh your browser and try again. If this error persists, please contact ITSupport@wyanokegroup.com for assistance. Close Would you like to receive email reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME? Yes No Activity saved! You'll receive reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME. UnsubscribeModerna reveals optimistic data for influenza-COVID-19 vaccine RecommendedNew webinar with Fujifilm: Monocyte activation test (MAT): Insight into examining regulations and markets prospectsNew webinar: The path to optimisation in pharmaceutical microbiologyJoin our webinar: An alternative medium to support sterility testing using the Growth Direct® Rapid Sterility SystemDiscover more in our new application note: validating recombinant cascade reagents in 3 simple steps About us | Advertise with us | Contact us MenuHomeAI HubNewsArticlesVideosPodcastsPublicationsWhitepapers/App Notes/PostersWebinarsContent HubsEventsThe Future of Bio Pharmaceutical Analysis 2024 (Online Summit)PHARMA MICROBIOLOGY – Navigating Compliance and Best Practices (Online Summit)Pharma 4.0: Breakfast BriefingThe Future of Pharmaceutical Analysis 2023 (Online Summit)Industry EventsAnalytical techniquesBiopharmaDrug deliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegs & Legs newsModerna reveals optimistic data for influenza-COVID-19 vaccine1SHARES Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardPosted: 6 October 2023 | Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) | No comments yetStrong influenza and COVID-19 immunogenicity compared to approved standalone vaccines has been demonstrated in Moderna’s combination vaccine, interim Phase I/II trial data shows. Credit: Golden Shrimp / Shutterstock.comPositive interim results from Moderna’s Phase I/II trial of mRNA-1083, an investigational vaccine designed to immunise against both influenza and COVID-19, have been released.There are several benefits of the combination vaccine as a preventative measure against these respiratory conditions, according to the pharmaceutical company. For example: higher patient compliance, easier administration and greater convenience.Data from Moderna’s mRNA-1083 Phase I/II trialThe ongoing Phase I/II clinical trial is evaluating the safety and immunogenicity of mRNA-1083 compared to a standard dose of the influenza vaccine Fluarix, in adults aged 50-64. Additionally, the combination vaccine is being investigated against Fluzone HD, an enhanced influenza vaccine, in adults 65-79 years of age. According to Moderna, mRNA-1083 was compared against Spikevax booster in both age groups.mRNA-1083 achieved hemagglutination inhibition antibody titers similar to or greater than both licensed quadrivalent influenza vaccines. Moreover, the combination vaccine achieved SARS-CoV-2 neutralising antibody titers similar to the Spikevax bivalent booster in the Phase I/II study, Moderna stated. No new safety concerns were identified for mRNA-1083 compared to the standalone vaccines in the study.Read EPR’s recent interview with Moderna: Guaranteeing resilience in vaccine manufacturing…The company also noted that the mRNA vaccine achieved:Geometric mean titer (GMT) ratios >0 relative to Fluarix in adults 50-64 years of age, for all four influenza vaccine strainsmRNA-1083 GMT ratios relative to Fluzone HD in adults aged 65-79 were also >0. This was the case for all four influenza vaccine strainsGMT ratios of mRNA-1083 relative to Spikevax bivalent were >9 in adults between 50 and 64 years old and >1.0 in adults 65 to 79 years of age, relative to Spikevax.“We are excited to move combination respiratory vaccines into Phase III development,” stated Stéphane Bancel, Chief Executive Officer of Moderna. The company reported that a Phase III trial of mRNA-1083 for adults 50 years old and over is set to begin in 2023. A potential regulatory approval for the combination vaccine is targeted for 2025.mRNA researchers awarded 2023 Nobel PrizeRelated topicsBig Pharma, Biopharmaceuticals, Clinical Development, Clinical Trials, Data Analysis, Drug Development, Drug Safety, Immunisation, Industry Insight, mRNA, Research & Development (R&D), Therapeutics, Vaccine Technology, Vaccines, VirusesRelated organisationsModernaRelated drugsFluarix, Fluzone, mRNA-1083, Spikevax, vaccinesRelated peopleStéphane BancelRelated diseases & conditionsCovid-19, Influenza, SARS-CoV-2 By Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review)6 October 2023No comments yetShares1 Share via Pinterest Reddit Buffer Xing WhatsApp FlipboardRelated topicsBig Pharma, Biopharmaceuticals, Clinical Development, Clinical Trials, Data Analysis, Drug Development, Drug Safety, Immunisation, Industry Insight, mRNA, Research & Development (R&D), Therapeutics, Vaccine Technology, Vaccines, VirusesRelated organisationsModernaRelated drugsFluarix, Fluzone, mRNA-1083, Spikevax, vaccinesRelated peopleStéphane BancelRelated diseases & conditionsCovid-19, Influenza, SARS-CoV-2 Most popular...Final Chapter text published for early adoptionFirst-of-a-kind EU approval granted for eosinophilic esophagitis medicineEncouraging data revealed for schizophrenia long-acting injectablesInnovative static culturing method developedSingle-use bioreactor market to witness favourable expansion to 2030 Read the latest issueAll subscriptions include online membership, giving you access to the journal and exclusive content. Download free copyRelated content webinarSimplify your move from a vial to a prefilled syringeBy newsOptimising reverse-phase chromatography for molnupiravir productionBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsNovel biologic could offer ulcerative colitis symptomatic remissionBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsHaemophilia treatment with new delivery method approvedBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) newsInnovative small molecule shows promise in obesityBy Catherine Eckford (European Pharmaceutical Review) Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment *Name * Email * Website ContentNewsArticlesMagazineWhitepapers & App NotesEventsWebinarsVideosCompany ProfilesTopicsAnalytical TechniquesBiopharmaDrug DeliveryFormulationManufacturingPackaging & LabellingQA/QCR&DRegulation & LegislationAdvertising & EditorialAdvertising OpportunitiesAdvertising Tech SpecsAdvisory BoardInformation for AuthorsMedia PlannerPermission to reuse our contentWrite for us | Advertise with us Contact Subscribe TodayT: +44 (0)1959 563311 F: +44 (0)1959 563123 Company InformationEuropean Pharmaceutical Review is published by: Russell Publishing Ltd.Court LodgeHogtrough HillBrasted, Kent, TN16 1NUUnited KingdomAboutCareers @ Russell PublishingTerms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyManage your cookies© Russell Publishing Limited, 2010-2024. All rights reserved.Website development by e-Motive Media Limited. This website uses cookies to enable, optimise and analyse site operations, as well as to provide personalised content and allow you to connect to social media. By clicking "I agree" you consent to the use of cookies for non-essential functions and the related processing of personal data. You can adjust your cookie and associated data processing preferences at any time via our "Cookie Settings". Please view our Cookie Policy to learn more about the use of cookies on our website.Manage your cookies I agreeCookie Settings Close Cookie SettingsThis website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as ”Necessary” are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. For our other types of cookies “Advertising & Targeting”, “Analytics” and “Performance”, these help us analyse and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these different types of cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. You can adjust the available sliders to ‘Enabled’ or ‘Disabled’, then click ‘Save and Accept’. View our Cookie Policy page. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncookielawinfo-checkbox-advertising-targetingThe cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Advertising & Targeting".cookielawinfo-checkbox-analyticsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Analytics".cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessaryThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".cookielawinfo-checkbox-performanceThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Performance".PHPSESSIDThis cookie is native to PHP applications. The cookie is used to store and identify a users' unique session ID for the purpose of managing user session on the website. The cookie is a session cookies and is deleted when all the browser windows are closed.viewed_cookie_policyThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data.zmember_loggedThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls whether you are able to see content which is only available to logged in users. Performance performancePerformance cookies are includes cookies that deliver enhanced functionalities of the website, such as caching. These cookies do not store any personal information.CookieDescriptioncf_ob_infoThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and, in conjunction with the cookie 'cf_use_ob', is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.cf_use_obThis cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.free_subscription_onlyThis session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls which types of content you are able to access.ls_smartpushThis cookie is set by Litespeed Server and allows the server to store settings to help improve performance of the site.one_signal_sdk_dbThis cookie is set by OneSignal push notifications and is used for storing user preferences in connection with their notification permission status.YSCThis cookie is set by Youtube and is used to track the views of embedded videos. Analytics analyticsAnalytics cookies collect information about your use of the content, and in combination with previously collected information, are used to measure, understand, and report on your usage of this website.CookieDescriptionbcookieThis cookie is set by LinkedIn. The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.GPSThis cookie is set by YouTube and registers a unique ID for tracking users based on their geographical locationlangThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.lidcThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.lisscThis cookie is set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.vuidWe embed videos from our official Vimeo channel. When you press play, Vimeo will drop third party cookies to enable the video to play and to see how long a viewer has watched the video. This cookie does not track individuals.wow.anonymousIdThis cookie is set by Spotler and tracks an anonymous visitor ID.wow.scheduleThis cookie is set by Spotler and enables it to track the Load Balance Session Queue.wow.sessionThis cookie is set by Spotler to track the Internet Information Services (IIS) session state.wow.utmvaluesThis cookie is set by Spotler and stores the UTM values for the session. UTM values are specific text strings that are appended to URLs that allow Communigator to track the URLs and the UTM values when they get clicked on._gaThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. It stores information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors._gatThis cookies is set by Google Universal Analytics to throttle the request rate to limit the collection of data on high traffic sites._gidThis cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visited in an anonymous form. Advertising & Targeting advertising-targetingAdvertising and targeting cookies help us provide our visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns.CookieDescriptionadvanced_ads_browser_widthThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the browser width.advanced_ads_page_impressionsThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and measures the number of previous page impressions.advanced_ads_pro_server_infoThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets geo-location, user role and user capabilities. It is used by cache busting in Advanced Ads Pro when the appropriate visitor conditions are used.advanced_ads_pro_visitor_referrerThis cookie is set by Advanced Ads and sets the referrer URL.bscookieThis cookie is a browser ID cookie set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.IDEThis cookie is set by Google DoubleClick and stores information about how the user uses the website and any other advertisement before visiting the website. This is used to present users with ads that are relevant to them according to the user profile.li_sugrThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used for tracking.UserMatchHistoryThis cookie is set by Linkedin and is used to track visitors on multiple websites, in order to present relevant advertisement based on the visitor's preferences.VISITOR_INFO1_LIVEThis cookie is set by YouTube. Used to track the information of the embedded YouTube videos on a website. Save & AcceptWhy You Need a Flu Shot (and When To Get It)Locations:Abu Dhabi|Canada|Florida|London|Nevada|Ohio|Health EssentialsHealth LibraryFind a DoctorMake an AppointmentNewsCareersContact UsSearchAdvertisementOctober 3, 2023/Health Conditions/Cold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesWhy You Need a Flu Shot (and When To Get It)Prevention is best against this serious illnessHealthcare providers across the country are bracing for another season of treating respiratory viruses like the flu, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and COVID-19.AdvertisementCleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. PolicyAnd while the flu might not seem like something to worry about, it’s a virus we should all be prepared for. So, you may be wondering, Should I get a flu shot?“Influenza is a very serious disease, and during a normal flu season, around 40,000 or more people die from it,” says infectious disease specialist Kristin Englund, MD. “So, with any preventable disease, we should do everything we can to protect ourselves.”Getting your flu vaccine is vital to not just keeping you and your family healthy, but also relieving our over-burdened healthcare system.To learn more about the importance of getting the flu vaccine, we talked to Dr. Englund, along with infectious disease clinical pharmacist Kaitlyn Rivard, PharmD.Why the vaccine mattersFirst of all, Dr. Englund notes that it’s just good practice to get a flu shot every year. She adds that the vaccine’s prevention-geared properties are key.“When people get influenza or get the flu, it’s not only just the symptoms that they have, like a cough, fever and an infection in the lungs,” she says. “It taxes the body and really puts a lot of stress on all of the other systems.”That can cause some serious complications, she continues. “You can have a heart attack or even a stroke as a side effect from having influenza. So, we want to make sure that we’re keeping everybody healthy from all of these complications.”AdvertisementDr. Englund says that a flu shot is especially important this year because other respiratory viruses like COVID-19 and RSV will be circulating.“We’re going to have influenza, RSV and COVID-19 coexisting and there’s a lot of overlap between the symptoms,” she states. “We also anticipate that there will be some people who have co-infections, which could be difficult.”When to get the flu vaccineWe bet you’re now wondering: So, when should I get a flu shot?Dr. Englund and Dr. Rivard advise getting a flu vaccine as soon as it becomes available. Many healthcare providers, including the Cleveland Clinic, begin offering the flu vaccine at the beginning of September.And in case you were wondering, the flu vaccine doesn’t interfere with the COVID-19 vaccine or the RSV vaccine.“All available COVID-19 and RSV vaccines can be given at the same time as the flu vaccine,” clarifies Dr. Rivard. “If someone is coming in for their flu shot and they’re eligible for a COVID-19 vaccine or RSV vaccine but haven’t received it yet, we can offer that. In fact, both the CDC [U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] and the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommend co-administering almost any two vaccines together.”She adds that there are very few instances in which certain vaccines can’t be administered at the same time, noting that children often receive multiple vaccines during one visit to their pediatrician.And there’s no concern about overloading our immune systems with multiple vaccines.“We’re exposed to things that stimulate our immune system all the time,” Dr. Englund says. “Our immune system is constantly responding to various exposures even if you don’t realize it.”Why it’s important to get a flu shot every yearOne reason it’s so important to get your annual flu shot is this: Protecting yourself is a lot easier than treating the flu.“There are some treatments available for the flu that are evolving,” Dr. Englund says. “But to avoid the disease altogether or to only have a mild case because you’ve been vaccinated is much better than trying to treat it. Prevention is best.”And that goes equally for kids — it’s also crucial to get them vaccinated for the flu.“It’s important for children to get the flu vaccine, too, because the circulation of flu in children, if nothing else, puts adults at risk, too,” emphasizes Dr. Englund.“Influenza is a serious disease and it’s unpredictable, and otherwise healthy children are unfortunately hospitalized and die every year because of it. So, even for normal, healthy children, it’s really important to get vaccinated every year.”AdvertisementAdvertisementLearn more about our editorial process.Health LibraryFlu (Influenza)OverviewSymptoms and CausesDiagnosis and TestsManagement and TreatmentPreventionHealth LibraryFlu (Influenza)OverviewSymptoms and CausesDiagnosis and TestsManagement and TreatmentPreventionAdvertisementRelated ArticlesOctober 29, 2024/Children's HealthRSV vs. Pneumonia: Sorting out Your Child’s Fever and CoughRSV can lead your child to develop pneumonia and have trouble breathingOctober 23, 2024/Cold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesWhat Is Respiratory Season, and Are You Ready?Getting vaccinated in October can help protect you against severe illness between November and MarchOctober 8, 2024/Mental HealthHands Off! How To Stop Touching Your FaceFace-touching is a common habit, but one that can be overcome, like by learning to recognize when you’re doing it and keeping your hands distractedSeptember 27, 2024/Cold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesGot Flu-Like Symptoms? A New At-Home COVID-19 and Flu Test Can HelpThis at-home test for COVID-19 and flu can help you figure out what’s causing your symptoms, and how best to treat themSeptember 12, 2024/Cold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesHow Long Are You Contagious With the Flu?You may be spreading the flu virus before your symptoms start and up to a week afterJune 21, 2024/Brain & Nervous SystemWhat You Need To Know About MS and VaccinesMost routine vaccines are safe for people living with multiple sclerosis — but be sure to talk with your care team about your needsJune 5, 2024/Infectious DiseaseAre You Up to Date on Your COVID-19 Vaccines?Updated vaccinations are recommended to better protect against the evolving virus May 30, 2024/Infectious DiseaseShould You Be Worried About COVID Arm?Redness, swelling, itching and rash can happen when your body’s immune system reacts to the vaccine injectionTrending TopicsEar, Nose & ThroatHome Remedies for an Ear Infection: What To Try and What To AvoidNot all ear infections need antibiotics — cold and warm compresses and changing up your sleep position can helpNutrition52 Foods High In IronPump up your iron intake with foods like tuna, tofu and turkeyNutritionIs Starting Your Day With Lemon Water Healthy?A glass of lemon water in the morning can help with digestion and boost vitamin C levels, and may even help get you into a better routineHealth Categories to ExploreBrain & Nervous SystemChildren's HealthExercise & FitnessHeart HealthMen's HealthMental HealthNutritionOrthopaedicsPrimary CareSkin Care & BeautyWellnessWomen's HealthOther Popular CategoriesAging WellAllergiesCancer Care & PreventionChronic PainCold, Flu & Respiratory IllnessesDiabetes & EndocrinologyDigestiveEar, Nose & ThroatEye CareInfectious DiseaseLungOral HealthParentingPregnancy & ChildbirthRecipesRheumatology & ImmunologySenior HealthSex & RelationshipsSleepUrinary & Kidney HealthWeight LossAdRendered: Tue Nov 12 2024 03:31:29 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)FacebookTwitterYouTubeInstagramLinkedInPinterestSnapchatCleveland ClinicHomeAbout Cleveland ClinicCareers at Cleveland ClinicGivingOffice of Diversity & InclusionCommunity OutreachResearch & InnovationsHealth LibraryFree Health eNewslettersResources for Medical ProfessionalsMedia RelationsSite Information & PoliciesSend Us FeedbackAbout this WebsiteAdvertising PolicySocial Media PolicyCopyright, Reprints & LicensingWebsite Terms of UseWebsite Privacy PolicyNotice of Privacy PracticesNon-Discrimination NoticeResourcesMobile AppsPodcasts9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195 | 800.223.2273 | © 2024 Cleveland Clinic. All Rights Reserved.Readout Newsletter: Biotech news, including Moderna's Covid vaccine Skip to Main Content Election 2024 FDA Congress Newsletters Log In My Account Subscribe Now My Account Settings Billing Log Out Reporting from the frontiers of health and medicine Newsletters Log In My Account Subscribe Now BiotechPharmaPublic HealthHealth TechPolicyScienceFirst OpinionSTAT+STAT Events Search Log In Try STAT+ My Account Home News Latest Business Biotech Pharma Health Tech Health Insurance Hospitals Medical Devices Washington Policy FDA CDC NIH Science CRISPR Gene Therapy Research Neuroscience Public Health H5N1 Bird Flu Addiction Covid-19 Abortion Health Disparities Infectious Disease Mental Health Disease Cancer Cardiovascular Disease Chronic Disease Diabetes Alzheimer's Obesity Features Coercive Care The Obesity Revolution The War on Recovery Newsletters Opinion Columns Adam Feuerstein Matthew Herper Ed Silverman Reports E-books Podcasts Tools & Trackers CRISPR Tracker Breakthrough Device Tracker Generative AI Tracker Obesity Drug Tracker Events Upcoming Events Summits 2025 Breakthrough East 2025 Breakthrough West Community STAT Wunderkinds '24 STAT Madness Video Advertise STAT Brand Studio Don't miss out Subscribe to STAT+ today, for the best life sciences journalism in the industry Learn more The ReadoutModerna’s plan to make a single vaccine for Covid, influenza, and RSV is on track By Damian Garde Oct. 5, 2023 Reprints RONNY HARTMANN/AFP via Getty Images Want to stay on top of the science and politics driving biotech today? Sign up to get our biotech newsletter in your inbox. Hello, all. Damian here with a rare look at a biotech in collapse, Moderna’s ambitious future in vaccines, and what looks like a massive missed opportunity.advertisement The need-to-know this morning • Uniqure announced it would lay off about 20% of its workforce as part of a reorganization plan. • The Japanese firm Kyowa Kirin is acquiring gene therapy maker Orchard Therapeutics in a $400 million deal. What it’s like when your biotech goes belly up Histogen, like many biotech companies that went public in 2020, has seen its best-laid plans gradually come apart. But unlike most of its peers, the company has chosen to return its remaining cash to shareholders instead of pressing on. And, even more uncommon, Histogen is speaking frankly about what it’s like to fail in biotech. In an interview with STAT’s Jonathan Wosen, the company’s outgoing leadership detailed the series of setbacks that took Histogen from a promising drug developer to a penny stock on the verge of liquidation. There were clinical setbacks, unsuccessful partnerships, failed reverse mergers and, finally, the decision to just pack it in.advertisement “The energy was certainly one of, ‘Look, we have a tough job to do. We don’t really have a lot of great options. What’s really in the interest of shareholders?’” said David Crean, a member of Histogen’s board. Read more. Did Pfizer miss a multibillion-dollar opportunity? Yesterday, Sanofi agreed to pay up to $1.5 billion for a 50% share of an in-development autoimmune treatment. Earlier this year, Merck paid about $11 billion for a company developing a similar medicine. Each deal serves as a reminder that Pfizer, which had a competing drug in its own pipeline, chose to all but give it away in 2022. The common thread is TL1A, a bodily protein linked to inflammation and tissue scarring. Targeting TL1A seems to hold promise for treating a host of inflammatory disorders, including ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease, which is why Sanofi and Merck spent all that money. Pfizer, by contrast, granted the U.S. rights to its TL1A treatment to Roivant Sciences for nothing up front, instead taking a 25% stake in the Roivant subsidiary that will develop it. About a month later, the Roivant drug outperformed expectations in a Phase 2 trial, with results comparable to Prometheus’ treatment. Moderna’s omnibus vaccine is on track The grand plan for Moderna’s future in respiratory viruses is to market a single shot that would protect against Covid-19, influenza, and RSV, using the scalability of mRNA to craft a first-of-its-kind product. And the first step — establishing the promise of its combination flu and Covid vaccine — is moving on as planned. Yesterday Moderna said its combo shot measured up to established flu and Covid vaccines in generating immune responses against each virus. The next step is to take that combination to Phase 3, which could lead to approval by 2025. At the same time, Moderna is awaiting FDA approval for its RSV vaccine and testing a combination that would protect against all three viruses. Moderna has projected 2027 respiratory vaccine revenue of between $8 billion and $15 billion, a bullish forecast that will require the company to succeed with its omnibus vaccine. Among the potential challenges are waning demand for Covid boosters and a side effect profile that might lead consumers to opt for other products. Sandoz makes a shaky debut after spinoff After more than a year of corporate plotting, market speculation, and shareholder debate, Novartis’ generics division began its life as a standalone company. And the immediate reaction was less than enthusiastic. Sandoz began trading on the Swiss exchange yesterday, opening at a valuation of about $11 billion. That was below analysts’ projections, which ranged from about $12 billion to $25 billion. The problem, one analyst told Bloomberg, is that the market is wary of the volatile world of generics, and Sandoz, which has a deeper pipeline of biosimilars than many of its rivals, will need time to win investors over. Newsletters Sign up for The Readout Your morning rundown of the science, politics, and money driving biotech today Please enter a valid email address. Privacy Policy More reads • Was Amgen less than forthcoming about FDA’s concerns on its cancer drug? STAT • Key Senate panel eyes action on drug shortages, STAT • Why rings of RNA could be the next blockbuster drug, Nature • Eli Lilly executive who oversaw development of blockbuster diabetes drug is set to retire, Bloomberg About the Author Reprints Damian Garde National Biotech Reporter Damian Garde covered biotech, was a co-writer of The Readout newsletter, and was a co-host of "The Readout LOUD" podcast. @damiangarde Tags biotechnology Coronavirus drug development drug pricing Pharmaceuticals Vaccines To submit a correction request, please visit our Contact Us page. Trending Compounding group sues FDA for removing Lilly’s obesity drug… Compounding group sues FDA for removing Lilly’s obesity drug from its shortages list White House should declare national emergency over IV fluid… White House should declare national emergency over IV fluid shortages caused by Helene, says hospital group With boost from RFK Jr. and Tucker Carlson, two… With boost from RFK Jr. and Tucker Carlson, two chronic disease entrepreneurs vault into Trump’s orbit Recommended Schizophrenia drug AbbVie picked up in $9 billion acquisition… Schizophrenia drug AbbVie picked up in $9 billion acquisition fails in key trials Risk of aspiration during surgery added to GLP-1 drug… Risk of aspiration during surgery added to GLP-1 drug labels What the Trump administration could mean for the health… What the Trump administration could mean for the health care industry, from hospitals to pharma Recommended Stories Politics Lizzy Lawrence STAT Plus: What letting RFK Jr. ‘go wild’ might mean for Trump’s FDA Who to Know Isabella Cueto STAT Plus: ‘MAHA’ is moving into Trump’s White House. Here’s who RFK Jr. could bring along for the ride advertisement Matt's Take Matthew Herper STAT Plus: How will Trump’s election change the FDA? History yields some clues Pharma John Wilkerson, Lizzy Lawrence, Rachel Cohrs Zhang, and Sarah Owermohle STAT Plus: Pharma giant GSK is quitting BIO in latest setback for the lobbying group Biotech Adam Feuerstein and Jason Mast STAT Plus: Patient dies in Beam Therapeutics trial of CRISPR sickle cell treatment Reporting from the frontiers of health and medicine Back to top Company About Our Team Contact Us Careers Diversity & Inclusion Our Awards Advertise With Us STAT Brand Studio Supporters Licensing Stories Account STAT+ Group Subscriptions FAQ My Account Log In Subscribe More Events Newsletters Reports App Podcasts Community Privacy Comment Policy Terms Do Not Sell My Data ©2024 STATRSV hospitalizations have worse clinical outcomes for older Americans than flu, COVID | CIDRAP Skip to main content University of Minnesota Main navigationMain content University of Minnesotahttp:/win-cities.umn.edu/612-625-5000 Go to the U of M home page Main navigation News Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Podcasts Newsletters About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us About Search CLOSE Search Support Menu RSV hospitalizations have worse clinical outcomes for older Americans than flu, COVID Stephanie Soucheray, MA COVID-19 lakshmiprasad S / iStock Share Copied to clipboard Though hospitalizations for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) are less common than those for flu or COVID-19, they are more severe and more likely to occur in adults ages 75 and older, according to new data published today in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. The study looked at adult hospitalization for RSV in the United States from February 2022 to May 2023. A total of 5,784 adults aged 60 years or older hospitalized with acute respiratory illness and laboratory-confirmed RSV, SARS-CoV-2, or influenza infection were prospectively enrolled in the study conducted at 25 US hospitals. Severity of illness was based on the following outcomes: standard-flow oxygen therapy, high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) or noninvasive ventilation (NIV), intensive care unit (ICU) admission, and invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) or death. Overall, 304 (5.3%) adults were hospitalized with RSV, 4,734 (81.8%) with COVID-19, and 746 (12.9%) with influenza. The median age of hospitalized RSV patients was 72 years, compared to 74 for COVID-19 and 71 for influenza. Greater odds of respiratory support needed The odds for all outcomes were higher for RSV patients compared to COVID-19 or influenza. Patients hospitalized with RSV were more likely than hospitalized COVID-19 patients or hospitalized influenza patients to receive standard-flow oxygen (adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 2.97 [COVID-19] and 2.07 [influenza]) and HFNC or NIV (aOR, 2.25 [COVID-19] and 1.99 [influenza]) or to be admitted to an ICU (aOR, 1.49 [COVID-19] and 1.55 [influenza]). "Clinical outcomes in patients hospitalized with RSV were worse than those among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 or influenza. The odds of the composite outcome of IMV or death between patients hospitalized with RSV and patients hospitalized with COVID-19 was similar but much higher for RSV compared to influenza. "Clinical outcomes in patients hospitalized with RSV were worse than those among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 or influenza," the authors said. "Because RSV disease is less common than COVID-19 or influenza disease among hospitalized patients, clinicians might be less aware of RSV as a serious respiratory pathogen in older adults." In June 2023, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommended RSV vaccination for adults aged 60 years and older. In the United States, an estimated 60,000 to 160,000 RSV-associated hospitalizations and 6,000 to 10,000 RSV-associated deaths occur each year among adults aged 65 and older. Canadian study shows increase in RSV hospitalizations post pandemic Another group likely to be hospitalized for RSV is infants under age 6 months. A new study from Canada published this week in JAMA Network Open found an increase in pediatric RSV hospital admissions during the 2021 to 2022 cold and flu season but not an increase in disease severity. The study looked at RSV trends across five seasons (2017-2018 to 2021-2022) at 13 pediatric tertiary care centers. RSV hospitalizations for children 0 to 16 years were considered. Across all seasons, 60.8% of hospitalizations were among children aged less than 6 months. There were 58 hospitalizations reported in 2020-2021, followed by 3,170 hospitalizations in 2021-2022, the authors said. "We observed an overall increase in pediatric RSV–associated hospitalizations in Canada after the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning in the summer of 2021," the authors concluded. "This resurgence of RSV infections was likely associated with reduced population-level immunity caused by the absence of infections in the previous year, combined with children’s reengagement in social activities and the relaxing of other COVID-19 public health measures." Related news Previous Next Paxlovid cuts COVID hospitalization, death risk and speeds symptom relief, studies find Mary Van Beusekom MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Stephanie Soucheray Study finds no adverse brain development in kids exposed to COVID in utero Mary Van Beusekom Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Stephanie Soucheray Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Stephanie Soucheray Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science Mary Van Beusekom Low COVID, flu vaccine uptake noted in US healthcare workers Stephanie Soucheray Risk of long COVID in kids grew along with rising childhood obesity during pandemic Mary Van Beusekom This week's top reads Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Overall, the risk of developing 28 out of 36 long-COVID symptoms lessened when vaccines were effective. Stephanie Soucheray California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases In related developments, the USDA reported more dairy cow and poultry outbreaks, as Los Angeles Country announced its first H5 wastewater detection. Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Since a spillover in October 2023 the novel reassortment has replaced the older clade in Cambodia's poultry. Lisa Schnirring MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Among 12- to 17-year-olds, 90% of those with MIS-C were unvaccinated. Stephanie Soucheray CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows The CDC now recommends testing and prophylactic Tamiflu use in asymptomatic workers exposed to sick animals. Lisa Schnirring Four cases of sexually transmitted fungal infection reported in New York The infections were caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes type VII (TMVII), a sexually transmitted fungus that causes ringworm. Chris Dall Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science The greatest levels of trust were seen among men, those with university degrees and high median outcomes, and those who had lost someone to COVID-19. Mary Van Beusekom Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Over half of participants (57%) reported a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Stephanie Soucheray Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen The presumed positive infection comes amid a rise in poultry outbreaks in BC and US western states, likely triggered by wild bird migration. Lisa Schnirring Cases top 50,000 in Africa's mpox outbreak In other outbreak developments, medical groups announce a vaccine allocation plan and a vaccine trial to begin in pregnant women and in children younger than 2. Lisa Schnirring Our underwriters Unrestricted financial support provided by Principal Underwriter Leading Underwriter Major Underwriter Supporting Underwriter Become an Underwriter Help make CIDRAP's vital work possible Support Us Home Editorial policy Search news Contact Us CIDRAP - Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy Research and Innovation Office, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN Email us © 2024 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights Reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer Research and Innovation Office | Contact U of M | Privacy Policy Newsletter subscribe Get CIDRAP updates Choose newsletters Select all Daily Headlines Antimicrobial Stewardship Newsletter Chronic Wasting Disease Newsletter Flu Vaccine Roadmap Newsletter Resilient Drug Supply Newsletter Email Email Format html text News Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Podcasts Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Newsletters About About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us DonateFlu Vaccine Available at the Alachua County Health Department × You are leaving the Alachua County Website Thank you for visiting the Alachua County website. By clicking “Ok” you will be redirected to a non-County maintained website. Alachua County may not be responsible for the content at the site you are about to be linked to. Ok Cancel Turn on more accessible mode Turn off more accessible mode Sign In How Can We Help You? arrow_drop_down Make a Public Records Request Volunteering Ambulance Records Request Employment Opportunities Adopt a Pet Advisory Boards Pay a Ticket Waste Collection Parks & Open Space Business Resources County Budgets Request a Proclamation Request an Accommodation Agenda & Minutes Alachua County Citizens Academy Alachua County Events Alert Alachua Emergency Notifications Conserving Your Lands County Holiday Schedule Disaster Preparedness Find Adoptable Pets Foster Grandparent Program Hazardous Waste Disposal and Recycling Irrigation Restrictions Libraries Map Genius Open Finance Portal Our Vision & Values Pay an Ambulance Bill Poet Laureate Recycling Solicitation Opportunities Tree Planting and Care Truth and Reconciliation Veteran's Services Victim Services Visit Parks & Preserves Wage Recovery County Offices arrow_drop_down County Commission Offices Animal Resources Budget and Fiscal Services Code Administration Communications Office Community Support Services County Attorney County Commissioners (BoCC) County Manager's Office Court Services Economic Development Emergency Management Engineering and Operations Environmental Protection Equal Opportunity Facilities Management Fire Rescue Growth Management Human Resources Information & Telecommunications Services Land Conservation Parks & Open Space Public Works Procurement Risk Management Solid Waste & Resource Recovery Sustainability, Equity, Economic, and Strategic Development Veteran Services Visitors and Convention Bureau Other County Offices Alachua County Library District CareerSource North Central Florida Charter Review Commission Children's Trust of Alachua County Clerk of the Court County Recorder Health Department Property Appraiser's Office Public Defender School Board of Alachua County Sheriff's Office State Attorney's Office Supervisor of Elections Office Tax Collector's Office Traffic Citation Bureau UF/IFAS Cooperative Extension Business Resources arrow_drop_down Business Resources Home Business Development Business Education Business Incentives Business Infrastructure Doing Business in Alachua County Information Center Permitting Tools & Resources Workforce Contact Us Home>County News>Article Menu search search Hero Area Content​ View more Alachua County Headlines Flu Vaccine Available at the Alachua County Health Department Published on 10/4/2023 by Last updated: 10/4/2023 4:30 PM Page ContentThis press release was published at the request of the Florida Department of Health in Alachua County. The Florida Department of Health in Alachua County (DOH-Alachua) is offering influenza vaccines. “Receiving an influenza vaccine is a primary preventive measure against influenza infection,” stated Paul Myers, Administrator of the Alachua County Health Department. “In addition to getting a flu immunization, staying home when ill, practicing proper cough etiquette, and washing your hands are effective personal means to protect yourself and the community from a variety of illnesses. Popular, painless, safe, and effective FluMist has been available at school clinics, while FluMist and shots are available at all health department sites.” Flu immunizations are being offered at the Florida Department of Health in Alachua County – East Gainesville Clinic – Main Headquarters (224 S.E. 24th Street, Gainesville, 352-334-7910), the Florida Department of Health in Alachua County – Alachua Clinic located in the Hitchcock’s shopping plaza 15530 N.W. US Hwy 441, Alachua, 386-462-2542), and the Florida Department of Health in Alachua County – Southwest Clinic (816 S.W. 64th Terrace, Gainesville, 352-225-4320). Appointments are required for flu shots at all three health department sites. These can be made by calling the clinics at the numbers listed above. This year’s flu vaccine is effective against the major circulating strains of flu, and Fluzone High-Dose shots are available for those 65 and older. The cost for the regular vaccine is $25.00, and the high-dose shots are available at different price points. If citizens have Medicare Part B, there is no charge if they bring their Medicare B card and any other supplemental insurance cards with them. Citizens who normally receive their vaccines from providers other than the Health Department should contact them for vaccine availability. Those between the ages of 6 months and 18 years who are uninsured and have Medicaid or insurance that does not cover the immunization may receive the vaccine at the Alachua County Health Department at no cost. For more information, including forms to expedite your visit, visit the Florida Department of Health in Alachua County website. Related News 11-12-24 County Commission Regular Meeting Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Sed porttitor tempor posuere. Etiam eu suscipit tellus. Community Workshop for Safe Streets and Roads/Taller Comunitario Para el Plan de Acción de Calles y Caminos Seguros Para Todos for All Action Plan Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Sed porttitor tempor posuere. Etiam eu suscipit tellus. Feature Story - The Fest: Celebrating the legacy of a punk rock community Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Sed porttitor tempor posuere. Etiam eu suscipit tellus. County Closings and Waste Collection for Veterans Day Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Sed porttitor tempor posuere. Etiam eu suscipit tellus. Read All About It: Alachua County News and Updates Keep up-to-date with all news and developments in your community, delivered to your inbox. Subscribe​ Mark Sexton Communications Director Phone: 352-374-5204 Cell: 352-283-2317 msexton@alachuacounty.us If you have a disability and need an accommodation in order to participate in a County program, service or public meeting, please contact the Alachua County Equal Opportunity Office at 352-374-5275 at least 2 business days prior to the event. TTY users please call 711 (Florida Relay Service). Alachua County aims to continually improve the accessibility and usability of its website. If you are an individual with a disability and you experience difficulty or require assistance or accommodation in using our website, please contact the Alachua County ADA Coordinator at ADA@alachuacounty.us or call the Alachua County Equal Opportunity Office at 352-374-5275; TDD/TTY Users please call 711 Florida Relay Service. View Alachua County's Website Accessibility Policy And Procedures If you have a disability and need an accommodation in order to participate in a County program, service or public meeting, please contact the Equal Opportunity Office at 352-374-5275 at least 2 business days prior to the event. TDD users, please call 711 (Florida Relay Service). Facebook Instagram Twitter YouTube Flickr Contact us To make a public records request, please contact the Public Records Custodian at (352) 264-6906 or publicrecordsrequest@alachuacounty.us. Please visit the Public Records Request webpage for more information. This website is a public service. Please read the Legal Disclaimer. Website designed and engineered by Alachua County ITS, Applications Division Version 2014 (v1.0) Under Florida law (Statute 119.011), all information, including e-mail, written letters, documents and phone messages, sent to the Alachua County Board of County Commissioners is subject to Public Records law. This includes the sender's e-mail address, home address or phone number if shown in the message, the content of the message and any associated attachments to the mail. Also please be aware that electronic correspondence (e-mail) is made available on the Commission's public archive site immediately upon being sent. Instead, contact Alachua County Offices by phone or in writing. As part of an ongoing accessibility initiative we are using the Siteimprove Intelligence PlatformTM to help identify and prioritize accessibility issues on our website. photo_camera Background image: Lake Alice provided by: PhotoTale Studio, Portrait, Family and Landscape Photographer in Gainesville, FLModerna sees positive results from combo vaccine against COVID-19, flu News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Account Account Anonymous User Log In Log In Log Out Log Out News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Specialties Choose a specialty All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Menu Close Specialties All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Infectious Disease Subspecialties Antimicrobials Dermatology Emerging Diseases Fungal Diseases Gastrointestinal Infections Hepatitis C HIV/AIDS Influenza MRSA Nosocomial Infections Pediatric ID Practice Management Respiratory Infections STDs Vaccination Viral Hepatitis Zoonotic Infections Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Account Account Log In Log In Log Out Log Out Account Account Anonymous User Close Searchbar Healio News Infectious Disease Vaccination COVID-19 Resource Center ByStephen I. Feller Fact checked byCarol L. DiBerardino, MLA, ELS Read more October 04, 2023 2 min read Save Moderna sees positive results from combo vaccine against COVID-19, flu ByStephen I. Feller Fact checked byCarol L. DiBerardino, MLA, ELS Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Key takeaways: Moderna’s messenger RNA combination vaccine generated immune responses similar to existing flu and COVID-19 vaccines. The company said a phase 3 trial of the vaccine will start later this year. Moderna said Wednesday that its messenger RNA-based combination vaccine against influenza and COVID-19 elicited neutralizing antibody levels that were as high — or higher — than existing vaccines in a phase 1/2 trial. Based on data from the ongoing trial, which is set to conclude in December, Moderna said it will begin a phase 3 trial of the combination vaccine in adults aged 50 years or older this year and is targeting regulatory approval applications for 2025. Moderna announced positive results from its phase 1/2 trial of a combination vaccine against influenza and COVID-19. Image: Adobe Stock “Flu and COVID-19 represent a significant seasonal burden for individuals, providers, health care systems and economies,” Moderna CEO Stéphane Bancel, MSc, MBA, said in a press release. “Combination vaccines offer an important opportunity to improve consumer and providers experience, increase compliance with public health recommendations and deliver value for health care systems.” Moderna recruited roughly 600 participants for the randomized, observer blind trial to test its combination mRNA-1083 vaccine against a standard influenza vaccine in adults aged 50 to 64 years, an enhanced influenza vaccine in adults aged 65 to 79 years, and the company’s bivalent COVID-19 booster in both groups of adults. According to Moderna, the vaccine achieved antibody titer levels similar to or greater than both quadrivalent influenza vaccines and a SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody titer response similar to the bivalent booster, with geometric mean titer (GMT) ratios of 1 or greater for all comparisons except relative to the bivalent COVID-19 booster in adults aged 50 to 64 years, for which the ratio was 0.9 or greater. Reported rates of adverse reactions to the combination vaccine were also similar to those from standalone COVID-19 vaccines, with grade 3 local or systemic reactions reported in less than 4% of participants aged 50 years and older. In 2021, Moderna began testing an investigational mRNA influenza vaccine and said it was expanding its mRNA program to develop vaccines against HIV and Nipah virus. Last month, it announced positive results of the influenza mRNA vaccine, saying it met its primary endpoint in a phase 3 trial and outperformed a high-dose influenza vaccine in the phase 1/2 trial. In July, the company initiated a rolling submission with the FDA for its mRNA-based vaccine against respiratory syncytial virus vaccine after phase 3 trial data showed it was effective. References: A study of mRNA-based influenza and SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) multi-component vaccines in healthy adults. https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT05827926. Last updated Sept. 13, 2023. Accessed Oct. 4, 2023. Moderna announces positive phase 1/2 data from mRNA-1083, the company’s combination vaccine against influenza and COVID-19. https://investors.modernatx.comewsews-details/2023/Moderna-Announces-Positive-Phase-12-Data-from-mRNA-1083-the-Companys-Combination-Vaccine-Against-Influenza-and-COVID-19/default.aspx. Published Oct. 4, 2023. Accessed Oct. 4, 2023. Moderna expands the field of mRNA medicine with positive clinical results across cancer, rare disease, and infectious disease. https://investors.modernatx.comewsews-details/2023/Moderna-Expands-the-Field-of-mRNA-Medicine-with-Positive-Clinical-Results-Across-Cancer-Rare-Disease-and-Infectious-Disease/default.aspx. Published Sept. 13, 2023. Accessed Oct. 4, 2023. Published by: Sources/DisclosuresCollapse Source: Press Release Disclosures: Bancel is employed by Moderna. Read more about covid-19 covid-19 vaccine influenza viruses influenza vaccination Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print Comment Continue Reading Related Content Play on Healio Follow Healio Twitter Facebook Instagram Threads LinkedIn About About Healio About Healio About the Wyanoke Group About the Wyanoke Group Editorial Policy and Philosophy Editorial Policy and Philosophy Sitemap Sitemap Account Information My Account Login My Account My Account Help Help Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Unknown Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Contact Us Email Us Email Us Contact Newsroom Contact Newsroom Advertising Information Advertising Information Permissions and Reprints Permissions and Reprints Legal Do Not Sell My Personal Information Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms and Conditions Terms and Conditions Medical Disclaimer Medical Disclaimer Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Sign Up for Email Get the latest news and education delivered to your inbox Email address Enter your email Update email address Specialty All Specialties Allergy & Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology/Hepatology Hematology Oncology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women’s Health & OB/GYN Subscribe Update email address The email address associated with your Healio account is: If you would like to edit or change the email address that your subscriptions and alerts are sent to, use the "Update email address" link. Update email address © Healio All Rights Reserved. Job board for health care professionals Job Opportunities We’re sorry, but an unexpected error has occurred. Please refresh your browser and try again. If this error persists, please contact ITSupport@wyanokegroup.com for assistance. Close Would you like to receive email reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME? Yes No Activity saved! You'll receive reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME. UnsubscribeAs Turkey Production Rises, Prices Drop, Just in Time for Thanksgiving | Market Intel | American Farm Bureau Federation MENU WHO WE ARE WHAT WE DO GET INVOLVED NEWSFarm Bureau® NewsNewslineIn the NewsNews ReleaseMARKET INTELLatest AnalysisMarket PricesVIEWPOINTSFocus on AgricultureThe ZiplineEVENTSAmarillo Farm & Ranch show2025 American Farm Bureau Convention2025 FUSION ConferenceADVOCACYiFarmiVote 2024Presidential Candidate QuestionnaireAction AlertsAction Alerts Farm Bill: Farmers are in need; Congress needs to act now!COMMUNICATION: Support AM Radio for Every Vehicle Act!EPA to Designate PFAS as Hazardous Substances; Impact to Farms likely to be WidespreadGrassroots Grassroots AdvocacyBe a Successful AdvocateSign up for Action Alerts118th Congress Briefing BookletLegal AdvocacyINITIATIVES#StillFarmingAg Innovation ChallengePartners in Advocacy LeadershipFarm Dog of the YearFarm State of MindCounty Activities of ExcellenceSafety & Health Network Safety & Health HomepageThink F.A.S.TVeteran Farmer Award of ExcellencePROGRAMSYoung Farmers & RanchersPromotion & EducationWomen’s LeadershipLEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENTFarm Bureau UniversityABOUTWho We AreWhat We DoGet InvolvedMeet our LeadershipFast Facts About AgStaff DirectoryCareersJOINBecome a MemberMember Benefits ISSUES Farm BillTradeSustainabilityRegulatory ReformRural BroadbandLaborVIEW ALL TRENDING TOPICS Farm BillSustainabilityFarm IncomeFarm LaborTradeFoundation for Agriculture NEWS news Home Farm Bureau® News Newsline In the News News Release MARKET INTEL market intel Home Latest Analysis Market Prices VIEWPOINTS viewpoints Home Focus on Agriculture The Zipline EVENTS events Home Amarillo Farm & Ranch show 2025 American Farm Bureau Convention 2025 FUSION Conference ADVOCACY advocacy Home iFarmiVote 2024 Presidential Candidate Questionnaire Action Alerts Grassroots Legal Advocacy INITIATIVES initiatives Home #StillFarming Ag Innovation Challenge Partners in Advocacy Leadership Farm Dog of the Year Farm State of Mind County Activities of Excellence Safety & Health Network Veteran Farmer Award of Excellence PROGRAMS programs Home Young Farmers & Ranchers Promotion & Education Women’s Leadership LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT leadership development Home Farm Bureau University ABOUT about Home Who We Are What We Do Get Involved Meet our Leadership Fast Facts About Ag Staff Directory Careers JOIN join Home Become a Member Member Benefits ISSUES Farm Bill Trade Sustainability Regulatory Reform Rural Broadband Labor MORE TRENDING TOPICS Farm Bill Sustainability Farm Income Farm Labor Trade Foundation for Agriculture > Market Intel | Oct 05, 2023 | 10/05/23 light dark Facebook Twitter LinkedIn As Turkey Production Rises, Prices Drop, Just in Time for Thanksgiving Bernt Nelson Economist photo credit: Getty photo credit: Getty Bernt Nelson Economist Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) has had a long hold on poultry and egg farmers in the United States. The H5N1 outbreak that began in January 2022 spanned almost 19 months with over 800 confirmed detections affecting nearly 59 million birds in commercial and backyard flocks. The resulting supply concerns and record turkey and egg prices during the 2022 holiday season caused problems for both consumers and farmers. With economic concerns still looming, consumers are wondering if Thanksgiving dinner will cost as much as last year. As many trees lose their leaves and we head toward the holidays, this Market Intel evaluates how the H5N1 avian influenza virus might affect prices this year. HPAIThe status of HPAI is much different now than it was just a year ago. Migratory birds are a major vector of this virus, which naturally makes spring and fall migration high risk times (Figure 1). Detections from the current outbreak peaked during March 2022 with 20.96 million birds affected before gradually falling to just 540 birds in September 2023. This can be compared to 8.15 million birds affected in September 2022. June marked the first month with no detections since the outbreak began in February 2022. Will Supplies and Prices be More Stable in 2023? SuppliesTurkey supplies have recovered since the HPAI outbreak began. Due to the time it takes for poults placed on feed to be ready for market (about 14 weeks) poults must be placed on feed in July in order to be ready to market by Thanksgiving. According to USDA’s September 2023 Livestock, Dairy, and Poultry Outlook, July 2023 turkey production was 432.3 million pounds. This is 9.7% above July 2022, but still about 6% below pre-2022 HPAI outbreak levels, with 457.9 million pounds produced in July 2021. Much of the increase in production is attributed to live weights (the weight of a market ready bird) rising 3.8% above last year and higher processing numbers. USDA’s Turkey Hatchery report, released monthly, indicates there were 26.8 million eggs in incubators on Aug. 1, up 1% from 2022. Poults (young turkeys) hatched during July were up slightly from 2022 at 22.5. Net placements of poults on feed in July were 21.9 million, down slightly from last year. May and June placements of poults on feed were well above average and make up for lower placements in July. USDA’s annual Turkeys Raised report estimates that 219 million turkeys were raised in 2023, an increase of 4% from 2022 and 1% above pre-HPAI outbreak levels in 2021 (Figure 2). This increase in the number of turkeys raised along with strong placements of poults on feed in May and June is a good indication of lower consumer prices ahead of Thanksgiving.Prices and DemandTurkey prices gave consumers quite a shock in 2022. Driven largely by inflation and the effects of HPAI, prices reached a record $1.72 per pound for an 8–16-pound, frozen, Grade A, whole young hen, 20% higher than the previous year. These higher prices, caused by HPAI induced supply depletion, led to lower demand, with USDA estimating a decrease per capita demand of 2% in 2022, dipping from 14.9 lbs. per person to 14.6 pounds per person. Average turkey prices in 2023 have fallen due to growth in production. The average price for the 8–16-pound turkey typically served for Thanksgiving was $1.27 per pound in August 2023, 22% lower than August 2022 (Figure 3). Some of the more specialized products have come down even more since last year. Boneless, skinless, tom turkey breasts, for example, have declined by 61% from the near record $6.65 per pound to $2.59 per pound in August 2023. The September 2023 USDA World Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates report forecasts per capita demand for turkey to increase by 6% to 15.5 pounds per person in 2023 in response to lower prices.EggsEgg production began a downhill slide due to HPAI in March 2022 that lasted 12 months with the first monthly increase in production occurring in April 2023. During this time, the effects of HPAI combined with inflation rates to send egg prices skyrocketing to record levels. (Figure 3). USDA’s September Chicken and Egg report estimates total egg production was 9.38 billion eggs, up 2% from September 2022. There were 386 million total layers in the United States on Sept. 1, which is 3% greater than September 2022. This represents a recovery in the egg sector from last year’s HPAI outbreak. USDA states in the previously referenced September outlook that egg production for the second half of the year is expected to slow due to stagnant flock growth. This brings the projection for 2023 egg production to 7.885 billion dozen eggs, up 1.3% from 2022. Demand/PricesUSDA’s Agricultural Marketing Service describes egg demand as “fairly good” in the Sept. 25 Egg Market News report, with regional wholesale prices for large shell eggs gently falling 10-35 cents with most prices between $1.19-$1.23 per dozen. USDA’s Economic Research Service estimates the national average retail price for shell eggs was $2.04 per dozen in August 2023, down 30% from $3.11 in August 2023. This is nearly 60% lower than the record average price of $4.82 set in January 2023 (Figure 4). Retail egg prices have come down a great deal from 2022 but the lower forecasted production for the second half of 2023 may cause a slight increase in egg prices.Will there be enough turkey to go around for Thanksgiving? Farmers and consumers alike should receive some turkey price relief for Thanksgiving. With very few HPAI detections, turkey and poultry supplies have recovered over the last year. This means there is plenty of turkey – and the lower prices that come with strong supplies – to go around for Thanksgiving. Consumers can get full details about turkey prices and more on Nov. 15 when the American Farm Bureau Federation releases the results of its annual cost of Thanksgiving dinner survey! Top Issues Farm Bill Trade Sustainability Regulatory Reform Rural Broadband Labor VIEW ALL Trending Topics Farm Bill Sustainability Farm Income Farm Labor Trade Foundation for Agriculture VIEW ALL Front Desk: (202) 406-3600 General Inquiries: info@fb.org Media Inquiries: media@fb.org 600 Maryland Avenue SW Suite 1000 Washington DC 20024 News Viewpoints Market Intel Who We Are What We Do Get Involved Shop Contact Issues Events Advocacy Initiatives Programs Who We Are What We Do Get Involved JOIN © 2024 American Farm Bureau Federation ® | Privacy Policy | Terms & ConditionsWhat People with Eczema Should Know Before Getting a Flu, COVID-19 or RSV Vaccine | National Eczema Association What People with Eczema Should Know Before Getting a Flu, COVID-19 or RSV Vaccine Articles By Janine Cooper Published On: Oct 2, 2023 Last Updated On: Oct 2, 2023 The threat of another “tripledemic” — the nickname given to last year’s simultaneous outbreak of flu, COVID-19 and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) — is on the horizon for this upcoming flu season. But unlike last year, RSV vaccines are now available to those 60 years and older, in addition to the existing flu and COVID-19 vaccines.1 The question for people with eczema is: What’s the safety of these vaccines and atopic dermatitis (AD)? “These vaccines are generally quite safe for people with eczema,” said Dr. Joy Wan, assistant professor of dermatology and pediatric dermatologist at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “In fact, for some people with eczema who are taking medications that might suppress their immune system, it is probably even more important to make sure one gets vaccinated to limit their risk of getting these common infections or having more severe symptoms.” But how do the flu, COVID-19 and RSV vaccines work for those with AD? What should eczema warriors consider before getting these vaccinations? A good place to start is by gaining a better understanding of each vaccine — what it does and how it may affect those with eczema. The flu shot and eczema The flu vaccine helps protect against the common influenza viruses for each upcoming flu season. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends everyone 6 months and older in the U.S. get a yearly flu shot.2 For those with eczema who may have weakened immune systems, the general recommendation when getting a flu vaccine is to avoid vaccines that contain a live virus. The COVID-19 vaccine and eczema The COVID-19 vaccine works to help build immunity to the COVID-19 virus without exposing the immune system to the live virus. The CDC recommends everyone ages 5 and older should get one updated Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine to stay up to date.3 There have been some reports from those with eczema who say they experienced flare-ups after a COVID-19 vaccination.4,5 However, these reports were generally rare and the reactions may be due to other factors outside of the vaccine itself. The RSV vaccine and eczema The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently approved a new vaccine, Arexvy, designed to prevent RSV in those who are 60 and older. Prior to this new vaccine, monoclonal antibodies were used to help strengthen the body’s immune response to RSV — particularly for babies and toddlers who are considered high risk. Since the new RSV vaccine was only recently approved by the FDA, there are no current reports or studies on how this vaccine may affect those with eczema. What to consider before getting vaccinated For those with AD who are wondering if getting vaccinated for flu, COVID-19 and RSV is right for them, Dr. Wan provided her insight on the following questions. Are people with AD more susceptible to getting sick from the flu, COVID-19 and RSV? “Some people with atopic dermatitis might be more susceptible to getting sick from these infections or having worse symptoms,” Dr. Wan explained. “Especially if their immune system is relatively compromised by treatments that they are taking for their atopic dermatitis.” What do dermatologists recommend to their patients with eczema regarding flu, COVID-19 and RSV vaccines? “I recommend following the CDC guidelines for getting these vaccinations,” said Dr. Wan. “However, some patients with eczema may need to avoid getting ‘live’ vaccinations due to their immune status when on specific treatments for eczema.” Should people with AD or food allergies get vaccines in a doctor’s office instead of a pharmacy or off-site vaccine clinic? “The risk of having an immediate side effect, such as an allergic reaction, to vaccines is generally very low,” Dr. Wan explained. “If you have a history of allergy to vaccines or components of vaccines, then you may consider getting them in a doctor’s office. However, many pharmacies and off-site vaccine clinics are equipped to handle these situations as well. I would recommend that you get it at the place where you are most comfortable.” Are people with eczema likely to flare after a vaccine? “It is possible that some people with eczema can flare after a vaccine,” said Dr. Wan. “But it’s still only a minority of people with eczema and when a flare does occur after vaccination, it is usually easily manageable. If you have previously experienced eczema flares with vaccines, it may be worth making sure that you can see your dermatologist soon after the vaccine.” What should people with AD ask their doctor when deciding if it’s safe to get these vaccines? Dr. Wan explained that those with AD should ask about the risks and benefits of these vaccines based on their individual situation. “For example,” she said, “some treatments for eczema may place one at greater risk for catching infections or having more severe symptoms with these types of infections. Check with your doctor about whether there are any special considerations for your own situation when it comes to getting or not getting these types of vaccines.” Key takeaway With the potential of another “tripledemic” happening this flu season, it’s a good idea for those with eczema to start talking to their doctor today about the flu, COVID-19 and RSV vaccines. References: 1. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. FDA Approves First Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) Vaccine. https://www.fda.govews-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first-respiratory-syncytial-virus-rsv-vaccine May 3, 2023. Accessed August 11, 2023. 2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Influenza: Flu Shot. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/flushot.htm August 25, 2022. Accessed August 11, 2023. 3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. COVID-19: Stay Up to Date with COVID-19 Vaccines. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/stay-up-to-date.html September 15, 2023. Accessed October 2, 2023. 4. Leasure AC, Cowper SE, McNiff J, Cohen JM. Generalized eczematous reactions to the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2021;35(11):e716-e717. doi:10.1111/jdv.17494 5. Corbeddu M, Diociaiuti A, Vinci MR, et al. Transient cutaneous manifestations after administration of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine: an Italian single-centre case series. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2021;35(8):e483-e485. doi:10.1111/jdv.17268 Related Posts Articles Eczema Awareness Month 2024: The Ecz-hibition In October 2024, the National Eczema Association acknowledged Eczema Awareness Month through the The Ecz-hibition campaign by putting #EczemaOnDisplay. Articles +1 Is Lavender Good or Bad for Eczema… Some say lavender is good for eczema, but dermatologists disagree. Let’s get to the bottom of the lavender debate. Articles +1 Why I Give: Sarah Young O’Donnell Sarah Young O’Donnell, from New York City, shares how she and her family discovered NEA and what it means to her to give back. Articles Eczema Pop Quiz: Eczema Awareness Month Edition Test your knowledge to see if you know these surprising facts about this complex condition. The National Eczema Association is the driving force for an eczema community fueled by knowledge, strengthened through collective action and propelled by the promise for a better future. Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Threads LinkedIn Inspire National Eczema Association | ​​​​​​​505 San Marin Drive, #B300 | Novato, CA 94945 415-499-3474 or 800-818-7546 NEA is a qualified 501(c)(3) EIN 93-0988840 © 2002-2024 National Eczema Association, All rights reserved. NEA is a qualified 501(c)(3) EIN 93-0988840 © 2002-2024 National Eczema Association, All rights reserved. Get the latest news Get the latest eczema news delivered to your inbox. Advances in research and treatments Lifestyle tips and hacks Stories from the community NEA Newsletter Signup with Segmentation Email (required)* zip (required)* ZIP / Postal Code What is your primary relationship to eczema?*Select one (required)I am an adult with eczema (18 and over)I am a teen with eczema (13 - 17)I am the parent of a child with eczemaI am a caregiver/partner/spouse of someone with eczemaI am a supporter of someone with eczemaI am an eczema healthcare professionalCorporate interestOtherOpt-in* I want to receive the latest eczema news in my inbox! HiddenSF Lead Source* HiddenRe engage If user exists, mark true to remove opt-out check PhoneThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Please support this website by adding us to your whitelist in your ad blocker. Ads are what helps us bring you premium content! Thank you! The latest in eczema news, delivered Evidence-based articles, expert-sourced lifestyle tips and stories from your community. Email (required)* zip (required)* ZIP / Postal Code What is your primary relationship to eczema?*Select one (required)I am an adult with eczema (18 and over)I am a teen with eczema (13 - 17)I am the parent of a child with eczemaI am a caregiver/partner/spouse of someone with eczemaI am a supporter of someone with eczemaI am an eczema healthcare professionalCorporate interestOtherReceive Emails* I want to receive the latest eczema news in my inbox! HiddenSF Lead Source* HiddenRe engage If user exists, mark true to remove opt-out check XCombination COVID-19/flu vaccines are being tested, with Moderna starting phase 3 trials - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeHealthLatest updatesAsk a questionShare Combination COVID-19/flu vaccines are being tested, with Moderna starting phase 3 trialsBy health reporter Paige CockburnABC Health & WellbeingTopic:COVID-19Fri 6 Oct 2023Friday 6 October 2023Fri 6 Oct 2023 at 7:00pmPharmaceutical companies are testing combination vaccines that cover COVID-19 plus other respiratory diseases. (Getty Images: 5/15 WEST)abc.net.auews/covid-flu-moderna-vaccine-trial-infection-protection-phase-3/102943052Link copiedShareShare articleA combination COVID-19 and influenza vaccine developed by Moderna is a step closer to approval after early clinical trials proved successful, the pharmaceutical company reported this week.Key points:Moderna is just one pharmaceutical company currently developing a combination COVID-19/influenza vaccineThe earliest we could expect one of these vaccines to be approved in Australia is 2025Combination COVID/influenza/RSV vaccines are also in developmentThe vaccine, called mRNA-1083, is one of several COVID-19/influenza vaccines currently in development, with pharmaceutical companies Pfizer and Novavax also conducting clinical trials with their own versions.In a press release, Moderna said its combined phase 1 and 2 trials evaluated the safety and efficacy of their COVID/influenza vaccine when compared to:a dose of influenza vaccine Fluarix for adults between 50 and 64 years of agea dose of enhanced influenza vaccine, Fluzone HD, in adults 65 to 70 years of agethe Spikevax booster (Moderna's COVID-19 vaccine) for both age groups.The vaccine was found safe, according to the company's statement, with only around four per cent of trial participants experiencing "grade three adverse reactions", which are "medically significant" but not life-threatening.mRNA-1083 didn't cause any new reactions that weren't already linked to Flurarix, Fluzone or Spikevax, and provided similar or greater viral protection from influenza and COVID-19, according to Moderna.mRNA vaccines beyond COVID-19Photo shows A hand holding a small glass vial containing liquid with a label that says COVID-19 mRNA vaccineBeyond the pandemic, how might mRNA vaccines protect us against other diseases?The company says it plans to begin phase 3 trials soon in adults aged 50 and over, and is hoping for regulatory approval in the US in 2025.Director of infectious diseases at Mater Health Services Paul Griffin said it was important to await peer review of the findings but early results appeared promising."Their combined mRNA vaccine had a similar safety profile and similar levels of efficacy [to current standalone vaccines], which is obviously very positive news."He said when developing combination vaccines, it is important to ensure the protection offered by one vaccine isn't diminished by the other."This trial has established that's not the case, so it really paves the way for the combined vaccine to continue progressing."Phase 3 will show vaccine effectivenessDr Griffin said early-stage clinical trials focused on safety and ensuring the vaccine generated sufficient levels of antibodies."But we can't say that absolutely translates into good levels of protection."That will need to be demonstrated in phase 3, which we expect to be the case."Dr Griffin has been working on clinical trials of Novavax's combination COVID-19/influenza vaccine, and says phase 3 testing is underway after they too saw promising early results.Novavax's vaccine differs to Moderna's and Pfizer's as it is protein-based, which means a form of a virus spike protein is injected into the body, leading to the production of antibodies.Moderna and Pfizer are making mRNA vaccines. They use strands of genetic code to tell the body to construct spike proteins, which then elicit an immune response.Adding RSV to the mixDr Griffin says because Pfizer, Moderna and Novavax have all demonstrated their COVID-19 vaccines are "adaptable" to a combination vaccine, he expects more COVID-19/influenza vaccines will be made by other pharmaceutical companies."They will be very impactful."Clinical trial stagesPre-clinical: Testing in animals. Does the vaccine produce antibodies? Does it protect against illness? What dose is necessary?Phase 1: Testing in a small number of humans. This phase is about making sure the vaccine is safe.Phase 2: More testing in humans — does the vaccine actually work?Phase 3: Testing in a larger number of humans to confirm its effectiveness.Phase 4: After the vaccine has been rolled out, ongoing surveillance to make sure it's safe in the long term.But he's most excited about a combination COVID-19/influenza/RSV vaccine, which he is also trialling with Novavax.RSV — respiratory syncytial virus — is a common and highly contagious respiratory virus that usually causes mild, cold-like symptoms."We haven't had an RSV vaccine until very recently in some parts of the world," Dr Griffin said."Being able to combine all that into one vaccine is going to make a huge difference, I think."There is one limitation with combination vaccines though — the viruses they cover don't necessarily peak at the same time of year."COVID is yet to become seasonal so the optimum timing of these combined vaccines is something that will have to be carefully thought through," Dr Griffin said."But, on balance, I think this limitation is outweighed by increasing the overall rate of uptake of these vaccines."Combo vaccines will make getting vaccinated easierMany Australians have fallen behind on their COVID-19 immunisations, according to the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI).ABC Health in your Instagram feedFollow @abchealth on Instagram, where we're busting myths and sharing practical, smart health advice.Last month, it reported only 53 per cent of people aged 65 years and older received a booster dose in the past six months.ATAGI recommends that all adults aged 75 years and over should receive an additional booster if six months have passed since their most recent dose.Dr Griffin believes combination vaccines will increase take-up as they mean one less trip to the GP or pharmacist."These combination vaccines will make it simpler and easier, and are certainly going to be something that helps people who are less keen on getting multiple injections."He believes the earliest Australia will see COVID-19/influenza combination vaccines would be 2025, but this is dependent on successful outcomes in upcoming clinical trials.Health in your inboxGet the latest health news and information from across the ABC.Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement.Email addressSubscribePosted Fri 6 Oct 2023 at 7:00pmFriday 6 Oct 2023 at 7:00pmFri 6 Oct 2023 at 7:00pmShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesFamily of teacher's aide killed in preschool crash pay tribute to 'cherished mother, wife, daughter'Topic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Barron Trump and AOC expose the problems with the Democratic campaignTopic:US ElectionsPhoto shows Barron Trump and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in a split screen image. Four foreign nationals found on remote NT island say they paid money to be taken to AustraliaTopic:Indigenous (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander)Photo shows Four people walk in the shallows of a coastline, with white backs slung over their shouldersRex given $80m lifeline, as ACCC warns Qantas controls 65pc of market and prices are upLIVEPhoto shows A Regional Express (REX) aircraft unloads at Charleville Airport in south-west Queensland.Donald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorPhoto shows SuperannuationRelated storiesA new COVID-19 virus has been detected onshore. So is it time to get a booster?Topic:ExplainerPhoto shows Senior man wearing a shirt receives an injection in his arm.Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine awarded to scientists whose work enabled mRNA COVID-19 vaccinesTopic:Science and TechnologyPhoto shows A man and a woman wearing masks and formal clothing pose with clear glass trophies.Flu vaccine numbers are down by almost two million. What's to blame?Topic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A woman wearing a bright yellow face mask look down at a nurse putting a sticker bandaid on her arm after a vaccination.Related topicsAustraliaCOVID-19Epidemics and PandemicsInfluenzaPharmaceuticalsRespiratory DiseasesUnited StatesVaccines and ImmunityTop StoriesFamily of teacher's aide killed in preschool crash pay tribute to 'cherished mother, wife, daughter'Topic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Barron Trump and AOC expose the problems with the Democratic campaignTopic:US ElectionsFour foreign nationals found on remote NT island say they paid money to be taken to AustraliaTopic:Indigenous (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander)Rex given $80m lifeline, as ACCC warns Qantas controls 65pc of market and prices are upTopic:Stock MarketDonald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorJust InWhy 'New Zealand are worried' about the rising powers of Tonga and SamoaJAnalysis by Jon Healy3m ago3 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 3:28amSafety advice would have cost Hillcrest jumping castle operator around $2,000, court toldTopic:Courts and Trials3m ago3 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 3:28amEarly election speculation reaches a fever pitch as Albanese announces two candidates in two hoursTopic:Elections12m ago12 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 3:20amCosmic coincidence clouded scientists' understanding of Uranus for years, study showsTopic:Planets and Asteroids41m ago41 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:50amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCRSV more severe than COVID-19, flu in older adults, CDC data show News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Account Account Anonymous User Log In Log In Log Out Log Out News News CME CME Clinical Guidance Clinical Guidance Community Community Specialties Choose a specialty All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Menu Close Specialties All Specialties Allergy/Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hematology/Oncology Hepatology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women's Health & OB/GYN Home Headline News Infectious Disease Subspecialties Antimicrobials Dermatology Emerging Diseases Fungal Diseases Gastrointestinal Infections Hepatitis C HIV/AIDS Influenza MRSA Nosocomial Infections Pediatric ID Practice Management Respiratory Infections STDs Vaccination Viral Hepatitis Zoonotic Infections Meeting News Podcasts Blogs & Columns Job Opportunities Resources Account Account Log In Log In Log Out Log Out Account Account Anonymous User Close Searchbar Healio News Infectious Disease Respiratory Infections COVID-19 Resource Center ByStephen I. Feller Fact checked byCarol L. DiBerardino, MLA, ELS Read more October 05, 2023 3 min read Save RSV more severe than COVID-19, flu in older adults, CDC data show ByStephen I. Feller Fact checked byCarol L. DiBerardino, MLA, ELS Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Key takeaways: New data show that although there are far more COVID-19 and influenza hospitalizations, RSV caused more severe outcomes. For the first time, vaccines against all three respiratory diseases are available. Fewer older adults are hospitalized with respiratory syncytial virus than COVID-19 or influenza, but those who are experience more serious outcomes than patients hospitalized with the other two illnesses, new CDC data show. The data are from one of three studies published Thursday in MMWR that highlight the potential severity of RSV and COVID-19 among older adults in the United States and underscore the importance of getting vaccinated, the CDC said. Data derived from Taylor CA, et al. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023;doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7240a3. The other two studies include data showing that RSV hospitalizations are most common among adults aged older than 75 years, and that less than one-quarter of adults aged older than 65 years who were hospitalized with SARS-CoV-2 infection had received a recommended COVID-19 booster vaccine. Last month, the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases reported findings from a survey that showed most adults in the U.S. are not concerned about COVID-19, influenza or RSV, despite ongoing worries about a fall “tripledemic.” For the first time ever, vaccines are available for all three illnesses, including updated COVID-19 shots and the world’s first vaccines against RSV. In one study published Thursday, Diya Surie, MD, from the CDC’s Coronavirus and Other Respiratory Viruses Division, and colleagues analyzed data on 5,784 adults aged older than 60 years enrolled by the CDC’s IVY Network who were hospitalized with lab-confirmed influenza, RSV or SARS-CoV-2 infection between Feb. 1, 2022, and May 31, 2023. Among patients included in the analysis, 81.8% had COVID-19, 12.9% had influenza and 5.3% had RSV. The odds that a patient needed mechanical ventilation or died were similar between patients with RSV and patients with COVID-19 (adjusted OR = 1.39; 95% CI, 0.98-1.96), but were significantly higher for patients with RSV than for patients with influenza (aOR = 2.08; 95% CI, 1.33-3.26), according to the study. “Because RSV disease is less common than COVID-19 or influenza disease among hospitalized patients, clinicians might be less aware of RSV as a serious respiratory pathogen in older adults,” Surie and colleagues wrote. In another study, Fiona P. Havers, MD, a medical epidemiologist at the CDC, and colleagues assessed population-based surveillance data from the CDC’s RSV-NET on adults aged older than 60 years hospitalized with RSV between July 1, 2022, and June 30, 2023. Among more than 3,200 hospitalized patients, 54% were adults aged older than 75 years, 37.5% were adults aged older than 80 years, and 13.5% were adults aged 60 to 64 years. Additionally, 17.2% of the patients lived in long-term care facilities, according to the study. Havers and colleagues said clinicians and patients should consider age — especially older than 75 years — long-term care facility residence and underlying medical conditions when making decisions about vaccination. A third study by Christopher A. Taylor, PhD, of the CDC’s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, and colleagues analyzed population-based surveillance data on lab-confirmed COVID-19-associated hospitalizations from COVID-NET collected between January and August 2023. They found that the rate of COVID-19 hospitalizations among adults aged older than 65 years decreased by 86% during the study period from 42.2 per 100,000 to 5.9 per 100,00 — its lowest level since July 2021 — before increasing again to 16.4 per 100,000 at the end of August 2021. Among hospitalized patients, 62.9% were adults aged older than 65 years, most of whom had underlying conditions. Of these patients, just 23.5% had received a recommended COVID-19 bivalent vaccine. “Adults with increased risk for COVID-19-associated hospitalization, including all adults aged 65 years and older, should reduce their risk for severe COVID-19 by receiving recommended COVID-19 vaccinations, adopting measures to reduce risk for contracting COVID-19 and seeking prompt outpatient antiviral treatment after a positive SARS-CoV-2 test,” Taylor and colleagues wrote. References: Havers FP, et al. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023;doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7240a1. Surie D, et al. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023;doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7240a2. Taylor CA, et al. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023;doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7240a3. Published by: Sources/DisclosuresCollapse Source: Surie D, et al. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023;doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm72410a3. Disclosures: Havers, Surie and Taylor report no relevant financial disclosures. Please see the studies for all other authors’ financial disclosures. Read more about covid-19 rsv infection influenza Add topic to email alerts Receive an email when new articles are posted on Please provide your email address to receive an email when new articles are posted on . Subscribe Added to email alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts You've successfully added to your alerts. You will receive an email when new content is published. Click Here to Manage Email Alerts Back to Healio We were unable to process your request. Please try again later. If you continue to have this issue please contact customerservice@slackinc.com. Back to Healio Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print Comment Continue Reading Related Content Play on Healio Follow Healio Twitter Facebook Instagram Threads LinkedIn About About Healio About Healio About the Wyanoke Group About the Wyanoke Group Editorial Policy and Philosophy Editorial Policy and Philosophy Sitemap Sitemap Account Information My Account Login My Account My Account Help Help Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Email Subscriptions Unknown Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Newspaper and Journal Subscriptions Contact Us Email Us Email Us Contact Newsroom Contact Newsroom Advertising Information Advertising Information Permissions and Reprints Permissions and Reprints Legal Do Not Sell My Personal Information Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms and Conditions Terms and Conditions Medical Disclaimer Medical Disclaimer Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Sign Up for Email Get the latest news and education delivered to your inbox Email address Enter your email Update email address Specialty All Specialties Allergy & Asthma Cardiology Dermatology Endocrinology Gastroenterology/Hepatology Hematology Oncology Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Ophthalmology Optometry Orthopedics Pediatrics Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Rheumatology Women’s Health & OB/GYN Subscribe Update email address The email address associated with your Healio account is: If you would like to edit or change the email address that your subscriptions and alerts are sent to, use the "Update email address" link. Update email address © Healio All Rights Reserved. Job board for health care professionals Job Opportunities We’re sorry, but an unexpected error has occurred. Please refresh your browser and try again. If this error persists, please contact ITSupport@wyanokegroup.com for assistance. Close Would you like to receive email reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME? Yes No Activity saved! You'll receive reminders to complete your saved activities from Healio CME. UnsubscribeUrgent Measures being Taken in Galápagos to Combat Avian Flu and Protect Biodiversity | Galápagos Conservancy Galápagos Conservancy Menu Our Impact Learn More Rewilding Galápagos Saving Species Achieving Sustainability Conservation Action Grants About Us Learn More Team Galápagos Board of Directors Advisory Council Give Ways to Give Member Login Adopt a Giant Tortoise Travel Learn More News Search Spanish DONATE SUBSCRIBE DONATE Urgent Measures being Taken in Galápagos to Combat Avian Flu and Protect Biodiversity October 6, 2023 4:42 pm Biosecurity agents examine a bird, in an urgent effort to address the recent outbreak of avian influenza H5N1 and protect the rich biodiversity of the Galápagos. © Galápagos National Park In response to the alarming discovery of afflicted marine birds in the Galápagos Islands, the Galápagos National Park Directorate has taken immediate action to investigate the cause and protect the region’s unique biodiversity. Three bird specimens have tested positive for avian influenza H5N1, prompting urgent measures. Immediate Actions Taken Following the discovery, the Galápagos National Park Directorate acted swiftly to identify the cause. Samples collected from sickly birds were sent to the National Institute of Public Health Research in Guayaquil for validation. Biosecurity Measures Implemented The Galápagos National Park Directorate and the Agency for the Control and Regulation of Biosecurity and Quarantine for Galápagos have now enacted strict biosecurity protocols. Visitor sites with afflicted birds presented, such as Genovesa Island and Punta Pitt at San Cristóbal Island, have been closed. Additionally, tour operators have been urged to strengthen disinfection procedures for footwear and clothing for tourists entering and leaving visitor sites, as well as disinfecting outdoor common areas and tender boats used for passenger disembarkation, to prevent virus transmission. Ongoing Monitoring Park rangers and biosecurity agents are closely monitoring the habitats and nesting areas of endemic birds, such as Galápagos penguins and flightless cormorants. Naturalist guides and tour operators have been asked to intensify their observation of wildlife and report any anomalous behavior immediately via an established emergency line. Public Advisory The Galápagos National Park Directorate has issued an urgent call to the Galápagos community to refrain from handling sick or lifeless birds if encountered. To prevent the virus from spreading, a specialized team has been formed to collect and properly dispose following strict protocols of any deceased birds. Biosecurity professionals carefully collect samples from a Galápagos booby showing symptoms of avian influenza H5N1, in the ongoing efforts to protect the region's unique biodiversity from the virus. © Galápagos National Park Galápagos Conservancy’s General Director, scientist Washington Tapia, is deeply troubled by the arrival of this virus in Galápagos and reaffirms our commitment to providing support for the implementation of measures that minimize its impact on this unique ecosystem. “We are on permanent alert regarding this issue, and we have full confidence in the ability of the Galápagos National Park Directorate and the Galápagos Biosecurity Agency to address this situation in a timely and effective manner,” emphasized Tapia. Trained personnel from the environmental authority closely monitor the birds of Galápagos, consistently and under strict biosecurity measures. © Galápagos National Park Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email Pinterest Telegram PrevPreviousEcuador’s Ambitious Ecological Restoration in Galápagos NextUpdate: Española Giant Tortoise RepatriationNext HELP SAVE GALÁPAGOS The Latest Conservation News from Galápagos Newsroom Ocean Guardians: Young Scouts Explore and Protect the Marine Ecosystems of Galápagos Read the Article New Expedition to Wolf Volcano: Our Ongoing Commitment to Protecting the Pink Iguana Read the Article Local Communities Are Key to Preserving the Wonders of the Galápagos Read the Article Discovery of Galápagos Petrel Nests on Isabela Island Renews Conservation Hopes Read the Article Load More Menu Our Impact Learn More Rewilding Galápagos Saving Species Achieving Sustainability Conservation Action Grants About Us Learn More Team Galápagos Board of Directors Advisory Council Give Ways to Give Member Login Adopt a Giant Tortoise Travel Learn More News Search Spanish SUBSCRIBE Show Your Support Galápagos Conservancy donors are the driving force behind our efforts to conserve this magical place. Join the fight to save it by becoming a member. DONATE NOW More Information Menu Contact Us Member Login Media Newsroom Conservation Action Grants Galápagos Post Magazine Annual Reports & Financials Careers Privacy Policy Shark Count Shark Count Terms of Use Our Partners Menu Stay Connected Follow Galápagos Conservancy on social media to get the latest conservation updates and alerts in real time. Galápagos Conservancy Galápagos Conservancy, Inc.® is a registered 501(c)(3) non-profit organization with EIN Tax ID # 13-3281486. Donations are tax-deductible to the extent allowed by law in your country. Search for: This site uses cookies to offer you a better browsing experience.AcceptRejectPrivacy PolicyWhy Do Vaccines Need to Get Updated? Search Search Infection Prevention Diagnostics Therapeutics Vaccines & Immunity Health Equity About EIN Network Sign Up Twitter Sign Up for the IDSA Newsletter Why Do Vaccines Need to Get Updated? Home Vaccines & Immunity Why Do Vaccines Need to Get Updated? 05 October, 2023 Q: How and why do we update vaccines against viruses like SARS-CoV-2? A: For seasonal viral infections such as influenza, yearly vaccines are recommended to “boost” waning immunity and provide improved protection against severe disease in advance of higher community circulation periods. Additionally, updated vaccines serve as an opportunity to better match vaccines to the anticipated common virus subtypes for the coming season by including updated vaccine antigens or sequences. Governmental and public health bodies are now applying this strategy to SARS-CoV-2 vaccination. Specifically, FDA and CDC are in agreement that Omicron XBB sublineages, which dominate the global variant landscape as of fall 2023, should be the focus of the updated vaccine formulations. The authorized mRNA vaccines made by the companies Pfizer and Moderna include the XBB.1.5 spike sequence, which is very similar to that of several other widespread XBB sublineages such as EG.5 and FL.15.1. Preliminary data suggest that vaccination with this strain update leads to improved generation of neutralizing antibodies and other immune responses against these and other variants (such as the emerging sublineage BA.2.86); this antibody response would be in addition to recharging other aspects of naturally waning immunity (Pfizer ACIP presentation, September 2023; Moderna ACIP presentation, September 2023; Sheward, September 2023 – preprint, not peer-reviewed; Chalkias, September 2023 – preprint, not peer-reviewed). In summary, deployment of updated COVID-19 vaccines is an important component of improving protection in fall-winter 2023. Like influenza, there is a goal to update these vaccines regularly, though timing and frequency of updates will depend upon whether SARS-CoV-2 achieves predictable seasonal circulation as well as how quickly and how substantially the virus changes over time. Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email READ MORE Related Articles Loading... Sign up for IDSA's Newsletter Stay informed with daily resources, media and news. Sign Up Now This resource center was funded in part by a cooperative agreement with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (grant number 6 NU50CK000477-04-01). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is an agency within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). The contents of this resource center do not necessarily represent the policy of CDC or HHS, and should not be considered an endorsement by the Federal Government. About EIN Network Signup Contact For questions or feedback, contact info@idsociety.org For media inquiries, contact idsa@messagepartnerspr.com Twitter © Copyright IDSA 2024 This website uses cookies We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. Cookies facilitate the functioning of this site including a member login and personalized experience. Cookies are also used to generate analytics to improve this site as well as enable social media functionality. OkThe virus that may cause death: Why you should get vaccinated for RSV - The Jerusalem Post Advertisement JP Newsletter Israel News Health & Wellness WORLD NEWS Middle East Business & Innovation Opinion JP Store Login Log Out Archaeology Israel Real Estate Judaism Kabbalah Environment Antisemitism JP Spanish Podcasts JP Shopping Aliyah Portal Premium Jerusalem Post Health & Wellness The virus that may cause death: Why you should get vaccinated for RSV While COVID-19 and the flu get all the attention, Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) remains a silent threat, causing widespread respiratory illnesses every winter. By DAVID GREENBERG OCTOBER 6, 2023 04:41 (photo credit: MIRIAM ALSTER/FLASH90) As we witness a resurgence of COVID-19 alongside the onset of winter, the threat of influenza and RSV looms large, affecting both infants and adults.Of the three diseases—flu, COVID-19, and RSV—the flu is the most familiar to medicine, with available prevention and treatment options. COVID-19, too, has garnered global attention, but effective treatments are still emerging. In stark contrast, there are currently no approved drugs for RSV-infected individuals, only those in development.While influenza and COVID-19 can lead to global epidemics, striking fear and causing widespread fatalities, there's limited awareness about the equally dangerous RSV virus, especially among adults with preexisting health conditions, who face a high risk of hospitalization and death when infected. What is RSV?While both influenza and COVID-19 have received extensive media coverage, the RSV virus, which typically thrives during winter, remains obscure to the general public. Despite the severe risks, global awareness about RSV is largely confined to its impact on children.Combining RSV and COVID-19 infections or even COVID-19 and the flu is rare. However, simultaneous infections of the flu and RSV do occur.As COVID-19 cases surge again, Israel braces for a concurrent rise in influenza and RSV cases, emphasizing the importance of awareness and vaccination.The absence of approved drugs for RSV infection and the scarcity of information about its symptoms contribute to the overdiagnosis of influenza in many cases. Nonetheless, the lack of awareness about RSV, especially its severe complications among adults, is inexcusable.Comparing Influenza and RSVInfluenza exhibits varying levels of morbidity and mortality from year to year.When the COVID-19 pandemic began, both the RSV and flu viruses seemed to vanish. Stay updated with the latest news! Subscribe to The Jerusalem Post Newsletter Subscribe Now In contrast to the cyclical nature of COVID-19 and the flu, RSV is ever-present.Some years witness higher RSV morbidity and mortality than influenza.Moreover, RSV mutates, potentially leading to more severe outbreaks. Recent research, presented during the annual conference of the European Lung Association in Italy, highlights the vulnerability of not only adults above 60 but also immunosuppressed individuals with underlying health conditions. Conditions such as COPD, diabetes, asthma, liver and kidney diseases, and cardiovascular disorders make individuals susceptible to severe RSV morbidity, often resulting in around 12 days of hospitalization.The Dangers of InfectionThe RSV virus is considered highly contagious. Similar to COVID-19 and the flu, it can cause viral pneumonia, often characterized by inflammation in both lungs. Typical symptoms include coughing, shortness of breath, and a decrease in blood oxygen saturation. The virus can also be found in the nervous system, brain, and other organs like the liver and kidneys.Viral pneumonia can become complicated by bacterial pneumonia as a secondary infection. It's crucial to note that bacterial pneumonia can be fatal, especially when accompanied by viral pneumonia, presenting a significant danger to patients with the risk factors listed above.As more risk factors are added, the likelihood of the disease manifesting in a severe form increases.The Importance of Vaccination Against RSV and Preventing InfectionRegarding the flu, the first vaccines against it appeared on the market in the 1950s. Their effectiveness varies because the flu virus constantly changes, and vaccines only target specific proteins. Therefore, a vaccine is effective if it matches the proteins that haven't undergone mutations and are similar to those included in the vaccine. This is why flu vaccines need annual updates, and their effectiveness fluctuates depending on the year's mutations.Coronavirus, on the other hand, has a more stable protein structure and undergoes fewer mutations—although updates are still necessary to cover new mutations. Its effectiveness is also limited over time.In contrast, the prevention potential against RSV infection surpasses that of the flu and COVID-19. A highly effective vaccine has recently been developed for adults, and it's crucial to get vaccinated as a preventive measure. This can save lives and reduce the financial burden on hospitals and the healthcare system. Vaccination can prevent hospitalizations and even deaths among adults with underlying conditions that can worsen due to RSV infection.Credit: INGIMAGEPrevention is Better than TreatmentAlways remember that prevention is better than treatment. Preventing diseases saves lives, reduces mortality rates, and saves money. Therefore, getting vaccinated against the RSV virus is of utmost importance.Receiving such a vaccine benefits both individuals and the country. During periods of severe and high morbidity, like the potential winter ahead, it can prevent the overload of medical systems, as observed in Israel and Italy during the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic.The author is an expert in the study of respiratory infections and their prevention. He serves as the director of the Saban Children's Hospital at the Soroka University Medical Center. This article was originally published by The Jerusalem Post's sister paper, Maariv.Sign up for the Health & Wellness newsletter >> Related Tags flu COVID-19 COVID Hot Opinion Change the climate: Israel’s environmental potential at COP29 and regional impact By JPOST EDITORIAL To recover, Democrats must expel anti-Zionist extremists who put off Middle America By AMOTZ ASA-EL Leaders of the Jewish enemies have always died as weak cowards By URI PILICHOWSKI How will the recent US election affect Iran, Russia, and North Korea? By LOUIS RENÉ BERES Israel cannot work with an organization that enables Hamas activities and terrorism By ZINA RAKHAMILOVA Most Read 1 Israel can't arm itself with 30,000-pound bombs in time against Iran 2 'We were ambushed': Pogrom in Amsterdam wounds several 3 102 years ago, one of the all-time greatest archaeological discoveries was made 4 Scientists unlock secrets of 3,000-year-old tablet revealing path to Noah's Ark 5 Trump’s victory throws diplomatic bombshell into Israel's multi-front war Advertisement Information About Us Contact us Feedback Terms Of Service Privacy Policy Subscriber Agreement JPost Jobs Cancel Subscription Sitemap פרסום בג'רוזלם פוסט Customer Service Advertise with Us The Jerusalem Post Group Breaking News World News Iran News MDA Heroes The Jerusalem Report Jerusalem Post Lite חדשות מעריב Real Estate Listings Hype Special Content JP Store BrandBlend Services Precious Metals Tools and services JPost Premium Ulpan Online JPost Newsletter Our Magazines Learn Hebrew RSS feed JPost.com Archive Digital Library Lists of Jewish holidays Law לוח חגים ומועדים 2024 זמני כניסת שבת Sites Of Interest Poalim Online JNF-USA The Jerusalem Post Customer Service Center can be contacted with any questions or requests: Telephone: *2421 * Extension 4 Jerusalem Post or 03-7619056 Fax: 03-5613699 E-mail: subs@jpost.com The center is staffed and provides answers on Sundays through Thursdays between 07:00 AM and 14:00 PM and Fridays only handles distribution requests between 7:00 AM and 12:30 PM For international customers: The center is staffed and provides answers on Sundays through Thursdays between 7AM and 14PM Israel time Toll Free number 1-800-448-9291 Telephone +972-3-761-9056 Fax: 972-3-561-3699 E-mail: subs@jpost.com Copyright © 2024 Jpost Inc. All rights reserved • Terms of Use • Privacy Policy Designed byHow Long You’re Contagious With Covid, Flu, R.S.V. and More - The New York Times Skip to contentSkip to site indexComments Am I Still Contagious?Skip to CommentsThe comments section is closed. To submit a letter to the editor for publication, write to letters@nytimes.com. Am I Still Contagious? Here’s how to navigate eight of the most insidious and infectious illnesses. By Dana G. Smith Illustrations by Cristina Spanò Oct. 6, 2023 Produced by Deanna Donegan and Hang Do Thi Duc.Read 342 CommentsShare full article342AdvertisementSKIP ADVERTISEMENTSite IndexSite Information Navigation© 2024 The New York Times CompanyNYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapCanadaInternationalHelpSubscriptionsManage Privacy PreferencesLane County Public Health to provide COVID and Influenza immunizations Please ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of website accessibilityTue, 12 Nov 2024 03:32:26 GMT (1731382346456)Story Infinite Scroll - News3 v1.0.0 (common)c176e2edee36242d1f910bbcf0b370e84d231d3fNewsWeatherRadarMapsCamerasClosingsODOT CamerasUmpqua River Info7-Day ForecastSportsOutdoorsGame CenterWatch Now 51 Sun 60 Mon 54Lane County Public Health to provide COVID and Influenza immunizations by News StaffTue, October 3rd 2023 at 10:17 AMUpdated Wed, October 4th 2023 at 5:47 PM(Image via Lane County Government)TOPICS:LCPHCOVIDImmunizationsInfluenzaVaccinesChildrenUninsuredUnderinsuredUnderinsured and uninsured children will be able to receive COVID and Flu immunizations at no cost thanks to Lane County Public Health (LCPH) Communicable Disease section.Now that the COVID vaccine is widely available coupled with the effect of Federal and State funding cuts to COVID funding, LCPH is currently unable to provide privately insured/Medicaid/Medicare COVID vaccine for adults (age 19 and over). Instead, LCPH will be using what limited resources are available to focus on those in the community with the highest need based on access and uninsured status.LCPH says children6 months to 18 years of age who are uninsured, underinsured, Medicaid, and/or Native/Alaskan American will be eligible to receive these immunizations free of charge. LCPH says they will also provide COVID and Influenza vaccines to privately insured children.“We are exited to be able to offer this opportunity to children across Lane County,” said Lane County Public Health Communicable Disease Supervisor, Nicole Sticka. “VFC allows us to insure children of families who have significant barriers to basic healthcare can receive vital protection going into this respiratory disease season.”LCPH says influenza immunizations are already available, while the latest COVID vaccine will be made available through LCPH in late October.Pharmacies are also approved to provide these vaccines to anyone over the age of 7 and LCPH encourages those who are able to do so to seek services via their healthcare provider or a pharmacy.To find out what clinics are available for the VFC program or to make an appointment with Communicable Disease call: 541-682-4041.Stay ConnectedLike UsFollow Us© 2024 Sinclair, Inc.TermsEEOFCCFCCPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyCookie PreferencesLoading ...Divide over bird flu vaccine leads to ban of French poultry imports | Popular Science Search for: Science Archaeology Ask Us Anything Biology Dinosaurs Physics Popular Science Videos Space The Weirdest Thing I Learned This Week Technology AI Aviation Best of What’s New Engineering Internet Military Robots Security Vehicles Photography Environment Agriculture Animals Climate Change Conservation Energy Sustainability Weather DIY Life Skills Projects Tech Hacks Gear Audio Cameras Computers Fitness Gear Gaming Gift Guides Home Home Theater Outdoor Gear Phones Tablets Wearables More Newsletter Cover Art Store Podcasts Video Popsci+ FIND US ON Social Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Instagram Pinterest Youtube Flipboard Apple News+ RSS Science Archaeology Ask Us Anything Biology Dinosaurs Physics Popular Science Videos Space The Weirdest Thing I Learned This Week Technology AI Aviation Best of What’s New Engineering Internet Military Robots Security Vehicles Photography Environment Agriculture Animals Climate Change Conservation Energy Sustainability Weather DIY Life Skills Projects Tech Hacks Gear Audio Cameras Computers Fitness Gear Gaming Gift Guides Home Home Theater Outdoor Gear Phones Tablets Wearables MERCH Cover Art Store Newsletter Search for: Health Diseases USDA bans French poultry imports over avian influenza vaccine The ban comes after France begins Europe’s only mass-vaccination campaign against bird flu. By Laura Baisas Posted on Oct 6, 2023 9:00 AM EDT Bird flu has been detected in at least 67 countries. Deposit Photos Share The threat of avian influenza (H5N1) continues to be a serious health and economic issue. As of September, almost 60 million birds have been affected in the United States since the latest outbreak began in January 2022. There are currently 839 known H5N1 outbreaks around the world. [Related: Thriving baby California condor is a ray of hope for the unique species.] Earlier this month, France began Europe’s only mass-vaccination campaign against avian influenza. The country plans to vaccinate roughly 64 million ducks at 2,700 farms over the next year as an effort to end mass culls. Drastic actions like the culls cost the poultry industry millions of dollars every year. “Vaccination should mean we only face individual cases, avoiding the tidal waves sweeping through farms,” poultry chief at the SNGTV farm vets’ association Jocelyn Marguerie told DW News. To reduce the risk of more Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) spreading in the US, the Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service has barred poultry imports from France and its European Union trading partners including Iceland, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, and Norway. The ban covers live ducks, duck eggs, and unmitigated/untreated duck products in addition to poultry products and is due to their recent vaccination campaign. According to a press release, the agency is concerned that the vaccines may mask that the virus is already circulating in poultry, as the vaccinated birds may not show any signs of infection and could lead to the contaminated animals being brought into the US. In France, the vaccine will be given in two doses and is obligatory for ducklings as young as 10 days old being raised on farms that have more than 250 birds. It will cost close to 100 million euros ($105 million) and 85 percent of the cost will reportedly be financed by the French government. “Typically, animal vaccines in the US take approximately 3 years to develop and get FDA approval. Even though vaccination reduces mortality significantly, there is still concern that vaccinated birds can become infected and shed the virus,” Michelle Hawkins, an ABVP certified veterinarian at the University of California, Davis and the director of the California Raptor Center tells PopSci. “This is the main concern regarding France authorizing a vaccine. Ducks often carry avian influenza viruses without showing any clinical signs when infected.” Hawkins also cited a concern about how quickly HPAI can mutate which could potentially reduce the vaccine’s efficacy. [Related: One way to fight off bird flu: extra-CRISPRed chicken.] Recently, commercial flocks have been culled in South Africa to stop the spread and the virus which has been detected in at least 67 countries. It has also been found in domestic cats in Poland and has even jumped from wild birds into seals on the East and West Coasts of the US. While vaccination is not enough to completely stop the disease yet, the jabs are a tool in fighting it. The Department of Agriculture began evaluating four HPAI vaccine candidates for animals and began some trials in April 2023. Other countries including Egypt, China, Mexico, and Vietnam have been vaccinating flocks for years. Currently, the risk of avian flu to humans is low, with only one reported human case of this virus in the US. There are trials underway of vaccines for humans if the virus mutates to become more of a threat to people. Researchers in the United Kingdom have also isolated a gene called BTN3A3 that could keep the virus from infecting humans. In the meantime, vigilance from bird owners and other protective measures including avoiding contact with wild birds and reporting dead birds to the proper authorities remain crucial. “It is critical that bird owners look at what they can do immediately to protect their flocks– now,” says Hawkins. Agriculture Animals Environment Laura Baisas Staff writer Laura is a science news writer, covering a wide variety of subjects, but she is particularly fascinated by all things aquatic, paleontology, nanotechnology, and exploring how science influences daily life. Latest Environment 14 dramatic moments from the 2024 Nature’s Best Photo Awards 14 dramatic moments from the 2024 Nature’s Best Photo Awards By Popular Science Team Technology The forgotten technology that made YouTube possible The forgotten technology that made YouTube possible By Popular Science Team More in Diseases What makes a fever an infection-busting superpower What makes a fever an infection-busting superpower By Edmund K. LeGrand and Joe Alcock/The Conversation mRNA vaccine innovators win the Nobel Prize in medicine mRNA vaccine innovators win the Nobel Prize in medicine By Laura Baisas Afraid of needles? Check out this octopus-inspired drug patch. Afraid of needles? Check out this octopus-inspired drug patch. By Jocelyn Solis-Moreira Substance use disorder may be connected to a specific brain circuit Substance use disorder may be connected to a specific brain circuit By Laura Baisas Why healthcare workers are worried about possible changes to masking protocols in hospitals Why healthcare workers are worried about possible changes to masking protocols in hospitals By Amy Maxmen / KFF Health News Do I need a COVID booster? And all of your other questions answered. Do I need a COVID booster? And all of your other questions answered. By Arthur Allen/KFF Health News Turmeric may help stomach aches, study shows Turmeric may help stomach aches, study shows By Sara Kiley Watson How to avoid getting COVID again How to avoid getting COVID again By Jocelyn Solis-Moreira SEE MORE More in Health The uncharted world of emerging pathogens The uncharted world of emerging pathogens By Rene Ebersole / Undark Are you washing your hair too much or not enough? Are you washing your hair too much or not enough? By Jocelyn Solis-Moreira Are you burned out? Here’s how your body might be telling you. Are you burned out? Here’s how your body might be telling you. By Neha Sangwan Many schools stock overdose reversal meds, but others worry about stigma Many schools stock overdose reversal meds, but others worry about stigma By Rae Ellen Bichell and Virginia Garcia Pivik/KFF Health News What happens when nurses are hired like Ubers What happens when nurses are hired like Ubers By Colin Lecher / The Markup Why no two sourdoughs are exactly the same Why no two sourdoughs are exactly the same By Laura Baisas Are you a night owl or an early bird? Knowing could help you do better at work or school. Are you a night owl or an early bird? Knowing could help you do better at work or school. By Cindi May / The Conversation The unintended side effects of popular weight loss drugs The unintended side effects of popular weight loss drugs By Jocelyn Solis-Moreira SEE MORE Like science, tech, and DIY projects? Breakthroughs, discoveries, and DIY tips sent every weekday. Sign up By signing up you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. Science Archaeology Ask Us Anything Biology Dinosaurs Physics Popular Science Videos Space The Weirdest Thing I Learned This Week Technology AI Aviation Best of What’s New Engineering Internet Military Robots Security Photography Environment Agriculture Animals Climate Change Conservation Energy Sustainability Weather DIY Life Skills Projects Tech Hacks Gear Audio Cameras Computers Fitness Gear Gaming Gift Guides Home Home Theater Outdoor Gear Phones Tablets Wearables More Editorial Standards How We Test And Review Products About Us Contact Us PopSci Merch PopSci Shop PopSci+ Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Affiliate Disclosure Sitemap DepositPhotos FOLLOW US DISCLAIMER(S) Articles may contain affiliate links which enable us to share in the revenue of any purchases made. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Service. © 2024 Recurrent. All rights reserved.After COVID killed off a flu strain, annual flu shots are in for a redesign - Ars Technica Skip to content Ars Technica home Sections Forum Subscribe AI Biz & IT Cars Culture Gaming Health Policy Science Security Space Tech Feature Reviews Store AI Biz & IT Cars Culture Gaming Health Policy Science Security Space Tech Forum Subscribe Story text Size Small Standard Large Width * Standard Wide Links Standard Orange * Subscribers only Learn more Pin to story Theme Light Dark System Sign In Seemingly extinct After COVID killed off a flu strain, annual flu shots are in for a redesign It's TBD how and when a reformulation will happen, but it's now in the works. Beth Mole – Oct 5, 2023 7:33 pm | 46 The flu virus, showing the H and N proteins on its surface. Credit: CDC The flu virus, showing the H and N proteins on its surface. Credit: CDC Text settings Story text Size Small Standard Large Width * Standard Wide Links Standard Orange * Subscribers only Learn more Minimize to nav Vaccine advisers for the Food and Drug Administration voted unanimously (12 to 0) Thursday to remove, "as soon as possible," a component of annual flu shots that targets a strain of the virus that appears to have gone extinct amid the COVID-19 pandemic. The vote follows a similar recommendation from the World Health Organization last week, which stated that "every effort should be made to exclude this component as soon as possible." Exactly how soon that removal could happen is unclear, though, and some advisers on the FDA's panel expressed frustration that plans for the removal appear to have been slow-walked in the last couple of years, as it only became more apparent that the strain may be gone for good. The missing strain is the influenza type B Yamagata lineage (aka B/Yamagata), one of only four flu viruses targeted by annual vaccines. There have been no confirmed detections of B/Yamagata worldwide since March 2020, when the pandemic coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, erupted onto the global scene, dramatically disrupting the lives of people and other viruses everywhere. The subsequent 2020-2021 flu season was virtually nonexistent. While other strains and lineages of influenza have since rebounded and are moving back to their normal seasonal cycles, B/Yamagata is still unaccounted for. Still, it's rather difficult to determine with absolute certainty if a virus has truly gone extinct—particularly a lineage that had previously circulated worldwide. For this reason, flu experts have been cautious about declaring it "extinct" and retooling annual shots. But now, after more than three years since its disappearance, experts are confident in saying it presents a low risk of infection, and it's time to move on. In fact, keeping the vaccines as is may be riskier than taking the B/Yamagata component out. That's because some flu vaccines include inactivated or weakened viruses, requiring vaccine manufacturers to grow live viruses. Thus, keeping B/Yamagata in vaccines poses a risk of reintroducing the virus to people if a mishap occurs during production. “Room for improvement” But moving on from B/Yamagata is easier said than done. There are two formulations of flu vaccines: trivalent vaccines and quadrivalent ones. The trivalent shots only target three strains and don't need reformulating; they target two type A strains (H1N1 and H3N2) and another type B lineage called B/Victoria. But many of the vaccines in high-income countries, like the US, are quadrivalent, targeting four strains—the two type As and both B/Victoria and B/Yamagata—and thus need reformulating. The simplest thing to do would be to take the B/Yamagata out of the current vaccines, dropping quadrivalent vaccines to trivalent ones. But the makers of quadrivalent vaccines largely only have licenses to make quadrivalent vaccines—not trivalent ones. In the US, all currently distributed, licensed vaccines are quadrivalent. Makers of those quadrivalent vaccines still technically have licenses for trivalent formulas, an FDA official said in the meeting today. But, the trivalent licenses have been moved to a "Discontinued" status and would have to go through a regulatory procedure to be revived. Another hurdle is timing. Flu vaccines for the 2023-2024 season in the Northern Hemisphere are out now (with a B/Yamagata component in quadrivalent formulations)—far too late for a retool. (To find where to get a flu shot, you can check out vaccines.gov.) Now, vaccine experts, like the panel of FDA advisers who met today, are selecting flu strains for the 2024 season in the Southern Hemisphere, which usually spans April to September. But, there too, it is too late to switch manufacturing processes from quadrivalent to trivalent formulations. In the meeting today, a representative for one flu vaccine maker, Sanofi, suggested the company would see what it could do to reformulate shots for the 2024-2025 season in the Northern Hemisphere, but still, there are no guarantees. Beyond the problems of less-than-nimble manufacturing and licensing, experts are also unsure what an ideal reformulated flu vaccine would be. One possibility is to keep a quadrivalent formula but use three type A viruses and one type B instead of the previous even split. Another possibility is to drop to a trivalent formula but boost the dosage of one of the targeted flu strains—the most dominant in circulation—or boost the dosage for all three. Between 2010 and 2023, seasonal flu vaccine efficacy has ranged from a dismal 19 percent to 60 percent, so there's "room for improvement," Jerry Weir, director of the Division of Viral Products in the FDA’s Office of Vaccines Research and Review, noted in today's meeting. “We are where we are” However, there's virtually no data to guide advisers on how best to redesign flu shots. Weir left the meeting today saying that the FDA would work with manufacturers and experts to update shots as soon as possible and figure out how to improve the vaccines. But some FDA advisers expressed frustration that it appeared this work was just starting now and not a year or two ago. Hana El Sahly, chair of the FDA's advisory panel and an infectious disease expert at Baylor University, noted that today's meeting was the fourth in which advisers had discussed the disappearance of B/Yamagata. In past meetings, many had made clear that they mainly supported keeping the strain in flu shot formulations thus far to buy the FDA and manufacturers time to figure out reformulations. "What I'm concerned about is that it seems like we are going to begin the discussion about it now with manufacturers and regulatory agencies," El Sahly said. "I wonder why this has not taken place so far." The Sanofi representative responded that the company has not had "substantive meetings" with the FDA on the topic. "Here we are, and we've listened and we're ready to act, but I can't reverse the past. We are where we are," he said. Weir, meanwhile, acknowledged the frustration and assured El Sahly that, despite the slow progress, their advice was "moving the conversation forward," and there would be "tangible results" in "the near future." Related Stories WHO says flu vaccines should ditch strain that vanished during COVID Influenza viruses in the B/Yamagata lineage have not been seen since March 2020. Listing image: CDC Beth Mole Senior Health Reporter Beth Mole Senior Health Reporter Beth is Ars Technica’s Senior Health Reporter. Beth has a Ph.D. in microbiology from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and attended the Science Communication program at the University of California, Santa Cruz. She specializes in covering infectious diseases, public health, and microbes. 46 Comments Comments Forum view Loading comments... Prev story Next story Most Read 1. How a stubborn computer scientist accidentally launched the deep learning boom 2. Russia: Fine, I guess we should have a Grasshopper rocket project, too 3. Marvel drops Captain America: Brave New World trailer 4. There are some things the Crew-8 astronauts aren’t ready to talk about 5. DNA shows Pompeii’s dead aren’t who we thought they were Customize Ars Technica has been separating the signal from the noise for over 25 years. With our unique combination of technical savvy and wide-ranging interest in the technological arts and sciences, Ars is the trusted source in a sea of information. After all, you don’t need to know everything, only what’s important. More from Ars About Us Staff Directory Newsletters Ars Videos General FAQ RSS Feeds Contact Contact us Advertise with us Reprints Do Not Sell My Personal Information © 2024 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement and Ars Technica Addendum and Your California Privacy Rights. Ars Technica may earn compensation on sales from links on this site. Read our affiliate link policy. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad ChoicesInterim Influenza Virological and Epidemiological season report prepared for the WHO Consultation on the Composition of Influenza Virus Vaccines for the Northern Hemisphere 2023/2024 - NIPH Skip to main content 2023 Published 04.10.2023 Go to top Address/contact Norwegian Institute of Public Health Switchboard: (+47) 21 07 70 00Org. no. 983 744 516 Contact us Latest News by year Divisions and departments Would you like to work at the NIPH? All our Studies Projects Publications Health registries Content A-Z About the Norwegian Institute of Public Health Privacy PolicyVaccines can help keep you and your loved ones healthy this fall and winter | Idaho Department of Health and Welfare Skip to main content Header Utility Navigation For Providers About DHW Contact Us Forms Idaho 2-1-1 User account menu Main navigation triggers Services & Programs Health & Wellness News & Notices Main navigation disclosures Services & Programs Behavioral Health Adult Behavioral Health Behavioral Health Crisis Resources Children's Behavioral Health Opioids Substance Use Disorders Suicide Prevention Birth, Marriage and Death Records Advance Directives & Registry Birth Records Death, Stillbirth, and Miscarriage Records Marriage and Divorce Records Registries Children & Families Assisted Care and Facilities Child Care Child and Family Services and Foster Care Child Support Disability Services Family Planning Home Visiting Program Immunizations Newborn Screening Financial Assistance Aid to the Aged, Blind, and Disabled Cash Assistance (AABD) Community Services Block Grants Home Heating and Utility Assistance Temporary Assistance for Families in Idaho (TAFI) Food Assistance Community Food Resources Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Women, Infants, & Children (WIC) Medicaid & Health Assisted Care and Facilities Katie Beckett Medicaid for Adults Medicaid for Children Medicaid for Children with Disabilities Medicaid for Elderly or Disabled Adults Women's Health, Fit & Fall, Quit Smoking Health & Wellness Community Health Brain Health Crisis Standards of Care Excessive Alcohol Use Food Safety Physical Activity and Nutrition Public Health Districts Sexual Violence Prevention Environmental Health Carbon Monoxide Clandestine Labs Drinking Water and Private Wells Fish Advisories Lead Mold Per and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) Pesticides Radon Safe Water Wildfire Smoke Diseases & Conditions Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Asthma Cancer COVID-19 Cytomegalovirus Diabetes Flu (Seasonal and Pandemic) Heart Disease Hepatitis HIV Mpox Prediabetes Rabies Respiratory Syncytial Virus Sexually Transmitted Diseases Stroke Tuberculosis West Nile Virus Emergency Planning Emergency Preparedness (READY Idaho) Poison Response Strategic National Stockpile Healthy Infants & Children Child and Adolescent Immunization Children's Special Health Program Obesity Oral Health Safe Sleep School Health Women's Health & Pregnancy Breastfeeding Idaho Maternal and Child Health Women's Cancer Screening (Women's Health Check) News & Notices Newsroom DHW Blog For Media News Articles Public Meetings View Notices and Proposed Rules Public Records Requests Submit a Public Records Request Mobile Nav Main Navigation Menu Services & Programs Behavioral Health Adult Behavioral Health Behavioral Health Crisis Resources Children's Behavioral Health Opioids Substance Use Disorders Suicide Prevention Birth, Marriage and Death Records Advance Directives & Registry Birth Records Death, Stillbirth, and Miscarriage Records Marriage and Divorce Records Registries Children & Families Assisted Care and Facilities Child Care Child and Family Services and Foster Care Child Support Disability Services Family Planning Home Visiting Program Immunizations Newborn Screening Financial Assistance Aid to the Aged, Blind, and Disabled Cash Assistance (AABD) Community Services Block Grants Home Heating and Utility Assistance Temporary Assistance for Families in Idaho (TAFI) Food Assistance Community Food Resources Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Women, Infants, & Children (WIC) Medicaid & Health Assisted Care and Facilities Katie Beckett Medicaid for Adults Medicaid for Children Medicaid for Children with Disabilities Medicaid for Elderly or Disabled Adults Women's Health, Fit & Fall, Quit Smoking Health & Wellness Community Health Brain Health Crisis Standards of Care Excessive Alcohol Use Food Safety Physical Activity and Nutrition Public Health Districts Sexual Violence Prevention Environmental Health Diseases & Conditions Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Asthma Cancer COVID-19 Cytomegalovirus Diabetes Flu (Seasonal and Pandemic) Heart Disease Hepatitis HIV Mpox Prediabetes Rabies Respiratory Syncytial Virus Sexually Transmitted Diseases Stroke Tuberculosis West Nile Virus Emergency Planning Healthy Infants & Children Women's Health & Pregnancy News & Notices Newsroom DHW Blog For Media News Articles Public Meetings View Notices and Proposed Rules Public Records Requests Submit a Public Records Request Mobile Nav Header Utility Menu For Providers About DHW Contact Us Forms Idaho 2-1-1 User account menu Search Search terms search Breadcrumb Home DHW Voice Vaccines can help keep you and your loved ones healthy this fall and winter Vaccines can help keep you and your loved ones healthy this fall and winter Vaccines can help keep you and your loved ones healthy this fall and winter October 3, 2023 Dr. Kathryn Turner, Division of Public Health Respiratory disease season has arrived, and public health officials are urging Idahoans to protect themselves and their loved ones. Seasonal influenza (flu) virus, the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, are all expected to be part of the respiratory disease season this fall and winter. As people move indoors during colder months, they spend more time in close contact with others, and the chances of spreading germs increases. While most people who catch a respiratory virus will recover after a short illness, some can get sick enough to be hospitalized. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the number of hospitalizations for respiratory diseases this season could be similar to last year for all three viruses. The great news is that there are vaccines that protect from flu, RSV, and SARS-CoV-2. COVID-19 The updated COVID-19 vaccine is now available for everyone 6 months and older. The updated vaccine protects against the variant of the virus causing infections right now. Vaccination not only remains the best way to protect from severe COVID illness, it also reduces the chance of getting long COVID, which affects some people after the initial infection and can last for weeks or months. Flu To protect against the flu, everyone 6 months of age or older should get the flu vaccine before the season starts, usually before November. This year’s flu vaccines will protect against the influenza viruses expected to be circulating during the upcoming flu season. High dose flu vaccines are available for people 65 years of age and older. The higher dose of ingredients in these vaccines gives older adults a better immune response and better protection against the flu. Getting the flu vaccine not only protects individuals who get it but can reduce spread to others. RSV For the first time, vaccines against RSV are available. RSV causes mild cold symptoms in most people but can lead to hospitalization and even death in older people and babies. People 60 years and older may receive a single dose of RSV vaccine and should talk with their healthcare provider about whether they should get it. Pregnant people are recommended to receive one dose of RSV vaccine as early as 32 weeks and as late as 36 weeks of pregnancy to protect their newborn infants from RSV. A new immunization against RSV (nirsevimab) is also available for babies, who can become very ill from RSV. One dose of nirsevimab is recommended for infants younger than 8 months born before or during the RSV season. For children 8 to 19 months who are at increased risk of severe illness, nirsevimab or palivizumab (a similar monoclonal product) might be recommended. Parents should discuss using these products with their child’s healthcare provider. Additional ways to protect yourself and others In addition to getting vaccinated, everyone can reduce the risk of getting sick from respiratory viruses or spreading them by washing their hands, covering coughs and sneezes, staying home when sick, practicing physical distancing, and wearing masks when disease activity is high in a community. The CDC has published guidance for the respiratory season, a respiratory season outlook, and publishes weekly respiratory disease season updates. Follow the situation in Idaho on the Influenza, RSV, and COVID-19 dashboards. Flu dashboard: https://www.gethealthy.dhw.idaho.gov/infectious-disease-idaho RSV dashboard: https://www.gethealthy.dhw.idaho.govesp-synct COVID-19 dashboard: https://coronavirus.idaho.gov/ Dr. Kathryn Turner is deputy state epidemiologist in the Division of Public Health. The Idaho Department of Health and Welfare is dedicated to strengthening the health, safety, and independence of Idahoans. Learn more at healthandwelfare.idaho.gov. Join the Discussion Please note the following terms of participation in commenting on the DHW Voice blog. To ensure a productive discussion you agree to post only comments directly related to this post and to refrain from posting obscenities; threatening, abusive or discriminatory language; sexually explicit material; and other material that would violate the law if published here; promotional content; or private information such as phone numbers or addresses. DHW reserves the right to screen and remove inappropriate comments. Share This Post More DHW Voice Posts You May Like November 8, 2022 RSV season arrives early in Idaho; take action to protect yourself and your family Read the full article October 11, 2022 Influenza season is right around the corner, get your vaccine now Read the full article November 29, 2022 It's OK to wear a mask Read the full article Footer Navigation About Us Careers Contact Us DHW Blog Language Assistance Non-Discrimination Public Records Request Crisis Services Report Child Abuse Report Fraud Submit a Child Care Complaint Suicide Hotline Related Background Check Unit Healthy Connections Idaho.gov Idalink My Choice Matters Townhall Idaho Social Media Icons Footer Utility Accessibility Cybersercurity Privacy - Idaho Privacy - DHW Security This site is powered by CiviServCholera in the WHO African Region | OMS | Bureau régional pour l'Afrique Aller au contenu principal EnglishFrançaisPortuguese Toggle navigation Search website... Rechercher Rechercher EnglishFrançaisPortuguese Main navigation Home Thèmes de santé All topics » S A B C D E F G H I L M N O P R T U V W Y Z Popular Tuberculose (TB) Santé de l'adolescent Peste Listériose Health Topics (Niger) Health topics (Democratic Republic of Congo) World Tuberculosis Day 2019 Pays All Countries » A B C D E G K L M N R S T U Z News from countries L’OMS et l’Ambassade de Chine renforcent leur collaboration pour le renforcement du système sanitaire en République du Congo31 octobre 2024 Tous contre la polio : au Niger, les efforts s’intensifient pour l’éradication de la maladie 31 octobre 2024 Epidémie de choléra au Niger: l’OMS offre un appui immédiat au pays dans la prise en charge 28 octobre 2024 Octobre rose au sein des établissements scolaires 28 octobre 2024 Prévenir les épidémies d’Ebola grâce à la vaccination de l’entourage des anciens guéris de l’Équateur, au nord de la RDC.28 octobre 2024 Comunicado de Imprensa Médias Newsroom All news Feature Stories News Releases Photo Stories Statements and commentaries Notes for Media Headlines Tous contre la polio : au Niger, les efforts s’intensifient pour l’éradication de la maladie 31 octobre 2024 La République démocratique du Congo introduit le vaccin antipaludique R2131 octobre 2024 L’OMS et l’Ambassade de Chine renforcent leur collaboration pour le renforcement du système sanitaire en République du Congo31 octobre 2024 Les Ministres de la santé africains et les délégués adoptent une déclaration sur le changement climatique et la santé31 octobre 2024 Spotlight Southern Africa faces uptick in COVID-19 cases Données et connaissances L'OMS en Afrique About WHO in the African region » About Us Contact us Governance Leadership Innovation Organizational structure Programmes and clusters Regional Director for Africa Accountability » Financial reports General Programme of Work The Transformation Agenda » Main navigation Home Thèmes de santé All topics » S A B C D E F G H I L M N O P R T U V W Y Z Popular Tuberculose (TB) Santé de l'adolescent Peste Listériose Health Topics (Niger) Health topics (Democratic Republic of Congo) World Tuberculosis Day 2019 Pays All Countries » A B C D E G K L M N R S T U Z News from countries L’OMS et l’Ambassade de Chine renforcent leur collaboration pour le renforcement du système sanitaire en République du Congo31 octobre 2024 Tous contre la polio : au Niger, les efforts s’intensifient pour l’éradication de la maladie 31 octobre 2024 Epidémie de choléra au Niger: l’OMS offre un appui immédiat au pays dans la prise en charge 28 octobre 2024 Octobre rose au sein des établissements scolaires 28 octobre 2024 Prévenir les épidémies d’Ebola grâce à la vaccination de l’entourage des anciens guéris de l’Équateur, au nord de la RDC.28 octobre 2024 Comunicado de Imprensa Médias Newsroom All news Feature Stories News Releases Photo Stories Statements and commentaries Notes for Media Headlines Tous contre la polio : au Niger, les efforts s’intensifient pour l’éradication de la maladie 31 octobre 2024 La République démocratique du Congo introduit le vaccin antipaludique R2131 octobre 2024 L’OMS et l’Ambassade de Chine renforcent leur collaboration pour le renforcement du système sanitaire en République du Congo31 octobre 2024 Les Ministres de la santé africains et les délégués adoptent une déclaration sur le changement climatique et la santé31 octobre 2024 Spotlight Southern Africa faces uptick in COVID-19 cases Données et connaissances L'OMS en Afrique About WHO in the African region » About Us Contact us Governance Leadership Innovation Organizational structure Programmes and clusters Regional Director for Africa Accountability » Financial reports General Programme of Work The Transformation Agenda » L'OMS en Afrique Thèmes de santé Respiratory Virus Surveillance in the WHO African Region Epidemiological Week 36, September 2 to 8 2024 During Epidemiological Week (Epiweek) 36, 26 countries in the WHO African region (WHO AFR) contributed virological data for analysis - Algeria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa, South Sudan, Togo, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. During week 36, 1,549 specimens were collected, and 1,501 were tested for influenza.In Epiweek 36, 205 specimens tested positive for influenza virus (positivity of 13.7%), of which 135 specimens were Influenza A, and 70 specimens were Influenza B. The following influenza viruses were identified: Influenza A (H1N1)pdm09 (n = 38), Influenza A (H3) (n = 67), Influenza A (subtyping not performed) (n = 30), Influenza B (lineage not determined) (n = 9), and Influenza B (Victoria) (n = 61).SARS CoV-2In Epiweek 36, of the 1,358 specimens processed by 20 laboratories in the African Region, a total of 42 specimens tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 (positivity of 3.1%).Cumulatively from weeks 1 to 36, the WHO AFR influenza laboratory network has tested 60,506 sentinel surveillance specimens for SARS-CoV-2, of which 3,293 were positive for SARS-CoV-2 (cumulative positivity rate 5.4%). Week 36, September 2 to 8 2024 Week 35, August 26 to September 1 2024 Week 34, August 19 to 25 2024 Week 29, July 15 to 21 2024 Week 33, August 12 to 18 2024 Week 32, August 5 to 11 2024 Week 31, July 29 to 4 August 2024 Influenza Week 30, July 22 to 28 2024 Week 28, July 8 to 14 2024 Week 27, July 1 to 7 2024 Week 26, June 24 to 30 2024 Pagination Page courante 1 Page 2 Page 3 Page 4 Page 5 Page 6 Next › Dernière page Last » Aide et services Copyright Careers Privacy policy Sitemap Contactez nous General inquiries WHO country offices Bureaux de l'OMS WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region WHO European Region WHO Headquarters WHO Region of the Americas WHO South-East Asia Region WHO Western Pacific Region Suivez nous Twitter Facebook YouTube Rss FeedCOVID, flu, RSV tracking in Mass.: New dashboard for 2023 – NBC Boston Skip to content Main Navigation Search Search for: Local Weather Investigations Videos Sports U.S. & World Traffic Newsletters Watch News 24/7 Trending 24/7 streaming news Download our app! Donald Trump Drake Maye Celtics Karen Read trial @Issue Expand Massachusetts Redesigned COVID dashboard tracks COVID, flu, RSV in Mass. The data posted Thursday showed the 2023 season so far being less severe than the previous two years, but with more cases than in 2020 or 2019 By Colin A. Young • Published October 5, 2023 • Updated on October 5, 2023 at 5:08 pm NBC10 Boston With peak season for respiratory illnesses like the flu and COVID-19 approaching, the Massachusetts Department of Public Health on Thursday launched a refreshed dashboard to track trends and provide the public with helpful information focused on COVID-19, influenza, and respiratory syncytial syndrome (RSV). The redesigned dashboard, which will continue to be updated weekly by the end of each Thursday, centralizes DPH reporting on respiratory illnesses and attempts to make the most useful or relevant information available at a glance, with users able to drill down for even more detail. WATCH ANYTIME FOR FREE Stream NBC10 Boston news for free, 24/7, wherever you are. The data posted Thursday showed the 2023 season so far being less severe than the previous two years, but with more cases than in 2020 or 2019. All four previous years saw case numbers steadily rise until peaking in late December and early January. More COVID news Oct 2, 2023 Nobel Prize in medicine goes to 2 scientists whose work enabled creation of mRNA vaccines against COVID-19 Joe Biden Sep 23, 2023 Biden has gotten the updated COVID-19 vaccine and the annual flu shot, the White House says news Sep 21, 2023 You can get more free Covid-19 tests mailed to your door, starting Monday—here's how Get updates on what's happening in Boston to your inbox. Sign up for our News Headlines newsletter. This article tagged under: Massachusetts on now 10:30PM: NECN NOW Trending Stories Taylor Swift Taylor Swift politely corrects security guard while arriving at Chiefs game Social Security Social security recipients will see an increase in 2025 — and an extra check in November Boston Restaurant Talk Tree House Brewing may be opening new brewery, distillery, and tasting room in Boston LGBTQ ‘Exactly the same Seth Moulton': Rep. stands by comments on trans athletes, record Cybersecurity Data breaches in Massachusetts — by the numbers Weather Forecast Facebook Instagram TikTok About NBC10 Boston NBC Sports Boston Our News Standards Submit a Tip for Investigations Connect With Us Newsletters Xfinity: Internet, TV, streaming, more WBTS Public Inspection File WBTS Accessibility WBTS Employment Information FCC Applications NBC Non-Profit News Partnership Reports Send Feedback Terms of Service Privacy Policy Your Privacy Choices CA Notice Ad Choices Advertise with us Copyright © 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLC. All rights reserved Close Menu Search for: Meet the Team Local Weather School Closings Weather Alerts Investigations NBC10 Boston Responds Submit a tip Video Health Traffic NBC Sports Boston Sports Celtics New England Patriots Bruins Red Sox Entertainment Hub Today Politics About NBC10 Boston Our News Standards TV Listings Submit a Tip Submit a Consumer Complaint Submit Photos and Video Newsletters TV Schedule Download Our Apps Cozi TV Follow Us Facebook Instagram TikTok Contact UsWhat is brain fog? Learn symptoms, causes, and how to get rid of itSkip to main content HomeWellnessFoodHumankindProblem SolvedHolidaysComicsWomankindPets What's brain fog? Five expert recommended steps to get rid of brain fog.Josie Goodrich USA TODAYMost people have experienced jet lag – that sluggish feeling in your brain where you are tired and can’t really think straight.The same sort of fuzzy feeling can happen when you get the flu, or like most people, you can experience it as a symptom of COVID-19, specifically long COVID-19. Well, what if that fuzzy, out-of-it feeling doesn’t wear off quickly? You may be experiencing what experts are calling “brain fog.”Here's more in-depth information on brain fog and what you should know about it.What is brain fog?“I think the safest way to put it is that brain fog is a symptom rather than a diagnosis,” said Dr. Daniel Torres, a neurologist at Lennox Hill Hospital. “When people talk about brain fog, they’re usually describing a feeling of fuzziness in their head, difficulty thinking or fatigue.”Essentially, brain fog is an experience that people are feeling in their heads, Torres said. The common misconception is that brain fog is always a symptom of a brain disease, but that is not the case. “If you've ever had a fever, and felt like it was hard to think and felt slowed down because you had the flu, you could put that into the category of brain fog,” Torres said. In the context of many medical problems, people will describe this phenomenon as “brain fog,” Torres explained. “When people talk about brain fog, the medical thing that we usually refer to is ‘Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)’”That being said, brain fog is not the result of one thing, and the best way to figure out why you are experiencing your brain fog is to consult with your doctor, Torres said.How to get rid of brain fog?When the brain experiences this sort of fuzzy feeling, your main goal is to get your brain functioning in a healthy manner again, Torres said. Exercise. One of the first things to do is slowly begin to exercise, doing things like a recumbent bicycle, pool exercises and other gentle things to start moving the body and stimulate the brain. Sleep. “Sleep is super important. In sleep, a lot of the toxins that our brain produces through normal activity are cleared when you're in sleep,” Torres said. Avoid stress. Stress and how you manage stress affect your functioning and your brain. So, managing psychological stressors can really make a big impact on brain improvement, Torres said.Avoid alcohol/drugs and eat healthily. Avoiding alcohol and drugs, as well as processed and sugary foods, can help your brain strengthen. Focusing on a healthy diet and what you are putting into your body is important, Torres said.What is the healthiest fruit? This one is high in antioxidants and has cognitive and cardiovascular benefits.Speak with a doctor. “The behavioral interventions, when you look at people getting better over the long term, probably make the biggest difference,” Torres said. “Having a team of therapists whether it's physical therapist, psychotherapist, plus your doctor who work together and take you slowly through a rehabilitation process is usually the most effective thing.”Just Curious for more? We've got you coveredUSA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day. From "How to play Powerball" to what the "healthiest rice" is to "Who is the Zodiac Killer?" – we're striving to find answers to the most common questions you ask every day. Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you. Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024Why the new COVID shot is a game-changer (and why the term ‘booster’ is obsolete) Skip to contentNewslettersSubscribeMenuSCIENCECORONAVIRUS COVERAGEWhy the new COVID shot is a game-changer (and why the term ‘booster’ is obsolete)The latest vaccine formula is available in local pharmacies now. Experts say it will be like the annual flu shot: one and done. Here’s why.A nurse holds up a single dose of a COVID-19 vaccine alongside a single dose of the flu vaccine at the Feixa Llarga nursing home in Barcelona, Spain, where residents are being inoculated against both viral infections.Photograph by Zowy Voeten, Getty ImagesByDaryl AustinOctober 3, 2023•9 min readUnlike earlier in the pandemic, when the initial vaccines were followed by a seemingly never-ending stream of boosters, the recently updated COVID vaccine is simple: a single shot.Developed by Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna and approved on September 11 by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the new COVID vaccines have arrived just as the latest strain of the virus is causing a spike in hospitalizations and death rates. Last week, for instance, COVID-19 deaths in the United States rose by 8 percent from the previous week, and the number of hospitalizations hit 19,079—up by nearly 4,000 from the same week the month before.The primary reason for the rise “is because immunity is waning for many people," says William Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. Waning immunity occurs when protective antibodies and cellular defenses that were first stimulated by vaccine or infection diminish over time. In the case of COVID-19, it takes an average of about seven months for such waning to occur from one’s last COVID infection and about nine months following one’s last COVID vaccine.It's why the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) encourages people to stay up to date on their COVID vaccines.Schaffner explains that these updated vaccines are like the annual flu shot in that we are getting closer to needing only one COVID jab a year—rendering the term "booster" obsolete. "For more than 40 years, flu shots have been updated annually to protect against new strains of influenza and we're now updating our COVID vaccines the same way." Vaccination versus infection Although some still believe getting infected with the virus confers greater immunity than a COVID shot, the data continues to suggest otherwise. Though research does show that so called "natural immunity" that occurs after a previous COVID infection is as protective as getting vaccinated against the virus, it is much riskier and dangerous."We have ample data going back three years now showing that gaining immunity through vaccination is far safer than getting it by infection," explains John Moore, a microbiologist and immunologist at Weill Cornell Medicine.Schaffner points out that those who are nervous about getting the vaccine should consider that more than 600 million doses of the COVID shots have been safely administered in the U.S. (more than 12 billion globally), while the risk of hospitalization or death from a COVID infection remains. What’s more, emerging research has shown that multiple COVID infections can lead to chronic health issues such as diabetes, kidney disease, organ failure, and even mental health problems. Long COVID symptoms are also troubling and include brain fog, fatigue, chest pain, dizziness, and diminished taste or smell.The CDC says that vaccination remains one’s best chance of reducing the risk of long COVID symptoms, chronic conditions, and hospitalization or death—a point echoed by research scientists."Even if someone doesn't end up suffering hospitalization or chronic conditions as a result of a COVID infection," Moore says, "at the very least the disease will make their life quite unpleasant for a week or longer as they deal with many disruptive symptoms. Isn't that alone worse than a potential sore arm and a one-day headache that some experience after getting the vaccine?"Why the new shot is prudent Though previous COVID vaccines provided life-saving protection against the original strain of the virus and its many subsequent variants, the latest strains of the virus, including the most common, EG.5, "carry lots of mutations that may help them evade any immunity we currently have," says Erin Abner, an epidemiologist at the University of Kentucky College of Public Health.The new shots, now available at pharmacies across the country, have been engineered to specifically target the Omicron subvariants circulating today."The most important message is for Americans to get this newly available annual immunization since it specifically targets these new (Omicron) XBB subvariants and their derivatives," advises Peter Hotez, a physician and co-director of the Texas Children’s Hospital Center for Vaccine Development.Who should get the new COVID vaccines and when? The CDC recommends that anyone six months and older receives the latest COVID shot. Leana Wen, an emergency physician and public health professor at the George Washington University Milken Institute School of Public Health, says that older adults and immunocompromised individuals should be at the front of the line: “For them, this vaccine is especially essential.” You May Also LikeSCIENCEWhy does COVID-19 cause brain fog? Scientists may finally have an answer.SCIENCEIt’s good to feel bad after your COVID shotSCIENCEIs long COVID forever? A new study has clues.One area where opinions differ, however, is when to get the new shot.Though the CDC recommends getting this vaccine if it's been two months since one's last COVID vaccine or infection, many epidemiologists and primary care physicians think people can wait until four to six months have passed since their last COVID vaccine or infection."It's not unsafe to get it any sooner, just thought to be unnecessary so close to an earlier infection or vaccine dose," Moore says. "It may be wise to space them out a bit more to spread out protection."But that's only a question of timing. "It does not matter whether or not you got an earlier version of the vaccine be it the primary series, booster, or any COVID vaccine, the new vaccine can help protect you," says Scott Ratzan a physician based in New York City and a lecturer at CUNY Graduate School of Public Health.“(The new vaccine) will not provide complete protection from infection,” adds Abner, “but (it) will drastically reduce the risk of severe illness, hospitalization, and death."It's also worth noting that these latest shots are “generally a one-and-done vaccine, regardless of past COVID vaccine history," says Elizabeth Jacobs, a chronic disease epidemiologist at the University of Arizona Cancer Center. The exception is kids under the age of five who have never been vaccinated. For them, their initial vaccination should comprise of more than one dose. "Individuals who are immunocompromised may also need more than one dose." Can you get the COVID shot and flu shot together? The CDC says, and the experts agree, that it's okay to get both the influenza and COVID vaccines at the same time. "By now, we've seen plenty of data showing there are no harms associated with getting both shots together," says Schaffner.One consideration the experts pointed out regarding potentially spacing them apart, however, is whether you have had any kind of negative response to either vaccine in the past such as a headache, nausea, or a particularly sore arm, and whether you'd prefer spacing out those short-term side effects over two trips to the pharmacy "or suffering through just one maybe especially insufferable day," says Moore. He adds that "by now, most people know how their body reacts to either a flu or COVID vaccine, so whatever your past short-term response to each one has been, this time will probably be similar."One other thing Ratzan says to consider regarding the timing of both vaccines is that "some people are waiting to get the flu vaccine in later October or November for maximum effectiveness during flu season, though they should schedule to get the latest COVID vaccine now."Who shouldn't get the COVID vaccine? Because of age, health conditions, or other factors, the CDC sometimes advises certain groups against getting some vaccines, but that isn't the case for COVID shots.Currently, the only people for whom these shots are not recommended are those who have had a rare but severe allergic reaction to an earlier dose of the vaccine, or individuals with a history of myocarditis or pericarditis within three weeks of receiving any COVID-19 vaccine.All other groups, including pregnant women, children six months and older, and those with chronic medical conditions are advised to get the updated COVID jab. In fact, for many such people, the risk of adverse effects from a COVID-19 infection makes doing so especially important.Is the new COVID vaccine still free? Pfizer and Moderna have priced their updated COVID vaccines at about $125. Since the end of the public health emergency in May 2023, the U.S. federal government is no longer covering the cost of these vaccines.Now, health insurance companies are expected to pick up the tab. There have been reports of coding issues and some hiccups with some insurances not covering the cost of the vaccines, but "hopefully these issues will get ironed out very soon," says Hotez.In the meantime, and for those who are uninsured or underinsured, the CDC is providing a Bridge Access Program to cover the cost of the shot through December 31, 2024. "In addition, local health departments may have some free or reduced-cost COVID vaccines available," says Jacobs.Both Pfizer and Moderna's vaccines "are thought to be equivalent, so get whichever one your provider has available," advises Schaffner. "If you are vaccinated against these latest strains of COVID during October, you should receive optimal protection through the winter."Related TopicsVACCINATIONMEDICINECORONAVIRUSINFLUENZAYou May Also LikeSCIENCENew obesity drugs are coming. Here's how they could change everything.SCIENCEHere's what we know about the BA.2 Omicron subvariant driving a new COVID-19 waveSCIENCEWhat is 'immune amnesia?' This long-term side effect of measles is newly relevant.SCIENCEThere are actually 4 types of pneumonia. These are the differences.SCIENCEWe're having a COVID summer surge. Should you get the updated vaccines now?LegalTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyYour US State Privacy RightsChildren's Online Privacy PolicyInterest-Based AdsAbout Nielsen MeasurementDo Not Sell or Share My Personal InformationOur SitesNat Geo HomeAttend a Live EventBook a TripBuy MapsInspire Your KidsShop Nat GeoVisit the D.C. MuseumWatch TVLearn About Our ImpactSupport Our MissionMastheadPress RoomAdvertise With UsJoin UsSubscribeCustomer ServiceRenew SubscriptionManage Your SubscriptionWork at Nat GeoSign Up for Our NewslettersContribute to Protect the PlanetFollow usNational Geographic InstagramNational Geographic FacebookNational Geographic TwitterNational Geographic YoutubeNational Geographic LinkedinNational Geographic TiktokNational Geographic RedditUnited States (Change)Copyright © 1996-2015 National Geographic SocietyCopyright © 2015-2024 National Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reservedEpidemic and emerging disease alerts in the Pacific as of 03 October 2023 - World | ReliefWeb Skip to main content Help Log in ReliefWeb Content Search What are you looking for? Search|t Updates Countries Disasters Organizations Topics Jobs Training Informing humanitarians worldwide 24/7 — a service provided by UN OCHA World + 7 more Epidemic and emerging disease alerts in the Pacific as of 03 October 2023 Format Map Source SPC Posted 3 Oct 2023 Originally published 3 Oct 2023 Attachments Download Map (PDF | 426.22 KB) Highlights/updates since the last map was sent on PacNet on 26 September 2023: Dengue: Palau: Two laboratory-confirmed cases of DENV-2 have been reported on 4 and 19 September 2023 in Palau. Both cases have no travel history. The last confirmed case of DENV-2 was from November 2018. As a result, a red alert for DENV-2 is added to the map. – Source: personal communication with country officials on 03 October 2023 and Ministry of Health and Human Services Syndromic Surveillance Report – EpiWeek 39. Influenza like illness: FSM, Yap State: In EpiWeek 39, there was a slight decrease of Influenza-Like Illness (ILI) cases reported. However, cases remain above the established ILI threshold. Recent laboratory results have identified 6 cases of Enterovirus/Rhinovirus and 12 Influenza A subtype H1 2009. – Source: Yap State Department of Health Services Communicable Disease Report week 39 accessed on 03 October 2023. Tuvalu: The Ministry of Health declared an outbreak of Influenza Like Illness (ILI) on 18th September. A total of 758 ILI cases were recorded within 2 health centers from the beginning of the outbreak up to the 30 September 2023. A total of 56 samples were sent to Australia on the 21st of September for identification. To date a total of 240 COVID-19 Rapid Antigen Tests conducted with all negative results, along with the ruling out of dengue and typhoid. Because no agent aetiology for this increase has yet been identified, a grey alert has been added to the map. – Source: Tuvalu Influenza Like Illness Situational Report #3 accessed on 03 October 2023. Typhoid Fever: Fiji: As of the 10 September 2023, based on the laboratory-confirmed cases, the national incidence rate along with the 4 divisions in Fiji remains below the average threshold since EpiWeek 34. The red alert is changed to a blue alert for Typhoid Fever. – Source: Fiji MoHMS PacNet Alert Notification 01 received on 30 September 2023. Leptospirosis: Fiji: Fiji Ministry of Health and Medica Services has informed that based on the laboratory-confirmed cases as of 10 September 2023, the national incidence rate is currently above the outbreak threshold in EpiWeek 36 with Central and Western Divisions driving the trends above the outbreak threshold. The red alert is maintained, and the star is removed. – Source: Fiji MoHMS PacNet Alert Notification 01 received on 30 September 2023. Zika Virus Solomon Islands: The Ministry of Health and Medical Services detected six laboratory confirmed Zika virus in Honiara as of 30 the September 2023. The Ministry of Health and Medical Services calls on Honiara residents and property owners to get rid of mosquito breeding sites near your properties. As a result, a red alert for zika virus is added. – Source: Health... - Ministry Of Health & Medical Services - Solomon Islands | Facebook 03 October 2023. Other information: Coronavirus disease 2019 Due to the evolving nature of COVID-19 testing, vaccination and reporting strategies across the Pacific region, the data reported might not reflect the true situation in a number of countries. Wallis and Futuna: Between the 29 September and 02 October 2023, 6 confirmed COVID-19 cases have been reported in Wallis. Out of these, 3 cases were imported, and 3 were acquired within the community. No significant increase in the number of consultations, flu-like symptoms, and paracetamol consumption in week 39. Emergency room visits remains below the monthly averages – Source: Rapport de situation n°1 accessed, Circulation du SARS-COV2 à Wallis 02/10/2023. Influenza like illness: Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas (CNMI): In EpiWeek 38 (September 17 – September 23, 2023), the cases of ILI have increased 57% compared to the previous three weeks. The number of ILI cases increase from 87 in EpiWeek 37 to 107 in EpiWeek 38. Laboratory results have identified Influenza A, influenza B in the majority of the tests performed. – Source: CNMI weekly syndromic surveillance report (September 17 – September 23, 2023). Malaria: Solomon Islands: From the 15th to the 21st September 2023, 97 positive malaria cases were recorded in Honiara, with the top hotspot communities being Papaho, Panatina, Mbokona, and Kukum. - Source: WEEKLY MALARIA AND AWARENESS IN HONIARA CITY – My SIG Services Portal (solomons.gov.sb) accessed on 03 October 2023. Measles: New Zealand: A second person in Auckland has been diagnosed with measles, unrelated to the previous case but linked to recent overseas travel. Public health officials are tracing individuals who may have had contact with the infected person in hospital waiting rooms over the weekend. – Source: Second measles case in Auckland, unlinked to last week's | RNZ News accessed on 03 October 2023. Victoria, Australia: As of the 26 September 2023, a new case of measles was identified in a returned overseas traveller. There has been a total of 4 measles cases reported in Victoria since the start of 2023. – Source: New measles case in Victoria | health.vic.gov.au accessed on 03 October 2023. Typhoid fever New Zealand: An outbreak of typhoid has been identified in a team of rural workers in Tairāwhiti, New Zealand, with six cases reported. The outbreak is believed to have originated from a team member who recently returned from overseas, and control measures have been implemented to prevent further spread. – Source: Ministry of Health and Medical Services detected 6 Zika Virus accessed on 03 October 2023. Upcoming mass gathering event: The 17th Pacific Games Solomon Islands: As of the 29 September 2023, Ministry of Health & Medical Services published on their website the Health Advice for Travellers to the 17th Pacific Fames. – Source: Health advice for Travellers to the Pacific Games in Solomon Islands – My SIG Services Portal (solomons.gov.sb) on 03 October 2023. Report details Primary country World Other countries AustraliaFijiMicronesia (Federated States of)New ZealandPalauSolomon IslandsTuvalu Source Pacific Community Format Map Theme Health Disaster type Epidemic Language English Share Share this on Facebook Share this on X Post this on LinkedIn Related Content World Navigating the climate-health nexus: linking health data with climate data to advance public health interventions Format Analysis Source BMC Posted 12 Nov 2024 Originally published 11 Nov 2024 World + 7 more Polio Transition Independent Monitoring Board Seventh Report - The struggle for progress: Does system strengthening always have to be slow? (October 2024) Format Analysis Source GPEI Posted 12 Nov 2024 Originally published 7 Nov 2024 World Prioritising health in humanitarian work: the need for comprehensive and inclusive research Format News and Press Release Source ODI - HPN Posted 11 Nov 2024 Originally published 11 Nov 2024 World Joint Brief: the Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change & Médecins Sans Frontières 2024 - Every Climate Action Counts: the Ripple Effect of Each Failure on Health Care in Humanitarian Settings Format Analysis Sources MSFThe Lancet Posted 11 Nov 2024 Originally published 11 Nov 2024 Blog Labs About Us Terms Contact Facebook X LinkedIn Instagram Telegram OCHA Services Related Platforms Humanitarian Action Central Emergency Response Fund Other OCHA Services Financial Tracking Service Humanitarian Data Exchange Humanitarian ID ReliefWeb Response Inter-Agency Standing Committee OCHA website ReliefWeb Virtual OSOCC More OCHA Services Opens in a new window Service provided by United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs UN OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OCHA coordinates the global emergency response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. ReliefWeb's Terms & Conditions. © 2024 all rights reserved.Watkins begins month of walk-in flu shot clinics | News | kansan.com Skip to main content You have permission to edit this article. Edit Close Facebook Twitter TikTok Instagram Sections Site search Search Home News Campus Administration Student Life Student Senate Science and Technology Crime and Public Safety Obituaries Local Government State National Sports Football Men's Basketball Jayhawks in the NBA Women's Basketball Volleyball Baseball Softball Track and Field Tennis Soccer Golf Arts & Culture Food Music Theater and Performance Fashion Features Opinion Submit a Letter to the Editor Photo & Video Staff About Advertise Housing Guide Advertising Rates & Media Kit Store Close Watkins begins month of walk-in flu shot clinics Cara Barone | @carabar.one & Rory Smith | @rorysmithmedia Oct 6, 2023 Oct 6, 2023 Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save Watkins Health Services kicked off its month of walk-in flu vaccination clinics with a clinic at Daisy Hill Commons on Oct. 3.Watkins conducts the off-site clinics every year with the goal of curbing flu season as much as possible, said Patty Quinlan, clinical program coordinator at Watkins. Two-hour clinics will take place every Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday in October, as well as on Nov. 1, mostly from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.Students should be sure to bring their health insurance cards with them to be billed correctly and ensure that they can get the vaccine. Shots are $40 each, but most insurance policies fully cover the vaccine, Quinlan said. “It’d be really nice to get that before you leave for Thanksgiving or your winter break, especially if you’re going to be around the elderly family members or little babies,” Quinlan said.Dr. Graig Nickel, the medical director at Watkins Health Services, said, referencing the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, that the vaccine is believed to reduce the risk of getting sick with the flu by 40%-60% across the population.This year’s flu vaccine, Quinlan said, targets four different influenza viruses. Influenza A and B viruses affect humans most significantly, so flu vaccines primarily protect against two strains of influenza A and two strains of influenza B. Quinlan said that, this flu season, the most common influenza strains going around seem to be well-matched in the flu vaccines being distributed.“It doesn’t always exactly match, but this year it shows to,” Quinlan said.Cait Phelan, a freshman majoring in human biology, gets a flu vaccine every year. This year, she got it at the Daisy Hill clinic.“It took like five minutes,” Phelan said. “Everyone was super nice and helpful.”Likewise, freshman mathematics major Jackson Vaughn described his experience at the clinic as “very smooth.”“Honestly [the experience was] better than some that I have at home,” Vaughn said. “Having to go to the doctor and sign in and schedule appointments. Just coming in, it was very easy.”Influenza does not yet appear to be widespread on campus, as Watkins has not recorded a positive case of influenza since the beginning of the semester, despite performing approximately 1,000 tests.However, Dr. Nickel says that if a student does test positive for influenza, they should follow Watkins’s guidelines for COVID-19 exposure and isolate themselves for at least five days after their symptoms begin.Nickel also said that Watkins should have the new COVID-19 booster shot “soon,” which would allow students to receive both vaccines during the same trip. Students can also make an appointment to get a flu shot online through their patient portal or by calling Watkins at 785-864-9500. Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save Tags Flu Vaccine Sick Shot Influenza Watkins Ku Kansas Latest News KU soccer to face St. Louis in 1st round of NCAA Tournament Where you live in Lawrence could be the greatest predictor of obesity KJHK's annual Battle of the Beats will mash up four local DJs Game Day Diary: A student's perspective on Kansas football at Arrowhead Stadium OPINION: Voters are not to blame for Kamala Harris' loss Weekly Event Roundup: Internship Fair, grocery bingo, vintage clothing market and more Asian American Student Union brings global flavors to Lawrence at Night Market KU equestrian team saddles up for success with passion, dedication Subscribe to On Campus * indicates required Email Address *Phone Number () -(###) ###-#### Most Popular Articles ArticlesCompetition builds as more coffee shops open in LawrenceThe Real Deal Record Breaker: Neal makes KU football history in win over Iowa StateREVIEW: Slow Rise bakes homemade treats you doughnut want to miss out onREVIEW: Tyler, the Creator's 'CHROMAKOPIA' is a raw and candid confessionalAsian American Student Union brings global flavors to Lawrence at Night MarketKU Athletics announces new gate policy for Allen Fieldhouse to enhance fan experienceHometown hero Zeke Mayo comes up clutch in win over No. 9 North CarolinaGame Day Diary: A student's perspective on Kansas football at Arrowhead StadiumUnofficial Douglas County election results, all precincts reportingKU Athletics pushes new fan experience initiatives to promote Kansas football Sections News Sports Arts & Culture Local Events Opinion Photos Video Gallery Services Contact Us Advertise With Us About Us Staff Promote Your Event Weather University Daily Kansan 113 Stauffer-Flint Hall, 1435 Jayhawk Blvd. Lawrence, KS 66045 Email: editor@kansan.com Follow Us Facebook Twitter TikTok Instagram A partner of Parse.ly, a digital analytics platform. × Browser Compatibility Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.We recommend switching to one of the following browsers: Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox © Copyright 2024 University Daily Kansan 113 Stauffer-Flint Hall, 1435 Jayhawk Blvd., Lawrence, KS | Terms of Use | Privacy Policy Powered by BLOX Content Management System from BLOX Digital.Hong Kong set for late start to winter flu season in February, expert says, calling on high-risk groups to get vaccinated immediately | South China Morning Post AdvertisementHong Kong healthcare and hospitalsHong KongHealth & EnvironmentHong Kong set for late start to winter flu season in February, expert says, calling on high-risk groups to get vaccinated immediatelyProfessor Ivan Hung says seasonal flu cycle has been disrupted by Covid-19 pandemic, resulting in a delayed start to winter outbreak ‘At present, Hong Kong is in the final stage of summer influenza season as the outbreak has been delayed by the Covid-19 pandemic,’ he adds Reading Time:2 minutesWhy you can trust SCMP3Cannix YauPublished: 12:59pm, 7 Oct 2023Updated: 5:06pm, 7 Oct 2023Hong Kong’s winter outbreak of seasonal flu is expected to emerge later than usual and start in February, a top government health adviser has said, calling on those most vulnerable to the infection to get their vaccine jabs as soon as possible.AdvertisementProfessor Ivan Hung Fan-ngai, a top infectious diseases expert from the University of Hong Kong, made the call on Saturday as he noted the seasonal flu cycle had been disrupted by the Covid-19 pandemic.“At present, Hong Kong is in the final stage of summer influenza season as the outbreak has been delayed by the Covid-19 pandemic,” he told a radio programme. “The winter influenza outbreak will begin from February to April next year with the flu cycle and coronavirus seasons emerging alternatively every six months.”Hung, who also serves on the government’s Scientific Committee on Vaccine Preventable Diseases, urged those considered high-risk groups, such as children, the chronically ill and elderly people living in care homes, to get an influenza shot immediately to prepare for the coming winter outbreak.“We strongly advise these groups of people to get jabbed against the seasonal flu. This is the best preventive measure against infections,” he said.Secretary for Health Lo Chung-mau, appearing on a TV programme, said getting vaccinated was the surest way to prevent contracting the seasonal flu or experiencing any resulting complications.Advertisement“After getting vaccinated, your immunity against flu infections will be boosted,” he said, adding that getting immunity from a jab was safer than acquiring it through an infection.Professor Ivan Hung has urged people from high-risk groups to get their flu vaccines immediately. Photo: Edmond SoAdvertisementLHNVD-105 shows robust and long-lasting responses via both intramuscular and intradermal administration | BioWorld BioWorld. Link to homepage. BioWorldBioWorld MedTechBioWorld AsiaBioWorld ScienceData SnapshotsBioWorldBioWorld MedTechInfographics: Dynamic digital data analysisSpecial reportsAgingAlzheimer's diseaseArtificial intelligenceBiosimilarsChina CAR TChina's GLP-1 landscapeCoronavirusInfographics: Dynamic digital data analysisIsraelIVDs on the risePFA re-energizes afib marketRadiopharmaceuticalsRise of obesityTop Biopharma Trends of 2023Top Med-tech Trends of 2023Top Preclinical Trends of 2023Premium reportsBioWorld Financings ReportsDisease Incidence & Prevalence Summaries BioWorld. Link to homepage. sign in Sign Out My Account SubscribeBioWorld - Monday, November 11, 2024Breaking News: Best of BioWorld Science: Q3See today's BioWorld ScienceHome » LHNVD-105 shows robust and long-lasting responses via both intramuscular and intradermal administrationXUpgrade your daily dose of biopharma and medtech news Subscribe to BioWorld™ news services See subscription optionsTo read the full story, subscribe or sign in.InfectionLHNVD-105 shows robust and long-lasting responses via both intramuscular and intradermal administration Oct. 4, 2023 No Comments Synthetic, multi-epitope peptide vaccines are becoming an attractive universal influenza vaccine strategy. Longhorn Vaccines & Diagnostics LLC has created LHNVD-105, an influenza vaccine candidate consisting of unconjugated multi-epitope influenza peptides.BioWorld Science Immune Infection Vaccine Popular Stories Today's news in briefBioWorldBioWorld briefs for Nov. 11, 2024. Today's news in briefBioWorld MedTechBioWorld MedTech briefs for November 11, 2024. Sales balloon for GLP-1 drugs from Novo Nordisk, Eli LillyBioWorldNearly $3.8 billion was earned by Novo Nordisk A/S and Eli Lilly and Co. in the third quarter for their glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) drugs to treat obesity.... Regulatory actions for Oct. 31, 2024BioWorldRegulatory snapshots, including global drug submissions and approvals, clinical trial approvals and other regulatory decisions and designations: Capsida, Electra,... Australia reimburses Vazkepa a decade after US approvalBioWorldFor the first time, Australians have access to CSL Inc.’s Vazkepa (icosapent ethyl/Vascepa) for managing cardiovascular disease more than a decade after the drug... BioWorld PremiumEnjoy extended coverage for the most complete market view with BioWorld, BioWorld MedTech, and BioWorld Asia in a single, easy to access subscription.SubscribeBioWorldToday's newsAnalysis and data insightClinicalData SnapshotsDeals and M&AFinancingsNewco newsOpinionRegulatoryScienceBioWorld MedTechToday's newsClinicalData SnapshotsDeals and M&AFinancingsNewco newsOpinionRegulatoryScienceBioWorld AsiaToday's newsAnalysis and data insightAustraliaChinaClinicalDeals and M&AFinancingsNewco newsRegulatoryScienceBioWorld ScienceToday's newsBiomarkersCancerConferencesEndocrine/MetabolicImmuneInfectionNeurology/PsychiatricPatentsMoreAboutAdvertise with BioWorldArchivesArticle reprints and permissionsContact usCookie policyCopyright noticeData methodologyInfographics: Dynamic digital data analysisPodcastsPrivacy policyShare your news with BioWorldStaffTerms of useTopic alertsFollow Us Copyright ©2024. All Rights Reserved. Design, CMS, Hosting & Web Development :: ePublishingCookie SettingsFemales May Be More Likely to Experience Side Effects After Flu Shot ​ Skip to content Health Search the site GO Please fill out this field. Newsletters Search Please fill out this field. News Conditions A - Z Conditions A - Z Anxiety Coronavirus Type 2 Diabetes Headaches and Migraines Heart Disease View All Nutrition Nutrition Eat Well Nutrition Basics Vitamins and Supplements View All Wellness Wellness Mental Health Fitness Skincare Sexual Health View All What to Buy What to Buy Nutrition & Supplements Oral & Dental Care Sleep Products Over the Counter Skincare View All About Us About Us Editorial Process Medical Expert Board Diversity Pledge Testing and Vetting Products Read More Stay informed with emails from us Search the site GO Please fill out this field. Newsletter Sign Up News Conditions A - Z Anxiety Coronavirus Type 2 Diabetes Headaches and Migraines Heart Disease View All Nutrition Eat Well Nutrition Basics Vitamins and Supplements View All Wellness Mental Health Fitness Skincare Sexual Health View All What to Buy Nutrition & Supplements Oral & Dental Care Sleep Products Over the Counter Skincare View All About Us Editorial Process Medical Expert Board Diversity Pledge Testing and Vetting Products News Study: Females May Be More Likely to Experience Side Effects After Flu Shot By Korin Miller Korin Miller Korin Miller is a freelance writer specializing in general wellness, sexual health and relationships, shopping, and lifestyle trends, with work appearing in Women’s Health, Self, Prevention, Forbes, Daily Beast, and more. health's editorial guidelines Published on October 5, 2023 Fact checked by Nick Blackmer Fact checked by Nick Blackmer Nick Blackmer is a librarian, fact-checker, and researcher with more than 20 years of experience in consumer-facing health and wellness content. health's fact checking process Close Females may be more likely to experience side effects from flu vaccines than males, new research says.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention continue to recommend that all people ages 6 years and older receive a flu vaccine every year, with rare exceptions.Though the new study didn't examine why females may fare worse with vaccine side effects, some working theories point to genetic and hormonal differences in females that may affect immune response. This article uses the term "female" and focuses on people who were born with a female reproductive system to accurately depict research. Health realizes that sex and gender are not interchangeable terms—not everyone who identifies as a woman was born with female reproductive organs, and not everyone with female reproductive organs identifies as a woman. Females may be more likely to experience flu vaccine side effects—including fever, headache, and muscle aches—compared to males, researchers say, and they should be made aware of these increased risks. The news comes from a new meta-analysis published in the Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, in which researchers compared adverse reactions to flu vaccines in males versus females. Overall, females were likelier to experience both injection-site reactions, as well as systemic reactions. Currently, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend that all people over the age of 6 months get a flu vaccine every year, with rare exceptions, including anyone who is allergic to the flu vaccine or any of its components. The flu vaccine is particularly important for people who are at a higher risk of flu-related complications. Although it’s been recognized that immune responses and adverse reactions to vaccines differ between females and males, most studies don’t specifically call out those differences. The lack of data on the differences in reactions also potentially puts females at risk and may increase their vaccine hesitancy. Here’s what to know about the sex differences in flu vaccine reactions and why these findings are important to public health. Studio Firma/Stocksy Females Have a Higher Risk of Reactions After Flu Shot For the study, researchers analyzed data from 18 different studies which included more than 34,000 adults. They found a higher risk of injection-site reactions (pain, swelling, or redness) in females compared to males, with females over 65 having the highest risk. Females were also more likely to experience systemic vaccine reactions (fever, headache, or muscle aches), and were likelier to experience severe reactions from the shots, as well. According to estimates by the study authors, for every 1,000 people who receive a flu vaccine, an additional 115 injection-site reactions and an additional 75 systemic reactions will be reported in females than males. The study did have some limitations: Researchers said that the adverse effects were all self-reported and that the reported adverse effects reflect both sex and gender—sex refers to biological and physiological characteristics of males and females, while gender refers to role and behavior of men and women. Study authors noted that women may also be more likely than men to report side effects or other health events. What Are the Side Effects of the Flu Vaccine? Sex Differences in Vaccine Reactions Previously Reported Experts generally agree that vaccines can affect both sexes differently. “There have been other pieces of literature that have concluded something similar,” William Schaffner, MD, an infectious disease specialist and professor at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, told Health. A study published last year by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found that, of 6,994 people who reported side effects of the COVID-19 vaccine, 79.1% of them were women. A cross-sectional study of 843 healthcare workers published last year found that around 65% of men had some kind of reaction to the COVID-19 vaccine, compared to 77% of women. A 2021 analysis of 41 research articles on COVID-19 vaccines also found that women had a higher risk of side effects than men. Despite this difference, “results for vaccination safety are often not presented by sex despite the fact that the risk of adverse events following vaccines could vary between males and females,” Marilou Kiely, PhD, lead author of the latest study and a researcher in the department of Microbiology, Infectiology, Immunology & Pediatrics at the University of Montreal, told Health. Theories Regarding Sex Differences in Vaccine Reactions The study didn’t explore why females are likelier to experience side effects—it simply found an association. However, there are some theories behind why females may be more likely to have vaccine reactions than males. “Genetic and hormonal differences between females and males influence the immune responses to infections and vaccination,” Kiely said, noting that females “usually develop a greater inflammatory response” after they’re vaccinated, which can lead to side effects. Estrogen specifically may be a larger factor. “It may be that estrogen is more involved in the immune system than we know,” Shaffner said. “But this hasn’t been studied carefully.” Ultimately, there are still a lot of unknowns. “It’s likely that there are many sex differences that we don’t know about or don’t understand when it comes to drug and vaccine administration,” Jamie Alan, RPh, PharmD, PhD, an associate professor of pharmacology and toxicology at Michigan State University, told Health. “Unfortunately, sex differences are poorly studied and poorly understood.” Can You Get a Flu Shot When You Have a Cold? Making Females Aware of an Increased Risk According to Kiely, it’s important for medical providers to be aware of these sex differences—and to share this information with patients. “Transparent communication of this increased risk would help sustain long-term trust in vaccines,” she said. However, Kiely added healthcare workers should also be aware that the reactions are usually mild. For patients, Schaffner said there’s nothing different that females need to do to prepare for vaccination. “It’s well known that vaccines have these potential side effects,” he said. Females and males may want to make sure that they have medication like acetaminophen or ibuprofen at home in case of a fever, and apply a cold, damp compress at the injection site when they get home, Kiely said. If you’re concerned about your risk of side effects, Alan suggested being mindful of when you get vaccinated. “You might want to schedule a vaccine on a day where you can take it easy afterward, just in case,” she said. Was this page helpful? Thanks for your feedback! Tell us why! Other Submit 5 Sources Health.com uses only high-quality sources, including peer-reviewed studies, to support the facts within our articles. Read our editorial process to learn more about how we fact-check and keep our content accurate, reliable, and trustworthy. Kiely M, Tadount F, Lo E, et al. Sex differences in adverse events following seasonal influenza vaccines: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. J Epidemiol Community Health. Published online September 21, 2023. doi:10.1136/jech-2023-220781 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Who needs a flu vaccine. Gee J, Marquez P, Su J, et al. First Month of COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring - United States, December 14, 2020-January 13, 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021;70(8):283-288. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7008e3 Al-Qazaz HK, Al-Obaidy LM, Attash HM. COVID-19 vaccination, do women suffer from more side effects than men? A retrospective cross-sectional study. Pharm Pract (Granada). 2022;20(2):2678. doi:10.18549/PharmPract.2022.2.2678 Vassallo A, Shajahan S, Harris K, et al. Sex and gender in COVID-19 vaccine research: substantial evidence gaps remain. Front Glob Womens Health. 2021;2:761511. doi:10.3389/fgwh.2021.761511 Related Articles CDC Recommends Stronger Flu Shots for People 65 and Older This Season—Here's Why What Your Sex Has To Do With COVID-19 Vaccine Side Effects This Year's Flu Shot Is a 'Good Match,' CDC Says—But Cases and Hospitalizations Continue to Rise Is a Swollen Upper Lip a Symptom of COVID? Why Do You Have Arm Pain After a Flu Shot? Where To Get Free Flu Shots Without Insurance Who Is Eligible for a Second Bivalent Booster? New CDC Recommendations, Explained FDA Panel Recommends New Monovalent COVID Booster Targeting XBB Variant 5 Ways Infectious Disease Experts Stay Healthy During Cold and Flu Season COVID Vaccine Update: CDC Now Recommends Second Dose For Older Adults, Immunocompromised Flu Shots: Are They 'Live Virus' Vaccines or Not? Will Everyone Need a Fourth Dose of a COVID-19 Vaccine? What Is a 'Tripledemic'? Experts Warn COVID, Flu, and RSV May Converge This Winter Study: mRNA Vaccines Fare Better Against COVID Variants Getting COVID and Flu Shots Together May Slightly Increase Risk of Stroke in Older Adults The FDA Approved New COVID Vaccines. Who Can Get One—And When? Health Newsletters Follow Us News Conditions A-Z Nutrition Wellness About Us Medical Expert Board Editorial Process Diversity Pledge Privacy Policy Product Vetting Terms of Service Careers Advertise Contact Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Health is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Newsletter Sign Up Newsletter Sign UpGarance Doré Enters the Beauty Business with her skincare line, Doré - Air Mail Skip to Content Subscribe Beauty Wellness Latest Issue Archive Sign In Subscribe Beauty Getting into Bed with Tiffany Haddish Getting into Bed with Charlize Theron The World’s Most Expensive Face-Lift Wellness Investigating “Oatzempic” My Mounjaro, My Choice Alcohol’s Worst Enemy Recommended Seek Treatment The Queen of Clean Have Some Fungi Latest Issue Archive My Account Latest Issue • Nov 09, 2024BeautyWellnessLatest IssueArchive Explore Air Mail Stories you won't find anywhere else Arts Intel An indispensable guide to travel and culture Air Supply Our highly selective online storefront LOOK A resource for all things beauty and wellness Newsstands NYC London Milan Gift Subscriptions About Archive Editors’ Picks: Read the Latest Issue Skin Care Travel and Food Sex and Relationships Wellness October 6, 2023 No. 8 Beauty and Wellness Go Back “I became what I hated.” Photograph by Ezra Petronio. Public Face Influenza She was a fashion blogger, illustrator, and photographer who suffered when the cameras turned on her. Garance Doré tries for her second (or third or fourth) act By Alexandra Marshall October 6, 2023 Reading Time: 8 minutes Garance Doré has been many things—most recently, the founder of a new beauty line and a members-only online community. Yet the first line of her obituary might still include “original front-row influencer.” It’s the least relevant part of her C.V., and the one she’s been most eager to escape. As the influencer phenomenon has worn on for well over a decade now, a life cycle is starting to emerge: first comes mounting attention and money, then comes anxiety and existential burnout.Such was the case for Doré, who, since stepping away from fashion-show-going, has remade her life in a far less public way. Now, at 48, she’s found some equilibrium, but it was a bumpy road, with a wee nervous breakdown along the way. “I became what I hated,” she says, at a café on the less populous side of the Butte Montmartre.An associate had originally suggested for our meeting a prissy boutique hotel with an eye-wateringly expensive menu. Doré needed the recommendation because she has less connection to Paris than you’d think, having lived in the city for only a few years. (The U.K. is her home base today.) The dessert menu had île flottante. We rolled our eyes and beat it around the corner for a Cobb salad and cheesecake.Since 2006, when Doré launched her first blog, she has contributed to the shift in the once reluctant fashion industry to the digital realm, picture by picture, post by post. If you can remember as far back as 17 years ago, nobody in the luxury design houses would deign to have a Web site. It took fashion bloggers, seen as grubby and gauche, to prove the value of an online audience. Today, she is a paragon of Parisian style, even though she grew up in Corsica, now lives in Somerset, and her name is neither Garance nor Doré. Née Mariline Fiori, she was born scrappy. From the tiny village of Girolata, Corsica, accessible only by boat or donkey, she didn’t come from the kind of people who rewarded sitting around looking pretty. The eldest of four, she was expected to earn. Her parents owned a restaurant called Le Bel Ombra, a favorite of passing yachtsmen including Gianni Agnelli. Her father grilled the fish while her glamorous mother greeted the guests. Doré worked there as a teenager to pay for trips to England and America to learn English. She borrowed her father’s kitchen to make croissants over summer holidays, which she peddled by boat. (One of her other jobs, as a windsurfing instructor on a nude beach, didn’t last quite as long.)Today, she is a paragon of Parisian style, even though she grew up in Corsica, now lives in Somerset, and her name is neither Garance nor Doré.After university she relocated to Marseille to become an illustrator, a career her parents didn’t approve of. But trips back and forth to Paris to hustle her portfolio netted very little. “I realized when I started actually getting work that I couldn’t make a living doing it,” she says. Doré thought a blog might help launch her career, so she learned Photoshop and, in 2006, gave birth to Une Fille Comme Moi. Like most of her peers, she decided to go anonymous, but where they called themselves “Fifi57” or “Girl in the City,” she went for something more distinguished. “Garance Doré” combined two colors, red and gold, recalled the artist Gustave Doré, and made her sound posher and more classically French than Corsican. It created the distance she needed to express herself about fashion and life. She clearly had an eye and a voice, and it had nothing to do with Parisian-fashion froideur. She was refreshing. The front-row insurgents in 2012: Bryanboy, Derek Blasberg, Doré, Scott Schuman, and Tommy Ton. Une Fille Comme Moi found its audience quickly, thanks to the self-supporting community of fashion blogs that were starting to catch the attention of print media. “I launched in June, and by the end of that summer, I started getting requests for interviews,” she recalls. “I was very shy and not media-ready, but I started feeling that something was happening, and if I was going to have a chance, this was it. So I took all the money I had [$2,000], and moved to Paris.” She was 31. Paris was her fashion graduate school. Doré started snapping pictures of women on the street as a way to understand this higher level of style. Soon she met Scott Schuman, a photographer with his own ascendant blog, the Sartorialist, and they became a couple. Street-style photography valorized individual, often eccentric takes on fashion. What was happening outside the shows started to become as exciting as what went on inside.“Scott was the first person in my life who said, ‘You have real talent,’” Doré says. With his American, can-do gumption, “he really pushed me.” Doré re-settled, moving into Schuman’s Greenwich Village apartment. The two became the buzziest megaphones, the Brangelina of bloggers, collaborating on high-profile branded projects including Tiffany & Co.’s True Love in Pictures series. By 2012, the Council of Fashion Designers of America would anoint the couple with a prestigious Eugenia Sheppard award for journalism. It was like she blinked and they became the Establishment.Doré started to overtake Schuman. It helped that, as people said, she was simply easier to work with, as endearing as her writing. Schuman, who had left his wife of 20 years to pursue the relationship with Doré, and who made loutish comments about Doré while they were together, was known to be prickly. She was also branching out, founding Atelier Doré, a creative agency that churned out blog content and campaigns for Net-a-Porter, L’Oréal, Louis Vuitton, Estée Lauder, Nars, Tiffany, and Shiseido. Doré was not a typical branding executive. “Garance was always most comfortable working from her couch,” says Emily Yeston, who started as an editorial assistant for the still-tiny Atelier Doré in 2011 and is now her business partner. “We would laugh because there was a desk in the office that was for her, but we would sit at it and eat lunch.”Doré was never a clotheshorse, either, though she cut a stylish figure with her high heels and big camera. It made sense, as the influencer economy was gaining traction in the 2010s, that brands would want her visibly in their front rows. Designers invited her and sent clothes, and she went along, happily accepting their largesse. Like many at the time, she was making it up as she went along. Why not?And then, in 2014, after seven high-profile years, Schuman and Doré broke up. Both issued carefully worded statements on their respective platforms. The news was gossiped about in the Cut, Gawker, and even the Daily Mail, in which Schuman was (rather snobbishly) quoted as saying that the two were “brought up differently.” (He was also quoted in The Globe and Mail, saying, “I’m pretty good at the sex. And pretty good at picture taking. That’s about it.”)Meanwhile, the digital media world was evolving. Instagram essentially flipped the camera around. “If you’re a photographer, you take photos at shows,” she says. “But if you’re an influencer, you’re there to be looked at.” Doré always shared her personal life in her writing, and on her podcast Pardon My French, but “when Instagram arrived, the camera turned on me. I’m a narcissist, like everyone else, but it didn’t feel so interesting. I couldn’t stay high on myself for very long.” Like many people who are unhappy and not sure why, Doré thought the problem was her. “I tried to play the game for a while. I even hired a stylist.” When she found herself whining about seat placement, she horrified herself.Her book, Love Style Life, filled with her writing and illustrations, came out in 2015. By 2016, she relocated to Los Angeles and fixed up a house in Mar Vista, where she hoped to slow down and start a family with her musician boyfriend. That didn’t work out.“The depression settled in slowly,” Doré says. “I was making money because I still had some contracts with brands, but I wasn’t writing. It was an L.A. depression where your psychic tells you you’re wonderful and you’re probably channeling, and you talk to angels.” The relationship went bust; she was structureless and developed dangerous levels of magical thinking. “I turned around and saw that I hadn’t done anything.” She had no energy to wrangle interview subjects for her podcast, and so she shut that down, too. A proper psychiatrist, with proper meds, came to the rescue. Back to the drawing board. “With everything I lived, all the glamour, the money, the recognition, the clothes, the trips, when everything calmed down, there was only one thing I missed,” Doré says. “It wasn’t money; it wasn’t success. It was writing for someone who understands me.” Doré stopped covering style on her Web site, and she and Yeston formally closed Atelier Doré, getting out of their expensive Bowery lease on the eve of the pandemic. Then, right as the world went into lockdown, Doré launched a newsletter. She was back to her first love: cranking out content from her couch. And it worked. What began as Garance.world grew fast enough that she decided to put it behind a paywall to keep the community manageable. It’s just moved to Substack, changed its name to “The Highlight,” and charges $7 a month or $70 a year. In it she explores careers, love, health, fashion and style, and childlessness—all things Doré has written plenty about before, with charm and candor. “Not that I’m the first, but anything that creates opportunities for people to come together” feels right to her now.Meanwhile, Yeston was casting about, looking for a job. “A founder said, ‘Oh, you should totally start a beauty brand,’” she says. “I was like, ‘Absolutely not. It’s such a crowded space. That’s insane.’” Then, while shopping for some micellar water, the gentle, watery cleanser that was made popular by Bioderma and Avène, to calm her irritated skin, she had trouble finding a formula without parabens or fragrance of any kind. Aha.Yeston saw an opening for a new interpretation of French pharmacy products. Who better to partner with than Doré?”“I said, ‘No, no, the world doesn’t need another product!,’” Doré recalls. “I like ease and simplicity, and don’t believe in 90 percent of what the beauty industry is selling. Emily said, ‘Exactly.... This is why you should do it.’” The line, conceived of as the jeans and white T-shirt of skin care, launched last May with four products, all made in a Paris lab: micellar water; a gentle cleanser that turns milky with friction; a soothing balm, sort of like Boiron’s cult Homéoplasmine; and a simple, comfortable facial moisturizer. In September, the brand added an ice roller to its product line.The range comes in spare, minty-green packaging, and its ingredients were verified by the Environmental Working Group. It’s far from the luxury world that made Doré’s name, with nothing more than $45. Credo beauty is the primary retailer in the U.S. In France it’s at Merci. Doré won’t release sales numbers but says about half of her customers have come back for more.“Doré products are not very glamorous,” she says. “You’re not dying to put them on your top shelf, but that’s on purpose.”Influencers, at least professional ones, are still figuring out how to keep their audiences engaged and the good times rolling. Doré has found success in photography, illustration, podcasting, advertising—maybe beauty will be next. Ultimately, what Doré is really selling is herself. Now, she knows how to do that without selling her soul. Alexandra Marshall is a Writer at Large at AIR MAIL and a contributor to W, The Wall Street Journal, Vogue, and Travel + Leisure. She chronicles her recent relocation to Le Perche in the newsletter An American Who Fled Paris Photo: Ezra Petronio/Art Partner; Billy Farrell Agency/Shutterstock; @instagram/garancedore → Go Back Issue No. 8 October 6, 2023 Loading issue contents … Issue No. 8 October 6, 2023 Look № 8 Contents Air MailArts IntelAir SupplyLOOK About Support FAQ Terms of Use Privacy Policy Press Advertising Gifts Subscriber Sign-in © 2024 Air Mail LLCHow seniors can access 4 key vaccines this fall — for COVID, flu, pneumonia, and RSV | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore How seniors can access 4 key vaccines this fall — for COVID, flu, pneumonia, and RSV | CBC News LoadedHealth·Second OpinionHow seniors can access 4 key vaccines this fall — for COVID, flu, pneumonia, and RSVCOVID-19, influenza, pneumococcal, and — for the first time — respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccines will all be available this fall for older adults. But medical experts warn high costs and patchwork rollouts could be barriers for seniors trying to protect themselves.Physicians warn patchwork approaches across provinces, high costs for certain shots may hinder uptakeLauren Pelley · CBC News · Posted: Oct 07, 2023 4:00 AM EDT | Last Updated: October 7, 2023Orlando Mosca, 71, gets his first dose of a COVID-19 vaccine in Toronto in April 2021. COVID, influenza, pneumococcal, and — for the first time — respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccines will all be available this fall for older adults. (Evan Mitsui/CBC)Social SharingThis story is part of CBC Health's Second Opinion, a weekly analysis of health and medical science news emailed to subscribers on Saturday mornings. If you haven't subscribed yet, you can do that by clicking here.With COVID-19 hospitalizations rising again, plus early signals suggesting other respiratory viruses are starting to circulate, Canada has an expanded slate of vaccines for seniors in its arsenal. COVID, influenza, pneumococcal, and — for the first time — respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccines will all be available this fall for older adults. There's hope the mix of new and updated shots will help keep more seniors out of hospital as health-care teams brace for the possibility of yet another busy fall and winter.But while older Canadians may have more options to protect themselves than ever before, physicians warn staggered rollouts, patchwork approaches among the provinces, and high costs for certain shots could hinder uptake."The vaccine landscape is becoming more promising for older Canadians," said Dr. Samir Sinha, the director of geriatrics at Sinai Health System in Toronto. "It's also becoming a bit more complicated."Here's what seniors need to know about the slate of shots arriving this fall.Which vaccines will be available?Updated COVID vaccines are already starting to roll out in various provinces, at different times.Monovalent, mRNA-based shots from Pfizer and Moderna, which target the XBB.1.5 Omicron subvariant, have already been approved by Health Canada, and a third, non-mRNA option from Novavax is still under review."The most current versions have been adjusted to be effective against the newest variants," said Dr. Roger Wong, clinical professor in geriatric medicine at the University of British Columbia. The delivery of flu shots to the provinces and territories is also well underway, a spokesperson for the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) told CBC News.Burden of RSV falls mainly on youngest children, study finds, stressing need for better preventionVaccines for pneumococcal disease are routinely offered as well — offering protection against potentially-deadly infections caused by the bacteria Streptococcus pneumoniae, which can lead to serious pneumonia. And the newest shot rolling out later this respiratory virus season is GSK's vaccine for RSV, which was approved by Health Canada in August for adults 60 and up.RSV is highly contagious, and for most people, it manifests like a common cold. But in more vulnerable populations, RSV can cause bronchiolitis — the inflammation of the small airways in the lungs — or pneumonia.A PHAC spokesperson said a "limited" supply of the RSV shots will be available for the fall and winter season.When can you get each shot?When it comes to the flu shot, things are simple: Medical experts say everyone should get an annual vaccine once they become available in the weeks ahead.As for COVID, Canadian guidance suggests waiting around six months after your last vaccination or infection to get the latest vaccine.Health Canada approves updated Pfizer vaccine for COVID-19Timing the administration of a pneumococcal vaccine can vary between individuals as well. Sinha said all Canadians over 65 should get the newest type of pneumococcal shot, but if you've been previously vaccinated against this type of bacterial infection, you might still need another — so it's worth talking to your primary-care provider to see if you're eligible. Meanwhile RSV shots have been approved in Canada for all those 60 and up, and Sinha said he's recommending the vaccine to all his older patients. Official recommendations on the vaccine's use, however, haven't yet been released by Canada's national vaccine advisory body, and PHAC doesn't expect that guidance until 2024.South of the border, U.S. officials say seniors should talk to their doctors about the benefits and risks, and consider getting the shots before RSV is widely circulating.Drs. Eugenie Phan and Christa Sinclair-Mills as well as occupational therapist Leslie Coulter visiting patients during house calls in Toronto on Jan. 21, 2022. (Evan Mitsui/CBC, Cole Burston/AFP/Getty Images)Are these vaccines free?It depends on the shot — and which province you're in."Some vaccines, they aren't covered necessarily by every province's public health-care system," noted nurse practitioner Anne Summach, an assistant teaching professor at the University of Alberta. "Cost is a big barrier."Both the COVID and standard influenza vaccines are available for free across Canada. Some provinces also offer free enhanced flu shots for seniors, which offer better protection than standard doses.Health Canada approves Moderna's updated COVID-19 vaccineBut which enhanced flu shots are free for seniors also depends on where you live.In B.C., for instance, one influenza vaccine with an adjuvant to create a stronger immune response is free for all adults 65 and up — while a higher-dose flu shot that's also recommended for seniors is only free for people living in long-term care, assisted living facilities, and First Nations communities. Ontario, in contrast, offers both options free to all seniors. WATCH | Experts say to wait for updated COVID-19 shots: Wait for updated COVID-19 booster this fall, experts suggest1 year agoDuration 2:30Despite an expected fall wave of COVID-19, health experts recommend most people wait for the next, updated vaccine — still a few weeks away — to get a booster for the most protection."Our advice always is — if cost is a barrier around the influenza vaccine for one of the enhanced vaccines that might not be covered — even just getting the basic standard influenza vaccination is better than doing nothing at all," Sinha said.The situation is a little different for the pneumococcal vaccine, as both older and newer versions exist. Sinha recommended talking to your primary-care provider to see your options — and to find out the cost in your area.Second OpinionResearchers are still untangling the risks of catching COVID over and overAs for the new RSV shots, most provinces will not be covering the cost, though Ontario is providing the vaccine free-of-charge in congregate living settings like long-term care homes.Many Canadians who want the shot could wind up paying somewhere upwards of $200 out-of-pocket, experts warn.Want a COVID-19 booster? Experts say most Canadians should wait for updated shotsAnd Sinha said seniors who want a full slate of all four vaccines, including high-dose flu shots, the latest pneumococcal vaccine, and the new RSV shot, may face costs totaling well over $500, depending on the province."When we're talking about our most vulnerable citizens across our country… an out-of-pocket expense is probably out of the question, as is the likelihood that they'll actually have private drug coverage," Sinha said, adding those barriers could impact uptake.Can you get multiple shots at once?Canada's vaccine advisory body says it's fine to get both COVID and flu vaccines on the same day, and some regional public health officials are also recommending eligible seniors get the pneumococcal shots during the same appointments as well.But the new RSV shots are a separate issue. Frontline providers say they don't expect that vaccine will be co-administered with other shots, though Canadian guidance still isn't out just yet to guide those decisions. Early signs suggest fall COVID-19 wave starting in Canada — before updated boosters are availableThe U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has noted there is "currently limited data available" regarding the RSV vaccines being co-administered with other vaccines.In clinical trials, there were also rare instances of patients who got both RSV and flu shots suffering severe side effects, the Washington Post recently reported, though experts say it's not clear whether this is a "statistical fluke" or the result of administering the vaccines together. A sign outside Toronto's Metro Hall this September promoting a vaccination clinic for COVID-19 and school immunizations. (Lauren Pelley/CBC)Why should seniors consider so many vaccines?The bottom line for older adults, medical experts say, is that many diseases hit harder later in life, making vaccination a crucial protective measure."We know for older adults, there can be changes in their immune system," said Wong. "Sometimes it's from aging itself, and sometimes it's other health conditions they're living with, like diabetes or a heart condition."Both the youngest and oldest among us typically fare worse when faced with influenza, for instance, while the elderly have overwhelmingly borne the brunt of serious and deadly COVID infections in Canada and beyond throughout the last few years.New data out this week from the U.S. CDC suggests that trend continued in 2023, with adults aged 65 and up accounting for roughly 63 per cent of all COVID-related hospitalizations. Health Canada approves 1st RSV vaccine for people 60 and olderAs for RSV, Canadian research suggests the virus has a more outsized impact on kids, and particularly infants under six months of age, but can also turn serious in older adults with pre-existing health conditions.American figures recently released also showed that, from early 2022 to early 2023, hospitalizations for RSV among adults aged 60 and up were less frequent than admissions for COVID or influenza — but were typically associated with more severe disease, including the need for high-flow oxygen or ICU admission.Meanwhile, Canadian data suggests the case fatality rate of pneumococcal pneumonia is typically up to seven per cent, and even higher among the elderly. 'Intense' flu season for Canadian kids needs solutions now and longer term, doctors sayEven when seniors survive a significant illness, Summach stressed that they don't always bounce back as easily as younger adults, and can lose muscle strength or other abilities. "Vaccination is one mechanism we have at our disposal to prevent those seasonal illnesses that can reduce function over time," she said. "Whatever you have access to, get it."ABOUT THE AUTHORLauren PelleySenior Health & Medical ReporterLauren Pelley covers the global spread of infectious diseases, pandemic preparedness and the crucial intersection between health and climate change. She's a two-time RNAO Media Award winner for in-depth health reporting in 2020 and 2022, a silver medallist for best editorial newsletter at the 2024 Digital Publishing Awards, and a 2024 Covering Climate Now award winner in the health category. Contact her at: lauren.pelley@cbc.ca.@LaurenPelleyCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowFlu shot myths make us sick — experts bust 6 major ones Primary Menu Sections US News Metro Politics Swing States 2024 World News Page Six Sports NFL MLB Olympics NBA NHL College Football College Basketball WNBA Post Sports+ Sports Betting Business Personal Finance Opinion Entertainment TV Movies Music Celebrities Awards Theater Shopping Lifestyle Weird But True Health Sex & Relationships Viral Trends Human Interest Parenting Fashion & Beauty Food & Drink Travel Real Estate Alexa Media Tech Science Space Environment Wildlife Archaeology Astrology Video Photos Visual Stories Today’s Paper Covers Columnists Horoscopes Crosswords & Games Sports Odds Podcasts Careers Email Newsletters Official Store Home Delivery Tips Search Email New York Post Open main lifestyle navigation Lifestyle Lifestyle Weird But True Health Sex & Relationships Viral Trends Human Interest Astrology Parenting Shopping Fashion & Beauty Food & Drink Travel Health Fitness Health Care Medicine Men’s Health Women’s Health Mental Health Nutrition Health & Wellness Products Personal Care Products Search Search trending now in Lifestyle Skip to main content I'm a sociopath — here's my one rule in the bedroom Miss Universe contestant expelled from competition over... Dear Abby: My husband doesn't care about my needs — and refuses... Doctor's 'pizza topping' trick to tell the difference between... Millennials defend wearing 'classic' ’50s outerwear — despite... I'm a doctor — beware these foods that may be giving you acid... Veterans Day 2024 deals: All the restaurant and retail stores... Mathematicians claim to know the formula for the 'perfect' female... Health Flu shot myths make us sick — experts bust 6 of the major ones By Marc Lallanilla Published Oct. 2, 2023, 6:28 p.m. ET Explore More I’m a doctor — 5 weird but proven ways to avoid colds and reduce the ‘yuck load’ Apple Watch Vitals app predicts colds, flu, COVID days before they hit, users claim This one simple habit can slash your chances of getting sick this season As temperatures drop, so do your odds of escaping the upcoming flu season unscathed. During the last flu season of 2022 to 2023, there was an early start to the season, higher than normal pediatric hospitalizations and deaths — and an unprecedented “tripledemic” with three respiratory viruses circulating (flu, RSV and COVID-19). As a result, in the U.S. there were at least 26 million illnesses, 290,000 hospitalizations and 19,000 deaths caused by the flu last season, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Heading into the new flu season, here are some key medical facts that dispel six myths about the flu shot and the bug itself. Myth 1: The flu shot can give you the flu Not possible: The flu shot contains an inactive virus and cannot give you influenza. It’s possible that your immune system will respond to the vaccine by causing you to feel slightly achy or to have a runny nose — but that’s very different from a case of influenza. People who think they came down with the flu after getting vaccinated probably had an unrelated upper-respiratory sickness, or already were infected with flu when they received the shot. It takes about two weeks for the vaccine to start preventing flu, according to University of California San Francisco Health. 3 Heading into the new flu season, some myths should be dispelled about the annual vaccine. NY Post illustration Myth 2: The flu is not that serious Across the globe, up to 650,000 people each year die of the flu, according to the World Health Organization. People who say they have a “slight” case of the flu are often coming down with a cold or a seasonal allergy. But symptoms of the flu are much worse: high fever, vomiting, trouble breathing, sore throat, cough, chills, body aches, headache, fatigue and diarrhea. The flu can often be a deadly disease — especially for people in high-risk groups such as infants, older people and those with underlying health conditions. 3 The flu is a serious — and preventable — infectious disease that kills hundreds of thousands of people each year worldwide. AP Myth 3: Pregnant women shouldn’t get the flu shot The flu shot is especially important for pregnant women, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that all pregnant women get vaccinated against the flu. Pregnant women, in fact, have a higher risk for serious complications from the flu than other women. And getting the flu shot while pregnant protects a baby for months after delivery. That’s especially important because infants younger than six months can’t get flu shots of their own — and they’re more likely to suffer serious complications if they catch the flu. Since the flu vaccine comes in two forms — the shot, which doesn’t contain a live virus, and a nasal spray, which contains a weakened one — pregnant women should only receive the vaccine in a shot, not in nasal form. 3 Doctors — including doctors who are pregnant — urge expectant women to get a flu shot. Greg Woodward / Boots Myth 4: If you got the flu — or the vaccine — last year, you’re safe Every year, a different strain of the flu virus is circulating, and each year’s vaccine is custom-tailored to that year’s strain. Additionally, the flu vaccine loses its potency over time, so a shot given a year ago needs an update. The current 2023 to 2024 flu vaccines performed well against the viruses that were circulating in the Southern Hemisphere during their flu season, which is now near its end, so this year’s vaccine is believed to be highly effective. A CDC study found that people who had received a flu vaccine in the Southern Hemisphere this past year were half as likely to be hospitalized with the flu compared to people who had not been vaccinated. See Also What to know as fall vaccinations against COVID, flu and RSV get underway Myth 5: You’re safe if you’re young and healthy Everyone can get the flu, even if you’re not in a high-risk group. Moreover, even young, healthy people can spread the flu to someone who is in a high-risk group — possibly killing them. And young people who miss work — and miss having fun with their friends — cost the U.S. economy an estimated $3.2 billion in direct medical costs, and indirect costs of $8 billion, according to a 2022 study. The CDC estimates that vaccination prevented 79,000 flu hospitalizations and 6.6 million flu-associated illnesses during the 2012-2013 influenza season. Myth 6: The flu vaccine has many side effects In fact, the flu vaccine is one of the safest and most reliable vaccines ever devised. Side effects of the shot — if any — are usually very mild and are typically limited to soreness at the injection site. In very rare cases — about one in a million — a person may get Guillain-Barré Syndrome, which causes muscle weakness and paralysis. But given how widespread the flu is, and how deadly the disease can be, any risk of severe side effects is considered negligible. Filed under COVID vaccine flu pneumonia public health vaccination vaccines 10/2/23 Read Next I'm allergic to strawberries — an airline 'discriminated... The Latest Deals Madden 25 for the PS5 is 50% off while this Early Black Friday deal lasts on Amazon Walmart’s early Black Friday sale is live today: 38 best deals I’d shop now Get ready for Wayfair’s Black Friday sale with the 24 best early deals Veterans Day 2024 deals: All the restaurant and retail stores offering discounts Target’s early Black Friday sale kicks off with up to $200 off vacuums, TVs, more Top Concerts Vividseats: Official Ticketing Partner of New York Post Get seats. Earn rewards. Experience it live. Taylor Swift 9 Shows | Get Tickets Coldplay 30 Shows | Get Tickets George Strait 1 Shows | Get Tickets Adele 4 Shows | Get Tickets The Eagles 16 Shows | Get Tickets See More Shows Trending Now ON NYPOST.COM This story has been shared 62,508 times. 62,508 Sean 'Diddy' Combs housed in low-security jail dorm alongside SBF— where inmates can spy on female convicts: sources This story has been shared 58,626 times. 58,626 Trump set to select Sen. Marco Rubio to serve as secretary of state in historic appointment: report This story has been shared 58,457 times. 58,457 Atlanta Falcons owner gave younger lover a cushy job on his private jet -- while forcing other flight attendants to work overtime: suit This story has been shared 54,082 times. 54,082 Hackers are targeting people who type these six words into their computer This story has been shared 44,487 times. 44,487 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle share new video message: 'We are at a crossroads' What to Shop Now Ruggable splashes its rugs with festive flair: Shop the holiday collection now Celebrate with savings: 30 businesses offering military discounts and sales for Veteran's Day 2024 Step into Dutton style: Ariat teams up with 'Yellowstone' to create a new Western collection You can already shop Target's early Black Friday deals: Our top 35 picks are up to 62% off now Celebrate Black Friday all month long! Shop 35 expert-picked Amazon early Black Friday deals on sell-out-risk gifts Now on Page Six Chris Wallace quits CNN after three years to explore streaming and podcasting Why Kevin Costner is not in a ‘rush’ to see his final ‘Yellowstone’ episode Fans think Jessica Simpson’s cryptic post is hint at Eric Johnson split See All Now on Decider Ana Navarro Delivers Spiteful Warning To Trump Voters On ‘The View’: “You Screwed Around And You’re About To Find Out” See All Heading into the new flu season, some myths should be dispelled about the annual vaccine. NY Post illustration The flu is a serious — and preventable — infectious disease that kills hundreds of thousands of people each year worldwide. AP Doctors — including doctors who are pregnant — urge expectant women to get a flu shot. Greg Woodward / Boots You are viewing 1 of 3 images Previous Image Next Image Advertisement More Stories Page Six 'Yellowstone' Season 5 Part 2 is finally here—Here's how to watch for free NYPost Sean 'Diddy' Combs housed in low-security jail dorm alongside SBF— where inmates can spy on female convicts: sources Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Email YouTube Sections & Features US News Metro World News Sports Sports Betting Business Opinion Entertainment Fashion & Beauty Shopping Lifestyle Real Estate Media Tech Science Health Travel Astrology Video Photos Visual Stories Alexa Covers Horoscopes Sports Odds Podcasts Crosswords & Games Columnists Classifieds Post Sports+ Subscribe Articles Manage Newsletters & Feeds Email Newsletters RSS Feeds NY Post Official Store Home Delivery Subscribe Manage Subscription Delivery Help Help/Support About New York Post Customer Service Apps Help Community Guidelines Contact Us Tips Newsroom Letters to the Editor Licensing & Reprints Careers Vulnerability Disclosure Program Apps iPhone App iPad App Android Phone Android Tablet Advertise Media Kit Contact © 2024 NYP Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved Terms of Use Membership Terms Privacy Notice Sitemap Your California Privacy Rights Do Not Sell My Personal InformationModerna’s dual Covid and flu vaccine moves to final stages after positive data CONTINUE TO SITE Or wait... News and analysis on the clinical development and manufacture of large molecule drugs Sign in Register Sign out My account Search Send Home News Bio developments Biopharma culture Contract manufacturing & logistics Markets & regulation Mergers & deals Promotional features Site Archive November 2024 October 2024 All News Multimedia Videos Podcasts Photo Galleries Trends Antibody-drug conjugates Biosimilars Cell & gene therapies Clinical development Emerging markets Pipelines Weight loss drugs Site Archive November 2024 October 2024 All News Multimedia Videos Podcasts Photo Galleries Resources Analytical (technologies & services) Bio-outsourcing Bioreactors Cell lines Disposable manufacturing tech Facilities Fill-finish & packaging Separation & purification Type of resources Library Technical papers Product brochures Videos Supplier webinars Suppliers Events Shows & conferences All events Editorial webinars Online events Events All Events Related Site Outsourcing-Pharma.com Menu close Register Send Home News Back to News Bio developments Biopharma culture Contract manufacturing & logistics Markets & regulation Mergers & deals Promotional features Trends Back to Trends Antibody-drug conjugates Biosimilars Cell & gene therapies Clinical development Emerging markets Pipelines Weight loss drugs Resources Back to Resources Analytical (technologies & services) Bio-outsourcing Bioreactors Cell lines Disposable manufacturing tech Facilities Fill-finish & packaging Separation & purification Events Back to Events All Events Shows & conferences All events Editorial webinars Online events Resources Back to Resources Library Technical papers Product brochures Videos Supplier webinars Suppliers Related Site Back to Related Site Outsourcing-Pharma.com Sign out My account User close Register Account & Access Sign in Register Sign out My account Moderna’s dual Covid and flu vaccine moves to final stages after positive data By Isabel Cameron 05-Oct-2023 - Last updated on 05-Oct-2023 at 09:03 GMT Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email to a friend © Getty Images Moderna’s combination vaccine targeting Covid and the flu is moving to a final stage trial after demonstrating positive results in an earlier study. The pharma giant anticipates the new vaccine, mRNA-1083, will win approval from regulators in 2025.Moderna’s phase 1/2 trial compared mRNA-1083 against Spikevax booster among two age groups – adults aged 50-64 years and 65-79 years.The study found that mRNA-1083 showed strong immunogenicity against Covid ​and the flu, with an acceptable reactogenicity and safety profile, compared to licensed standalone vaccines​. In addition, no new safety concerns were identified for the shot.As a result, the final, phase 3 clinical trial will begin later this year, featuring adult participants aged 50 and above.Influenza epidemics occur seasonally and vary in severity each year, causing respiratory illnesses and placing a substantial burden on healthcare systems.Worldwide, influenza leads to 3-5 million cases of severe diseases and 290K – 650K flu-related respiratory deaths in the US annually, despite the availability of current vaccines.Influenza and Covid impact people of all ages, but older adults are disproportionately affected​ and suffer more complications.According to Moderna, the global influenza market volume will see approximately 500-600 million doses annually with roughly 150 million doses administered in the US.The company anticipates that combination vaccines will simplify the process for people trying to protect themselves against seasonal respiratory viruses.In addition, Moderna expects respiratory product sales to be in the range of $8 billion to $15 billion, with profit in the range of $4 billion to $9 billion, by 2027. Stéphane Bancel, CEO of Moderna, said: “With today’s positive results from our combination vaccine against flu and COVID-19, we continue to expand our Phase 3 pipeline. Flu and COVID-19 represent a significant seasonal burden for individuals, providers, healthcare systems and economies.“Combination vaccines offer an important opportunity to improve consumer and provider experience, increase compliance with public health recommendations, and deliver value for healthcare systems. We are excited to move combination respiratory vaccines into Phase 3 development and look forward to partnering with public health officials to address the significant seasonal threat posed to people by these viruses.” Copyright - Unless otherwise stated all contents of this web site are © 2024 - William Reed Ltd - All Rights Reserved - Full details for the use of materials on this site can be found in the Terms & Conditions Related topics Bio developments Markets & regulation Emerging markets COVID-19 Related news Show more UK launches vaccine development hubs in $43 million project BioNTech to lead $2 billion mRNA-based oncology therapy market despite challenges LinkinVAX completes first batch of ‘PanCov’ vaccine to prevent COVID-19 PrecisionLife identifies genetic risk factors for long COVID Show more Follow us Facebook Twitter Linkedin Webinars On-demand webinars Manufacturing Friendly Aggregate Clearance in Downstream Processing of Bispecific and Traditional Antibodies Using a Novel POROS Mixed-Mode Chromatography Media Thermo Fisher Scientific - Biosciences Headlines Aditum Bio and Leads Biolabs join forces in new company to fight autoimmune diseases Sarepta discontinues development of Duchenne ASO treatment vesleteplirsen Synaffix and BigHat Biosciences collaborate to develop AI-designed ADC EMA accepts Alvotech and Advanz Pharma’s Marketing Authorization Application for biosimilar of J&J’s Simponi AbbVie acquires Aliada Therapeutics in $1.4 billion deal Abzena announces major expansion of its biologics manufacturing facility Aldevron’s Anu Codaty on passion, leadership, and innovation AstraZeneca’s rare disease therapy Fasenra receives EU approval Follow us Facebook Twitter Linkedin BioPharma-Reporter Advertise with us Why Register? Apply to reuse our content Press Releases – Guidelines About us Contact the Editor Report a technical problem Resources Whitelist our newsletters Editorial Calendar RSS Feed Podcast Help CentreAs season changes, number of patients with respiratory illness upNationalPoliticsValleyOpinionMoneySportsCulture & Lifestyle NationalMadhesh ProvinceLumbini ProvinceBagmati ProvinceNational SecurityKoshi ProvinceGandaki ProvinceKarnali ProvinceSudurpaschim ProvincePoliticsValleyKathmanduLalitpurBhaktapurOpinionColumnsAs it isLettersEditorialCartoonMoneySportsCricketFootballInternational SportsCulture & LifestyleArtsBrunch with the PostMoviesLife & StyleTheaterEntertainmentBooksFashionHealthFoodRecipesTravelInvestigationsClimate & EnvironmentWorldScience & TechnologyInterviewsVisual StoriesCrosswords & SudokuHoroscopeForexCorrectionsLetters to the EditorToday's ePaper Tuesday, November 12, 2024 Without Fear or FavourUNWIND IN STYLE 17.12°C KathmanduAir Quality in Kathmandu: 153300+Hazardous0-50Good51-100Moderate101-150Unhealty for Sensitive Groups151-200Unhealthy201-300Very Unhealthy Tue, Nov 12, 202417.12°C KathmanduAir Quality in Kathmandu: 153 What's News :Dedicated and trunk lines disputes Dengue cases rise Floods & landslides havoc Large cardamom price Nepal Premier League Health As season changes, number of patients with respiratory illness upDoctors advise elderly people and immunocompromised to take flu shots at the earliest. ShutterstockbookmarkfacebooktwitterWhatsappmail Arjun PoudelPublished at : October 4, 2023 Updated at : October 4, 2023 07:52 Kathmandu Winter season is yet to start, but the number of people suffering from respiratory illness has risen significantly in major hospitals in the Kathmandu Valley. Doctors say patients have been testing positive for influenza viruses A(H1N1), A (H3) and virus of B group.“The number of patients suffering from respiratory illnesses has doubled in the last few days,” said Dr Raju Pangeni, consultant pulmonologist and chest physician at HAMS Hospital. “Those already suffering from asthma and respiratory diseases are getting severe due to new infections.”October and November is the peak flu season in Nepal when thousands of people get infected with multiple respiratory viruses. Doctors said that along with influenza viruses A(H1N1), A (H3) and B group viruses, rhinoviruses and adenoviruses have been spreading in the country. They said that those already suffering from respiratory illness—asthma and others are at high risk of getting severe and dying. According to the World Health Organisation’s Global Influenza Surveillance, dozens of influenza cases have been reported in Nepal since the start of 2023. Infection of A (H3), also known as Hong Kong flu, A(H1N1), also known as swine flu, influenza B of Victoria lineage, and influenza B lineage undetermined are among the viruses detected in the country.“We have found an entire family suffering from respiratory illnesses,” said Pangeni. “Patients report to us that one of the members of the family got infected first and then all members got infected. We have admitted some serious patients with respiratory illness and damaged lungs in intensive care.”Doctors at the Kanti Children’s Hospital, the national referral centre for paediatric care said the number of patients suffering from respiratory illness have risen significantly of late. They also said that the infection is not only limited to children, but parents too are sick.“Small children have been infected either from schools or from home,” said Dr Ram Hari Chapagain, spokesman of Nepal Paediatric Society.Officials at Patan Hospital also said that the number of patients suffering from respiratory illness have risen noticeably of late.“We have expected more cases in the coming days, season change has just started,” said Dr Ravi Shakya, director at the hospital.Multiple doctors the Post talked to said that the influenza B virus, whose lineage is undetermined and has been rising alarmingly, is a matter of concern, as undetermined lineage of virus indicates mutation in the virus variant.They said that the number of people infected with seasonal influenza could be far more than what is recorded, as all cases do not reach hospitals and undergo testing and even doctors do not think necessary to carry out testing, as there is no specific treatment for the infection. The seasonal influenza virus causes respiratory complications, which affect the lungs. It spreads quickly in communities. It can cause fever, cough, body aches, occasional vomiting, diarrhoea and pneumonia.Experts say early diagnosis is crucial to prevent infection. Patients recover early if treated on time. Experts also said that both the severity of the disease and deaths increase if seasonal influenza cases are not diagnosed on time.“Despite availability of the influenza vaccine in Nepal, very few people opt to get vaccinated,” said Pangeni. “All people above two years old should take the vaccine. Children are vulnerable to influenza infection as they go school, and elderly people with underlying conditions are at risk of getting severe and dying from infection.”However, people from both groups do not get priority, as children generally do not get severe and people give little priority to elderly people in Nepal. Doctors say those who can afford it should take the vaccine. Arjun PoudelArjun Poudel is a health reporter for The Kathmandu Post. Before joining the Post, he worked for Sagarmatha Television, Naya Patrika, Republica and The Himalayan Times. Related NewsClimate change drives dengue as mosquitoes climb to new altitudes Nurses deployed at 18 hospitals to promote exclusive breastfeeding Call for awareness, training to reduce snakebite deaths JE death toll rises to 23, development partners not driven to provide vaccine Private labs are fleecing dengue patients Women in rural Madhesh face uphill battle to access sexual, reproductive care Most Read from HealthJE death toll rises to 23, development partners not driven to provide vaccine Government pledges free cancer treatment for children, experts flag critical gaps Women in rural Madhesh face uphill battle to access sexual, reproductive care Private labs are fleecing dengue patients Call for awareness, training to reduce snakebite deaths Editor's PicksWhat Trump 2.0 might mean for Nepal TIA’s reduced flight hours could stall economic growth Eyes north, ears south ‘Assertive Oli’ on the back foot as some plans falter Tihar joy fades for families hit by floods and landslides E-PAPER | November 12, 2024Read ePaper Online × ABOUT USAbout the Post Masthead Editorial Standards & Integrity Workplace Harassment Policy Privacy Policy READ USHome Delivery ePaper CONTACT USWrite for the Post Letters to the Editor Advertise in the Post Work for the Post Send us a tip INTERACT WITH USTwitter Facebook Instagram OUR SISTER PUBLICATIONS eKantipursaptahikNepalNariRadio KantipurKantipur TV© 2024 www.kathmandupost.comPrivacy PolicyTopHigh-risk individuals can now book latest COVID, influenza vaccines | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore High-risk individuals can now book latest COVID, influenza vaccines | CBC News LoadedKitchener-WaterlooHigh-risk individuals can now book latest COVID, influenza vaccinesThe vaccines are not currently available to individuals who are not high risk. Region of Waterloo Public Health defines "high-risk" individuals as those at risk of getting severely ill with COVID-19.Appointments will be made available for everyone once more vaccines become availableAastha Shetty · CBC News · Posted: Oct 04, 2023 12:04 PM EDT | Last Updated: October 4, 2023The vaccine shots are available through local clinics and the Region of Waterloo Public Health's neighbourhood nursing team. (Lars Hagberg/The Canadian Press)Social SharingHigh-risk individuals can now get their updated COVID-19 and influenza vaccinations.The vaccine shots are available through local clinics and the Region of Waterloo Public Health's neighbourhood nursing team.The public health unit defines "high-risk" individuals as those at risk of getting severely ill with COVID-19, such as children ages five to 11 with an underlying medical condition or adults over 65 living in a long-term care home.Region of Waterloo Public Health said appointments will be made available for everyone once more vaccines are in.People currently eligible for a vaccine can book their appointment online through the provincial website or by calling 1-833-943-3900.ABOUT THE AUTHORAastha ShettyCBC journalistAastha Shetty can be reached via email aastha.shetty@cbc.ca or by tweeting her at @aastha_shettyTwitterCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowFree Flu Vaccination Clinic for East Hartford Residents! | easthartfordct Skip to main content About Us Welcome to East Hartford, CT East Hartford is known as the crossroads of New England and is located an equal distance from New York and Boston with convenient and easy access to major highways, airports, railways and other modes of transportation, making East Hartford a convenient community to grow your business or family. History | Demographics | Elected Officials Learn More Departments Departments Animal ControlAssessorCrisis InterventionCorporation CounselDevelopment / Planning DepartmentEast Hartford WorksEngineeringFinanceFire DepartmentHealth and Human Services Human ResourcesInformation TechnologyInspections and PermitsLibraryMayor's OfficeParks and RecreationPoliceProbate CourtPublic Works PurchasingRegistrars of VotersSenior ServicesTax CollectionTown ClerkTreasurerYouth and Social Services All Departments Boards & Commissions Boards & Commissions Board of Assessment AppealsBoard of SelectmenCharter Revision CommissionCommission on AgingCommission on Culture and Fine ArtsCommission on Services for Persons with Disabilities East Hartford School Readiness CouncilEconomic Development CommissionEthics BoardHistoric District CommissionInland Wetland CommissionLibrary CommissionLocal Emergency PlanningMetropolitain District Commissioners Planning and Zoning CommissionPublic Building CommissionRedevelopment AgencySenior Center CommitteeTown CouncilVeteran's CommissionZoning Board of Appeals All Boards & Commissions Residents Residents About UsParks and RecreationPermits and Inspections East Hartford LibraryEast Hartford Housing AuthoritySocial Services Pay Taxes OnlinePublic WorksYouth ServicesWIC East Hartford Public SchoolsSenior Services Learn More Visitors Visitors About UsRiverfront RecaptureUCONN Huskies Cabela'sEHCCCHistorical Society Center CemeteryRaymond LibraryGolf Course Hockanum River TrailGreenway & Blueway TrailHockanum Linear Trail Learn More How Do I? How Do I Register to VoteFind Information on Recreational Activities Get a Birth CertificateGet a Facilities, Picnic, or Park Use PermitFind Information on Affordable Housing Apply for a Building PermitGet a Dump/Bulky Waste Permit Look up a Property AssessmentRegister My Alarm System All Topics A-Z Home Keywords Facebook Subscribe to E-Alerts | Google Translate You are hereHome Free Flu Vaccination Clinic for East Hartford Residents!Posted on: October 3, 2023 - 10:17am East Hartford, CT – InterCommunity Health Care will be at the Raymond Library on October 3rd and October 10th from 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. to conduct a flu vaccination clinic. InterCommunity’s mobile unit will be located in the Raymond Library parking lot at 840 Main Street, East Hartford, CT 06108. The first 50 people to get a flu shot at each clinic will receive a $30 gift card.No appointment is needed for these InterCommunity mobile events. Residents are advised to bring their insurance and ID cards; however, no one will be turned away from getting a flu shot. “The East Hartford Health Department recommends that all people ages 6 months and older receive a flu shot to reduce your risk of illness due to influenza,” said Director of Health Laurence Burnsed. “Getting vaccinated is especially important for individuals at high risk of severe illness, including persons 65 years and older, pregnant people, persons with underlying conditions, including asthma, diabetes, heart disease, and immunocompromising conditions. It’s also important for persons that provide care or have a high-risk family member within their household to reduce the risk of developing exposing our high-risk contacts.”Influenza (flu) is a contagious respiratory illness caused by influenza viruses that infect the nose, throat, and lungs. The best way to reduce the risk of flu and its potentially serious complications is by getting vaccinated against the flu each year. If residents have questions about flu shot recommendations or the InterCommunity mobile flu shot events at the Raymond Library, please contact the East Hartford Health Department at 860-291-7324 (option 1) to speak with a public health nurse. Town of East Hartford740 Main Street, East Hartford, CT 06108 (860) 291-7100Town Hall Hours of Operation:Monday-Wednesday, 8:30 AM – 4:30 PMThursday, 8:30 AM – 6:30 PMFriday, 8:30 AM-11:30 AM DisclaimerGovernment Websites by CivicPlus ® Login Quick Links Contact Us Trash & Recycling Online Tax Payments Online Meeting Streaming / Videos Voter Registration Community Assistance & Resources Senior Programs & Services East Hartford Public Schools Business ResourcesCan You Drink Coffee When Sick With A Cold Or Flu? | HuffPost Life Skip to Main Content×Main MenuU.S. Edition2024 ElectionsNewsU.S. NewsWorld NewsBusinessEnvironmentHealthSocial JusticeCrimePoliticsJoe BidenCongressExtremismOpinionEntertainmentCulture & ArtsMediaCelebrityTV & FilmBooksLifeStyle & BeautyFood & DrinkParentingTravelWellnessRelationshipsMoneyHome & LivingWork/LifeShoppingVoicesBlack VoicesQueer VoicesLatino VoicesIndigenous VoicesAsian VoicesWomen's VoicesHuffPost PersonalNEW: GamesHoroscopesVideoFrom Our PartnersWell TraveledThe Good LifeA New ViewNewslettersInternationalU.S.U.K.EspañaFranceΕλλάδα (Greece)Italia日本 (Japan)한국 (Korea)Follow UsTerms | Privacy PolicyPart of HuffPost Food & Drink. ©2024 BuzzFeed, Inc. All rights reserved.×What's Hot Log InSupport Us2024 ELECTIONSNEWSPOLITICSENTERTAINMENTLIFEPERSONALVOICESSHOPPINGGAMESU.S. EditionOpen editions submenuFood & DrinkHealth and MedicineCoffeecold and fluIs It Bad To Drink Coffee When You Have A Cold Or Flu?It turns out there are downsides to your morning cup of joe when you’re battling a respiratory illness.By Jillian WilsonWellness Reporter, HuffPostOct 6, 2023, 05:45 AM EDTLEAVE A COMMENTvisualspace via Getty ImagesCoffee disrupts your sleep, which is not helpful for someone fighting a cold or flu.A warm beverage is often considered a remedy for a respiratory illness like a cold or the flu.In fact, studies show that hot drinks can help temporarily relieve symptoms like runny noses and sore throats. Plus, there’s no denying that a warm cup in your hands is comforting as you battle a virus.When it comes to coffee, though, the hot nature of the beverage isn’t enough to make it a totally positive beverage option when you’re sick ― and there are a number of reasons why.Advertisement Below, experts share their thoughts on drinking coffee when you’re sick.Coffee keeps you awake, but your body needs rest when sick.“So, caffeine is a stimulant, and while it’s probably not going to have any impact on the clinical courses, either of a cold or flu or COVID or RSV ... the stimulant nature of caffeine may be counterproductive,” said Suan Hassig, an associate professor emerita of epidemiology at the School of Public Health at Tulane University in New Orleans.“Because, when you’re dealing with a viral infection, one of the things you really need to do is get good rest,” she said.Sleep helps your body recover from these viruses, and since coffee is intended to keep you awake, it can make it harder to get the sleep you need.The same goes for energy drinks, which often have more caffeine than a cup of coffee, Hassig said.“Too much caffeine can be bad for you whether you’ve got a cold or flu or not,” Hassig stated.For infrequent coffee drinkers, it can also be dehydrating in large quantities.“If it’s more than a mild illness, we want to be careful when we’re consuming caffeine because it’s dehydrating, it has a mild diuretic effect,” said Dr. Daniel Monti, the chair of the Department of Integrative Medicine and Nutritional Sciences at Jefferson Health in Philadelphia, who also runs DrDanMonti, a medical advice Instagram account. Advertisement Note that this does not go for everyone: Recent research shows that people who regularly drink a moderate amount of coffee do not experience dehydration from the beverage. Instead, any mild dehydration from its diuretic nature is seen in those not used to caffeine and drink a lot of it at once, according to NPR.So, if you don’t normally drink java, it’s not a good idea to make yourself a giant pot of coffee when you have a cold or the flu. Instead, it’s important to hydrate with water when you are under the weather, Monti said.And if you have any sickness-related vomiting or diarrhea, it’s doubly important to focus on hydration (with water, not coffee). “[Hydration] is particularly a concern if the illness is severe, so if we’re talking about a flu where there might be vomiting or diarrhea, then we really need to be careful because rehydrating and hydrating is very important,” Monti stated.milan2099 via Getty ImagesWhen you're sick, your body needs rest — and coffee and other caffeinated beverages can make it hard to get the sleep you need.Advertisement Additionally, coffee can upset your stomach.It’s well known that coffee makes you poop. It’s also not rare to hear that coffee hurts certain people’s stomachs.As mentioned above, people with certain seasonal illnesses may not want to consume something that adds to their stomach discomfort. “Some of these infections, not so much the cold, but the flu, can sometimes cause gastrointestinal symptoms as well, and aggravating that whole system from the stomach through the gut is just not a good idea,” Hassig noted.So, if you have an upset stomach and a history of coffee-induced tummy issues, you may want to skip your morning cup.All in all, drinking a modest amount of coffee when you’re sick is likely fine.Long story short, you most likely do not need to cut out coffee when you’re sick, but it could help reduce your caffeine consumption.Advertisement “There’s nothing wrong with having a cup of coffee, certainly in the first half of the day if that’s something that keeps you from having a non-caffeine headache or otherwise just helps you get going,” said Hassig, “but [you] should moderate [your] consumption because of the stimulant effects of caffeine, and you need to rest when you’re sick.”“If your illness is mild, the risks are low,” Monti said. When it comes to coffee consumption, potential issues only arise if you are throwing up or having diarrhea. Other beverages are ideal.You should make it a habit to drink other, more hydrating drinks when you have a respiratory illness.“It is very important to make sure that you maintain a good level of hydration, but plain water or organic fruit juices is a perfectly appropriate way to do that — water is actually best in that regard because it provides the body with what it needs most, which is the fluids to counteract the [illness],” Hassig said.Hot herbal teas and warm broth can also be useful beverages to drink when you’re sick, Monti said.Additionally, caffeinated teas like green tea can be easier on the stomach, making it a good replacement for someone who still wants an energy jolt but doesn’t want coffee, according to Monti. Advertisement Remember: When you’re sick, prioritize rest and hydration.Inflammation in our bodies increases when we have a cold or flu, according to Monti, which results in things like congestion, a runny nose and puffiness around the eyes.“If you’re looking to lower inflammation, the two things you can do naturally is to stay hydrated and to rest,” Monti said.Decreased inflammation can help alleviate some of those bothersome cold symptoms, while hydration and rest can help your body kick the virus it’s dealing with.RelatedHealth and MedicineCoffeecold and fluHere's Exactly When You Should Get Your COVID, Flu And RSV Shots5 Things Doctors Never, Ever Do During Cold And Flu SeasonCan Eating Sugar Weaken Your Immune System? Here's What To Know. Go to HomepageLEAVE A COMMENTSuggest a correction|Submit a tip From Our Partner From Our Partner HuffPost Shopping'sBest FindsNewsletter Sign UpThe Good LifeA completely essential daily guide to achieving the good life.Successfully Signed Up!Realness delivered to your inboxBy entering your email and clicking Sign Up, you're agreeing to let us send you customized marketing messages about us and our advertising partners. You are also agreeing to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. Close MORE IN Food & DrinkMORE IN LIFE NEWSPOLITICSENTERTAINMENTLIFEVOICESHUFFPOST PERSONALSHOPPINGNEWSLETTERSAbout UsAdvertiseContact UsRSSFAQCareersUser AgreementComment PolicyDMCA PolicyHuffPost Press RoomAccessibility StatementPrivacy PolicyConsent PreferencesPrivacy SettingsPart of HuffPost Food & Drink. ©2024 BuzzFeed, Inc. All rights reserved.The Huffington PostWhen does flu season start and end in the US? Skip to content NOWCAST KCRA 3 News at 7pm Watch on Demand Menu Search Homepage Local News Weather Commitment 2024 Radar Forecasting Our Future Traffic Closings Health 3 Investigates Noticias National News Get the Facts Matter of Fact Very Local Explore Outdoors Sports High School Playbook Entertainment Dying To Ask Farm to Fork Making Cents Project CommUNITY Stitch Upload Dignity Health Heart Hub (Ad) MeTV My58 EstrellaTV H&I Community News Team Editorials Contact Advertise with KCRA Privacy Notice Notice at Collection Terms of Use Your Privacy Choices: Opt Out of Sale/Targeted Ads SUBSCRIBE TO EMAIL Weather Search Press enter to search Type to Search Search location by ZIP code ZIP Advertisement Here’s when flu season starts and ends in the US, according to experts There’s no time like the present for the flu vaccine, though. Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 6:06 AM PDT Oct 3, 2023 Korin Miller Here’s when flu season starts and ends in the US, according to experts There’s no time like the present for the flu vaccine, though. Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 6:06 AM PDT Oct 3, 2023 Well, although it still might feel like summer outside, it's also that time of year to start preparing for *** flu season. And that means getting your flu shot. You know what? There are so many different misconceptions out there about the flu shot, some of which may actually cause you to avoid getting one. So we're here to break down the fact versus fiction and when it comes to those shots, Pharmacy district leader, Amy Lynn. Thanks so much for joining us. Thank you so much for having me. All right. So I'm excited because we're actually going to play *** game, which I find really fun. So you're gonna say *** statement about the flu and we're gonna decide, is it fact or is it fiction? It is gonna be fun? All right. So you go ahead and start off with your first statement. Yeah, let's go ahead and get started. So the first one, you can get the flu from getting *** flu vaccine. I'm gonna say fiction. It is fiction. So this is *** really big common misconception when it comes to the flu vaccine. So *** lot of people think I'm not gonna get the vaccine, it will cause the flu, but it's actually an inactivated vaccine. So it is impossible for it to actually cause the flu. But, but for people who feel sick and what is that? That's like your body's immune system. Right. So, the vaccine causes side effects. So sometimes people can mistake that for the flu. But it is common to feel *** little bit under the weather at your vaccine, your arm won't be sore. You might feel *** little bit tired, but that goes away usually in just 2 to 3 days, still better than getting the flu itself. Ok. Next one, better flu vaccines are necessary every year. Oh, I'm gonna say, I wanna say *** fact, but I'm gonna say because I don't get it every year. So this is actually *** fact. I was right by one. Thanks for keeping score. The flu vaccine is not *** one in done type of shot. So the flu virus does change and there are different strains that are prominent every year. So each of the formulation is different. So it is important to make sure you get the updated vaccine every year. Ok. And this next one has to do with timing. So it's too early to get the flu vaccine now. Fiction, fiction. Right? I did it before. Yes. Yes, absolutely. So it actually takes your body two weeks to develop the antibodies to the vaccine. So some people might think it's too early, but really we're right in the height of that flu season. So now is the time to go and get one. Ok. What's up next? It's hard to find *** place to get *** flu vaccine. Fiction. Yes. All right. Yes. So we have *** 9000 stores across the country that anybody can walk in and get *** flu vaccine at any time. Um, so you have *** lot of availability for our patients. So it's really easy to walk into your neighborhood pharmacy and get *** vaccine from your pharmacist and most people can schedule it with their regular doctor as well. Right? Um Yeah, absolutely. But with CV S, we do offer *** um online scheduling tool where you can actually schedule appointments for you and the whole family at the same time. So year we all went together. Yeah. And they *** lot easier. Yeah. Ok. So next one is you can get both the flu and COVID vaccines at the same time. Fact that is fact. So you guys are doing great. Uh Both vaccines are inactivated vaccines. So it's perfectly safe to get them at the same time. Ok. And then is this, is this our last question? I believe the next one is we don't need to get additional COVID boosters fiction, I think. OK, I'm gonna say because we just did *** story on there's *** changing *** new Yes. So this was kind of *** trick question. It's neither fact nor fiction. Um as we know, the COVID virus is always changing and evolving. So right now, we are trying to uh follow CDC guidance and kind of keep on top of what the new variants are going to be. So there is an updated booster for this year with the prominent variant for this season. Um But we'll see what the guidance of the CDC says tells us. Um hopefully it will be an annual vaccine like the flu in the future, but we just have to wait and see for that. All right, Amy, thank you so much for being here. This is fine. Thank you so much. GET LOCAL BREAKING NEWS ALERTS The latest breaking updates, delivered straight to your email inbox. Your Email AddressSubmit Privacy Notice Advertisement Here’s when flu season starts and ends in the US, according to experts There’s no time like the present for the flu vaccine, though. Share Copy Link Copy {copyShortcut} to copy Link copied! Updated: 6:06 AM PDT Oct 3, 2023 Korin Miller Between COVID-19, RSV, and the flu, there has been an onslaught of respiratory virus news over the past few years. While a recent jump in COVID-19 cases and new strains of the virus have gotten a lot of airplay, flu season is coming up fast, and it’s a good time for a refresher on how flu season works.Technically, you can get the flu any time, but the virus does tend to infect people more during certain times of the year, beginning in the fall. When is flu season exactly, though? Here’s what you need to know. When is flu season in the U.S.?Flu season varies across the world: The southern hemisphere, which has its summer when we have our winter and vice-versa, goes through flu season during opposite times as the northern hemisphere, says infectious disease expert Dr. Amesh A. Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.The exact timing of flu season can vary but, in the U.S., flu activity usually starts to pick up in October, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cooler weather drives more people indoors, explains Dr. Richard Watkins, an infectious disease physician and professor of internal medicine at the Northeast Ohio Medical University. “More people inside means they’re more likely to transmit viruses,” he says.From there, flu season typically peaks in December and February, before petering out in the springtime. In some seasons, heightened flu activity can last as late as May, the CDC says.Does flu season change from year to year?It can. There’s not one set day on the calendar when the flu starts up in the U.S. and then another when it disappears, says Dr. Thomas Russo, a professor and chief of infectious diseases at the University at Buffalo in New York. “Flu season can vary a little bit,” he says. “It tends to show up after Halloween in terms of cases really increasing, but it depends.”Variations in timing can be due to which strains are circulating, when they showed up from the southern hemisphere, and how much lingering immunity people have from the previous flu season, Russo says. “As a general rule, though, flu activity is the highest in December and January,” he adds. “That makes sense with people getting together over the holidays.” Why the flu is a concernThe flu is a contagious respiratory illness that’s caused by influenza viruses, according to the CDC. The flu can cause illness that ranges from mild to severe, and it can be deadly.The flu mainly spreads through tiny droplets that are created when someone with the flu coughs, sneezes or talks, the CDC explains. Those droplets can then land in the mouths or noses of other people and infect them. It’s less common, but a person might get the flu by touching an infected surface and then touching their mouth, nose, or eyes.Flu symptoms usually come on suddenly and they can vary, but the CDC says they generally include the following:fever or feeling feverish/having chillscoughsore throatrunny or stuffy nosemuscle or body achesheadachesfatiguevomiting and diarrhea (this is more common in children than adults)“Flu is a potentially lethal virus that kills tens of thousands of people each year,” Russo explains. “No one is risk-free when it comes to getting the flu, and even young, healthy people feel pretty miserable when they have it. It’s a serious virus that deserves our respect.”Has COVID-19 affected flu season?COVID-19 can impact flu season, Russo says. During the peak of the pandemic in 2020, COVID-19 “basically made flu season non-existent,” Adalja says. Case in point: There were just a little more than 2,000 flu cases reported to public health officials between late September 2020 and late April 2021, according to CDC data. But an estimated 36 million people had the flu during the 2019-2020 flu season.Now, flu cases have rebounded, with an estimated 26 to 50 million flu cases, 290,000 to 670,000 hospitalizations, and 17,000 to 98,000 deaths from flu last year, per the CDC. (The data is still preliminary at this point, which is why the CDC gives a range.)New COVID-19 strains have also been circulating and challenging immunity from previous infections and the vaccine—that caused a late-summer wave of infections that is still ongoing, Russo says.“COVID has changed flu season a little bit,” Russo continues. “These viruses seem to be in competition.” Meaning, when cases of COVID-19 are high, cases of the flu tend to be lower, and vice-versa. “If you have a COVID wave, you tend not to have a flu wave at the same time,” he says.For this season, Russo says it’s unclear which wave will come first. “We’re still learning the rules of timing with these,” he says. “There are multiple viruses playing the same sandbox, and it’s hard to know how this season will play out.”Regardless, experts stress the importance of getting your flu vaccine. “That’s the best way to ensure this is a mild season,” Adalja says. “It’s also an easy way to protect yourself against the flu.”Another thing you can do? Wash your hands. “Hand hygiene is vital,” adds Russo. Between COVID-19, RSV, and the flu, there has been an onslaught of respiratory virus news over the past few years. While a recent jump in COVID-19 cases and new strains of the virus have gotten a lot of airplay, flu season is coming up fast, and it’s a good time for a refresher on how flu season works.Technically, you can get the flu any time, but the virus does tend to infect people more during certain times of the year, beginning in the fall. When is flu season exactly, though? Here’s what you need to know. Advertisement When is flu season in the U.S.?Flu season varies across the world: The southern hemisphere, which has its summer when we have our winter and vice-versa, goes through flu season during opposite times as the northern hemisphere, says infectious disease expert Dr. Amesh A. Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.The exact timing of flu season can vary but, in the U.S., flu activity usually starts to pick up in October, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cooler weather drives more people indoors, explains Dr. Richard Watkins, an infectious disease physician and professor of internal medicine at the Northeast Ohio Medical University. “More people inside means they’re more likely to transmit viruses,” he says.From there, flu season typically peaks in December and February, before petering out in the springtime. In some seasons, heightened flu activity can last as late as May, the CDC says. What to know as fall vaccinations against COVID, flu and RSV get underway Does flu season change from year to year?It can. There’s not one set day on the calendar when the flu starts up in the U.S. and then another when it disappears, says Dr. Thomas Russo, a professor and chief of infectious diseases at the University at Buffalo in New York. “Flu season can vary a little bit,” he says. “It tends to show up after Halloween in terms of cases really increasing, but it depends.”Variations in timing can be due to which strains are circulating, when they showed up from the southern hemisphere, and how much lingering immunity people have from the previous flu season, Russo says. “As a general rule, though, flu activity is the highest in December and January,” he adds. “That makes sense with people getting together over the holidays.” Why the flu is a concernThe flu is a contagious respiratory illness that’s caused by influenza viruses, according to the CDC. The flu can cause illness that ranges from mild to severe, and it can be deadly.The flu mainly spreads through tiny droplets that are created when someone with the flu coughs, sneezes or talks, the CDC explains. Those droplets can then land in the mouths or noses of other people and infect them. It’s less common, but a person might get the flu by touching an infected surface and then touching their mouth, nose, or eyes.Flu symptoms usually come on suddenly and they can vary, but the CDC says they generally include the following:fever or feeling feverish/having chillscoughsore throatrunny or stuffy nosemuscle or body achesheadachesfatiguevomiting and diarrhea (this is more common in children than adults)“Flu is a potentially lethal virus that kills tens of thousands of people each year,” Russo explains. “No one is risk-free when it comes to getting the flu, and even young, healthy people feel pretty miserable when they have it. It’s a serious virus that deserves our respect.” Get the Facts: What to know about the new COVID-19 vaccine Has COVID-19 affected flu season?COVID-19 can impact flu season, Russo says. During the peak of the pandemic in 2020, COVID-19 “basically made flu season non-existent,” Adalja says. Case in point: There were just a little more than 2,000 flu cases reported to public health officials between late September 2020 and late April 2021, according to CDC data. But an estimated 36 million people had the flu during the 2019-2020 flu season.Now, flu cases have rebounded, with an estimated 26 to 50 million flu cases, 290,000 to 670,000 hospitalizations, and 17,000 to 98,000 deaths from flu last year, per the CDC. (The data is still preliminary at this point, which is why the CDC gives a range.)New COVID-19 strains have also been circulating and challenging immunity from previous infections and the vaccine—that caused a late-summer wave of infections that is still ongoing, Russo says.“COVID has changed flu season a little bit,” Russo continues. “These viruses seem to be in competition.” Meaning, when cases of COVID-19 are high, cases of the flu tend to be lower, and vice-versa. “If you have a COVID wave, you tend not to have a flu wave at the same time,” he says.For this season, Russo says it’s unclear which wave will come first. “We’re still learning the rules of timing with these,” he says. “There are multiple viruses playing the same sandbox, and it’s hard to know how this season will play out.”Regardless, experts stress the importance of getting your flu vaccine. “That’s the best way to ensure this is a mild season,” Adalja says. “It’s also an easy way to protect yourself against the flu.”Another thing you can do? Wash your hands. “Hand hygiene is vital,” adds Russo. Top Picks Get the Facts: The shifting veteran landscape Walmart is already starting Black Friday deals. Here’s what you need to know Firefighter's quick action saves newborn's life at SeaWorld Happy Veterans Day! Here are some retro stories celebrating those who served Loading more articles... KCRA Channel 3 Sacramento Contact Us News Team Apps & Social Email Alerts Careers Internships Advertise Digital Advertising Terms & Conditions Broadcast Terms & Conditions RSS EEO Reports Captioning Contacts KCRA Public Inspection File KQCA Public Inspection File Public File Assistance FCC Applications News Policy Statements Hearst Television participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites. ©2024, Hearst Television Inc. on behalf of KCRA-TV. Privacy Notice CA Notice at Collection Your CA Privacy Rights/Shine the Light DAA Industry Opt-Out Terms of Use Site Map Your Privacy Choices/(Opt-Out of Sale/Targeted Ads)GCC starts campaign to prevent H1N1 influenza and dengue - The Hindu India World Elections Technology e-Paper Menu Science Data Opinion SEARCH FREE TRIALGIFT a Subscription Subscribe LOGIN ACCOUNT PREMIUM Open in The Hindu AppFREE TRIALLOGINGIFT a Subscription ACCOUNT PREMIUM Subscribe Science Data Opinion SEARCH India World Elections Technology e-Paper Science Data Opinion SEARCH News Business Entertainment Life & Style Society Technology Videos Sport Cities States Science Show More Chennai Delhi Bengaluru Hyderabad Movies Food Children Data Kochi Books Education Podcast Brandhub To enjoy additional benefitsFREE TRIALGIFT a Subscription Subscribe LOGIN ACCOUNT PREMIUM ShowcaseSubscribe to NewslettersCrossword+CONNECT WITH US Home News Cities Chennai GCC starts campaign to prevent H1N1 influenza and dengue Updated - October 01, 2023 09:26 pm IST - CHENNAI The Hindu Bureau Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER Remove SEE ALL PRINT Mayor R. Priya inaugurating fogging operations in Chennai as part of mosquito control drive in Chennai on Sunday. | Photo Credit: B. JOTHI RAMALINGAM The Greater Chennai Corporation has intensified the drive to control dengue and H1N1 influenza after reports of a rise in cases in zones such as Adyar, Anna Nagar, Tiruvottiyur, Tondiarpet, Royapuram, Teynampet, Perungudi and Sholinganallur. Adyar zone has reported the largest number of dengue cases in the city this year. Councillors in zones such as Anna Nagar said there were reports of a rise in the number of cases in many areas. According to data compiled by the Corporation on Sunday, a number of children screened in zones such as Anna Nagar have acute respiratory infection. Many cases have been cross notified to other districts. Of the 250 children and 55 adults screened in Anna Nagar on Sunday, 81 patients had acute respiratory infections, 31 lower respiratory tract infection and 34 upper respiratory infections. “We are creating awareness about prevention of H1N1 influenza among residents. There may be cases in some private hospitals,” said an official. J. John, AIADMK councillor in Ambattur, said the Corporation officials in each of the wards were trying to cross notify cases to other districts and States to reduce the number of cases in their own wards to escape scrutiny by senior officials. “The cases are high. But officials in my ward have reported a few cases only,” he said. Meanwhile, several employees of the Corporation and senior officials have started screening for vector-borne diseases and H1N1 influenza in the city. Published - October 01, 2023 09:25 pm IST Read Comments Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER Remove SEE ALL PRINT Related Topics Chennai / Chennai Corporation / viral diseases / Swine Flu Top News Today0 / 0 Read in App The Hindu About Us Code of Editorial Values News Archive Sitemap Print Subscription Digital Subscription Subscribe to Newsletters Rss Feeds Readers Editor-Terms of Reference Authors & Contributors Frame Front page Contact us Contact Us Social Media Advertise With Us Group News Sites Business Line BL on Campus Sportstar Frontline இந்து தமிழ் திசை The Hindu Centre Young World Club The Hindu ePaper Business Line ePaper Crossword + Free Games Other Products RoofandFloor STEP Images Classifieds - Print Bookstore & Special Publications Popular Sections Elections Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2023 Latest News National News International News Videos Life & Style Food Podcast Showcase Opinion Editorial Columns Comment Cartoon Letters Interview Lead Business Agri-Business Industry Economy Markets Budget Sport Cricket Football Hockey Tennis Athletics Motorsport Races Other Sports Sci-Tech Science Technology Health Agriculture Environment Gadgets Internet States Andhra Pradesh Karnataka Kerala Tamil Nadu Telangana Cities Bengaluru Chennai Coimbatore Delhi Hyderabad Kochi Kolkata Kozhikode Madurai Mangaluru Mumbai Puducherry Thiruvananthapuram Tiruchirapalli Vijayawada Visakhapatnam Trending on The Hindu News Israel strikes on Iran LIVE Cyclone DANA LIVE (25 Oct) 50% hike in prices of commonly used drugs Indian hockey team beats Germany 5-3 Israel plans to ‘empty’ Gaza Strip of Palestinians: Mahmoud Abbas Jose Mourinho gets red card against Man United Germany gives India special status for military purchase approvals Iran strike will show the world Israel’s might: Defence chief Yoav Gallant Justice Sanjiv Khanna to take oath as Chief Justice of India on November 11 Trending on Group sites Stock Market Live Updates Stocks to buy today Hockey Mogun Bagan Paralympics 2024 Gold Rate Today Silver Rate Today Sexual Harassment in Telugu Film Industry Mango: The Michael Jackson of Fruits Frontline Current Issue Terms of Use Privacy Policy Copyright© 2024, THG PUBLISHING PVT LTD. or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. BACK TO TOPSign in to unlock member-only benefits!Access 10 free stories every monthSave stories to read laterAccess to comment on every storySign-up/manage your newsletter subscriptions with a single clickGet notified by email for early access to discounts & offers on our products✕Looks like you are already logged in from more than 3 devices!To continue logging in, remove at least one device from the below listLog outLog Out from all devicesTerms & conditions | Institutional SubscriberCommentsComments have to be in English, and in full sentences. They cannot be abusive or personal. Please abide by our community guidelines for posting your comments. We have migrated to a new commenting platform. If you are already a registered user of The Hindu and logged in, you may continue to engage with our articles. If you do not have an account please register and login to post comments. Users can access their older comments by logging into their accounts on Vuukle.Bunching COVID-19, the flu and RSV as a 'tripledemic’ is misleading - The Korea Times The Korea Times National Politics Foreign Affairs Multicultural Community Defense Environment & Animals Law & Crime Society Health & Science Business Tech Bio Companies Finance Companies Economy Markets Cryptocurrency Opinion Editorial Columns Thoughts of the Times Cartoon Today in History Blogs Tribune Service Blondie & Garfield Letter to the Editor Lifestyle Travel & Food Trends People & Events Books Around Town Fortune Telling Entertainment & Arts K-pop Films Shows & Dramas Music Theater & Others Sports World SCMP Asia Video Howdy Korea Korean Storytellers POPKORN Culture People News Photos Photo News Darkroom The Korea Times National Politics Foreign Affairs Multicultural Community Defense Environment & Animals Law & Crime Society Health & Science Business Tech Bio Companies Finance Companies Economy Markets Cryptocurrency Opinion Editorial Columns Thoughts of the Times Cartoon Today in History Blogs Tribune Service Blondie & Garfield Letter to the Editor Lifestyle Travel & Food Trends People & Events Books Around Town Fortune Telling Entertainment & Arts K-pop Films Shows & Dramas Music Theater & Others Sports World SCMP Asia Video Howdy Korea Korean Storytellers POPKORN Culture People News Photos Photo News Darkroom Login Register Login Register The Korea Times search all menu Login SubscribePhotosVideoWorldSportsOpinionEntertainment & ArtLifestyleFinanceBusinessNationalNorth Korea 1Lisa claims two awards, Jimin wins K-pop at MTV EMA 2024 3Korean essay on 'ramyeon' to be published in UK 5Actor Lee Si-young climbs Mardi Himal in Himalayas with 6-year-old son 7Have you ever been to a Korean wedding? 9BTS' Jin to host carousel fan signing event 11Korea to launch economic consultative bodies to brace for Trump 2.0 13SK chief wins chance to challenge $986 mil. divorce settlement 15Lotte, Shinsegae in limelight after Trump win 17Young Korean 'jang' maker hopes to bring back grandmother's taste in Korean traditional soybean sauce 19Seoul City to test UAM service next year for 2030 commercialization 2Actors Jung Woo-sung and Shin Hyun-been deny relationship rumors 4IU files complaints against 180 malicious commenters6Grammys face criticism for snubbing K-pop artists again this year 8Fire erupts at POSCO Pohang plant; 1 worker injured10Fencer Oh Sang-uk, chef Edward Lee to receive 2025 Korea Image Awards 12Nobel laureate Han Kang to hear Korean introduction at award ceremony in Stockholm 14Concerns grow over AI textbooks as digital dependence increases among students 16Putin finalizes N. Korea defense deal18Police uncover over 4,700 minors in crackdown on online gambling 20Loans from high-interest second-tier lenders soar amid tight lending rules Close for 24 hours The Korea Times search all menu Login SubscribePhotosVideoWorldSportsOpinionEntertainment & ArtLifestyleFinanceBusinessNationalNorth Korea Opinion EditorialColumnsThoughts of the TimesCartoonToday in HistoryBlogsTribune ServiceBlondie & GarfieldLetter to the Editor Tue, November 12, 2024 | 12:33 Bunching COVID-19, the flu and RSV as a 'tripledemic' is misleading Posted : 2023-10-03 16:00 Updated : 2023-10-03 16:00 By Sheldon H. JacobsonThe term “tripledemic” is being used to express the concerns about the collective spread of COVID-19, influenza and the respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, during this fall and winter. Yet each of these infectious diseases has their own risk profile. Placing them under the same epidemic umbrella may inadvertently overstate the impending dangers ? perhaps to the point of crying wolf when a calmer descriptor would be more beneficial and appropriate.The seasonal flu has a long history. A typical season runs from October through early spring. Vaccines are available that provide some protection against this virus. The challenge is predicting about six months in advance which strains will be circulating during flu season. This is the lead time needed to produce the vaccines using an egg-based process, the most common method used today. Each year, the vaccine is typically between 40 percent and 60 percent effective across the entire population.Seasonal flu typically affects the very young and those older than 65 most severely. These groups are targeted for vaccination, though everyone provides communal benefit from being vaccinated. The general rule is that when fewer people become infected, even those with little personal risk, there are fewer opportunities for the disease to spread those who are at the most risk of severe cases and poor outcomes.COVID-19 has been around since at least March 2020. It has similar symptoms to those of seasonal flu, though its impact at the population level is much more severe. Those older than 65 are at the highest risk of poor outcomes. Vaccines are available that have been effective in reducing the risk of severe disease. An updated vaccine was just launched that targets an omicron subvariant.RSV is a common respiratory virus, first identified in 1956. It typically causes mild symptoms, similar to those of the common cold. Much like influenza, for the young and those older than 65, the disease can be severe. Vaccines are available to protect against RSV, targeted at infants and those older than 60.The majority of the population is not at high risk of severe illness from the seasonal flu and RSV. The same can be said about COVID-19, though its impact is more variable and generally more severe and deadly than the others. However, all these viruses can produce severe disease in those with other health conditions, such as those who are immunocompromised or have asthma.Though all three viruses will circulate during the fall and winter, bunching them together as a “tripledemic” is misleading. Though the term makes for a good sound bite, it may foment fear that overstates the actual population risk.The two age-based groups that carry the highest risks of poor outcomes continue to be the very young and the elderly. Offering them the best available protections, such as vaccination, should be a top priority.In general, RSV poses little risk to most people.The seasonal flu is meticulously tracked by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and well understood. The strain mutations that occur through antigenic drift and shift make it an ongoing surveillance priority for the CDC. Such mutations are one reason why the vaccines must be updated and annual vaccination offers population benefits. The seasonal flu and its vaccines are generally understood and, hence, are highly unlikely to provide any surprises this year.The same holds true for RSV. The only addition is the recently approved vaccines for the elderly and the very young. Including RSV in the “tripledemic” may provide more awareness of the new vaccines.COVID-19 is the viral wild card in the group. New variants are constantly and rapidly emerging. What was dominant six months ago may no longer be circulating. The good news is that all the circulating variants are within the omicron lineage. This give some hope that the new government-approved COVID-19 vaccine will be effective across a spectrum of omicron variants, including those that may emerge over the next several months.COVID-19 stands out among the three viruses as posing the greatest risk across the widest swath of the population, as evidenced by the uptick in hospitalizations across the country over the past six months. Also, if a new mutation emerges that produces higher rates of poor outcomes, the current mitigation strategies may need to be reevaluated.Yes, three viruses will be circulating this virus season. Yes, hospitalization may remain high due to the three viruses, as the CDC predicts. Yet labeling them as a “tripledemic” may be more like crying wolf than communicating what may be coming.If public health authorities wish to engender trust in Americans and maintain credibility, presenting risks in a less sensational manner will go a long way. Catchy terms such as “tripledemic” may be counterproductive from a communication point of view; they may undermine the perception of public health and its mission to protect and improve people’s health.There is value in being prepared. There is no value in amplifying possible risks with a fear-inducing term. This article was published in the Chicago Tribune and distributed by Tribune Content Agency. Top 10 Stories 1Yoon practices golf in case of possible round with Trump2Seoul City to test UAM service next year for 2030 commercialization 3N. Korea's Kim finalizes defense pact with Russia 4Korean food makers ramp up global expansion5Hiking in Seoul gains popularity among foreign visitors 6Police officer acquitted after alleged prostitution involvement during college years 7Halfway through president’s term, Koreans notice no significant economic recovery8Hyundai subsidiary's robot dog deployed to strengthen security at Trump's Mar-a-Lago estate: report 9Korean battery industry views Trump win as blessing in disguise 10How high will Bitcoin soar? DARKROOM Bayern Munich beat Tottenham Hotspur in Seoul Tottenham 4-3 K-League All-Stars World Water Day 2024 Busan World Team Table Tennis Championships Finals Super Bowl 2024 CEO & Publisher: Oh Young-jin Digital News Email: webmaster@koreatimes.co.kr Tel: 02-724-2114 Online newspaper registration No: 서울,아52844 Date of registration: 2020.02.05 Masthead: The Korea Times Copyright © koreatimes.co.kr. All rights reserved. About Us Introduction History Contact Us Products & Services Subscribe E-paper RSS Service Content Sales Site Map Policy Code of Ethics Ombudsman Privacy Statement Terms of Service Copyright Policy Family Site Hankook Ilbo Dongwha GroupFlu, COVID-19 cases on the rise amid rainy season — DOH | GMA News Online We use cookies to ensure you get the best browsing experience. By continued use, you agree to our privacy policy and accept our use of such cookies. For further information, click FIND OUT MORE. I AGREE FIND OUT MORE X COVID-19 Full Coverage Cover Stories Sections On TV News Ulat Filipino Nation World Regions Metro Special Reports Money Economy Personal Finance Companies Motoring Sports Volleyball Basketball Boxing Football Other sports Pinoy Abroad Dispatch Pinoy Achievers Immigration Guide SciTech Weather Science and Research Technology, Gadgets and Gaming Showbiz Pep Chika Minute Showbiz Abroad Lifestyle Family and Relationships Travel Food Art and Culture Health and Wellness Shopping and Fashion Hobbies and Activities Opinion News Hardcore Hashtag Serbisyo Publiko Walang Pasok Transportation Missing Persons Community Bulletin Board GMA Brandtalk GMA Public Affairs Tracking Archives 24 Oras State of the Nation Saksi Unang Balita Balitanghali QRT News TV Live Photo Radio Video x advertisement Filtered By: Topstories News Flu, COVID-19 cases on the rise amid rainy season — DOH By GISELLE OMBAY, GMA Integrated News Published October 5, 2023 4:18pm The Department of Health (DOH) on Thursday confirmed that cases of influenza and COVID-19 have been increasing due to weather changes from warm to cold this rainy season. The agency, however, stressed that such an increase in communicable disease infections is expected. “Communicable diseases, particularly respiratory infections such as influenza and COVID-19 infections, are expected to increase during the rainy season and colder months due to proliferation of viruses as the weather transitions from increased heat and high humidity in the summer to wet and damp weather conditions,” the DOH said. Data from the Health Department showed that a total of 134,637 influenza-like illness cases were recorded nationally as of September 16. “Cases are slightly increasing with cases reported in the recent 3-4 weeks (Aug 20 - Sept 02, 2023) 8% higher compared to the two weeks prior,” the DOH said. COVID-19 cases, meanwhile, have also been slightly increasing since August with an average of 172 new cases reported daily as of October 2. DOH Undersecretary Maria Rosario Vergeire earlier said that the uptick in flu-like illnesses in some parts of the country was not due to the Nipah virus—a bat-borne, zoonotic virus spreading in India. According to the DOH, there were significant differences in the symptoms between the Nipah virus and flu-like illnesses. While both cause fever, patients with the viral infection also experience convulsions and confusion, as well as body aches, fatigue, headaches, sleepiness, faint spells, and swelling of the brain. Hospitalization Despite the rise in influenza and COVID-19 cases, the DOH pointed out that the country’s health system capacity remained at low risk. “While we observe increases at the national and regional level, our health system capacity remains at low risk with total and ICU (intensive care units) beds utilization rate at 16% and 13%, respectively,” it added. Private Hospitals Association of the Philippines Inc. (PHAPI) president Dr. Jose Rene de Grano also confirmed to GMA News Online that the number of patients with flu-like symptoms in hospitals have been increasing. “Medyo po [tumataas] pero ‘di pa naman alarming masyado. We are observing pa,” he said. (It is quite increasing but it’s not yet alarming. We are still observing.) De Grano explained that flu cases usually rise in the third and fourth quarter of the year due to sudden weather changes. “Ngayon [now], they are also observing the dengue and typhoid cases,” he added. Philippine General Hospital (PGH) spokesperson Dr. Jonas del Rosario also admitted that there are more flu patients now. Infectious diseases expert Dr. Rontgene Solante, meanwhile, said that many also develop pneumonia now due to a respiratory tract infection. “Mostly due to pneumonia admitted cases as a result of a respiratory tract infection whether it’s an influenza like illness or other respiratory pathogens,” he told GMA News Online. To prevent respiratory infections from further increasing, the DOH encouraged the public to assess themselves and, if needed, employ layers of protection such as wearing of face masks, ensuring adequate ventilation, and isolating when sick. The agency continued to remind the public to get vaccinated and boosted to provide an additional layer of protection against infection or severe disease. — RSJ, GMA Integrated News Tags: news, DOH, COVID-19, Influenza, flu More Videos Most Popular LOADING CONTENT LOAD MORE ARTICLES RETRY LOADING ◀ All Rights Reserved 2024 © GMA Network Inc. All Rights Reserved 2024 © GMA Network Inc. About GMA News Online About Us Contact Us Advertise with Us Careers Privacy Notice URL Policy AI Policy User Policy On TV GMA-7 Shows GMA News TV Shows TV Schedule News News Money Sports Pinoy Abroad SciTech Showbiz Lifestyle Opinion Hashtag Serbisyo Publiko Community Bulletin Board Tracking Cover Stories Eleksyon 2022 COVID-19 Full Coverage News News Money Sports Pinoy Abroad SciTech Showbiz Lifestyle Opinion Hashtag Serbisyo Publiko Community Bulletin Board Tracking Cover Stories Eleksyon 2022 COVID-19 Full Coverage Multimedia Videos Photos Radio -- DZBB Stay Connected RSS Feed Mobile Social Media Center Tools Search Stories GMANetwork.com Entertainment Artist Center Community International Radio Pictures Music Kapuso Foundation Corporate Regional TV GMANetwork.com Entertainment Artist Center Community International Radio Pictures Music Kapuso Foundation Corporate Regional TVNew COVID-19 vaccines available Oct. 16 in N.B. | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore New COVID-19 vaccines available Oct. 16 in N.B. | CBC News LoadedNew BrunswickNew COVID-19 vaccines available Oct. 16 in N.B.New Brunswickers can book COVID-19 vaccine appointments starting Friday, with the doses available starting Oct. 16, says the Department of Health, and flu shots can be administered at the same time.Eligible N.B.ers can start booking appointments for COVID vaccines and flu shots FridayBobbi-Jean MacKinnon · CBC News · Posted: Oct 05, 2023 10:23 AM EDT | Last Updated: October 5, 2023The new Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech vaccines contain the same ingredients as previous versions, except the formula has been updated to target the XBB.1.5 strain— much like how the seasonal influenza vaccine changes from year to year, the Department of Health said. (Joe Burbank/The Associated Press)Social SharingNew Brunswickers can start booking appointments on Friday for an updated COVID-19 vaccine as well as their annual flu shot, the Department of Health has announced.The new Moderna COVID vaccines will be available to everyone six months or older starting Oct. 16, as long as it's been at least six months since their last dose or COVID infection.The new Pfizer-BioNTech COVID vaccines are expected to arrive in late October or early November, it says.The updated vaccines are designed to target the circulating Omicron XBB.1.5 subvariant."As we know COVID-19 continues to circulate in New Brunswick, and across the globe, we are asking New Brunswickers to stay up to date with their vaccines," Dr. Jennifer Russell, the chief medical officer of health, said in a statement."In New Brunswick, nearly all circulating COVID strains are of the XBB family, so the updated vaccines are designed to offer improved protection compared to previous COVID vaccines."Dr. Jennifer Russell, the province's chief medical officer of health, said COVID activity has 'increased slightly' in recent weeks, and getting an updated vaccine will help reduce the risk of severe illness. (Ed Hunter/CBC)Public Health strongly recommends an updated vaccine for the following groups: People aged 65 or older. People who are pregnant. People with underlying medical conditions that place them at higher risk of COVID complications, including those who are immunocompromised. People who live in a long-term care facility, including nursing homes, special care homes, or adult residential facilities. People who work in health care, particularly those who have direct contact with patients and other caregivers. People who are of First Nations, Métis or Inuit descent. People can book an appointment online or by calling or visiting a participating pharmacy.Low vaccine uptake a concernDr. Yves Léger, the province's acting deputy chief medical officer of health, said COVID vaccine uptake has dropped over time and that's a concern."COVID is going to be here with us for the long haul, and vaccines should be part of that suite of tools that we use to protect ourselves," he told reporters during a video call Thursday afternoon.Since April 4, only about 28,000 doses of COVID-19 vaccines have been administered across the province.Dr. Yves Léger, the province's acting deputy chief medical officer of health, said vaccines offer the best protection against COVID-19. (Government of New Brunswick/Zoom)Asked what Public Health plans to do differently to increase uptake, Léger said he thinks it's important to explain the value of vaccines."While vaccines are very good at preventing infection and are even better at keeping people outside of hospitals, we know that that protection does start to wane with time," he said.So even if people got their initial doses, it's important they get a new shot to ensure that protection remains strong, Léger stressed.Cases expected to riseThe province does not have any modelling projections for COVID-19 or flu case counts, hospitalizations and deaths this respiratory season, Léger said.But he noted COVID numbers have already started to rise, and he expects that will continue."We certainly do expect to see some increase in COVID activity this fall, potentially spanning into the winter months. We do also expect to see influenza, of course, during this respiratory season."And if we look to the experience of Australia, which is often a good indicator of what we may see here … it should start earlier but will likely not peak as high, but be a bit more drawn out than what [we saw] last year."N.B. offers no new advice on COVID-19 as 2 new deaths, rise in hospitalizations reportedThe 2022-23 flu season in New Brunswick was the deadliest in at least a decade, with 69 deaths reported and 886 hospitalizations.One lab-confirmed flu case has been reported so far this season, according to Wednesday's Respiratory Watch report.COVID activity is described as "moderate," with two new COVID deaths in hospitals recorded between Sept. 17 and Sept. 23, and 58 hospitalizations — an increase for the third straight week.Masking encouragedPublic Health has no new guidance regarding masks, which haven't been mandatory since March 2022, said Léger.But he did clarify people are encouraged to wear them in public.Masking is especially important during the respiratory season, when COVID and flu cases are expected to rise, particularly for people who are older or have underlying medical conditions and are at risk of of severe complications if they are infected, said Léger. (narongpon chaibot/Shutterstock)"We certainly continue to encourage New Brunswickers to carry masks with them and wear them. Masks are effective, there's certainly no doubt about that."Last month, Canada's chief medical health officer, Dr. Theresa Tam, encouraged a return to masking.Facing criticismThe launch of the vaccine campaign comes after the province has faced criticism in recent months from virus experts and opposition health critics over a lack of information about its fall plans.In July, the National Advisory Committee on Immunization strongly recommended that Canadians get another shot this fall, if it's been at least six months since their last dose or infection.Health Canada approved Moderna's new vaccine on Sept. 12 and Pfizer's on Sept. 28. Federal officials aren't calling the shots "boosters." Instead, they view the updated options much like the annual flu shot.Léger said launching a vaccination campaign is complex and some factors were outside the province's control. He noted the new vaccines were only recently approved and the province was waiting to find out how many doses it would get.Léger also defended Russell's ongoing lack of availability to the media and the public. Her schedule is very busy, he said. That's why he was the one fielding questions from reporters. Russell wasn't available Thursday and Public Health wanted to get the information out as soon as possible, he said.Book flu shot at same timeNew Brunswickers are also encouraged to book appointments for their flu shot and pneumococcal vaccine, which can be administered at the same time as the COVID vaccine.The free flu shot is recommended for all New Brunswickers aged six months and older, with a higher dose available for those 65 or older to provide better protection.Public Health recommends New Brunswickers aged 65 and older receive one dose of pneumococcal vaccine, saying it protects against bacteria that can cause serious and life-threatening infections, such as pneumonia, ear infections and meningitis.CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories Horizon brings back mask rules for hospitals ahead of expected COVID increase Public Health silent on what New Brunswickers can expect from COVID-19 this fall 4 new COVID-19 deaths reported in N.B. in first 2 weeks of September Nearly 83% of tested N.B. schools exceeded peak CO2 limits, air quality results show 'Confusion' delayed N.B.'s review of response to COVID in special care homes N.B. changes definitions of COVID deaths and hospitalizations, launches Respiratory WatchFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowFlu season starts: Sufficient vaccine available – Berlin.de Berlin.deThe Official Website of BerlinPolitics & AdministrationCulture & EntertainmentTourismCity LifeAccessibilityBarrierefreiheitClose: AccessibilityHow accessible is this website?Accessibility statementWho can you contact if you have questions, comments or feedback regarding digital accessibility?Contact information for the relevant contact personWhere can I find additional information about accessibility in Berlin?Barrierefreie Informations- und Kommunikationstechnik (IKT)Open: SearchSearchSearchSchließen: SucheSearchSearchOpen: MenuMenuMenuClose: MenuChoose languageDeutschEnglishFrançaisItalianoMore links City Map Berlin.de Mail Berlin.de on Facebook Berlin.de on Instagram You are here:HomepageEnglishNews enCurrent language: EnglishdeDeutsch Flu season starts: Sufficient vaccine available A doctor vaccinates a woman against the flu. © dpa At the start of the flu season, sufficient vaccine is available for at-risk patients in Berlin. As the Senate Department for Health annoucned on Monday, the vaccination is currently offered by many primary care physicians, as well as in other medical practices. "In addition, pharmacies throughout Berlin also offer these vaccinations," the statement said. Vaccinations protec against severe disease progression, Berlin's Senator for Health Ina Czyborra (SPD) said in the statement. "They can also prevent an overload of the health care system." From October to mid-December, experts advise vulnerable patient groups to get flu shots. The flu wave usually reaches its peak after the turn of the year. Experts expect a significantly noticeable flu wave to loom this winter. Stiko: Vaccination not advisable for allThe Standing Commission on Vaccination (Stiko) does not advise all German citizens to get the annual flu shot. Only people over 60, pregnant women, children over six months, adults with certain pre-existing conditions, and people with a higher risk of contracting the flu due to their job, such as doctors and nurses. The groups overlap with the Stiko recommendation for the new adapted Coronavirus booster vaccination. Those who wish can therefore have both vaccines given at the same time. For people with Stiko recommendation, the vaccination is a mandatory benefit of the statutory health insurance and thus free of charge for insured persons, according to the Senate Administration. Author: dpa/deepl.com Publication date: 2 October 2023 Last updated: 2 October 2023 More News © dpaPosters to mark anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall on display The 35th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall was celebrated in Berlin at the weekend. Parts of the open-air installation are now moving to the Rotes Rathaus. more © dpaMore tourists are coming to Berlin Berlin attracts guests from all over the world. So far this year, more travelers have come from abroad than in the same period in 2023. more © dpaRound table on Berlin daycare centers starts The trade unions Verdi and GEW are calling for better working conditions in Berlin's daycare centers. The Senator for Education has invited them to a round table. She wants to talk about this in a larger group. more © dpa1.2 million parking spaces: New map shows details If roads are closed due to roadworks, many parking spaces are also temporarily lost. This must be taken into account when planning. New digital data should make this easier in future. more © dpaWegner: Fall of the Berlin Wall 35 years ago was lucky day for Germany Berlin's Governing Mayor Kai Wegner has praised the fall of the Berlin Wall 35 years ago as a "lucky day for Berlin" and for Germany. more © dpaBerlin is focusing on water tourism Boat tours on the Spree or sailing on the Müggelsee - Berlin already offers a number of opportunities for water tourism. The Senate sees opportunities for the future. more Discover Berlin Weather max. 5°C min. 3.9°C Extended Forecast © Nationalgalerie – Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Jacopo La ForgiaExhibitions in Berlin See the best museum, art and photography exhibitions at Berlin's top museums, galleries and event venues. more © dpaFlea Markets Berlin's most popular flea markets and antique markets with adresses, opening hours, public transport and map. more NewsPosters to mark anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall on displayMore tourists are coming to BerlinRound table on Berlin daycare centers starts1.2 million parking spaces: New map shows details © Andy PhillipsonWeekend Tips November 15 - 17, 2024: Events, concerts, exhibitions and more things to do for your perfect weekend in Berlin. more © fabiomax/AdobeStockRiver Cruises Boat trips in Berlin on Spree river, on Landwehr canal or over the Wannsee. more © dpaBerlin's Districts Information on residential areas, infrastructure, events, local authorities and leisure activities. more Travel InformationTrain StationsPublic TransportAirport BERBerlin A-ZScooters, Bicycle & Car SharingWiFi in Berlin Weitere Informationen zu diesem Auftritt Top of page Weitere Informationen zu Berlin.deOfficial Website of BerlinImprintPrivacy PolicyAccessibility statementGeneral Terms & ConditionsPolitics & BusinessGoverning Mayor of BerlinPolitics & AdministrationBusiness & EconomyPoint of Single ContactNew in BerlinWelcome Center BerlinBerlin Immigration OfficeIntegration coursesGerman language coursesTravel InformationAccomodation & HotelsAirport BERPublic TransportPoliceWhat to see & doTickets & EventsAttractions & SightsGuided ToursShoppingLanguagesDeutschEnglishFrançaisItaliano Berlin.de is a service of the State of Berlin.Seasonal flu hits Hyderabad, doctors call for precautions E-PAPERNATIONWORLDSTATESOPINIONSCITIESBUSINESSSPORTGOOD NEWSMOVIESPHOTOSVIDEOSWEB SCRAWLNATIONWORLDSTATESOPINIONSCITIESBUSINESSSPORTGOOD NEWSMOVIESPHOTOSVIDEOSWEB SCRAWL HyderabadSeasonal flu hits Hyderabad, doctors call for precautionsThis situation is expected to persist for the next one to two months due to ongoing festivals and increased social gatherings. It may worsen with the onset of winter.Image used for representational purposes. (Express Illustrations)Renuka KalpanaUpdated on: 06 Oct 2023, 3:35 am2 min readCopiedHYDERABAD: With Hyderabad experiencing the peak of seasonal flu, with nearly every other person falling ill, experts have highlighted that precautions are crucial, especially for older individuals and those with chronic illnesses. Doctors emphasised that the use of masks during gatherings is essential, and flu vaccinations are readily available.“In my outpatient clinic, I have observed that out of the 20 patients I see, eight to 10 of them are infected,” said Dr. Shiva Raju, a consultant physician at KIMS Hospital. Speaking to TNIE, he pointed out the prevalence of five infections including flu, dengue, acute gastroenteritis, typhoid, and waterborne viral hepatitis A or E.Along with vector-borne and airborne, several diseases stemming from water and food contamination are prevalent. The symptoms of this flu strain are somewhat distinct. Alongside the usual fever and severe body aches, individuals are reporting changes in their voice and persistent coughs that linger for two to three weeks.Additionally, many patients are grappling with prolonged fatigue even after their fever has subsided. Some individuals with diabetes have also developed lung infections like bronchitis. It’s worth noting that those above 50 years of age should exercise caution, as a few have been admitted, and some even require ICU care, though the numbers are not high, Dr Shiv Raju highlighted.“Persistent cough is the most disturbing thing observed among all the patients,” said Dr Kiran Manda, convenor of the Indian Medical Association (IMA) and Dr Kiran Manda, IMA convenor and professor and anaesthesiologist at Nizamabad government hospital. While dengue and influenza go hand in hand, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection is mostly observed among children.The experts also pointed out that the possibility of a new virus variant, is inconclusive at this time. Dengue cases are also on the rise, with 20-30% of severe cases affecting young individuals who require hospitalisation, albeit only a few end up in the ICU.This situation is expected to persist for the next one to two months due to ongoing festivals and increased social gatherings. It may worsen with the onset of winter. “As the rainy season is about to end, the dengue will also come down. However, Influenza is expected to increase,” Dr Mandala added.Dr Shivranjani Santosh added human metapneumo and coxsackievirus to the infections prevalent among the children. Even though dengue cases are in good numbers, they are not severely affecting children, she said.“Compared to last year, the cases are less. It was like a tsunami of infections last year. Whereas more throat and nose swab tests are being done, we are able to identify better which viruses are doing rounds,” she said.As we can’t completely eliminate viruses, the experts are stressing enhancing immunity through a nutritious diet and practices that minimise the virus’s impact on our bodies. Following precautionary measures such as masks during gatherings is essential, taking flu vaccinations and using protective equipment against mosquitos is a must.Follow The New Indian Express channel on WhatsApp Download the TNIE app to stay with us and follow the latestdengueviral feverinfluenzafluShow CommentsRelated StoriesNo stories found. Copyright - newindianexpress.com 2024. All rights reserved. Powered by Quintype X The New Indian Express www.newindianexpress.com INSTALL APPMoH stresses importance to take flu vaccine to avoid its spread - Saudi Gazette Tuesday November 12, 2024 / 10 , Jumada al-ula , 1446 Leading The Way SG Saudi Arabia Opinion Discover Saudi World Sports Business Life Advertisements SAUDI ARABIA MoH stresses importance to take flu vaccine to avoid its spread October 02, 2023 The Ministry of Health (MoH) stressed the importance of taking the influenza vaccine to avoid its spread. Follow Saudigazette on Saudi Gazette reportRIYADH — The Ministry of Health (MoH) stressed the importance of taking the influenza vaccine to avoid its spread.It is necessary to take caution against the spread of influenza and respiratory diseases, the Ministry stressed.It noted that taking the influenza vaccine will prevent infection, reduce side effects that come with the virus, as well as contribute significantly to reducing the number of cases.MoH said that influenza is considered an acute viral infection that spreads easily and affects all age groups.It explainrd that the groups most vulnerable to serious complications are those with chronic diseases, children, the elderly, pregnant women, as well as health workers.As for the method of the virus' transmission, MoH indicated that it is transmitted by inhaling droplets containing the virus or touching contaminated surfaces.It noted that its incubation period ranges on average from 2-4 days.The Ministry said that the virus comes as winter approaches, stressing that taking the seasonal influenza vaccine every year is one of the most important methods of prevention.Flu symptoms are multiple, including high temperature of more than 38 degrees Celsius, chills, sweating, headache, persistent dry cough, fatigue, exhaustion, runny nose, sore throat, as well as muscle pain.The Ministry said that the danger of influenza depends on a number of factors, including advanced age, the presence of chronic diseases, as well as weak immune system and obesity.The MoH enables all people in Saudi Arabia to take the influenza vaccine by booking an appointment through the “Sehhaty” application and obtaining the vaccine at the nearest primary health care center.< Previous PageNext Page > October 02, 2023 1880 views HIGHLIGHTS SAUDI ARABIA Arab-Islamic leaders seek freezing Israel's UN participation and UN probe into genocidal crimes in Gaza 7 hours ago Arab-Islamic leaders seek freezing Israel's UN participation and UN probe into genocidal crimes in Gaza SAUDI ARABIA Saudi FM: Israel wants to change the reality on the ground and destroy two-state solution 8 hours ago Saudi FM: Israel wants to change the reality on the ground and destroy two-state solution SAUDI ARABIA Crown Prince meets Assad and other leaders 10 hours ago Crown Prince meets Assad and other leaders COPYRIGHT © 2024 WWW.SAUDIGAZETTE.COM.SA - ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Powered by NewsPress NEWS CATEGORY saudi arabia world opinion business sports life advertisements COMPANY about us Epaper contact us Archive OTHER Epaper contact us ArchiveMoH stresses importance to take flu vaccine to avoid its spread - Saudi Gazette Tuesday November 12, 2024 / 10 , Jumada al-ula , 1446 Leading The Way SG Saudi Arabia Opinion Discover Saudi World Sports Business Life Advertisements SAUDI ARABIA MoH stresses importance to take flu vaccine to avoid its spread October 02, 2023 The Ministry of Health (MoH) stressed the importance of taking the influenza vaccine to avoid its spread. Follow Saudigazette on Saudi Gazette reportRIYADH — The Ministry of Health (MoH) stressed the importance of taking the influenza vaccine to avoid its spread.It is necessary to take caution against the spread of influenza and respiratory diseases, the Ministry stressed.It noted that taking the influenza vaccine will prevent infection, reduce side effects that come with the virus, as well as contribute significantly to reducing the number of cases.MoH said that influenza is considered an acute viral infection that spreads easily and affects all age groups.It explainrd that the groups most vulnerable to serious complications are those with chronic diseases, children, the elderly, pregnant women, as well as health workers.As for the method of the virus' transmission, MoH indicated that it is transmitted by inhaling droplets containing the virus or touching contaminated surfaces.It noted that its incubation period ranges on average from 2-4 days.The Ministry said that the virus comes as winter approaches, stressing that taking the seasonal influenza vaccine every year is one of the most important methods of prevention.Flu symptoms are multiple, including high temperature of more than 38 degrees Celsius, chills, sweating, headache, persistent dry cough, fatigue, exhaustion, runny nose, sore throat, as well as muscle pain.The Ministry said that the danger of influenza depends on a number of factors, including advanced age, the presence of chronic diseases, as well as weak immune system and obesity.The MoH enables all people in Saudi Arabia to take the influenza vaccine by booking an appointment through the “Sehhaty” application and obtaining the vaccine at the nearest primary health care center.< Previous PageNext Page > October 02, 2023 1880 views HIGHLIGHTS SAUDI ARABIA Arab-Islamic leaders seek freezing Israel's UN participation and UN probe into genocidal crimes in Gaza 7 hours ago Arab-Islamic leaders seek freezing Israel's UN participation and UN probe into genocidal crimes in Gaza SAUDI ARABIA Saudi FM: Israel wants to change the reality on the ground and destroy two-state solution 8 hours ago Saudi FM: Israel wants to change the reality on the ground and destroy two-state solution SAUDI ARABIA Crown Prince meets Assad and other leaders 10 hours ago Crown Prince meets Assad and other leaders COPYRIGHT © 2024 WWW.SAUDIGAZETTE.COM.SA - ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Powered by NewsPress NEWS CATEGORY saudi arabia world opinion business sports life advertisements COMPANY about us Epaper contact us Archive OTHER Epaper contact us ArchiveUKHSA winter briefing - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide this message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Health and social care Public health Health protection Infectious diseases Press release UKHSA winter briefing The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) sets out serious impacts of flu ahead of winter as eligible groups urged to come forward for vaccination. From: UK Health Security Agency Published 2 October 2023 The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) is urging vulnerable groups to take up the flu vaccine as data shows last year’s programme prevented around 25,000 hospitalisations in England. Even with these hospitalisations averted, excess winter deaths from flu were higher than those from COVID-19 in the 2022 to 2023 season, with over 14,000 recorded. Over 10,000 children were admitted to hospital and total hospitalisations for flu eclipsed those for COVID-19 at the peak of the season. Pregnant women, young children and those with certain chronic medical conditions, such as coronary heart disease, cerebral palsy, liver or spleen disorders or long-term lung conditions, are particularly vulnerable to flu. Effectiveness data from last year showed the flu vaccine reduced the risk of hospitalisations by two-thirds in children. Recent UKHSA modelling (surveillance graphs for week 37) also shows last year’s flu programme prevented around 25,000 hospitalisations in England, with just under 50,000 hospitalisations recorded through the season. Data from this year’s Southern Hemisphere winter season, where the H1N1 subtype was dominant, suggests the current flu vaccines are well matched against circulating strains, with the Australian government officially recording its season as ‘low’ clinical severity. It is possible the seasonal H1N1 virus could return to the UK where it has had limited circulation since 2019, after which measures to control the COVID-19 pandemic virtually eliminated the spread of all flu until the 2022 to 2023 season, when other subtypes re-emerged. All eligible groups are being encouraged to take up the flu vaccine, and at the same time book their COVID-19 autumn booster to protect themselves against the expected rise in cases as winter approaches. Professor Susan Hopkins, Chief Medical Adviser at UKHSA, said: Last year, the flu virus was estimated to be responsible for over 14,000 excess deaths and tens of thousands of hospitalisations, including over 10,000 in children. Last winter the vaccine prevented an estimated 25,000 hospitalisations, but this could be even greater if all those eligible for the flu vaccine came forward this year. Pregnant women, young children and those with chronic health conditions are particularly vulnerable, and we have good evidence to suggest this year’s vaccine will offer good protection. Taking up both the flu and COVID-19 vaccines ahead of winter provides the best level of protection against severe illness and will help ease the pressure on the NHS this winter. Vaccines Minister Maria Caulfield said: After beginning the NHS winter vaccination campaign early, this winter rollout will continue our tireless efforts to equip our communities with immunity against COVID-19 and flu and protect the most vulnerable among us. Flu placed a greater burden on hospitals than COVID-19 last year, so it’s essential that we all take part in reducing pressure on the health system by booking our COVID-19 and flu jabs as soon as possible to keep ourselves and our loved ones safe from infection. The NHS has already delivered flu jabs to over 2.8 million people since the start of the autumn campaign and given over 1 million autumn COVID-19 jabs since national bookings started on 18 September. Please do come forward and get your jabs to protect yourself and your loved ones. Deputy Chief Medical Officer Dr Thomas Waite said: Flu and COVID-19 circulated last winter, causing significant peaks and resulting in thousands of hospitalisations and deaths. It is important that we are protected against both. Vaccination is our strongest form of defence so if you are eligible, please come forward and get your jabs as soon as possible. In addition to flu, cases of COVID-19 are expected to rise this winter, increasing the risk to vulnerable groups. All eligible adults are urged to book their flu and COVID-19 vaccines online via the NHS website, by downloading the NHS App, or by calling 119 for free if they can’t get online, to give themselves the best protection against severe illness and hospitalisation. Parents of children aged 2 and 3 years (on 31 August) should book a nasal spray flu vaccine for their child at their local GP surgery. The schools programme also began in early September, with those aged 4 years up to those aged 16 years (school year 11) being offered a nasal spray vaccine, or an injection if this is unsuitable. It is important young people take up the vaccine as it protects the child themselves and helps stop the spread to vulnerable people around them, including babies, grandparents and people with weak immune systems. Chief Delivery Officer and National Director for Vaccinations and Screening for NHS England, Steve Russell, said: The NHS is off to a flying start with its COVID-19 and flu vaccination programme – with millions of people who are most at risk already receiving flu and COVID-19 vaccines since the start of the campaign, with hundreds of thousands more booked in to receive theirs this week. The NHS is inviting everyone eligible for a flu and COVID-19 vaccine to book online, via the app or by calling 119, and NHS staff are once again pulling out all the stops to deliver lifesaving vaccinations, with more vaccine sites than ever before to ensure people receive vital protection ahead of the winter months. Not only will these vaccines protect you and your loved ones from getting sick this winter, but they will also help ease pressure on the NHS by reducing hospitalisations – we want to see millions more getting vital protection – so please come forward and book your vaccines today. UK Health Security Agency press office 10 South ColonnadeLondonE14 4PU Email ukhsa-pressoffice@ukhsa.gov.uk Share this page The following links open in a new tab Share on Facebook (opens in new tab) Share on Twitter (opens in new tab) Updates to this page Published 2 October 2023 Explore the topic Infectious diseases Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab). Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright'Persistent cough and fever': As cases of "flu-like" illness continue to rise, here is what doctors say - Healthcare News | The Financial Express FEHomeHealthcareInterviewsDiagnosticsHealth TechMedical Devices FEHomeHealthcareInterviewsDiagnosticsHealth TechMedical Devices MUST READ Global cues for markets at this hour – Here are top 5 factors to watch ahead of market openingTrump 2.0: US President-elect picks Mike Waltz, Marco Rubio for his new administration – Here’s who else made the cutFirst flight of integrated Air India-Vistara entity takes off from Doha for MumbaiCaller ID: Telcos lose to Truecaller Pause slide Business Newsbusinesshealthcare'Persistent cough and fever': As cases of "flu-like" illness continue to rise, here is what doctors say ‘Persistent cough and fever’: As cases of “flu-like” illness continue to rise, here is what doctors say If someone has flu-like symptoms, they should isolate themselves for 3 -5 days or at least till the fever has settled for a minimum of 24 hours. Written by Sushmita Panda October 5, 2023 15:56 IST Follow Us People without warning signs should call the doctor if the fever lasts more than 24 to 48 hours. (Image Credits: Pixabay) Symptoms like high fever, cold and cough, and body aches are on the rise across India. According to doctors, there is a surge in viral illnesses, especially flu-like illnesses. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), seasonal influenza also known as the flu is an acute respiratory infection caused by influenza viruses. The flu is extremely common across the world. Some doctors also revealed that other than viral cases like influenza and dengue, waterborne diseases like Typhoid infection, hepatitis, bacterial infections of gut, and malaria are other common infections causing a spurt in fever cases.Also Read Fifth column by Tavleen Singh: Socialist prince vs real princes Across the aisle by P Chidambaram: Bare-knuckle politics Rs 1 crore salary package: The shocking truth behind CTC vs in-hand pay! Over-regulation pitfalls “There has been an increase in the number of acute febrile illness cases. Viral cases like influenza and dengue have been on the rise. Waterborne diseases like Typhoid infection, hepatitis, bacterial infections of gut and malaria are other common infections causing spurt in fever cases. Cases of seasonal flu have been on the rise across India, with inexplicable viral outbreaks becoming increasingly more common of late. The flood-like conditions created by the recent incessant rains have further exacerbated the spread of infectious diseases in some areas,” Dr. Rajinder Kumar Singal, Principal Director & HOD in Internal Medicine Department at BLK-Max Super Speciality Hospital, New Delhi told Financial Express.com. Also ReadNo fresh cases of the deadly Nipah Virus detected in India, says WHO According to Dr. Singal, in recent weeks there have been cases of prolonged coughing, sore throat, sneezing, watery discharge from the eyes and wheezing in many people. “Although summer months have begun, these flu-like symptoms along with allergic reactions have seen a significant rise. The spurt may be because of the common flu virus, H3N2, and H1N1 viruses. Some elderly patients have also required hospital admissions, and consequently developed pneumonia and bronchitis,” he added. Viral fever frequently manifests as a slew of symptoms that vary in severity, he said. “Some Typical symptoms of Febrile sickness are Fever, weakness and fatigue, Body Aches and Pains, Headaches, Sore Throat and Cough, Runny or Stuffy Nose, and Gastrointestinal Symptoms like nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea,” he added. According to Dr. Tushar Tayal, Lead Consultant, Department of Internal Medicine, CK Birla Hospital, Gurugram, with the present slightly cooler temperatures and slight humidity, the weather conditions have become optimal for virus survival. Consequently, there is a surge in viral illnesses, especially flu-like illnesses. “A lot of people are suffering from high-grade fever, cough running nose joint pain, and sometimes nausea and vomiting too. Most of these viruses belong to group A and B influenza viruses which include H1N1. And H3N2 also,” Dr. Tayal told Financial Express.com. What are the warning signs? According to Dr. Singal, in people with an acute fever, certain signs and characteristics are cause for concern. They include: Change in mental function, such as confusionHeadache, stiff neck, or bothFlat, small, purplish red spots on the skin (petechiae), which indicate bleeding under the skinLow blood pressureRapid heart rate or rapid breathingShortness of breath (dyspnea)A temperature that is higher than 104 deg F (40 deg C) or lower than 95 deg F (35 deg C)Recent use of drugs that suppress the immune system (immunosuppressants) When to see a doctor? According to Dr. Singal, people who have any warning signs should see a doctor right away. Such people typically need immediate testing and often admission to a hospital. “People without warning signs should call the doctor if the fever lasts more than 24 to 48 hours. Depending on the person’s age, other symptoms, and known medical conditions, the doctor may ask the person to come for evaluation or recommend treatment at home. Typically, people should see a doctor if a fever lasts more than three or four days regardless of other symptoms,” he told Financial Express.com. He also emphasised that viral illnesses do not need antibiotics, supportive care is the primary treatment for viral fevers. The goal of treatment is to relieve symptoms and encourage recovery, he said. Also ReadOne Health and the many challenges that emanate from G20 Delhi Declaration What are some important therapeutic components? Rest & Hydration: Staying hydrated aids in the maintenance of biological functioning as well as the management of fever-related fluid loss.Antipyretics like Paracetamol can help lower temperature and pain.Symptomatic Relief: Cough syrups, nasal decongestants, and throat lozenges provide temporary relief from specific symptoms. “Treatment of all viral infections is primarily symptomatic. People can take paracetamol tablets for fever, oral anti-allergic and nasal decongestants, and cough syrups. Steam and gargles will also help. There is no role of antibiotics in viral infections,” Dr. Tayal told Financial Express.com. What are some precautionary steps that can be followed? According to Dr. Tayal, some precautions that can be followed are: Frequent hand sanitisation and sanitisation of work surfacesWear mask in all public spaces and follow social distancingAlways use a tissue while sneezing and coughing and sanitize your hands immediatelyIf someone has flu-like symptoms, they should isolate themselves for 3 -5 days or at least till the fever has settled for a minimum of 24 hours TOPICSPharma and HealthcareGet live Share Market updates, Stock Market Quotes, and the latest India News … Read More and business news on Financial Express. Download the Financial Express App for the latest finance news. First published on: 05-10-2023 at 15:56 IST Stock Market Stats Market Stats Top Gainers Top Losers Indices Performance Gold Rate Today Silver Rate Today Petrol Rate Today Diesel Rate Today Nifty 50 Mutual Funds IPO Related News MSMEs will get collateral free loans of upto Rs 100 cr through a new credit assessment model by PSU banks: FM Mumbai: Western Railway announces train service changes on November 11 due to ROB construction Canada announces new rules for issuing multiple-entry visas Kolkata Metro Update: Services on Howrah Maidan-Esplanade stretch to be rescheduled from Monday – Check new timings here Mumbai’s underground metro line update: Metro Line 3 faces first technical glitch; passengers stranded for hours on Aarey-BKC corridor Satcom networks present opportunity to connect unconnected: ScindiaLife5 hr agoJyotiraditya Scindia, the Communications Minister, believes that non-terrestrial networks (NTNs) or satellite communication networks can help connect remote areas and support the UN SDGs. The government plans to allocate spectrum to satellite companies without auction, benefiting companies like Starlink. Despite resistance from telecom operators, Scindia is committed to this decision . View all shorts Photo Gallery 9 Photos US Election 2024 In Pictures: Trump’s victory fills the air with excitement but Harris’ ‘heart is full’ 5 days agoNovember 7, 2024 10 Photos In photos: Sacred moments from Chhath Puja festivities across India 6 days agoNovember 6, 2024 8 Photos Illuminating Diwali 2024: A visual journey through the festival of lights | In Images 2 weeks agoOctober 31, 2024 View All Trending Topics income tax calculator Silver rate today Gold rate today IPO sTOCK MARKET QUOTES Mutual funds Waaree Energies IPO 2024 Live Top Categories MarketJobsIndia NewsBusinessMoneyHealth CareJob CarrierLifePhotosLifestyleNDA vs INDIA Lok Sabha ElectionMaharashtra Election Stock Market Stats Market StatsNSE Top GainersNSE Top LosersBSE Top GainersBSE Top LosersIndices PerformanceNifty 50BSE Sensex PerformanceStock Market Quotes Top NSE/BSE Companies Share Price TOP NSE/BSE COMPANIES SHARE PRICETata Motors share priceTata Steel share priceState Bank Of India share priceHDFC Bank share priceInfosys share priceITC share priceWipro share priceNTPC share priceongc share priceAdani Enterprises share priceAdani Ports and Special Economic Zone share priceBharat Petroleum Corporation share priceCoal India share priceBajaj Finance share priceICICI Bank share priceTitan Company share priceLarsen & Toubro share pricePower Grid Corporation Of India share priceAsian Paints share priceHindustan Unilever share priceHCL Technologies share priceHindalco Industries share priceBajaj Auto share priceNestle India share priceAxis Bank share priceJSW Steel share priceTrent share priceTech Mahindra share priceReliance Industries share priceSun Pharmaceutical Industries share priceBajaj Finserv share priceUltratech Cement share priceCipla share priceIndusInd Bank share priceBharti Airtel share priceEicher Motors share priceBritannia Industries share priceHero MotoCorp share priceGrasim Industries share priceShriram Finance share priceApollo Hospitals Enterprise share priceMaruti Suzuki India share priceKotak Mahindra Bank share priceMahindra & Mahindra share priceTata Consumer Products share priceSBI Life Insurance Company share priceTCS share priceDr. Reddys Laboratories share priceHDFC Life Insurance Company share price Stock Price Quotes ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZOthers Popular Car Models Alto K10Maruti BalenoErtigaSwiftDzireFronxWagon RMaruti Suzuki BrezzaGrand VitaraHyundai CretaHyundai VenueMahindra TharScorpio NXuv 3XoKia SeltosKia SonetTata NexonTata PunchToyota FortunerToyota Innova CrystaTata CurvvMahindra Thar RoxxHyundai AlcazarMahindra BoleroMahindra ScorpioHonda ElevateMaruti Suzuki EecoMaruti Suzuki CelerioHonda AmazeHonda Citytoyota hyryderkia carnivalTata SafariTata TiagoTata HarrierMaruti Suzuki S PressoMaruti Suzuki InvictoToyota RumionToyota TaisorToyota GlanzaMahindra XUV700 Popular Brands Hyundai CarMahindra CarMaruti SuzukiTata CarToyota CarKia CarHonda CarBest Popular Cars Top Commodities Gold Rate TodayGold Rate in ChennaiGold Rate in KeralaGold Rate in HyderabadGold Rate in BangaloreGold Rate in MumbaiGold Rate in NoidaGold Price in DelhiGold Price in AhmedabadGold Price in KolkataSilver Rate TodaySilver Rate in BangaloreSilver Rate in AhmedabadSilver Rate in HyderabadSilver Rate in ChennaiSilver Rate in JaipurSilver Rate in MumbaiSilver Rate in DelhiSilver Rate in NoidaSilver Rate in LucknowPetrol PricePetrol Price in DelhiPetrol Price in MumbaiPetrol Price in BangalorePetrol Price in HyderabadPetrol Price in ChennaiPetrol Price in KolkataPetrol Price in PuneDiesel PriceDiesel Price in DelhiDiesel Price in BangaloreDiesel Price in MumbaiDiesel Price in HyderabadDiesel Price in ChennaiDiesel Price in ChandigarhDiesel Price in JaipurDiesel Price in Lucknow Trending Topics Budget 2024 Live Trending Stories 6th Pay Commission: DA hiked to 246% for THESE central govt staffSagility India to list today: Here are 4 things to know ahead of listingWhen to sell your mutual fund? Here’s how to decideWorld Pneumonia Day 2024: How does pneumonia increases risk of heart attacks and strokes?Trump 2.0: US President-elect picks Mike Waltz, Marco Rubion- A look at new administrationAir India-Vistara Merger: Which were the last Vistara flights on domestic and international routes?Oil And Natural Gas Corporation Share Price Today Live Updates, 12 Nov, 2024: Oil And Natural Gas Corporation on the radarBank of India Share Price Today Live Updates, 12 Nov, 2024: Bank of India on the radarGupshup’s Salim Ali on transforming customer engagement and the future of digital communicationBitcoin hits record high above $87,000India Election Results 2024 Highlights: Nitish Kumar, Chandrababu Naidu attend NDA meet at Modi residence, INDIA huddle shortlyPSEB 10th Result 2024 Highlights: Results OUT at pseb.ac.in, how to check, direct link to scoreboardBSEB Bihar Board 10th Result 2024 Live Updates: Result declared at bsebmatric.orgHappy International Women’s Day 2024: Share wishes, greetings, and messages with friends and familyMaha Shivratri 2024: Spread festive wishes and quotes to commemorate this special occasionLok Sabha Elections 2024: Congress CEC clears Rahul Gandhi’s candidacy for Wayanad seat, first candidate to be out soonPM Modi LIVE: PM Modi congratulates participants and awardees of National Creators AwardsJM Financial says will fully cooperate with Sebi in probe into public issue of debt securities More From Business Air India-Vistara Merger: Which were the last Vistara flights on domestic and international routes?Gupshup’s Salim Ali on transforming customer engagement and the future of digital communicationBitcoin hits record high above $87,000First flight of integrated Air India-Vistara entity takes off from Doha for MumbaiAir India-Vistara merger takes off: Fleets of both airlines to formally combine today – All you need to knowAmul milk to be launched in Europe this month-endValuation blues for dealmakersExports of PV products skyrocket despite solar investment spreeHCLTech launches AI Force extension for GitHub Copilot integrationBank of India posts 63% jump in net profit IndianExpress IAS officer caught in ‘Hindu-Muslim’ WhatsApp group row suspended in Kerala: ‘Created communal formations and alignments within cadres’Delhi, Beijing bid to move ties to pre-2020 normal: China officialsCyber crimes: 4.5 lakh ‘mule’ accounts frozen, many in public sector banksTrump shadow over COP29 meet, US negotiator says not end of fightHow the Maharashtra battle is shaping up: ‘Congress, BJP will stay where they are … Is baar toh khichdi pakne wali hai’ Follow Us Facebook Twitter Linkedin Download Apps Play_stor Apple_stor Express Group INDIAN EXPRESS GROUPThe Indian ExpressLoksattaJansattaInuthRamnath Goenka AwardsMyInsuranceClubIE TamilIE MalayalamIE BanglaIE GujaratiIE EducationThis website follows the DNPA’s code of conductCompare Term Insurance Quick Links T&CPrivacy PolicyHindiPan CardAadhaar CardInsuranceWorld NewsEntertainmentAirlines/AviationCONTACT USAbout Us Copyright © 2024 The Indian Express [P] Ltd. All Rights Reserved Market Data ✕Market DataMutual Funds IPO’s Open and Upcoming 6Top Indices Performance Stock Analysis Stock Market Stats Financial Literacy Gold Rate Today NSE Top Gainers 813NSE Top Losers 1945BSE Top Gainers 2101BSE Top Losers 3108NSE 52-Week High 0NSE 52-Week Low 0BSE 52-Week High 0BSE 52-Week Low 0NSE Price Shocker NSE Volume Shocker BSE Price Shocker BSE Volume Shocker NSE Buyers NSE Sellers BSE Buyers BSE Sellers Silver Rate Today Petrol Rate Today Diesel Rate Today#GetYourShots: Get your COVID-19 and flu vaccines this October | Doctors of BC Skip to main content Doctors of BC Login Contact Us Become a Member Account Login Managing your Practice View Overview CompensationFee Guide Business Cost Premium Contract Offerings Family physician compensation New payment model: A choice for family physicians Grants & Funding Billing & AuditsMini Practice Profiles The Audit Process Explained Avoiding an Audit Tips & Resources Frequently Asked Questions Business PathwaysStarting In Practice Managing Your Office Closing Your Practice Business Corner Virtual Events Business Advisors Contact Us Doctors Technology Office (DTO)Virtual Care Enhance Your Clinic's Security Managing your EMR Using AI Scribe Technologies Provincial Attachment SystemHow to access the PAS Panel Registry Attaching patients with the PAS Information on submitting and updating panel lists PAS FAQs Quality ImprovementPractice Support Program (PSP) Physician Quality Improvement Initiative Practice SupportsPrivacy Toolkit Practice Toolkits UpToDate Medical Records – Issues & Guidelines Programs for Rural Physicians Resources Member Announcement Consultations, Referrals, and Re-Referrals External Links Virtual Care Check out guides and resources to help you better use virtual care and technology to support patients. Learn More. Your Benefits View Overview InsuranceInsurance by Career Stage Insurance by Product Type My Insurance Forms Contact Us Insurance & Benefits During COVID-19 Negotiated BenefitsCMPA Rebate Continuing Medical Education Fund CPRSP Rural Education Action Plan Parental Leave Program Forms My Negotiated Benefits Physician Health & SafetyPhysician Health Program Memorandum of Agreement Discount ProgramsClub MD Telus Scotiabank + MD Financial Management Join UsStudents Resident Physicians Physicians Member Renewal Annual Dues My Dues Introducing the ultimate Club MD experience From work to play, and everything in between, we provide you with access to hundreds of deals from recognizable, best-in-class brands, elevating every facet of your life – from practice supports to entertainment, restaurants, electronics, travel, health and wellness, and more. Your Club MD membership ensures that these deals are exclusive to you, eliminating the need to search or negotiate. Welcome to the ultimate Club MD experience. Your membership, your choices, your journey. Explore now. Advocacy & Policy View Overview AdvocacyAdvocating for Solutions to Health Care Crisis The Health Professions and Occupations Act - Bill 36 COVID-19 Resources Integrated Activity Agreement Physician Health and Wellness Regional Advisors and Advocates NegotiationsAgreements & Contracts Physician Master Agreement EngagementMember Surveys Health Authority Engagement Surveys Have your Say Consultations Policy Database Health Promotion CampaignsWalk with your Doc Find a Doctor Open Mind BC Digital Health Advocacy & GovernanceDigital Health Governance Digital Health Policies Information Sharing Health Information Legislation Health Information Standards Engaging with you on Digital Health Advocacy and Initiatives Promoting Good Health Advocating for better health and improved safety on behalf of British Columbians. Learn more Collaboration View Overview Joint Collaborative CommitteesLeadership Training Project Funding Divisions of Family Practice Medical Staff Associations Guidelines and Protocols WorkSafeBC Liaison Committee Doctors of BC - ICBC Committee Medical Services Commission Working Together In partnership with the BC government, we are working to make a difference through collaborative programs. Learn more. News & Events View Overview NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewsletters President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Stay Informed Stay up to date with important information that impacts the profession and your practice. Doctors of BC provides a range of newsletters that target areas of interest to you. Subscribe to the President's Letter Subscribe to Newsletters About Us View Overview About Us Representing Our MembersHow We Work The BoardContact your Board Our Board Culture Representative AssemblyContact your RA Board & RA Reports Our President Leadership Committees Sections & Societies Equity, Diversity & Inclusion Cultural Safety & Humility Green Initiatives at Doctors of BC Careers AwardsDr David M. Bachop Gold Medal Dr Don Rix Award for Physician Leadership Doctors of BC Silver Medal of Service Award Changemaker Awards Health Promotion Awards Doctors of BC Scholarship Awards Dr Cam Coady Medal of Excellence CMA Honorary Membership Award Report to Members BC Health Care Organizations Constitution and Bylaws History Our Strategic Plan Our strategic plan guides us in our work to transform the health care system and improve patient care. Learn More. You are hereHomeNews & Events View Overview NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewsletters President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Stay Informed Stay up to date with important information that impacts the profession and your practice. Doctors of BC provides a range of newsletters that target areas of interest to you. Subscribe to the President's Letter Subscribe to Newsletters NewsTogether for Health#GetYourShots: Get your COVID-19 and flu vaccines this October Increase Decrease Current Size: 100% You are hereHomeNews & Events View Overview NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewsletters President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Stay Informed Stay up to date with important information that impacts the profession and your practice. Doctors of BC provides a range of newsletters that target areas of interest to you. Subscribe to the President's Letter Subscribe to Newsletters NewsTogether for Health#GetYourShots: Get your COVID-19 and flu vaccines this October Together for Health News & Events View Overview NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewsletters President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Stay Informed Stay up to date with important information that impacts the profession and your practice. Doctors of BC provides a range of newsletters that target areas of interest to you. Subscribe to the President's Letter Subscribe to Newsletters NewsDoctors Making a Difference Doctors of BC: Our stories DocTalks JCCs: Collaboration in Action Together for Health President's Letter My News Subscribe to NewslettersNewslettersIn Circulation Newsletters - Past Issues President's Letter Media RoomDoctors of BC in the Media BC Medical Journal Events Upcoming Events more events Executive Directors Learning Session November 12, 2024 For event details please contact events@doctorsofbc.ca. Event Details #GetYourShots: Get your COVID-19 and flu vaccines this October October 5, 2023 Together for Health COVID-19 and flu vaccines With respiratory illnesses such as COVID-19 and the flu expected to increase over the next few months, British Columbians are strongly encouraged to protect themselves and those around them by getting both their COVID-19 and influenza vaccines. When can you get vaccinated? Invitations to book both flu and COVID-19 immunizations will again be done through the government’s Get Vaccinated system and will automatically be sent in early October. Invitations will be sent to "priority populations" first – those with chronic health conditions, people ages 65 and older, people who are pregnant and Indigenous people, health-care workers, and long-term-care residents – with appointments for the public available on October 10, 2023. Both vaccines are once again free and available for everyone six months and older, including enhanced influenza vaccines for seniors. The enhanced vaccines provide better protection for those most at risk of severe illness and complications due to a natural weakening of the immune system that comes with age. Where can you get vaccinated? The Get Vaccinated invitation will provide British Columbians with the opportunity to book their vaccinations online. While this is the most efficient way to get vaccinated, vaccines will also be available in many participating pharmacies and health-authority clinics. And for the first time, some doctors’ and Nurse Practitioners’ offices can offer COVID-19 vaccines to their patients, along with influenza immunizations. Connect directly with your primary-care provider to see if they will be participating. Is it safe to get the flu and COVID-19 vaccines at the same time? Yes. According to the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI), anyone six months of age and older can get their seasonal influenza vaccine and their COVID-19 vaccine at the same time. Getting immunized is the best defense against the flu and COVID-19 viruses. It’s also the best way to protect yourself, your loved ones, and the health care system. Do you part and #GetYourShots. More information can be found on the government’s Respiratory Illness webpage. View all Together for Health Contact Us 115 - 1665 W. Broadway Vancouver, BC V6J 5A4 +1 604 736 5551 or +1 800 665 2262 Monday to Friday 8:30am to 4:30pm PST Contact Us FAQs Disclaimer Privacy Policy Constitution and Bylaws Endorsement Policy Code of Conduct © Doctors of BC All Rights Reserved Doctors of BC acknowledges that our organization is located on the traditional, ancestral, and unceded territories of the Coast Salish peoples, including the Musqueam, Squamish, and Tsleil-Waututh Nations, whose strong relationship with their territories continues today. Our employees, who are located throughout BC, work and live on many different Indigenous territories throughout the province. Acknowledging that we are on the traditional territories of First Nations communities is an expression of cultural humility and involves recognizing our duty and desire to support the provision of culturally safe care to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis people in BC. Back to top ⬆Do-or-die: Protect your chickens from bird flu - Food For Mzansi Latest Do-or-die: Protect your chickens from bird flu 3rd October 2023 AgriSETA drives women’s empowerment in agriculture sector 11th November 2024 Mogase’s livestock success built on heritage and hard work 11th November 2024 Canola industry confronts climate shifts as harvest sets in 11th November 2024 This week’s agri events: 11 – 15 November 11th November 2024 Get maximum benefits with effective livestock marketing 10th November 2024 Small-scale farmers show the way to sustainable agriculture 10th November 2024 SA agri-businesses target Asian market at China expo 9th November 2024 TLU calls for action as GP’s water crisis nears disaster 9th November 2024 How Voermol’s tailored nutrition boosts herd health year-round 8th November 2024 Bongi empowers youth through food, farming, and family ties 8th November 2024 Load More Tuesday, November 12, 2024 SUBSCRIBE 20 GLOBAL MEDIA AWARDS Login News Changemakers Lifestyle Farmer’s Inside Track Food for Thought No Result View All Result No Result View All Result News Changemakers Lifestyle Farmer’s Inside Track Food for Thought No Result View All Result Do-or-die: Protect your chickens from bird flu It's now or never for farmers to keep bird flu out as the disease sweeps across the country. An expert shares some key advice on how to safeguard farms during a time of crisis by Duncan Masiwa 3rd October 2023 in Farmer's Inside Track Reading Time: 5 mins read A A A A Reset With the current outbreak of avian influenza in six provinces, farmers have to adhere to strict guidelines to protect their poultry operations. Photo: Supplied/Pixabay Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on WhatsApp With the outbreak of avian influenza (bird flu) in South Africa, protecting your birds from the deadly disease has never been more important. Avian influenza (AI) is highly contagious and can have devastating consequences on bird populations and the poultry industry. According to Dr Mokgadi Seemola, poultry key account manager at Zoetis, there are some measures farmers can take to better protect their birds from avian influenza. Understand the symptoms Farmers quickly identify an outbreak through signs of infection, Seemola says. Symptoms for bird flu vary greatly depending on several things. Dr Mokgadi Seemola, poultry key account manager at Zoetis. Photo: Sourced/LinkedIn Firstly, the strain of the infection and the type of bird that’s affected. “There are two main strains of avian influenza, low pathogenic avian influenza and highly pathogenic avian influenza. “Low pathogenic avian influenza kind of speaks for itself. The birds have symptoms that could vary from no symptoms at all to severe symptoms depending on the other viruses or other conditions that the birds are challenged with,” she explains. Other symptoms include respiratory symptoms like sneezing, coughing, and nasal discharge. Symptoms can also be seen in egg-producing birds. Seemola says if you see a sudden drop in egg production or a slight drop in feed intake, that could be a sign of infection. When it comes to high pathogenic avian influenza, the most common sign is an increase in mortality. This is challenging because sometimes the birds show no signs of infection at all. “Symptoms can also include green diarrhoea, depression, subcutaneous haemorrhages, swelling, and discolouration on the feet (purple or red). Other symptoms can be production-related where your chickens don’t eat as much,” explains Seemola. READ: NEXT: Another province bites the dust as bird flu hits North West Know your chicken breed Farmers should know and understand their chicken breeds. Seemola says being aware of your breed’s potential health risks allows you to take preventive measures and respond promptly to any health concerns. “As a farmer it’s always important that you know what is normal for you and your farm. You know the breed specifications are and what is normal in that breed and what is not. “You need to have records that tell you what is normal for your farm. The instant you start to see a deviation from what is normal for you, you need to be worried,” cautions Seemola. She gives an example: If you give your chickens feed every day at 06:00 a.m. and you know by 09:00 p.m. all the feed is finished. But if by 11:00 or 12:00 the chickens still have not finished their feed, that could be an early symptom that the chickens are trying to tell you that something is not okay. Avian influenza shocker: 2.7 million chickens culled Steps to take once bird flu is suspected Both low-path and high-pathogenic avian influenza are controlled diseases under the Animal Diseases Act 35 of 1996. What this means is that you are obligated to report suspected, not confirmed cases of controlled diseases to the department of agriculture. This can be done either through the state veterinarian or by consulting your local veterinarian who will then follow up the necessary channels to make sure that the suspected outbreak is reported to the director of animal health. “Currently there is no confirmed or effective treatment for AI. What farmers need to do is stop the spread. The first thing you need to do is don’t move your animals “You’re not allowed to take birds off the farm, and if you do, it has to be under supervision and permit with the department of agriculture. The department will enforce that you slaughter any infected and affected birds,” Seemola explains. Also, the disposal of the carcasses has to be done under the guidance of the department of agriculture. Let’s talk biosecurity The first thing you have to do is create physical barriers. It should not be a case where any human being or any animal can walk amongst your birds and essentially exchange viruses and bacteria. “Another thing you can do is try to have an all-in, all-out system. Some people will have different ages of chickens in the same house and that tends to mess with your biosecurity. “Because you are now essentially putting the older birds that have been alive for longer with the new birds that are coming in from a completely different environment that maybe don’t have the same level of exposure in the same environment. This creates an environment where bacteria and viruses thrive,” Seemola says. Hygiene, clothing and reliability of sources Furthermore, there must be proper cleaning and disinfection not only of the houses but of all your cleaning materials. “Make sure that the people who have access to your farm have a change of clothes. Don’t use the same clothes you went hiking with, then you come back with those same cloths. Cloths can be a mechanical carrier of viruses,” warns Seemola. Another important thing is to make sure that you are getting your feed and water from safe and reliable sources. “Vet your sources. Are you getting from an approved and registered supplier or the uncle from down the road? Also, the water – is it of quality that you yourself would drink or are you just collecting from the river that could be contaminated?” Another important point is to not share equipment with other farms. “Even if it’s your brother, avoid sharing equipment. When the feed truck brings the feed make sure that they don’t enter your facilities.” Vaccination protocols Currently, vaccination for high pathogenic avian influenza has not been authorised in the country. Vaccination for low pathogenic avian influenza can only be done under approval from the director of animal health. This, however, comes with very strict conditions that the farmer would have to adhere to. “But there are some internationally available vaccines that are mass-produced for the vaccination against avian influenza. These vaccines vary with efficacy because we don’t all get the same strain of virus,” says Seemola. Avian influenza can pose a risk to human health as well. If you suspect your birds are infected, take precautions to minimise human exposure and seek medical advice if anyone develops symptoms after contact with sick birds. Avian influenza is a notifiable disease in many countries, and failing to report it can have serious legal and economic consequences. ALSO READ: Spick and span: The three pillars to packhouse perfection Sign up for Farmer’s Inside Track: Join our exclusive platform for new entrants into farming and agri-business, with newsletters and podcasts. Tags: Avian InfluenzaBird FluChickensCommercialising farmerTeach meZoetis South Africa Related Posts Mogase’s livestock success built on heritage and hard work 11th November 2024 This week’s agri events: 11 – 15 November 11th November 2024 Get maximum benefits with effective livestock marketing Small-scale farmers show the way to sustainable agriculture News This week’s agri events: 11 – 15 November by Tiisetso Manoko 11th November 2024 This week's agricultural events include an agricultural investment summit, a packhouse and agro-processing summit, a Karoo Ochse auction, Afasa webinars,... Read more Get maximum benefits with effective livestock marketing 10th November 2024 Small-scale farmers show the way to sustainable agriculture 10th November 2024 SA agri-businesses target Asian market at China expo 9th November 2024 TLU calls for action as GP’s water crisis nears disaster 9th November 2024 This week’s agri events: 11 – 15 November Dippenaar appointed Sati chairperson, eyes global growth D-day for USA: African agribusinesses keep close eye on election Thabo breeds success and herd quality with Voermol A healthy farming sector drives a food-secure nation THE NEW FACE OF SOUTH AFRICAN AGRICULTURE With 20 global awards in the first five years of its existence, Food For Mzansi is much more than an agriculture publication. It is a movement, unashamedly saluting the unsung heroes of South African agriculture. We believe in the power of agriculture to promote nation building and social cohesion by telling stories that are often overlooked by broader society. AgriSETA drives women’s empowerment in agriculture sector Mogase’s livestock success built on heritage and hard work Canola industry confronts climate shifts as harvest sets in This week’s agri events: 11 – 15 November Get maximum benefits with effective livestock marketing Small-scale farmers show the way to sustainable agriculture Our Story Contact Us Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Copyright Contact usOffice: +27 21 879 1824News: info@foodformzansi.co.zaAdvertising: sales@foodformzansi.co.za Contact usOffice: +27 21 879 1824News: info@foodformzansi.co.zaAdvertising: sales@foodformzansi.co.za Our Story Contact Us Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Copyright News Changemakers Lifestyle Farmer’s Inside Track Food for Thought Login Copyright © 2024 Food for Mzansi This website uses cookies. By continuing to use this website you are giving consent to cookies being used. Visit our Privacy and Cookie Policy. I AgreeHealth ministry receives 75k doses of Influenza vaccine - Trinidad Guardian Trinidad and Tobago Guardian Online JavaScript is disabled in your web browser or browser is too old to support JavaScript. Today almost all web pages contain JavaScript, a scripting programming language that runs on visitor's web browser. It makes web pages functional for specific purposes and if disabled for some reason, the content or the functionality of the web page can be limited or unavailable. Advertise With UsAbout UsListen Watch Login / Subscribe HomeNewsBusinessSportE-PaperFeaturesEnvironmentOpinionTraffic CamerasLifeClassifiedsDeath NoticesCommunityReal EstateAbout UsContact Us HomeNewsSportE-paperBusinessClassifiedsTraffic CamerasOtherEditorial Policies Death Notices Environment Features Opinion Games Subscriptions Real Estate Health ministry receives 75k doses of Influenza vaccine byRyan Bachoo2023100414113720231004Minister of Health Terrence Deyalsingh.The Min­istry of Health says it re­ceived 75,000 dos­es of the (2023/2024) In­fluen­za vac­cine on Mon­day. The vac­cine will be avail­able to mem­bers of the pub­lic at no cost, at all Health Cen­tres from Thurs­day. This vac­cine is a quadri­va­lent vac­cine, as such it con­tains the fol­low­ing four (4) strains of the In­fluen­za Virus:· In­fluen­za A (H1N1)· In­fluen­za A (H3N2)· In­fluen­za B (Aus­tria) – Vic­to­ria Lin­eage· In­fluen­za B (Phuket) – Ya­m­a­ga­ta Lin­eageThe In­fluen­za sea­son runs from Oc­to­ber 2023 to May 2024 in T&T. The Min­istry of Health has en­cour­aged el­i­gi­ble per­sons to get vac­ci­nat­ed. It is un­der­scored at this time that per­sons be­long­ing to the fol­low­ing high-risk groups may be prone to de­vel­op a more se­vere ill­ness if they con­tract the In­fluen­za virus:· Chil­dren aged 6 months to 5 years.· Adults 60 years of age and over.· Preg­nant women.· Per­sons suf­fer­ing from Non-Com­mu­ni­ca­ble Dis­eases (NCDs) (e.g. Di­a­betes, Hy­per­ten­sion, Heart Dis­ease) re­gard­less of their age.· Per­sons with com­pro­mised im­mune sys­tems (e.g. per­sons with Lu­pus, cer­tain Can­cer pa­tients).· Per­sons with chron­ic res­pi­ra­to­ry ill­ness­es (e.g. Asth­ma, Chron­ic Ob­struc­tive Pul­monary Dis­ease). Click HERE to Login Want FREE access to all our content? Sign up HERE!Tagged in: InstagramRelated articles Sponsored Weather PORT OF SPAIN WEATHER Sponsored Trending RBC defends its credit card limitsElderly women struggling with illness, hardship seek urgent helpIMF wants Govt to end forex restrictionsThree teens injured in Ariapita Avenue shootingT&T’s Brain DrainOne man gunned down, one injured in Rio ClaroTwo men chopped in bar brawlThree men held for robbing circus in OctoberImbert defends forex restrictions as IMF urges greater flexibilityLow turnout at Memorial Day Parade in Port-of-Spain Today's GuardianViewSubscribePublications A duet by Marvin Smith and Vanessa Bushe.Edison BoodoosinghA duet by Marvin Smith and Vanessa Bushe.Edison BoodoosinghMemorable performances in Versi d’Amore 20241111003511Hundreds of guests enjoy an impressive water, light and fireworks performance of a scene from the Journey to the West book at Huai’an, China. Angelo JedidiahHundreds of guests enjoy an impressive water, light and fireworks performance of a scene from the Journey to the West book at Huai’an, China. Angelo JedidiahTrini in China: Journey to the West—bringing folklore to life 20241111174612Tutor Zaheer Mohammed, left, with trainee Cristiano Benjamin, CCC operations manager Nicole Kistow, VMCOTT CEO Natasha Prince, trainee Jada Belgrave, and CCC programme co-ordinator Lt Curt Jones pose for a photo during the graduation ceremony. Photo courtesy Vanessa Moon Tutor Zaheer Mohammed, left, with trainee Cristiano Benjamin, CCC operations manager Nicole Kistow, VMCOTT CEO Natasha Prince, trainee Jada Belgrave, and CCC programme co-ordinator Lt Curt Jones pose for a photo during the graduation ceremony. Photo courtesy Vanessa Moon 33 auto mechanics graduate from CCC20241103210020Makeda CharlesMakeda CharlesMakeda Charles Using her story to touch survivors of abuse 20241027113816 Created by potrace 1.15, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2017 NewsBusinessSportsLifeOpinionTobago TodayClassifiedsDeath NoticesSubscriptionsReal EstateCategoriesNewsBusinessSportFeaturesOpinionTraffic CamerasDeath NoticesINFORMATIONAbout UsContact UsAdvertise With UsPrivacy PolicySubscriptionsTerms of ServicesDigital MediaThe Big Board Company.Real EstateClassifiedsTELEVISIONCNC3 TelevisionRADIO951 RemixSangeet 106.1 FMSky 99.5FMSlam 100.5 FMVibe CT 105 FMMix 90.1 FM (Guyana)Freedom 106.5 FMAbout Us Guardian Media is the premier provider of multimedia solutions and authoritative insight on news, politics, business, finance, sports, and current affairs. Our brand portfolio includes CNC3, Guardian, TBC Radio Network and The Big Board Company. Contact us Send us an e-mail here or call us at +1-(868)-225-4465 / +1-(868)-235-5668Follow usGet your free shots as seasonal influenza vaccination campaign begins in Abu Dhabi | Health – Gulf News Menu Menu Health UAE Business Going out Gold Forex Subscribe now Digital subscription Print+Digital (Bundle) ePaper Logout Go Digital subscription Print+Digital (Bundle) ePaper Trending UAE holidays Videos Classifieds Credit Card Deals Latest News UAE People Science Government Education Crime Emergencies Environment Health Transport Weather Ask the Law Living In UAE Visa+Immigration Housing Phone+Internet Banking Transport Health Education Relocate Reader Queries Safety+Security Business Banking & Insurance Aviation Property Tax News Corporate Tax Analysis Travel & Tourism Markets Retail Corporate News Tech Auto Best Buys Electronics Home and Kitchen Offers Consumables Lifestyle Your Money Saving and Investment Budget Living Taxation Expert Columns Community Tips Cryptocurrency Food Cooking and Cuisines Guide to Cooking Food Show Videos Friday Beauty Wellbeing Art & People Home Friday Partner Games Daily Crossword Sudoku Word Search Spell It Podcasts World Gulf Bahrain Kuwait Oman Qatar Saudi Yemen Mena Europe Africa Americas Asia India Pakistan Philippines Australia-New Zealand Corrections Opinion Columnists Special Reports Things To Do Events & Concerts Bars, Clubs & Pubs Cafes, Restaurants & News Going Out Parenting Pregnancy & Baby Learning & Play Child Health For Mums & Dads Ask Us Games UAE Success Stories Photos Sport UAE Sport Cricket IPL Motorsport Football Premiere League Tennis Golf in UAE UAE World Photos & Videos Course Reviews Learn to Play Gear Olympics Entertainment Hollywood Bollywood South Indian Music OTT Auto Lifestyle Health+Fitness GN Reach Tech Electronics Gaming Media Videos Best Of Bollywood News Entertainment Business Sport Community Special Features Supplement eBook The Kurator Life Luxury Style Gold-Forex Gratuity Calculator Notifications Coupons Gold/Forex Prayer Times ePaper GN Store About Gulf News Contact us Work with us Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Advertise with us Reach by GN GN Focus Gulf News epaper Sitemap Have your say Printing Services © Al Nisr Publishing LLC 2024. All rights reserved. Get your free shots as seasonal influenza vaccination campaign begins in Abu Dhabi UAE Login / Sign Up Logout Tuesday, November 12, 2024 Gold / Forex UAE Health People Science Government Education Crime Emergencies Environment Health Transport Weather Ask the Law All Sections Get your free shots as seasonal influenza vaccination campaign begins in Abu Dhabi The jab is available at 111 health centres and 15 pharmacies in the emirate Published: October 04, 2023 15:07 WAM Follow us The vaccine is highly recommended, especially among high-risk individuals more susceptible to the disease, such as healthcare workers and children younger than 5 years Image Credit: Supplied Also in this package Abu Dhabi authorises pharmacies to administer seasonal flu vaccine UAE: Free flu shots for 2,000 Sharjah residents this winter Are you down with the flu, influenza? Here's what UAE doctors are saying UAE: Flu season on its way, get vaccinated 2 weeks ahead, urges health ministry UAE: How to tell if you are at risk for pneumonia Abu Dhabi: Abu Dhabi Public Health Centre, a subsidiary of the Department of Health - Abu Dhabi, has launched its annual awareness campaign for seasonal influenza. The campaign comes under the ‘Stop the Spread’ programme to raise awareness about the importance of preventative care and vaccinations and the vital role they play in improving community health. Everyone aged 6 months and above is eligible to receive the seasonal influenza vaccine for free. The vaccine is highly recommended especially among high-risk individuals more susceptible to the disease, such as healthcare workers, children younger than 5 years, school-aged Children (5-18 years), pregnant women, adults aged 65 years and above, people with chronic conditions, Hajj and Umra pilgrims as well we smokers. Currently, the flu vaccination is available at 111 health centres including 15 pharmacies, aiming to facilitate the patient experience and provide easy access to the best therapeutic and preventative healthcare services. Through a seasonal influenza programme, the Centre aims to advise the community about the importance of identifying affected cases, analysing the viral pattern of the disease and the option of influenza vaccination for prevention. Fighting dominant strains The campaign will contribute to identifying dominant strains and making appropriate preventative measures available and reflects the emirate’s efforts to provide suitable vaccination options for citizens and residents, enhance effective health prevention and combat infectious diseases. Dr Farida Al Hosany, Executive Director of the Infectious Diseases Sector at Abu Dhabi Public Health Centre, emphasised the important awareness role played by the Centre through the Stop the Spread programme. This programme aims to provide the community with the necessary knowledge and culture to maintain public health and raise awareness about correct practices that prevent infection. She added: “The seasonal influenza programme is a significant addition to the efforts of the Centre in the field of awareness and preventive healthcare. The centre is committed to collaborating with strategic partners to reduce potential complications related to infectious diseases by emphasising the importance of preventive measures, especially as we approach the influenza season.” Recognised as one of the most effective methods of preventing seasonal influenza, vaccines protect against common types of influenza viruses and their components are updated annually to ensure their ability to provide the necessary immunity. The Stop the Spread programme includes three more upcoming awareness campaigns for vaccination, foodborne illnesses and antimicrobials, providing the general public with the knowledge and motivation to make informed decisions on the benefits of preventative care and be part of the drive to protect society. Trending Dubai: Flexible work system can cut morning rush by 30% UAE President hosts special dinner with Heads of States Employers urged to opt for savings scheme over gratuity Now, hop on a boat for free to reach Sharjah book fair Dubai Metro to start at 3am this Sunday Sheikh Mohammed approves Dh3.7b plan for internal roads Latest In UAE drives global climate finance push at COP29 9 minutes ago Celebrating global stories and cinematic innovation 17 minutes ago New 4x4 taxis in RAK for extreme weather 22 minutes ago From Washington to Trump, a profile of US presidents 30 minutes ago White rice: Is it bad to eat it daily? Debate rages on 32 minutes ago Go back to top Network links: GN Store About Gulf News Contact us Work with us Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Advertise with us Reach by GN GN Focus Gulf News epaper Sitemap Have your say Printing Services Find us on Social © Al Nisr Publishing LLC 2024. All rights reserved. This website stores cookies on your computer. These cookies are used to improve your experience and provide more personalized service to you. Both on your website and other media. To find out more about the cookies and data we use, please check out our Privacy Policy. OK Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Whatsapp Share on Mail Share on LinkedIn Copy link Follow on Whatsapp Follow on Google Follow on Telegram × Close Get Breaking News Alerts From Gulf News We’ll send you latest news updates through the day. You can manage them any time by clicking on the notification icon. Subscribe No ThanksInfluenza K-Drama Release Date, Cast, Plot & All You Need to Know DisneyHouse of the DragonMCUThe AcolyteAnimeK-WaveDCMarvelStar WarsFantasy & Sci-FiFantasy & Sci-FiDisneyHarry PotterMore CategoriesAmazon Prime VideoBooksComedy Comic BooksCyberpunkFandomsGamesGamingGeek CultureHubsListsLord of the RingsMoviesQuizzesReality TVReviewsSponsored ContentTV ShowsTech & GamesWhere to WatchDisneyHouse of the DragonMCUThe Acolyte Home K-WaveQueriesKdramaGeek CultureInfluenza K-Drama Release Date, Cast, Plot and All You Need to KnowHere's what we know so far about the Influenza K-drama! Credit: YG Entertainment | BLACKPINK OfficialBy Andrea Dawn BoycilloMovies & TV Writer Published: Sep 01, 2023, 10:12 am Updated: Oct 06, 2023, 10:32 am Credit: YG Entertainment | BLACKPINK Official This article contains information about the 'release-date' of either a movie, game or product. Unless stated explicitly, release dates are speculative & subject to change. See something wrong? Contact us hereInfluenza is an upcoming zombie thriller that will reportedly star Blackpink’s Jisoo and actor Park Jung-min. Many are looking forward to Influenza, especially because it may be Jisoo’s K-drama comeback. Here’s what we know about the Influenza K-drama so far.Influenza Release Date: When is the K-Drama Coming Out?As of writing, there’s no official release date yet for the K-drama, and no news yet when production begins.Influenza Cast: Who Stars in the K-Drama?Blackpink’s Jisoo and Korean actor Park Jung-min will reportedly star in Influenza. Jisoo will be playing a young professional named Young-joo, while Park Jung-min will be playing a soldier named Jae-yoon. Both received offers to star in the K-drama and are reviewing them.According to YG Entertainment, Jisoo’s agency, “She has received an offer for ‘Influenza’ and is reviewing the offer.”On the other hand, Park Jung-min’s agency, SEM Company, shared, “It is one of the projects that he is reviewing to star in.” (via Soompi).Jisoo had her first leading role in the K-drama Snowdrop where she starred alongside actor Jung Hae-in. Park Jung-min has starred in the Korean films Bleak Night and Deliver Us from Evil, as well as the K-dramas Entourage and Hellbound.There’s no news yet about supporting cast members for the K-drama.Influenza Plot: What is the K-Drama About?Influenza will be based on a novel written by Han Sang-woon. Influenza follows the story of a soldier named Jae-yoon and his girlfriend Young-joo, who face a world overcome by zombies.Jae-yoon enlisted in the military at the age of 26 after seeking an alternative service in the defense industry. Concerned about his future and relationship, he decides to break up with his girlfriend.Young-joo is a young professional. She awaits her boyfriend’s return from the military but receives notice of their breakup. Jae-yoon and Young-joo’s lives change when they find themselves in a zombie apocalypse.Influenza Crew: Who Are the Creative Minds Behind the Scenes?The upcoming Coupang Play series Influenza will be a collaboration between screenwriter Han Jin-won, director Yoon Sung-hyun, and writer Ji Ho-jin.Han Jin-won is best known for his work on Parasite, for which he won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay at the 92nd Academy Awards in 2020. Yoon Sung-hyun directed the films Bleak Night and Time to Hunt.Is There a Trailer for Influenza K-Drama?There’s no trailer for Influenza yet. So, stay tuned for more updates! You can check here for all the latest news on K-Dramas. READ NEXT: The Best Korean Dramas to Watch on Disney+ Right NowThis Article's Topics Explore new topics and discover content that's right for you! K-WaveQueriesKdramaGeek CultureHave an opinion on this article? We'd love to hear it! Join the conversation Andrea Dawn BoycilloMovies & TV WriterFilm & TV GeekAndrea covers films, TV shows, anime, and K-dramas for Epicstream. She has a degree in Mass Communication and has written news and features for various outlets for over five years. When not writing, you will find her engrossed in the latest novel. More From Andrea Dawn Boycillo Core TopicsTrue CrimeCelebritiesMoviesTV ShowsPop CultureReality TVHelpful LinksContact UsCookies PolicyAbout usWebsite Terms of UseEditorial PolicyPrivacy PolicySponsored Content Policy Team Sitemap WorldwideStarfield PortalMTG RocksStealth OptionalGfinityRacing GamesRealSport101Siege GGStock InformerRealGaming101 ESRealGaming101 PTTCG Rocks Why trust Epicstream? Epicstream was founded in 2015 by people passionate about geek culture and we are committed to our mission of making the fast-moving world of entertainment accessible to everyone. All our writers and editors are passionate members of the communities they write for, and all articles are checked to ensure they reach our high journalistic standards before publishing. At Gfinity Digital Media, we hold ourselves to the highest standards of editorial conduct, ensuring the integrity and quality of our content. Editorial independence is fundamental to our mission, allowing us to deliver unbiased verdicts on products and companies while avoiding conflicts of interest. Our editorial staff adheres to a stringent editorial policy to uphold this principle. Epicstream is supported by its audience. When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Learn more. Looking for specific products? Visit Stockinformer.co.uk/ stockinformer.com. © 2024 Gfinity PLC. Trademarks and brands are the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved. No part of this site or its content may be reproduced without permission